-ve in 2nd test, pregnant woman shifted out of Covid-19 hospital
2020-05-07
Bengaluru: For the first time, Karnataka on Wednesday reported an alleged false positive Covid-19 case.

A 30-year-old pregnant woman, who is in her third trimester, first tested positive at a private lab on April 5. However, on admission, doctors at Victoria Hospital trauma care centre sent her for a retest as they found her report inconclusive and also because the earlier test was done at a private lab.

As her second report came negative, she was shifted to a private hospital on Wednesday. However, according to the health and family welfare department, the woman’s case cannot be concluded as false positive yet. 

“We have to test her samples once again. There must be some confusion,” an IAS officer on Covid-19 duty told TOI.

“She is already exposed to a Covid-19 facility. She should have been kept in the isolation facility of the government hospital till another test report is received. The woman, however, does not have symptoms. She is strong psychologically too,” said a doctor at Victoria Hospital.

Meanwhile, in another goof-up, a 40-year-old head constable, who had tested positive for Covid-19, was found to be negative and discharged from the trauma care centre on Wednesday. He was shifted to an institutional quarantine.

According to officials, two policemen had given swab samples on May 1, but both the samples carried the same name and address. However, their mobile phone numbers were different. The error happened at Jayanagar General Hospital.

One of the samples tested positive and the head constable was declared infected and hospitalised. However, the error surfaced later and the head constable as well as the other policeman were tested again. This time, both were found to be negative.

“We don’t know who filled the forms. That’s where the confusion was created. Now, a retest will have to be done on their samples at the National Institute of Virology, Pune,” said health department authorities. 

“Remedial action will be initiated once the final confirmatory reports are received from the lab. As of now, both the persons are in isolation. Disciplinary action will be initiated against the officials responsible for the confusion,” a released from the health department said.


