Coronavirus scare: 1.5 lakh vendors to be hit by closure of weekly markets in Delhi
2020-03-18
NEW DELHI: At a time when sales have declined with people avoiding crowded areas due to the novel coronavirus scare, Delhi government’s Monday order to shut down weekly markets has left thousands of vendors in the city worried.


National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI) said there are more than 400 big and small weekly markets in the city, with a bulk of them located in east and west Delhi. The association estimates that around 1.5 lakh street vendors will be hit.


Coronavirus in India live updates

In Old Delhi, vendors of the now relocated Daryaganj Sunday book bazaar are equally perplexed. Ashrafilal Verma, vice-president of NASVI, said their biggest sales occur in March as the academic session starts from April 1. “The livelihood of more than 275 vendors is at stake. We have already collected the books from suppliers. What will we do now?” he remarked, seeking some relaxation from the government.



 

Ashok Kumar, who sells children’s clothes in the Friday market near St Thomas Church in RK Puram, said the weekly market gives him the biggest earnings. “I earn a bulk of my monthly income on these four days. My family will now have to survive on savings this month,” he added.

NASVI national coordinator Arbind Singh said the closure should have been carried out in a phased manner. “Daily wagers and vendors are the most impacted due to the slowdown triggered by Covid-19. This order will further worsen the economic condition of thousands of families. An alternative should have been made for the livelihood of the vendors,” he added.

Known by the days on which they are held — Budh, Shukr, Shani bazaar — these weekly markets come up at fixed times in specific localities attracting large crowds, most visitors being from middle and lower income groups. From essential grains to fruits and vegetables, street food, clothes and home merchandise, the “hafta bazaars” trade in items as per the demography and demands of the localities.

A senior municipal corporation official said that the large numbers of visitors is precisely why the markets need to be suspended for preventing further transmission of Covid-19.

“Initially, we were of the opinion that weekly bazaars trading in essential items like foodgrains, spices, vegetables, etc shouldn’t be shut because it might lead to scarcity of items and panic in the general public. However, now that Delhi government has issued the order, we will enforce it with the help of market pradhans,” added the official.

A few of the major weekly markets are held at Mohammadpur on Friday, Sector 6 RK Puram, Razapur and Majnu ka Tila on Sunday, Mandawali on Thursday, Bhogal on Tuesday, Sector 13 Rohini and opposite Fortis Hospital in Vasant Kunj on Saturday, and Govindpuri on Wednesday.


