1 more Indian on Japanese ship tests positive for COVID-19
2020-02-20
Madurai: The Indian embassy in Tokyo has confirmed that one more Indian crew on board quarantined ship Diamond Princess at Yokohama in Japan has tested positive for COVID-19. The cruise ship management said that more countries have airlifted their citizens – passengers and crew members – from the ship on Wednesday.

One Indian crew who tested positive for COVID-19 is among the 88 new cases identified on Tuesday. They have been taken to a hospital for treatment, reads a tweet by the Indian Embassy in Japan. This takes the total Indians on board the ship getting treated after testing positive for COVID-19 to seven, till 9pm (Japan time) on Wednesday and that their health condition is improving. The embassy added that disembarkation of passengers has started and is likely to continue till February 21.

The embassy is yet to respond to queries on the number of Indian crew members who had expressed their interest in prematurely ending the 14-day mandatory quarantine that began on February 19. “Countries have already started airlifting their citizens from the ship. We have been waiting for the government of India to fly us home. It’s been three days since the US evacuated their citizens and three days since we filled the forms given by the Indian embassy asking our willingness to prematurely leave the ship,” said Anbalagan, 41, a crew member from Madurai.

On Wednesday, the crew was given forms asking whether they had any symptoms of COVID-19. “We were informed that swab samples will be collected from us on Thursday. We are in fear that the delay in evacuation could lead to every one of us getting infected. Whenever a country evacuates their citizens, we hope that the government of India will be next,” he said. Princess Cruises, the operator of Diamond Princess, on their official website confirmed that that the embassies of Canada, Australia and Hong Kong are coordinating the evacuation of their guests and crew via chartered flights on Wednesday. It said that according to Japanese ministry of health, the disembarkation process for individuals who are not taking government repatriation flights will start on Wednesday. 

“The disembarkation process will take several days, since they will be tested, and the testing and results require two to three days to complete,” it stated. An internal communication from Susan Coskey, senior vice-president of HR-global fleet operations, to the crew members on Wednesday stated that they are of the understanding that most (if not all) teammates will have to undergo a minimum of 14 days additional quarantine once guests have disembarked. They are in discussion with the Japanese government on where and how it will take place, including whether this will be on the ship or ashore.

“An increasing number of governments are arranging charter air travel for their citizens to complete their quarantine periods in their home countries. This includes New Zealand, Hong Kong, India, Philippines, South Korea, Indonesia, Italy/European Union and United Kingdom (as a second flight),” she added. Delay in evacuating the crew members has left the families of the five from Tamil Nadu worried as they were expecting to fly home any time.


