10 Covid-19 patients in Bareilly division discharged from hospital
2020-05-09
BAREILLY: Ten people who were undergoing treatment for Covid-19 across the district were discharged from hospital over the past two days. Of them, eight are from Budaun and one each from Bareilly and Pilibhit. The patients from Budaun were discharged on Thursday while those from Bareilly and Pilibhit were released on Friday night. Also on Friday, officials declared Faridpur is no longer a hotspot. 


According to officials, all eight patients from Budaun were being treated at the community health centre (CHC) in Bithri Chainpur, which has been designated a Covid-19 Level-1 hospital for Bareilly district. The lone Bareilly patient who was released, a 28-year-old woman from Faridpur town, and the lone Pilibhit patient, 24-year-old youth, were being treated at private hospitals, which have been designated a Covid-19 Level-2 hospital. 

The woman, who gave birth to a baby at a private hospital in Rampur Garden of Bareilly, was found Covid-19 positive in a test carried out at a private laboratory. The Pilibhit youth underwent surgery at a private hospital on Pilibhit bypass of Bareilly, after he met with an accident. He too was found Covid-19 positive by the same private laboratory. Both patients had no travel history and their families claimed they had not come in contact with any positive case. 

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “On Friday, 106 samples, including the Faridpur woman and Pilibhit youth, were tested and found Covid-19 negative. As the last two have tested negative in three consecutive tests done in the government laboratory at Indian Veterinary Research Institute, they were discharged. With this, Faridpur will be removed from the list of hotspots from Saturday, and we will discontinue active case search there. Family members of both will also be discharged from quarantine. Even the two private hospitals where they had been admitted earlier, will be allowed to resume their out-patient department (OPD) service from Saturday.”

Budaun chief medical officer Dr Yashpal Singh said, “In Budaun, 26 samples were found negative on Friday.”

In Bareilly division, six active cases of Covid-19 are currently under treatment.


