10 Covid-19 cases crop up from new localities
2020-05-16
Nagpur: After being restricted to two hotspots—Mominpura and Satranjipura — for long time, Covid- 19 cases are now being reported from new areas of city. There have been 10 such cases in last 19 days. Source/origin of infection in six old cases is also yet to be ascertained. Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has continued to claim there was no community spread of virus yet.

A 65-year-old person admitted at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on May 13 tested positive on May 15. He is a resident of Khalasi Line, Gaddigodam, in West Nagpur and 10th case from an area not a containment zone. TOI learnt he is a daily wage earner and has severe comorbidities.

The team of Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) led by additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar has started tracing his family members, close contacts and will investigate source of infection.

On May 14, a 65-year-old person from Baba Farid Nagar, Kharbi, in South Nagpur, had tested positive. He was admitted at GMCH after local residents reported to police that he had come from outside some days ago.

Dr Gantawar said, “Person seems to a resident of Mominpura and went to Kharbi a few days ago. His sons are residents of Mominpura. We are investigating the case,” he said.

Another comorbidity person, a 29-year-old from Pandhrabodi in West Nagpur tested positive on May 7 and died on May 11. His 27 family members and close contacts were quarantined and tested but all came negative.

Admitted at GMCH, a 51-year-old from Jawahar Nagar in South Nagpur had tested positive on May 9. He was taking care of accounts in a transport company working from Kalamna. His 12 family members and close contacts were quarantined and tested and all were negative.

A 51-year-old homeopathic practitioner from Bada Tajbagh in South Nagpur had tested positive on May 6. Samples of her husband, son and a few more close contacts came negative.

On May 7, a youth from Kashi Nagar, Shatabdi chowk in South-West Nagpur admitted as SARI patient at GMCH had tested positive. Reports of his family members and close contacts are also negative. In this case, some doctors and staff of two hospitals were quarantined but their reports are not known.

A 44-year-old cancer patient from Sangam Nagar in North Nagpur had tested positive on April 26. The person, an auto driver, had undergone surgery on April 14 at a cancer hospital on Kamptee road and discharged on April 22. He came back for check-up complaining of cough and other health problems on April 24. Around 202 people were quarantined of whom only a seven-year-old boy was found positive. 59 doctors and staff of cancer hospital all came negative.

A 32-year-old truck cleaner from Khushi Nagar in North Nagpur tested positive on May 6. He had returned from Mumbai and other cities on April 27 and went for testing. Six of his family members were found negative.

In all these six cases, source of infection is yet to be ascertained. Dr Gantawar said, “Khushi Nagar patient had travelled to many cities so might have got infected there. In remaining five cases, we are finding links and may connect to existing containment zones.”

A 22-year-old football player from Parvati Nagar in South-West Nagpur was tested positive after death. This case was connected with Mominpura and Satranjipura. NMC nurse from Ganespeth who tested positive was linked with a positive case from Timki. These areas are containment zones.


