Rajasthan: 10 evacuees from Iran among 14 test positive for Covid-19
2020-04-01
JAIPUR: Fourteen people, including 10 evacuees from Iran, were diagnosed with Covid-19 till Tuesday afternoon, taking the total number of cases to 93 in the state. One each case has been reported from Jhunjhunu, Dungarpur, Jaipur and Ajmer.


Among the 93, there are 17 who were airlifted and quarantined at Army wellness centres in Jodhpur and Jaisalmer.

In Ajmer, 17-year-old sister of the 23-year-old salesman, who had toured several districts of Punjab before reaching Ajmer, where he was diagnosed with Covid-19 on March 28, has also been tested positive. His other family members, including 57-year-old father, 40-year-old mother and 20-year-old brother, were already found infected with the virus on March 29. His 17-year-old sister was tested negative on March 29, but now she has been found infected with the virus, said hospital sources.

In Dungarpur, two persons — a 48-year-old man and his 14-year-old son, were diagnosed with Covid-19 on March 27. They had covered long distance from Indore to Dungarpur by motorbike. Now, the 48-year-old person’s father might have contracted the virus from his son and grandson.

Besides, in Jhunjhunu, a 44-year-old person who had recently returned from Dubai has been found infected with the virus.

A case has also been reported from Jagannathji Ki Gali in the Walled City area, where a 60-year-old man was found suffering from influenza-like illness. Since his condition was serious, the doctors at SMS Hospital admitted him to the medical ICU. Health department officials said the 60-year-old man came in contact with a Covid-19 patient, who lives in Phhuta Khurra. So far, 13 people have been found infected with the virus in the Walled City area, which is now turning into a Covid-19 hotbed.

Besides, 10 more people who were airlifted from Iran and kept in a quarantine facility in Army wellness centres in Jodhpur and Jaisalmer, tested positive. On Monday, seven evacuees were found infected with the virus. Eight of them are undergoing treatment at SN Medical College, Jodhpur, while nine have been admitted to AIIMS, Jodhpur.

“Out of 26 Covid-19 positive cases in Bhilwara, 13 have recovered and tested negative for the disease,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

