10 Indonesian Tablighis held in Mumbai for ‘attempt to murder’
2020-04-28
MUMBAI: Bandra police recently arrested 10 of the 12 Indonesians who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat religious congregation in Delhi and travelled to Mumbai on March 23. After they were tracked down to a building in Bandra (West), all six couples were put under institutional quarantine at a hotel. Two men tested positive for Covid-19 and have been quarantined till May 8. The other 10, including six women, were taken into custody after their negative reports were received on April 23.


All 12 had allegedly not followed the lockdown orders and visited a few mosques, including one in Dharavi, thus attracting charges under IPC sections for culpable homicide not amounting to murder and attempt to murder, said the police.

Indonesians stayed at 3 places in city before Bandra

They were found to have roamed around in the city and attended prayer sessions at mosques. This is the main reason why they have been booked under Indian Penal Code sections 304 for culpable homicide not amounting to murder, 307 for attempt to murder, 188 for disobedience to an order duly promulgated by a public servant and 269 for a negligent act, besides the Epidemic Diseases Act, a Bandra police officer told TOI.

Read our coronavirus live blog for all the latest news and updates
The case was registered in the first week of April against the six couples after police received a tip-off that they had moved into a flat in Bandra. Police are collecting information about the person who had given them the place to stay. “We learnt the couples attended the congregation and came to Mumbai in different batches on different dates and stayed in three different locations in the city before relocating to Bandra,” said a police officer. 

Coronavirus: Centre, states wary of lifting curbs, graded easing on cardsThe sum of consultations PM Modi had with chief ministers on Monday, official sources said, was that most states wanted the lockdown to continue with some easing of curbs, depending on the situation in a particular area. Green zones may witness the piecemeal lifting of restrictions while tough stipulations will remain in red zones like Delhi, Mumbai and Ahmedabad. 
The couples are in India on tourist visas. Mumbai police spokesperson DCP Pranaya Ashok said all were quarantined and 10 were arrested after they tested negative. “The 10 will be produced before Bandra court after they complete their five-day custody on Tuesday.”



