10 labourers working in Mumbai testCovid +ve in Kheri and Shahjahanpur
2020-05-15
Bareilly: Nine migrant labourers of Lakhimpur Kheri district and one from Shahjahanpur have been tested positive for Covid-19 late on Wednesday. All of them had returned from Mumbai and were quarantined at home. The total number of Covid-19 cases in Kheri has now risen to 14 with 10 active, while Shahjahanpur’s tally has reached two with one active.Around 3,000 migrant workers have returned from Covid-affected Maharashtra in the recent past and they have been quarantined at home after thermal screening. Health department is randomly sending the samples of the migrants and on Wednesday, test results of 36 arrived, and nine of them were found positive. All the nine migrants were residing in Mumbai’s Dharavi and used to work as labourers or domestic help.Kheri CMO Dr Manoj Agarwal told TOI, “A cluster of nearly 50 labourers had returned from Mumbai’s Dharavi and nine of them are reported positive for Covid-19. We have sent the samples of remaining members of the group and report is expected in the next 24 hours. To be on the safer side, we are trying to identify if any migrant had arrived in the village on his or her own. We have also sanitised the village, and its five hamlets in Nighasan block. All the new cases are symptomatic and have been admitted at L1 hospital for treatment.”In Shahjahanpur, a resident of Rukanpur village in Kalaan area had returned with his brother in-law from Mumbai on a truck. After getting dropped off in Kanpur, he came to Shahjahanpur travelling on foot while his brother in-law reached his village in Farrukhabad district. The locals alerted the health department and his sample was sent for Covid-19 testing on Tuesday.Shahjahanpur’s deputy CMO Dr Laxman Singh told TOI, “A youth was tested positive for Covid-19, so we have sealed the village and residents have been advised to stay at home. The entire village has been barricaded and samples of seven family members will be sent for testing. The youth is asymptomatic and has been sent to Bareilly for treatment.”He further said, “Nearly 30 migrants belonging to Shahjahanpur city who returned from Mumbai have been quarantined at shelter homes on the city’s outskirts. They would only be sent home once they are tested negative.”