10 more test +ve for Covid-19 in Solapur
2020-04-21
Kolhapur: As many as 10 new Covid-19 positive cases were reported from Solapur city on Monday, taking the tally of active cases to 23 in the city. 

According to district collector Milind Shambharkar, all the 10 patients are being treated at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Sarvopchar Rugnalaya—the civil hospital in Solapur.

Shambharkar added that two patients who have tested positive for Covid-19 already had a case of severe acute respiratory illness (SARI). The remaining eight patients were all close contacts of the patients who had previously contracted the infection.

The district administration is on high alert as there has been a surge in the number of positive cases in the district in the past few days. Movement across the city has been restricted. 

Shambharkar said that they have formed six containment zones in Solapur city, where the survey was underway, to curb the spread of the infection. The zones collectively constitute around 14,000 families and around 74,000 residents.

“Around 123 teams have been deployed to conduct the survey in the zones. We are hoping that the citizens cooperate,” he said.

He added that from the past few weeks till Monday noon, they have tested 792 people. 

The throat swab sample test reports of 630 people have arrived, while results of 162 suspects are still awaited. While the reports of 605 people returned negative, 25 have tested positive for the contagion. Two people have already succumbed to the infection. 

“Currently, all the patients are being treated at the civil hospital. Two private hospitals have been put on standby mode in case of an emergency,” said Shambharkar.

Satara police warn citizens of fake account

Satara police warned citizens to not fall for fake advertisements making rounds on social media claiming to provide liquor the amid lockdown.

Satara’s additional superintendent of police Dhiraj Patil said that social media users have been asked to pay 50% money in advance if they wanted liquor. When the source of the advertisement was checked, it was found that the mobile number belonged to someone in Uttar Pradesh and that it was a fake advertisment.

Patil appealed to citizens not to fall prey to such types of advertisements.


