10 travellers back from Italy quarantined in Pune's Naidu hospital
2020-03-02
PUNE: Ten travellers who recently returned from Italy were quarantined at the PMC’s Naidu Infectious Diseases Hospital on Sunday after they complained of minor illness. 


Their throat swab samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) to rule of the novel coronavirus infection (COVID-19). 

 
 
“They complained of cough, cold, fever, sore throat and headache, following which they were quarantined. We will get their report on Monday,” a health official of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) said. 

Passengers arriving from China, Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, South Korea, Japan, Nepal, Indonesia, Vietnam and Malaysia are already undergoing screening at the airport. Iran and Italy were added to the list on February 26 on the instructions of the Union government. 

“Travellers residing in Maharashtra, coming from Iran and Italy, are also being screened at Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA). They are tracked for 14 days to rule out the novel coronavirus infection,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate said.

A total of 61,939 passengers returning from China and other affected countries have been screened at CSMIA since January 18. Of them, 370 were put under 14-day surveillance and 125 were quarantined in Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur, among other parts of the state, after they complained of flu-like symptoms. Most of them tested negative for the infection and were discharged. 

A total of 241 of the 370 other travellers, who also visited these countries but didn’t develop any symptoms, have completed the mandatory 14-day follow-up by staying quarantined in their respective homes. The remaining travellers are being followed up with regularly, a state health official said. 

In Pune, 61 travellers were quarantined at the civic-run Naidu hospital over the last five weeks after they complained of minor illness. “A total of 51 travellers have tested negative for the virus so far and have been discharged. The reports of the 10 newly admitted travellers are awaited,” Ramchandra Hankare, chief of PMC’s health department, said. 

Apart from Pune, Mumbai and Thane, travellers are also being monitored in Nanded, Buldhana, Nagpur, Wardha, Sangli, Ahmednagar, Amaravati, Palghar, Jalgaon, Chandrapur and Satara districts. 

Health officials have said family, friends, colleagues and other close contacts of the travellers who returned from the affected countries should report themselves to health officials in case they develop flu-like symptoms. 

The Naidu hospital in Pune is designated as the isolation facility for residents/travellers returning from affected countries, an official said.

