100 among 3,800 foreign returnees showing Covid-19 symptoms: Odisha
2020-03-25
Bhubaneswar: The state government on Tuesday projected that at least 2,345 people in Odisha would suffer from Covid-19 by May 31. This, they said, was the best possible scenario. 

The government’s Covid-19 spokesperson, Subroto Bagchi, said the number might increase up to over 36,000 Covid-19 positive patients in the state. The figure for the country was projected to be at least 58,000 people and a maximum of 10 lakh, Bagchi added.

The spokesperson said 3,861 foreign returnees had registered on the 104 helpline and the government portal. Of them, around 100 have shown symptoms of coronavirus. “The government is monitoring their condition,” he said.

Bagchi said 45 people — both foreign returnees and their close contacts — were in hospital isolation. The other foreign returnees and their close contacts are in home quarantine.

The number of confirmed Covid-19 patients in the state remains two. Their condition is stable.

Chief minister Naveen Patnaik announced launch of a new programme — ‘Mo Jeebana (My Life)’ — in which people were encouraged to swear in the name of their family that they would not step out of home. In an emotional appeal, he said, “In the last 20 years, whatever requests I have made, you have responded positively to them. The request I am making today is the most important of all. Do swear in the name of your family not to venture out. If it is urgent, ensure 20 seconds hand-washing on return. Make a video of your pledge and share the same in social media,” he said.

Bagchi also asked people to take the lockdown seriously, saying it would be impossible to manage the situation if there was a spurt in corona patients. “In India, there are an average of 70 hospital beds per one lakh population,” he said.

During the lockdown, patients needing emergency treatment, healthcare professionals and those involved in essential services can move around. The government will curb all non-essential travel. To ensure compliance with the lockdown, the government has stopped all construction works across the state and closed all parks and non-essential commercial establishments. Banks, fuel filling stations, milk booths, groceries, fruits and vegetable outlets would remain open, Bagchi said.


