100 unidentified people booked for violating lockdown rules
2020-04-29
AGRA: Aligarh police on Monday booked 100 unidentified people in the district’s Jangalgadhi area, where residents allegedly violated lockdown rules and came out of their houses for shopping without wearing masks or following social distancing norms. Three people have tested positive for Covid-19 in the area. 

The action was taken after a video purportedly shot by a resident, clearly showing a large number of people shopping for essentials without following social distancing norms, went viral.

Earlier, three members from the same family in Jangalgadhi area had tested positive for novel coronavirus.

Abhishek, Aligarh SP (city), said a case was registered after verifying the video. He said all the violators have been booked under IPC sections 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) and provisions of the Epidemic Disease Act, 1897, at Delhi Gate police station.

After this incident, district magistrate CB Singh on Tuesday called a meeting of the mayor and city cleric along with other community members to instruct them to appeal in their brethren to follow lockdown rules and maintain social distancing.

He told TOI, “I have asked them to spread information at their own level as people are not following the norms and are putting their and the lives of others at risk.”

When contacted, Aligarh mayor Mohammad Furkan said, “I and shahar mufti, Khalid Hameed, have decided to appeal through newspapers and have also directed local councillors to visit their respective areas and inform residents about the importance of Covid-19 lockdown." 

He said this lockdown is necessary not only for the nation and city but for the people and their family members, too. “We will do our best to ensure strict implementation of the lockdown,” he said, adding that many people are not taking it seriously, which could be disastrous for the city.


