100 ‘contacts’ of third Covid-19 patient
2020-03-28
BHUBANESWAR: The state government on Friday said the state might be heading towards stage 3 of Covid-19 (community transmission), a day after a man who has no travel history — either abroad or outside Odisha — and did not come in contact with any coronavirus patient tested positive for the virus.


The health department has so far traced more than 100 people who came in ‘direct contact’ with the man in the past few days and immediately put them under quarantine.

“We may be moving towards Phase 3 of the transmission (when the source of infection is not established). People must strictly abide by the lockdown norms and stay indoors,” Subroto Bagchi, state’s spokesperson for Covid-19, said on Friday. 

Bagchi said about 10 teams were working round the clock to trace people who might have come in contact with the man in the last few days. Government insiders said the figure could stand around 200.

Health secretary Nikunja Bihari Dhal said, “The rapid response teams have already quarantined 100 people who have come in direct contact with the man. The swab samples of five persons who are his close contacts have been sent for testing.” 

Sources said staff members of a bank, where the man’s wife works, are among those asked to stay in self-isolation. This apart, an employee of the Vidhan Sabha dispensary, where the patient had initially gone for treatment with flu-like symptoms on March 16, has been asked to stay in home isolation. A doctor, paramedical staff and nurses of a private hospital have also been put under quarantine.

The man was admitted to the private hospital for two days from March 23 before being shifted to the isolation facility in a government-run hospital on Thursday. The government also asked patients not to visit the private hospital where he had sought consultation, but allowed the treatment of patients who are already admitted there. “It will be difficult to shift patients from there because some of them are in the ICU,” a government official said.

The government spokesperson said the 60-year-old man had travelled to Delhi and Rewari in Haryana between March 7 and 10 with his family. The man — third from Odisha to test positive for Covid19 had travelled on an Indigo flight from Delhi to Bhubaneswar with his wife and daughter on March 10.

Earlier, a 31-year-old man with a travel history to Italy and a 20-year-old who had returned from the UK tested positive for the virus. The government authorities said their conditions are asymptomatic and stable. 

As many as 37 persons are in hospital isolation in the state for suspected symptoms. A government statement said samples of around 256 people were sent for the Covid-19 test. Of the total, the results of 67 are being awaited.


