100-bed quarantine facility comes up at Kalagram
2020-03-19
AURANGABAD: In its fight to contain the spread of coronavirus, the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) and the district administration have come up with a 100-bed quarantine facility at Kalagram, which is spread across seven acres and is located in the Cidco area of the city. These arrangements are in addition to the 30 isolation-bed arrangement made at the Chikalthana-based district general civil hospital.


Health authorities said the arrangement made at Kalagram is the largest in the region. If required, the authorities are ready to increase the beds at this centre, apart from setting up more such accessible quarantine facilities in Aurangabad.

Responding to a letter sent by AMC chief Astik Kumar Pandey on Wednesday, district collector Uday Choudhary sanctioned Rs 2.5 crore for immediate procurement of equipment and medicines required to tackle Covid-19. “Rs 1 cr from state disaster fund and Rs 1.5 cr from the district planning committee have been immediately sanctioned to the civic body for the purchase of required items to tackle the outbreak,” said Choudhary.

The items the civic body intends to purchase include 50,000 triple layer masks, 2,000 personal protection devices, 10,000 N-95 masks, about 100 infrared thermometers, thermal body scanners, digital as well as portable X-ray machines, about five adult-cum-paediatric ventilators, essential drugs and other articles.

Sources said municipal commissioner sent a detailed requisition letter to the district administration seeking funds for the purchase of equipment, which was immediately sanctioned. 

“We got Rs 2.5 cr for prioritizing the items and going for emergency purchases as soon as possible. We are ready with a 100-quarantine bed facility at Kalagram,” the AMC commissioner told TOI.

The officer said the civic body is leaving no stone unturned in terms of preparations, precautions and preventive measures, which are being carried out on a war-footing, to contain the outbreak of disease.

The civic body’s health department is working in close coordination with the district health department as well as the Government Medical College and Hospital authorities for monitoring the developments.


