100% lockdown in Maratha colony till April 21: KMC
2020-04-10
KOLHAPUR: The three-day 100% lockdown in Kasba Bawda and Line Bazaar areas will be lifted from Friday onwards, barring Maratha colony where the third confirmed Covid-19 case was reported on Monday. 


Due to the 100% lockdown, grocery shops, milk shops and markets in these colonies were shut. The 40,000-odd people living in these areas were confined to their homes. The local community groups made arrangements to supply the essentials to the residents living in these areas. 

A local leader part of the monitoring the lockdown said, “People have to follow the lockdown rules. People can come to buy the essentials they need from the grocery and medical shops. Though we will open the roads, people will not be allowed to go out with their vehicles except in the case of an emergency.” 

The Kolhapur Municipal Corporation (KMC) has quarantined over 17 people in various centres. Though the throat swab samples of these patients have tested negative, they will still be kept under observation. 

An official from the civc administration said, “The lockdown at Maratha Colony will continue till April 21. The KMC has made arrangements to supply essentials to the residents here.” 

On Thursday, mayor Nilofer Ajrekar supplied two vegetables free of cost to the residents living in the colony. She said that over 300 people lived in the colony and that the civic administration would address the needs of each and everyone as long as the 100% lockdown was in place. 

A senior police official deployed at the containment zone said that even after complete lockdown ended in Kasba Bawda and Line Bajaar areas, police would continue patrolling the areas at regular intervals during the day and at night to keep a check on unruly citizens venturing out of their homes without any valid reason. 

“No one will be allowed morning or evening walks. Everyone has to wear a mask before moving out for buying any essentials. We are communicating with representatives from every lane. They have been asked to provide inputs of the situation in their locality so that we can help the locals in every possible way,” said a police officer. 


