100% lockdown for few days in Kasba Bawda, Line Bazaar
2020-04-07
KOLHAPUR: The residents of Kasba Bawda and Line Bazaar areas will observe complete lockdown, meaning no one will be allowed to step outside their houses.


This comes after the first Covid-19 case was reported from the Maratha Colony of Kasba Bawda.

An elderly woman had tested positive for coronavirus. Immediately after the report, the civic administration deployed its staff to disinfect the entire area. 

The police sealed the locality and declared it as a containment zone. No one will be allowed to move in or out of the locality till everyone there has been screened.

Civic chief Mallinath Kalshetti said, “We have quarantined five people who were in direct contact with the Covid-19 patient. A domestic help has been traced and she will be screened as well. Our teams will go to every house and conduct a survey from Tuesday. The area has been declared containment zone.”

After primary enquiry, it was found that the elderly woman went to a private hospital, then to a government hospital in Line Bazaar to get her health checked. The civic official said she was referred by the doctors of the government hospital to the CPR hospital for screening. 

The locals said she did not come out of her house in the past few days and not many of them had come in contact with her.

“The colony is in a single lane. Therefore, we immediately contacted the residents. Many of them have said that they have not come in contact with her, but we will still take them for screening. We have advised all of them to stay inside their houses. We have locked the gates of the lane and other lanes so that nobody can leave,” said Kalshetti.

The residents of the nearby colonies and societies will have to face inconvenience for some time. The locals through social media declared 100% lockdown of the locality for the next three to four days.

A local, requesting anonymity, said, “Only three milk dairies and medical shops of Kasba Bawda and Line Bazaar areas will remain open at all times. The grocery shops will be open for three hours in the morning and three hours in the evening. No vehicular movement will be allowed.”

The two areas combined have a total population of more than 50,000 people. 

The local police and district administration said that all the major roads connecting the internal areas of the city will, however, remain open.


