Coronavirus scare: 1,000 Ghaziabad families chant mantra to stop pandemic
2020-03-23
GHAZIABAD: As people across the country stayed home on Sunday to observe the nationwide ‘janta curfew’, and blew conch shells and sounded the bells in large numbers exactly at 5pm, residents in several societies of Crossings Republik went a step ahead and chanted the ‘Mahamrityunjaya Mantra’ in chorus. The sacred utterance is believed to assure longevity, ward off the evil, and prevent calamities and untimely deaths, the residents said.


Coronavirus in India live updates

At 4pm, they connected their phones or music systems with stereo speakers through Bluetooth and played the mantra across the residential blocks. “More than 1,000 families from as many as 18 societies of Crossings Republik held a one-hour-long chanting of the mantra, which removes fear from the mind of people and fill them with positive energy, from 4 pm to 5 pm, said Ujjawal Mishra, general secretary of Crossings Republik Flat Owners Association. 

Mishra added that it was a spontaneous decision. “All of us were sitting at home due to 'janta curfew' and thought of doing something creative. As many people were already doing pujas and chanting the mantra inside their respective houses, we thought of doing it together, at a mass level,” he shared. 

What followed was quick coordination. Two WhatsApp groups were formed and within half an hour, more than 500 joined the groups and expressed their willingness to participate, said Kshitiz Singhal, a resident of Paramount Symphony.

Singhal informed that since the district has been put under lockdown till March 25, Crossings residents have decided to hold this particular event every evening.

Many residents appreciated the effort and said at a time when people in every corner of the world are scared due to the deadly coronavirus infection, the event created a festive atmosphere.

After completing the chanting, residents came out to their balconies and terraces to clap and blow conch shells to express appreciation for those providing essential services as suggested by Narendra Modi.


