Maharashtra: 1,021 test negative for Covid-19 in region
2020-04-09
AURANGABAD: The throat swab samples of as many as 1,021 individuals showing symptoms of Covid-19, from eight districts of Marathwada, have tested negative till Tuesday.


A total of 1,045 have been tested for Covid-19. Of them, 24 have tested positive. The authorities have maintained that those who have tested negative will still have to remain under home quarantine for 14 days as a precautionary measure. Also, special caution is being exercised for those who were in close contact with the positive patients but have tested negative.

Aurangabad district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said irrational fears associated with Covid-19 is forcing people to misinterpret symptoms of common flu with that of coronavirus. “We appeal each and every member of the society to follow the lockdown and social distancing norms during this crucial stage of fight against the pandemic,” he said.

Citing protocol formed for dealing with the Covid-19 outbreak, Osmanabad district collector Deepa Mudhole-Munde said those who were in close contact with positive cases, but their lab reports have come out as negative would undergo three more tests over a stipulated quarantine period of 14 days.

“Such individuals have been sent to institutional quarantine and must be under watch for 14 days to completely negate the possibility of Covid-19 infection,” she said.

As per official data, lab reports of a total 299 of Covid-19 suspected patients across eight districts of Marathwada were awaited by Tuesday, while throat swab samples of 27 people were rejected due to non-compliance with the laid down procedure of sample collection.

By Tuesday, 2,397 individuals have been home quarantined in the region whereas another 247 are in institutional quarantine. In addition, a total of 587 persons were under monitoring in designated isolation wards.

On the other hand, the tally of confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Marathwada on Tuesday reached 27 (including 2 cases in private hospitals and one death).

Authorities from Aurangabad division have been also tracing people who came in contact with Covid-19 patients. 


