1,059 Telangana families have more than one Covid-19 positive member
2020-05-31
HYDERABAD: As many as 1,059 families in Telangana have more than one member who has tested positive for Covid-19, said state health authorities on Saturday. Of these, at least 50% were affected by the virus during phase three of the lockdown. 


Statistics reveal that the the third lockdown— from May 4 to May 30 — has seen the number of cases multiplying much faster as compared to the two previous lockdown between March 22 and May 3.

With substantial relaxations extended during the third phase, Telangana recorded 1,005 new cases were (of the total 2,008 local cases) while 541 families were impacted (of the total 1,059 families). Among 2,008 cases, 984 have been traced to the Markaz meeting in Delhi, with the first Markaz cases being reported on March 16 and the last Markaz contact testing positive on May 24. 

Meanwhile, state health authorities, on Saturday, stressed the need to continue taking adequate precautions like personal hygiene, wearing masks and maintaining social distance during the post lockdown period. Speaking at a press conference, director public health, Telangana Dr G Srinivas Rao listed out examples of Suryapet, Borabanda and Shadnagar where the virus spread due to parties held despite the lockdown.

“Covid-19 cases are increasing rapidly in the state and are likely to continue to be on the rise. Due to relaxation and increased people’s movement, the virus spread quickly but carelessness is another reason for it. A 27-year-old from Borabanda went to his grandmother’s place at Pahadi Shareef and partied with 25 people during lockdown. Thus 14 people of one family and 11 different families contracted the virus,” he said.

Not only the elderly staying at home, but even the youth who go out need to take precautions, Dr Rao said. 

“We have 210 cases of people over 60 years, but not all of them went out. Because their family members returning from outside were not careful, the elderly too contracted the virus. Since symptoms are not quickly and easily visible, youngsters tend to forgo precautions such as social distancing,” he said, adding that active surveillance is being conducted to check cases of influenza-like illnesses within containment zones. 

