108 helpline turns out to be a saviour on wheels amid battle against Covid
2020-05-24
Nagpur: Maharashtra Emergency Medical Service (MEMS), which runs the 108 ambulance helpline, is proving to be one of the front-line soldiers in the Covid-19 pandemic situation. By May 18, these ambulances have served 11,718 patients in Vidarbha. These ambulances are used to transport Covid-19 suspects from their houses to the respective government hospitals. They also drop cured Covid-19 patients to their residence after discharge. 

Dr Deepakkumar Uke, operations head, East Maharashtra, said our ambulance drivers too deserve appreciation and recognition as ‘Corona Warriors’ as they are risking their lives in transporting potential Covid-19 positive patients.

“Total 937 ambulances, including 233 advanced life support (ALS) and 704 basic life support (BLS), with over 5,000 emergency medical service professionals like doctors, drivers and managers are working in MEMS. In Vidarbha, 151 such ambulances are serving in 11 districts,” said Dr Uke. 

In the present pandemic situation, 25% of these ambulances have been identified in corporation areas for serving all suspected as well as confirmed Covid-19 patients from community screening centres like railway stations, airports etc and hospitals. 

All dedicated Coivd specific ambulances are equipped with oxygen delivery system (ODS), two jumbo oxygen cylinders, one portable oxygen cylinder and disposable oxygen delivery masks.

Till May 17, total 54,164 patients were transported by MEMS team in these ambulances from community to healthcare facilities and also from hospital to quarantine facilities and back home. These include 11,718 from 11 districts of Vidarbha. Here, these ambulances also transported confirmed Covid-19 positive patients from Amravati to Nagpur and from Chandrapur to Nagpur. 

Uke informed that teams at 108 ambulance service are taking special care to be safe and keep others safe from infection. “Sterilization and fumigation of all ambulances serving Covid-19 suspects or diagnosed patients is being done immediately. Standard face mask, glove, hand sanitizer and complete PPE kits are provided to the ambulance staff as per requirements,” he said. 

All staffers have been given special training in disinfection, disaster specific communication and technology integration and emergency response.


