10th Covid death in Bhopal, all gas victims
2020-04-26
BHOPAL: The coronavirus pandemic is turning out to be hellish for survivors of the 1984 Bhopal gas tragedy, the world’s worst industrial accident. Ten of them have been killed by the virus now, sparking panic in the community that is bound by tragedy rather than caste or religion.


All of Bhopal’s 10 dead Covid-19 patients are gas victims. And nearly all of them tested positive after death, including the latest victim, 70-year-old Razaq Qureshi, a resident of Putlighar. He died at the state-run Hamidia Hospital on April 22 and his report came positive on Friday, said Qureshi's son. He had hypertension and diabetes.

Gas victims are particularly vulnerable to Covid-19 as exposure to the gas in 1984 damaged their lungs and other organs, and left them with weakened immunity.

Madhya Pradesh high court recently directed BMHRC – the hospital exclusively for gas victims – to test every visiting patient for the virus so that they could be treated in time. By then, seven gas survivors had died without knowing they had the coronavirus infection, and the court wanted to prevent this and facilitate early treatment.

But this practice is yet to begin, leading to a complaint being filed with the Supreme Court monitoring committee that keeps a watch on gas relief hospitals, including BMHRC.

Razaq Qureshi was among three gas victims to die on Friday of complications related to Covid-19. M S Qureshi, 68, a resident of Jumerati, died during treatment at AIIMS-Bhopal. He had suffered a paralytic attack in the past and had hypertension. Sixty-year-old Abdul Gaffar, a vegetable wholesaler, who lived in Bagh Umraodulha, also died at AIIMS-Bhopal a few hours after Qureshi. He was undergoing treatment there since April 3. He had diabetes and suffered from after-effects of a cerebral stroke. His son and wife have also tested positive for coronavirus.

The seven gas victims, who died of coronavirus earlier, are Naresh Khatik, Jagannath Maithil, Imran, Rajkmuar Yadav, Ashfaq Nadvi, Yunus and Riyazuddin.

The health bulletin issued by the Bhopal chief medical and health officer, however, reported only nine coronavirus deaths in Bhopal till Saturday evening. Asked about Razaq Qureshi’s death at Hamidia Hospital, the CMHO said: “Let me confirm.”

