11 arrested in UP & Uttarakhand for spreading rumour about Covid-19
2020-03-24
RUDRAPUR/BIJNOR: People in several cities of western UP and neighbouring Uttarakhand spent sleepless night due to a mischievous WhatsApp message which claimed that people are dying in their sleep due to novel coronavirus. Police had to use public announcement systems to quell the rumour on late Sunday night.


In Uttarakhand’s Udham Singh Nagar and Haridwar districts police traced and booked 12 people and arrested three of them. While in UP’s Bijnor, at least eight persons have been arrested and the state police’s cyber cell was trying to trace the origin of the message which also contained photos of dead people.

In hill state’s Udham Singh Nagar, police arrested three persons after registering a case against 10 people for the rumour mongering. District’s senior superintendent of police (SSP) Barinderjit Singh said, “The photo used in the WhatsApp message was that of a suicide in Delhi which took place a few months ago. Three persons have been arrested.”

In Haridwar, police have booked two persons for spreading the rumours.

Hundreds of residents in the three cities, which are adjacent, were seen on roads on late Sunday night with some offering prayers while the others trying to ascertain the authenticity of the message. Similar message was circulated in other neighbouring cities also.

In Udham Singh Nagar, police teams visited several colonies and tried to calm down the residents who were out on streets. In Rudrapur, the headquarters of the district, policemen made public announcements in their bid to put an end to the rumour.

“Panic gripped Rudrapur’s Transit Camp colony and people came out on roads in huge numbers. They lit up fires, performed pooja and chanted mantras,” said Monu Nishad, municipal councillor of the area.

Superintendent of police (SP) city Devendra Peencha said, “The janata curfew went well. But, in the night, some miscreants spread these rumours. Police personnel were sent to several such spots and they tried to quell the rumour by making announcements. Strict actions will be taken against those who spread rumours.”

On Monday evening, SSP Singh said, “The accused have been booked under Disaster Management Act 54, Information Technology Act 66, Section 336 (endangering life or personal safety of others), 270 (to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life), 188 (disobedience of an order duly promulgated by a public servant) and 81 Police Act and other relevant sections of the IPC.”


