11 clerics with Tablighi links sent to jail from quarantine in Jamshedpur
2020-04-19
Jamshedpur: Police on Saturday sent 11 foreign clerics to Ghatshila central jail on charges of violating visa norms and the nationwide lockdown after they completed their quarantine period. Police have charged the 11 Muslim clerics from Kazakhstan, China and Kyrgyzstan under Section 14 (B) of the Foreigners Act, 1946 for undertaking religious preaching while being in India on a tourist visa.

“These foreigners were visiting India on a tourist visa and they were not supposed to indulge in propagating any religion or preaching,” SP (rural) Piyush Pandey said. The clerics were tested thrice for the novel coronavirus during the 25-day quarantine period and then legal proceedings were initiated against them.

The clerics were put under quarantine on March 25 after they went to Steel City from Rargaon near Ranchi after the delegation was apprehended while on its way to the Ranchi airport to catch a flight to Delhi. The clerics had arrived in India in January this year and were touring different parts of the country to propagate Islam upon invitation from the Tablighi Jamaat.

While the delegation was in quarantine at the police training centre at Musaboni in Ghatshila, a state CID and Intelligence Bureau team questioned them on March 27 to collect information about their travel history and religious activities. The police lodged a case against the clerics at Jaduguda police station on April 7 and forwarded them to jail on Saturday.

The delegation had attended the Jamaat’s markaz at Nizamuddin in New Delhi from March 13 to 15 and then reached Jharkhand. During their stay in the state, the delegation travelled to Seraikela, Chandil, Bundu and Ranchi, met local Islamic clerics and participated in various programmes.

One such programme was scheduled to be held in Kapali on the outskirts of Steel City on March 25, but was cancelled at the last minute. The police caught the delegation while it was returning to Ranchi. “The clerics have conceded that they had visited India for Tablighi work even in the past,” said a police inspector who was part of the team that interrogated the clerics.


