11 foreigners, 16 of two families suspected of attending Nizamuddin Jamaat, quarantined
2020-04-02
KANPUR: Around ten Tablighi delegations, including one from abroad, affiliated to Nizamuddin Markaz are in the city. They arrived on March 14 and 21 and comprise 129 members.


The district administration has quarantined all 11 members of foreign delegation and 16 members of two families of Budhia Ghat on suspicion of attending the Nizamuddin Jamaat.

District administration officials said the delegation includes 4 Afghans, 3 Iranians, 1 British, and three Indians.

“All 11 people, including foreign nationals, have been quarantined at Lala Lajpat Rai hospital. Of the remaining 16, nine are at Ursala Horseman hospital and seven others, all members of one family, are quarantined at their home,” the official said.

The foreign delegation visited Nizamuddin Markaz, went to Rajasthan and reached Kanpur on March 14 and has been staying at Suffa Mosque in Babupurwa. The members include Yazdani Abdul Raheem, Phooladi Ibrahim and Rigi Yunus (all from Iran), Sabir Abdul Raheem, Jan Mohammad, Jarinjai, M Barat Rahamatullah, Hashimi Syed Md (all from Afghanistan), Daud Ayub, Ismail (UK). Among three Indian members, two belong to Indore and one to Kerala. They had to go back to Nizamuddin Markaz but had to stay due to lockdown.

The district administration was relaxed on not finding any name from Kanpur in the list released by Nizamuddin Markaz.

The administration received a complaint on phone on Tuesday evening from Golaghat. The caller informed that nine members of a family had recently visited Delhi. The family members, however, said they had visited Delhi to attend a marriage. The family consists of two women, one six month old girl child and rest all males.

The control room got another call informing that 7 members of a family had returned from Nizamuddin. They were screened but no symptoms were found hence had were asked to quarantine at home.

DM Dr Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari informed that LIU is on alert and all the Jamaat delegation members are being scanned and quarantined.


