11 fresh Covid-19 positive cases reported in Sambhal, Moradabad and Rampur
2020-05-09
BAREILLY: After a gap of five days as many as 11 new Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Sambhal, Moradabad and Rampur districts on Friday. Health officials said that all five cases in Sambhal are of those who had recently arrived from Delhi. In Moradabad, among four fresh Covid-19 positive cases, one is a milkman who runs a dairy near Maqbara Chowki.


Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Anita Singh said that it was the first time when any coronavirus positive case was reported from the district's Gunnaur area.

“On May 2, some labourers working at Azadpur mandi in Delhi had arrived here. They are residents of different villages in Gunnaur sub-division. All the migrant workers have already been shifted to quarantine centres as soon as they arrived here and their samples were sent for examination. Today after the report arrived, five of them were tested positive for the virus,” the CMO added.

Individuals who tested positive include two of Tarfari village and three of Mehua village. The health department officials said that after five new cases, the tally in Sambhal has reached 29. As many as eight patients have been discharged while one had succumbed to the deadly disease. Currently, there are 20 active cases in the district.

On the other hand, Moradabad CMO Dr MC Garg said that two samples were repeated and they again tested positive while four new cases have taken the tally to 120. According to district magistrate RK Singh, as many as 88 patients have been discharged after successfully completing their quarantine and being tested negative, while five persons died due to Novel coronavirus in Moradabad. Currently, 27 positive cases are there in Moradabad.

“Among the new cases, a woman resident of Mugalpura and three men from Galshaheed and Maqbara areas have tested positive. All three areas are hotspots,” the CMO said.

In Rampur, two migrant workers who had come back from Ahmedabad on May 3 have tested positive. Rampur CMO Dr Subodh Sharma said that five youths of Pipalsana village and Asara colony, working in Gujarat, had returned home. They were placed under quarantine. “Pipalsana resident, 20, and Asara resident, 26, have tested positive for the virus. Their reports came in on Friday,” he added.


