Kozhikode: 11 in family of Covid-19 victim test positive
2020-05-27
KOZHIKODE: As many as 11 persons in the family of Asiya who died of Covid-19 at Kozhikode government medical college on Monday have tested positive for the virus. Her husband, two sons, one daughter, two daughters-in-law and one grandchild were infected earlier while four more grandchildren tested positive on Tuesday. The latest cases are all girls, two aged 9 and another two aged 13 and 15.


“Asiya’s is a joint family with 24 members,” Dharmadom panchayat president Baby Sarojam said. “Her husband and sons are engaged in wholesale fish sale in Thalassery market. They might have travelled to distant places to procure fish and this could be a possible source of infection,” she said.

“Another possibility is from the private hospital in Kozhikode where she underwent treatment. It was at the hospital that she was tested positive,” the panchayat president said.

She said a joint meeting of revenue and police officials was convened on Monday to expedite the process of source tracing. “We have noticed that vehicles carrying goods are violating norms after relaxations in lockdown. This raises the risk of disease spread,” she said.

Thalassery DSP K V Venugopal said Asiya had a limited number of contacts as she was bedridden.

"Only her immediate relatives and women in the neighbourhood had direct contact with her," he said.

Asiya's body was buried at Kannamparambu Juma Masjid in Kozhikode on Tuesday by following all protocol.

According to the medical bulletin, she was a "hypertensive, seizure disorder patient with history of subarachnoid hemorrhage status post surgery in 2002, presented with decreased food intake and altered sensorium for the last one month."

She was admitted to a hospital in Thalassery on April 20 for urinary tract infection and metabolic encephalopathy. Her condition worsened on Monday night and death occurred in the night due to cardiac arrest, the bulletin said.

In the meantime, containment zones in Kannur have risen to 32 wards in 20 local bodies. These include some wards in Kannur corporation, Payyannur and Mattannur municipality, Chirakkal, Peralassery and Pinarayi panchayats.

The Payyannur judicial first class magistrate court has been closed for 14 days after an accused who surrendered in the court tested postive. The magistrate, assistant public prosecutor, court staff and police personnel have been asked to go on quarantine.

In another development, 23 personnel attached to Kannapuram police station have been sent in quarantine after an accused they arrested tested positive. Fire and rescue personnel sanitized the police station and efforts are on to prepare a contact list of the person.


