Covid-19: 11 new cases, 10 discharged in 24 hours in Bihar
2020-05-05
PATNA: Eleven new Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Bihar on Monday, taking the total number to 528 in the state. This is the lowest one-day count recorded in two weeks. The past three days saw among the highest number of cases with 36 reported on Sunday, 15 on Saturday and 41 positive cases on Friday.

However, in a positive development, 10 people recovered from the virus in the past 24 hours. Now the total number of active cases stand at 395 while four have died so far.

State nodal officer for Covid-19, Dr Ragini Mishra said the decrease in cases is a good indication. “There is no slowing down in the number of samples being tested, but the number of positive cases have come down today. Recently we were getting 50 to 60 positive cases in a day, however, today’s report comes as a big relief,” she said.

Maximum number of cases on Monday were recorded from Jhanjharpur in Madhubani with five people testing positive for the virus, followed by Begusarai and Kaimur with two people testing positive in both districts. One case each from Vidyapati Nagar in Samastipur and Sanachri in West Champaram was also reported.

Dr Mishra informed that all five positive cases from Jhanjharpur were of migrants who had recently returned from Noida on a truck. “Even the one from Samastipur had returned from Delhi. We are mainly getting positive cases from migrants who have come back home from other states.”

Talking about the inflow of migrants in large number after nod from the Centre, Dr Mishra said, “All those who have arrived were screened and taken to the block level quarantine. Even at the quarantine centre they will be screened daily.”

According to the state health society, altogether 28,345 samples had been tested by Monday morning in Bihar. Munger retained the top position with 102 people testing positive. Buxar has second highest positive cases with 56 people infected with the virus, followed by Rohtas with 52, Patna with 44 and Nalanda with 36 positive cases. Sheohar, Sheikhpura and Purnia have reported one case each, while two cases have been reported from Araria and Madhepura.

