11 Of 13 Districts In State Have Been Declared Covid Hotspots By Centre
2020-04-18
Vijayawada: With the Union government identifying 11 of the 13 districts in the state as Covid ‘hotspots’ or ‘red zones’, the state government has shifted its focus from detection of cases to containment of the pandemic. 

According to health officials, the major objective now is to convert red zone districts to orange and then subsequently to green, with the motto ‘restrict the red (zone) and protect the green (zone)’. Officials have identified nearly 90 mandals as red and orange zones in various districts based on the disease incidence in respective areas.

Guntur and Kurnool continue to lead with 126 cases each, accounting for nearly 44% of the cases in the state. Kurnool has 15 red zone mandals. Even a month after the state registered its first Covid-19 case, the north-coastal districts of Srikakulam and Vizianagaram remained Covid-19 free as of April 17.

Srikakulam and Vizianagaram are the only two districts in the state to find a place in the Union government’s non-infected (green zone) list of districts. 

Another north-coastal district, Visakhapatnam, has not registered a new case in the last 10 days, while East Godavari reported its last case over a week ago.

The state health department has proposed to screen at least 15 lakh people over the next 28 days by augmenting testing capacity and leveraging increased testing modalities validated by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). The state has now reached a testing capacity of 3,000 samples a day, up from 90 samples a day in February.

The testing strategy mooted by the health department includes using swab-based VRDL tests only for contacts of patients and high risk persons within containment clusters.

The Truenat, modified PCR sample system and the chemiluminescent immunoassays IgG and IgM (CLIA) testing will target the population at moderate risk or displaying mild symptoms within the containment zone. 

Rapid diagnostic testing kits will be used for community screening and high incidence areas. Even if a patient tests positive in Truenat or other testing, it will be confirmed again with a RT-PCR test.

Special chief secretary, medical, health and family welfare, KS Jawahar Reddy, said, “Increasing the testing capacity and screening more people will help detect more positive cases. This will in turn help us in demarcation of red zones and hotspot areas.”


