112 private hospitals across Tamil Nadu to treat Covid-19 patients
2020-04-05
CHENNAI: The state government on Saturday released a list of 112 private hospitals across the state including 11 in Chennai that will provide treatment to Covid-19 patients. Patients wanting to get treated in private hospitals can do so at these approved establishments at their own expense.


 The list includes 11 hospitals in Chennai and two from neighbouring districts of Kancheepuram and Chengalpattu. The list also includes 25 private medical colleges from 10 districts including 13 colleges from Kancheepuram and Chengalpattu.

 The health and family welfare department issued the order on April 3 which said a section of people desired to get treatment for Covid-19 at private hospitals. Considering the spread of the disease in the state, the government decided to include private hospitals for treating of Covid-19. 

According to the order, hospitals were directed to follow the treatment protocol prescribed by the Union government and to send a daily report on the treatment given to patients to the director of public health and preventive medicine. Based on the situation, the list of hospitals shall be modified, the order said. 

Two days ago the state designated 22 government medical college hospitals in 18 districts, including four from Chennai, as 'exclusive Covid-19 hospitals'. 

Director of medical and rural health services S Gurunathan said, "Apollo Hospitals in Ayanambakkam has expressed willingness. The hospitals branches in Trichy and Madurai have been added," he said.

In Coimbatore, seven private hospitals have been selected to treat Covid-19 patients at their premises, of which three are private medical college hospitals -- Karpagam faculty of medical sciences and research, KMCH institute of medical sciences and research and PSG institute of medical sciences and research. Coimbatore collector K Rajamani said 200 beds at PSG hospital, 150 at Karpagam medical college hospital, 120 at Kovai Medical Centre and Hospital and 20 beds at KG hospital were earmarked for Covid-19 patients and those with symptoms of the virus. In Tirupur, Sri Kumaran Hospital and Revathi Medical centre were approved. Joint director of public health Krishna said, "If any patient who is tested positive for Covid-19 wants to undergo treatment at the approved private hospitals, we can shift them."

