Kolkata: 11,300 vehicle owners prosecuted for flouting lockdown in past three weeks
2020-04-17
KOLKATA: Think of the consequences before you take out your vehicle for a spin without any urgency during the lockdown. From checking the authenticity of e-pass to examining the reason for going out during the lockdown, cops are keeping lens on the motorists and bikers they spot in roads. If there is any improper answer, cops are seizing the vehicles and prosecuting the owners. Total 11,300 vehicle owners have been prosecuted for flouting the lockdown in the past three weeks while 1,549 of the vehicles were seized in the past six days, said the joint CP (traffic) Santosh Pandey. 




“It acts as a big deterrent. Empty roads are leading to breaking of the lockdown,” said a top cop. Almost 40% of the seized vehicles are four-wheelers, unlike the normal days when two-wheelers make up more than two-third of the vehicles impounded by the police. The 11,300 vehicle owners are among 17,000 people arrested so far in the city for violating the lockdown. 

Unlike the Motor Vehicles Act, cops don’t need to show the seized vehicle in court during the lockdown and this has helped them step up the drive against the violators. “Police stations are not getting clogged as the vehicles are being released once the rider or driver gets bail. This is allowing us to make maximum seizures,” said a police officer. 

Police said that once caught, people come up with queer excuses. “A man kept arguing with me at Esplanade that his uncle was a government servant and that he had the right to use his uncle's car, which had a valid e-pass stuck on the windscreen. A woman near Kasba told us that his mother-in-law was making her feel claustrophobic at home, so she came out of home to get some fresh air,” said the police officer. 

However, cops are cracking down on the violation in two ways. The first method is to prosecute the offender under IPC section 188.

 For other serious violations like fake e-pass or dangerous driving, cops are slapping the offenders with harsher IPC and MV Act.

Cops from the detective department are using an app that can crosscheck the QR code on the e-pass issued by Lalbazar. If the code on the app does not match with that on the car, cops have the power to seize the vehicle at the spot and lodge the complaint of cheating and forgery.


