12 Covid-19 deaths reported in Pune in a day, most had underlying medical conditions
2020-04-09
PUNE: Twelve more critically ill patients succumbed to novel coronavirus-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome at different hospitals in Pune, health officials confirmed on Wednesday.


All of them had underlying medical conditions including diabetes, hypertension, cardiac and kidney ailments. This has pushed Pune’s Covid-19 toll to 20. Three of them had died a couple of days ago, and their throat swab reports turned out to be positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. This is the highest number of Covid-19 casualties reported on a single day in Pune.

Besides, Pune reported 38 fresh cases of the contagion on Wednesday — also the highest reported on a single day so far. Most of them are close contacts of people earlier found infected with Covid-19 and belong to low-income groups. Some of them are slum-dwellers. Maximum cases are from Tadiwala Road, Hadapsar, Ghorpadi Peth, Parvati, Kashewadi slum in Bhavani Peth, Mangalwar Peth and Nana Peth.

Of the 12 Covid-19 deaths, four were reported from Hadapsar. Two of these victims were from Sayyednagar slum in Hadapsar.

“None of the 12 people who succumbed to the Covid-19-induced complications and associated underlying medical conditions had any history of recent foreign travel or any proximity to known infected patient or their close contacts. Most of them were elderlies and had diabetes and hypertension. They had tested positive for Covid-19 while undergoing treatment for breathlessness at different hospitals in the city,” district health officer Bhagwan Pawar, the nodal officer of the Covid-19 containment plan in Pune, told TOI.

Among the victims, a 57-year-old woman, a resident of Sayyednagar in Hadapsar, was rushed to a private hospital in Fatimanagar when she complained of severe breathlessness around 10.30am on Tuesday morning. “Our medical staffers put in their best efforts to salvage her, but she died around 11.15am. She was a known patient of cardio-vascular disease,” said the hospital’s medical director.

“In view of her severe difficulty in breathing and residential address, we fumigated the hospital, quarantined our 20 health workers who came in contact with her and sent her throat swab to the National Institute of Virology (NIV). The sample tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday,” he said.

Another 73-year-old victim of Covid-19 was also from Sayyednagar — a slum area in Hadapsar. The man was admitted to a private hospital in Hadapsar for severe difficulty in breathing on April 2. He was put on ventilator support the next day as his condition worsened and he succumbed on Wednesday. He was a known patient of diabetes and hypertension.

A 62-year-old man from Indiranagar on Handewadi Road in Hadapsar was admitted to the same hospital in Hadapsar on April 1 with complaints of cough and breathlessness. After his condition worsened, he was intubated and put on ventilator support on April 4. He died on Wednesday afternoon.

A 40-year-old critically-ill man, a known patient of chronic liver disease undergoing aggressive treatment at a private hospital in Deccan and had tested positive for the Covid-19 infection on March 26, also succumbed to the associated complications around 4.15pm on Wednesday. He was a resident of Sahakarnagar.

Another victim was a 44-year-old man from Raviwar Peth. He was admitted to civic-run Naidu Hospital for breathlessness. “He had uncontrolled diabetes and slipped into kidney failure during the treatment. He died early in the morning on Wednesday,” said a civic health official.

A 71-year-old resident of Kondhwa, who also had diabetes and chronic kidney disease and had been undergoing treatment at the state-run Sassoon General Hospital since April 4, died of Covid-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) on Wednesday.

Another 54-year-old man from Hadapsar, undergoing treatment at the hospital for breathlessness, died of the complications the same day.

A 55-year-old woman from Kasba Peth, also a patient of hypertension, was admitted to Sassoon hospital on April 2. She succumbed to complications on April 7. Her throat swab reported tested positive for the contagion on Wednesday.

Another 65-year-old man from Kondhwa was admitted to Sassoon hospital for breathlessness on April 6. He died of the complication the next day. His throat swab tested positive for the contagion on Wednesday.

A 67-year-old woman from Ghorpadi Peth was admitted to Sassoon hospital on April 4. She succumbed to the associated complication of the contagion two days later. Her throat swab tested positive on Wednesday.

Another 63-year-old woman from Bhavani Peth was admitted to Sassoon hospital for breathlessness on April 4. She was undergoing treatment for kidney-related injury and had tested positive for the contagion. She succumbed to the respiratory distress and other complications on Wednesday.

A 60-year-old resident of Samarathnagar at Baramati in Pune district was admitted to Sassoon hospital on April 5 as he complained of difficulty in breathing. A known patient of chronic kidney disease, diabetes and hypertension, he succumbed on Wednesday. 


