12 fresh Covid-19 cases take tally to 60 in Mysuru
2020-04-18
MYSURU: The district continues to be on tenterhooks as 12 more persons tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday. While 11 of them are related to the pharmaceutical firm in Nanjangud, the 12th person, a woman, is related to the septuagenarian who was diagnosed with Covid-19 while being treated for respiratory infection. With this, the total number of active Covid-19 patients in the district touched 60 on Friday. 


Meanwhile, one more employee of the pharmaceutical company has been cured and discharged. With this, a total of 13 persons—11 of the pharmaceutical firm and two Dubai-returnees—have recovered from virus infection in the district, said an official. 

So far, 73 positive cases are reported in Mysuru, out of which 60 are related to Nanjangud firm, the biggest cluster case in Karnataka. Eight others are related to Tablighi Jamaat visitors, two are Dubai-returnees, one a contact of Dubai-returnees and two are Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI)-related.


2nd SARI case in district

The woman who tested positive on Friday is a relative of the septuagenarian with Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) who developed symptoms of Covid-19. She has been shifted to covid hospital.

Samples from three other family members have been collected. This is the first SARI case in Mysuru which is also worrying officials as it is an indication of community level infection, which could prove risky. 

The senior citizen, a 72-year-old man, was first treated at a private hospital in Siddaratha Layout, before being shifted to another private hospital where he was diagnosed with covid symptoms. 

The private hospital in Siddartha Layout has been shut and all those working there have been kept under observation. 

Meanwhile, the patient is said to have visited a cooperative bank in the heart of Mysuru and authorities are checking all his contacts to quarantine them. 


Probe still on in Nanjangud

The police team investigating the pharmaceutical firm case—the biggest cluster infection in Karnataka—have started probing in different angles after it was ruled out that the infection was from some frozen consignment and due to contact of foreign nationals.

 Sources claimed that one among the positive patients, who was discharged from hospital, had said that he had travelled to Kerala recently. An ADGP-rank officer has been deputed to uncover the mystery surrounding the infection at the firm in Nanjangud.

