12 new Covid +ve in Amt in a day; panic over community spread fears
2020-05-01
Amravati: Detection of 12 new Covid-19 cases from four different localities in the city on Thursday has heightened the concerns of the administration and put citizens in a wave of shock and fear.All the 12 positive persons have now been shifted to Covid ward for the treatment.The posting of the highest number of cases in a day, since the detection of the first case on April 4, has taken the total count of novel coronavirus positive cases in the district to 40. This includes seven deaths and four recovered cases. As of April 30, there are 29 positive cases in the Covid Hospital.The most number of cases (5) came from Kholapuri Gate locality, already a containment zone, where three women aged 70, 35 and 27 and two men aged 45 and 39 tested positive. This area has earlier thrown three cases, thus making it the most sensitive of the 14 localities in the city where this virus has spread its tentacles.Hanuman Nagar in the same area had its first Covid case today in the form of a 65-year-old woman, while three suspects from the family of a 55-year- old paan kiosk operator of Kanwar Nagar locality, who died in Covid Hospital on April 27 morning, too tested positive. The deceased’s report is, however, still awaited.Like Hanuman Nagar, Nalsabpura too emerged a new locality with Covid positive cases as two women aged 29 and 30 and a man aged 29 tested positive.The presence of the virus in different parts has created fears of community spread even as divisional commissioner Piyush Singh on Thursday reiterated that it is not so. “It’s not community spread,” he told TOI.An official said the new cases testing positive from Kholapuri Gate area are not related to a 58-year-old man, a native of Nandura Pinglai in Morshi tehsil, who has been residing in this locality for the last five years and tested positive on April 26. He has infected his 40-year-old wife and a 20-year-old boy in the neighbourhood on April 28, the source added.Of the three positive cases from the family of the deceased suspect from Kanwar Nagar, is his 70-year-old mother, 43-year-old brother and 47-year-old sister-in-law, the official said. As many as 18 family members and seven friends present at the funeral of this Kanwar Nagar deceased have been put in institutional quarantine at the Covid Hospital.Meanwhile, Amravati Municipal Corporation has declared Chetandas Bagicha in Masanganj locality a containment zone and sealed all entry points to it after it reported the Covid case of a 72-year-old man on Wednesday. Similar action has also been for Kanwar Nagar, while Hanuman Nagar and Nalsabpura localities already come under the previously announced containment zones, the official said.Collector Shailesh Naval said though there has been a spurt in the number of cases, people should not panic and cooperate with the administration by staying put at home. He said 43 reports were received on Thursday out of which 31 came negative and 12 positive. Naval also informed that 65 new samples have been sent for testing today. The health administration to date has screened 6,816 persons and sent 1,221 throat swabs samples for testing out of which 900 have tested negative and 40 positive, while reports of 274 are awaited.