West Bengal: 12 of 21 Covid-19 patients are from three families
2020-03-30
KOLKATA: More than half of Bengal’s Covid-19 patients till Sunday — 12 out of 21 — belong to three family clusters who were infected by individuals with a history of foreign travel, which underlines the importance of keeping social distance even at home. Three individuals who returned from the UK have transmitted the virus to 12 people in these clusters and led to the quarantine of 45 people, some of who have tested negative. Experts felt the number of infected could have been curbed had the families acted more responsibly and stuck to the distan-cing norms.

A Ballygunge youth who got infected in the UK — the first to test positive in the state on March 20 — spread the virus to his parents and a domestic help. Eleven members of the family were quarantined. A 67-year-old who tested positive last week had picked up the virus from a family member at a wedding in Egra. Later, two other members of the family tested positive. On March 27, five members of a family from Tehatta, who had been infected by a UK-returned relative at a gathering in Delhi, tested positive.

 
 

Even though the norms had been laid down and an alert had been sounded throughout the country, none of these families bothered to follow them, rued virologist Amitabha Nandy. 

 
TimesViewWe seem to be entering a critical phase in our fight against this disease. So it is important that we do not repeat those mistakes that some of us made when the disease was yet to have a Bengal footprint. It is imperative that we stay careful and safe. 

“They must have known that anyone returning from the UK was a suspect even if there were no symptoms. But they chose to ignore it and risked the lives of several around them. What’s more shocking is that they didn’t even care to insulate themselves from the suspect, resulting in a spread. Had they stuck to the home- quarantine rule, they could have prevented the transmission. It will now take a considerable effort to break the chain,” said Nandy. 

Once the quarantine norm and the rules of social distancing are flouted, transmission will be inevitable, making it difficult to trace those who have come in contact with the patient, said infectious diseases consultant Rahul Jain. 

“Some people tend to infect more than the rest. The ones that transmitted the virus in Bengal turned out to be effective spreaders. A Bollywood singer, though she had come in contact with several others, did not infect anyone. So there is no alternative to following the distancing norms at home,” said Jain.

Amiya Hati, former director of School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, said, “Social distancing is a must at home too, especially when there is someone suffering from flu-like symptoms or someone who is asymptomatic but has come from an affected area.” 

“Everyone in these three clusters are educated and well informed. But they broke the guidelines and made mistakes. For example, in the Ballygunge case, the youth could have infected more people because of his movements after returning from London. Luckily, he infected only three. If we do not learn from such mistakes, more cluster infections will happen,” said pulmonologist Dhiman Ganguly, who is part of the 12-member expert committee set up by the state to combat Covid-19.

“In the Tehatta case, the five infected had mingled with a US-returned relative who was in the risk category. Now, they may have infected others in Tehatta. Currently, we have identified 16 such high-risk contacts,” said a state health department official.


