12 prisoners of Agra Central Jail test positive for Covid-19, junior doctor infected
2020-05-11
AGRA: At least 21 new Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Agra district on Sunday evening, taking the district tally to 764. Out of these, 12 cases were related to prisoners of Agra Central Jail. Besides, one junior doctor of SN Medical College was also found positive. 

Talking to TOI, deputy inspector-general (prisons) Luv Kumar said, “We have sent 24 samples of prisoners for lab testing - out of these, 12 reported Covid-19 positive by SN Medical College. Now, fresh samples have been collected for lab testing at the National Jalma Institute for Leprosy." 

Significantly, on Saturday afternoon, a 60-year-old convict of Agra Central Jail, who was tested positive for Covid-19, had died during treatment at the SN Medical College. 

According to jail officials, the convict was admitted to the emergency ward of SNMC on May 3. He had high blood pressure and suffered a brain stroke. His samples were collected and sent for testing on May 4. He was confirmed Covid-19 positive on the evening of May 6. 

Apart from the 12 prisoners and a junior doctor, a fourth-grade worker of SN Medical college and a ration dealer were also diagnosed with the deadly virus.

Chief medical officer (CMO) Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

According to health department, at least 90 active cases are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts, while 80 are linked to a private hospital on National Highway-2. Another 22 are linked to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. 

Besides, 50 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts. These include a senior resident doctor and four junior doctors of SN Medical College. So far, 30 vegetable sellers have also been tested positive in Agra. 

The CMO added, “Till now, 326 people have recovered and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened."

