12 test Covid-19 positive in Jharkhand, 10 returned home recently
2020-05-16
RANCHI/HAZARIBAGH/SINDRI: Jharkhand recorded 12 new Covid-19 cases on Friday as migrants returning home continued to test positive for the novel coronavirus. The state reported 100 fresh cases in the 11 days since May 5 as migrants return home. The state tally of positive cases now stands at 215, of which 115 are active cases while 98 have recovered and two have died.

Ranchi, which accounts for almost half the tally (102) in the state, did not record any new case, even as 10 patients who recovered were discharged from Rims taking the total number of recoveries in the city to 71.

However, the number of cases have risen sharply in the distircis in the last few days. The figure in Hazaribag continued to rise as six new cases were detected in the district on Friday. Of these, four are migrant workers and two are new mothers who gave birth at a private hospital recently.

Hazaribag DC Bhuvnesh Pratap Singh said: “Three are migrants from different villages in Bishnugarh block and had who have returned from Mumbai recently. The other is also a migrant from Barkathha block. The young mothers are residents of Godhakhar and Manar villages in Katkumsandi and were admitted at Srinivas Hospital in Demotand. The hospital’s management has been told to collect samples of all doctors and others who came in contact with the patients.” 

In Garhwa, all four new cases are migrants who have returned from Nasik and Mumbai in Maharashtra. Garhwa DDC Naman Priyesh Lakra said: “They returned to the district earlier this week. Two are from Meral block and one each from Majhiaon and Garhwa town.”

A 31-year-old resident of Kapuria colony in Dhanbad who returned home from Mumbai in his own car with three family members on May 11 tested positive. Dhanbad DC Amit Kumar said: “He was stranded in Mumbai since the lockdown was imposed. He was under institutional quarantine with his family. The three others have tested negative.”

In East Singhbhum, the patient is a 30-year-old man from Patmada block who has returned from another state, sources said.


