12-yr-old deceased was not Covid-19 patient
2020-04-11
Nagpur: After six members in one family tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday, many samples from their high risk contacts tested negative on Friday. In fact, no new patient was recorded on Friday in the city.

The two suspects who had died at the Covid-19 ward of Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Thursday also tested negative on Friday. 

Authorities informed that swab samples of a 12-year-old boy from Parseoni, who was under treatment at GMCH from April 5, were collected on April 6. The boy was a patient of type-I diabetes. He died of respiratory problems on Thursday night. Results of his samples came from the IGGMCH lab on Friday morning. The boy tested negative. 

On the same day, a 58-year-old Nagpurian was admitted in GMCH. As he was facing difficulty in respiration, doctors admitted him in Covid-19 ward. A patient of hypertension, he died the same day. His samples were tested in GMCH laboratory, and came negative on Friday.

Apart from this, 31 samples from Nagpur were tested at the GMCH lab and all of them were negative. IGGMCH laboratory tested 44 samples, while AIIMS lab tested 51 from Nagpur and other centres of Vidarbha. All 128 samples tested negative.

The good news continued for Nagpur as 5th positive patient, a businessman from Khamla, recovered fully and was discharged from the IGGMCH on Friday. In spite of being a patient of diabetes, he recovered with the help of doctors. Some of his family members, who had tested positive after him, are also doing well. They will also be discharged in the next two days, provided their samples test negative. As many as five more patients from Nagpur can get discharged by Monday. 

Saturday is going to be an important day for Nagpur as 114 throat swab samples collected from Central India College of Pharmacy Quarantine Centre at Lonara will be tested. NMC’s contamination drive is going on in full swing and three new patients were admitted from different parts of city at the GMCH isolation ward. Doctors here informed that Ward no. 25 has total 21 patients while Ward no. 49 has 23 patients. Swab samples of all these patients were taken on Friday and will be tested on Saturday. 

Meanwhile, the Nagpur Municipal corporation (NMC) started a Food Zone on Friday. Women staffers of revenue department are preparing tiffins while men are distributing food. On the very first day, the food zone distributed fresh food to more than 1,000 needy people. Nagpur Residential Hotels Association also joined the fight against Covid-19 on Friday. Hotels will provide their rooms at subsidized rates to those who want to stay quarantined in hotel rooms instead of the government quarantine centres.


