120 morning walkers arrested in Latur for violating lockdown norms
2020-04-03
Aurangabad: As many as 120 people, who were out on morning walks, were arrested by police from different parts of Latur for violating the lockdown order.

A police team, led by deputy superintendent of police (DySP) Sachin Sangle, hit the streets on Thursday morning to ensure that people are not violating the lockdown that has been imposed to curb the spread of Covid-19.

“The morning walkers were brought to the Shivajinagar police station and were made to sit there for five hours. They were later released on bail,” a police officer said.

“They have been arrested under sections 188 (for disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) and 269 (for negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) of the Indian Penal Code along with several provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (for better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease),” Sangle said.

“We were shocked to see people coming out for walks in such a large number even though the lockdown is in force. We hope that this action will now keep them and others indoors,” he added.

Sangle said that Latur police have so far seized over 200 vehicles from those who were found roaming around without any genuine reason.

Meanwhile, sources said that following reports of the arrest of morning walkers, district collector G Srikant rushed to the police station and appreciated the action. “As most of the morning walkers are suffering from some or the other health conditions, they were provided with drinking water bottles and biscuits to ensure they don’t face any health complication.”

Srikant told TOI that the120 people were made to take a pledge that they would behave properly and follow the rule. “Police, district administration and the civic body are working hard to ensure that nothing untoward occurs in Latur. But we were appalled to find that such a large number of irresponsible people ventured out in the name of morning walk,” he said.


