1,216 workers arrive by special train from Gujarat, 3 suspects quarantined
2020-05-06
Bareilly: Of the total 1,216 migrant workers who reached Bareilly by the Shramik special train from Ahmedabad in Gujarat on Tuesday, a few people claimed they had paid Rs 525 to buy tickets for the journey.

Yash Dixit (18) and his father Brajesh Kumar told TOI, “We were working in a factory making thread. On Monday, we were sent to Sabarmati railway station in a bus, in which we paid Rs 525 each for train tickets. I paid Rs 1,050 for two tickets.”

From Bareilly junction, Dixit and his father boarded a bus to their home in Mainpuri. He added, “My father used to work as a mechanic in Mainpuri, but as he was not getting much work here, both of us moved to Gujarat in June 2018. The factory where we used to work paid us Rs 420 on daily basis for 12 hour shifts. After the factory shut down on March 22 due to lockdown, we had no work and faced difficulties in finding food. We had no choice but to return home. After all that has happened, we might not return even after lockdown is lifted.”

Rajendra Prasad, a native of Bhadohi, said, “I was working in a factory in Ahmedabad. When return arrangements were made, we were asked to board a bus from the factory campus to Sabarmati railway station and after our health check-up was done. I too paid Rs 525 for the train ticket in the bus. Though we didn’t buy the ticket from the counter, we were given physical tickets as we entered the train.”

Some passengers claimed they were give train tickets for free. Abdul Rahman, who was working at a brick kiln in Gujarat, said, “I am happy the government helped me reach home. I did not have to pay for my return journey.”

Pradeep Kumar (25) of Etawah said, “We boarded the train around midnight and were given boiled rice for lunch the next morning at Ajmer.”

After the train reached Bareilly, health teams screened them again, and then they were sent to their home districts in buses. Bareilly station superintendent Satya Veer Singh said, “The train was scheduled to reach by 11.45 am, but arrived late at 4.25 pm. Social distancing was followed when passengers deboarded. Of the 1,216 passengers, three were suspected of carrying covid and have been quarantined.”

Cheeni Prasad, assistant regional manager, UPSRTC, said, “Only 25 people were made to sit per bus, to maintain social distancing.”


