124 recoveries for every Covid death in Kerala, just 4 in Bengal
2020-05-19
NEW DELHI: Looking at the number of Covid-19 cases in different states would suggest Maharashtra is doing the worst, followed by Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Delhi in that order. However, if we also look at the proportion of deaths and recoveries in each state as of Monday morning, a completely different picture emerges. 



Unsurprisingly, Kerala, with just four deaths so far, looks the best among the major states with 124 recovered cases for every death. At the other end of the spectrum is West Bengal, with just four cases that recovered for every death. The national average is 12 recoveries per death.

Tamil Nadu is among the best performers by this yardstick with 53 recoveries per death and Delhi’s 28 recoveries per death puts it well above the national average but in the middling category.

West Bengal, with just 2,677 confirmed cases, also happens to have among the lowest testing rates of about 86 tests per lakh population, only Bihar and Uttar Pradesh having lower rates. 



When considering the ratio of recoveries to deaths, Maharashtra still shows up very poorly, better only than West Bengal. Maharashtra recorded just six recoveries for every death, followed by Gujarat, which recorded about seven recovered cases for every death. Both states are testing in the region of 200 for every lakh population.

More recoveries and fewer deaths could indicate better medical care for those testing positive but it could also indicate that through more testing cases are being detected at an earlier stage when effective intervention is possible. 

Other than Kerala, Bihar (59) and Odisha (55) among the major states have the highest number of recovered cases for every death. But their ratios are rapidly falling, having been 65 in both cases just a day earlier. There is a difference between the two, however. Odisha has a testing rate of 219 per lakh population while Bihar has the lowest testing rate in India of 37 tests per lakh population. With an increase in the numbers of cases testing positive in Bihar recently as migrants return, it remains to be seen how these numbers change.

For the most populous state, UP has relatively few cases, but given the fact that its testing rate is the second lowest, just 77 per lakh, the same caveats apply as in Bihar. Again, with lakhs of migrants returning to these states, it remains to be seen how well their health systems will cope with testing and treating.

Delhi recorded the highest testing rate of 669 per lakh population. But its 28 recovered cases for every death is a middling performance despite the advantages of being the capital with a large number of tertiary care hospitals in the public sector involved in the treatment of Covid-19 cases right from the start.

Tamil Nadu's testing rate of 432 per lakh population might be less than Delhi and Andhra Pradesh, but it records 53 recovered cases for every death, much higher than the other two.


