128 of 157 from Uttar Pradesh who had attended Tablighi meet traced
2020-04-01
LUCKNOW: After a 24-hour search for 157 people from the state, who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation at Nizamuddin in Delhi, police in 18 districts managed to track down 128 of them.


While 120 were found to be quarantined in Delhi, eight were traced to be at their native places and have been home-quarantined. The search of he remaining 29 is on.

The police, however, traced 95 others, who had also attended the Jammat event and were not on the list of 157 from Uttar Pradesh shared by the Delhi Police.

11 Bangladeshi nationals who were staying in a Bhadohi mosque after Tablighi meet have been quarantined


DGP: Cops from 18 dists roped in to trace members

The UP Police had received the list after Jammat headquarters in Delhi's Nizamuddin, which hosted a congregation early this month, was found to be hotspot for the spread of coronavirus.

Out of these 95 people, 51 were foun in Mathura and 14 in Meerut. Besides, Jaunpur police found 30 people from other states, who had attended the Jamaat event and were coming back from Delhi, travelling in a bus. DGP Hitesh Chandra Awasthy said that police chiefs of 18 districts had been given the task to trace the people who had visited the Nizamuddin markaz in Delhi. The 157 people who had attended the event were from Ghaziabad, Bahraich, Bhadoi, Bijnor, Baghpat, Barabanki, Prayagraj, Muzaffarnagar, Lucknow, Mathura, Agra, Sitapur, Shamli, Saharanpur, Meerut, Balrampur, Hapur and Varanasi. Senior police officials said that eight of them were found at their respective homes in various districts and have been asked to remain home quarantined after their samples were taken for further pathological tests. Sleuths with the help of surveillance and contact addresses provided by the Delhi police are now on the lookout for the remaining 29 of the

157. Police with the assistance of surveillance and health officials is tracing the 29 others.

Maximum 28 persons who attended the markaz were from Muzaffarnagar, followed by 18 from Lucknow. “We have identified all of 18 who went to Nizamuddin even in Delhi, and have been quarantined by authorities in Delhi only,” said Lucknow joint commissioner of police, law and order, Naveen Arora. Of 11 others -- eight from Mauaima (Prayagraj) and three from neighbouring Pratapgarh district -- who attended the Jamaat congregration in Delhi have also been traced to Delhi. They have been quarantined in a hospital by the authorities, said the SSP Prayagraj, Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj. Similarly, in Baghpat of the four who went to attend, three were traced but one was missing. Likewise, in Mathura, of the two who attended one was in Delhi while sample of another one was taken by health authorities, despite no signs of flu or fever. In Sitapur, of the eight who attended, seven were foun quarantined in Delhi, while one was in Sitapur. He was tested and was found negative for any virus.

The district administration of Barabanki also confirmed that of all the 14 who visited the markaz while Saharanpur administration found its three natives had been quarantined in Delhi.

