129 fresh Covid-19 cases in Rajasthan, Churu reports first death
2020-05-10
JAIPUR: The state on Saturday reported 129 fresh coronavirus cases and three deaths. With this, the number of positive cases rose to 3,708 and toll mounted to 106. Two deaths took place in Jaipur, while another occurred in Churu.


Three persons, including two migrant labourers, tested positive in Churu who had travelled from Surat on Saturday.

Churu reported first Covid-19 death when a 33-year-old person who belonged to Sujangarh area died while undergoing treatment at the SMS Hospital in Jaipur. He was admitted to the hospital on May 7.

A 24-year-old woman, resident of Agarwal Farm in Mansarovar, who was admitted to SMS Hospital on May 6 died on Saturday. She had co-morbid conditions of diabetes, hypertension and chronic kidney disease.

Besides, a four-year-old girl, resident of Vijay Nagar of Lankapuri slum area who was admitted to SMS Hospital on May 6 died on Saturday. She was suffering from ruptured liver abscess.

Among the districts which reported Covid-19 cases are Udaipur (24), Jaipur (51), Ajmer (15), Chittorgarh (10), Jodhpur (11), Pali (5), Jalore (3), Churu (3), Rajsamand (2), Dausa (1), Barmer (1), Sawai Madhopur (1), Sirohi (1) and Kota (1).

In Jaipur, eight cases were reported from Ajit Nagar in Sanganer, seven from Ramganj, three from Dadi ka Phatak in Murlipura, six from Shastri Nagar, two from Adarsh Nagar, five from Bapu Bazaar, five from Chandpole, three from Nahari ka Naka, three from Bagru, two from Gandhi Nagar, while one each case was reported from Moti Doongri, Transport Nagar, Jalupura, Mansarovar, Bas Badanpura, Galta Gate and Ghat Gate.

Churu reported three cases on Saturday after a gap of 27 days. The last three cases in Churu were reported on April 22 since then no case was reported. It was in green zone.

“Two persons travelled from Surat of Gujarat and reached Churu on May 5 and May 6. They were found infected with the virus,” said Bhanwar Lal, chief medical health officer (CMHO) Churu.

The two are asymptomatic and they were sent to quarantine facility on Saturday. The cause of concern is that they had travelled in buses. The person who reached on May 5 travelled in a bus with 12 co-passengers, a driver and a conductor.

The person who reached on May 6 had travelled with 40 co-passengers.

The health department has collected samples of 32 persons from their families and relative and identified 100 more who came in contact with the two coronavirus infected person.

Besides, Churu’s health department officials informed their counterparts in Sikar and Jhunjhunu that some of the co-passengers of the two infected persons had got off the bus in Fatehpur and Ramgarh of Sikar district, while some stopped their journey from Surat to Bisau of Jhunjhunu district. They were working as labourers in Surat.


