Coronavirus scare: 13 discharged from isolation wards in three Kerala districts
2020-02-07
THRISSUR: Ten people under observation in isolation wards were discharged on Thursday, eight from the isolation ward at Thrissur Medical College Hospital and two from the one at general hospital. They will now have to be under home quarantine for the remaining period of the 28-day coronavirus surveillance.


In all, 251 people are under coronavirus surveillance in Thrissur district as per the data available on Thursday, and out of them, 22 people have been admitted to different hospitals. The condition of the patient with novel coronavirus (nCoV) is stable. 

In Alappuzha, the condition of the student, who tested positive for nCoV and is in the isolation ward of Alappuzha Medical College Hospital, is satisfactory, said district collector M Anjana. One person, who was under observation at an isolation ward, was discharged on Thursday. Now, only seven people are in isolation wards in the district.

Meanwhile in Kottayam, two persons, who were under observation in the isolation ward in Government Medical College Hospital, were allowed to return home. They were allowed to leave after it was confirmed that their samples tested negative for nCoV. However, both will have to remain under home quarantine. Now, only one person is in the MCH isolation ward. 

Eight more persons arrived in Kottayam from nCoV-affected countries on Thursday. They have been directed by the health department to remain under home quarantine. The number of home-quarantined people in Kottayam has now reached 100.

In Wayanad, health authorities said that the test result of the samples taken from a youth, who had arrived in the district from China was negative. The test was conducted at the virology institute at Alappuzha. Meanwhile, the number of persons who were kept under observation in the district rose to 54 with the addition of five individuals who arrived recently from Thailand, Singapore and Saudi Arabia. 

(Inputs from Kottayam Alappuzha Kozhikode)


