13 family members of employee of Noida firm quarantined
2020-04-03
Bareilly: The district health department has shifted 13 relatives of an employee of a Noida-based firm to the quarantine centre at Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), after six members of another family linked to the same firm tested positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly. The test report of the latest Covid-suspect is awaited.The first employee of the Noida-based firm who is a Bareilly native who tested positive for Covid-19 is a 34-year-old man. Five members of his family, including his wife, mother, father, brother and sister, later tested positive for the same virus. It later surfaced that another man who had returned to Bareilly on March 18 works in the same firm in Noida. He was shifted to the district hospital’s isolation ward and his Covid-19 test report is awaited. Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “As this man was living with 13 of his family members in Bareilly’s Sanjay Nagar, we have shifted his kin to a 48-bed quarantine centre at IVRI as a precautionary measure. Besides, 961 people in Bareilly are currently under home quarantine.” He added, “The condition of all six people who tested positive is stable. We will send their second sample to Lucknow for tests.”Additional CMO Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “A total of 34 people were found living inside religious institutions in Bareilly, but after their medical examination, they were found to be normal. They have been asked to undergo home quarantine.”As the six Covid-19 patients are residents of Subhash Nagar, health department has identified 29,500 houses in a 3km-radius of their house for active case surveillance. Apart from this, 7,100 houses have been identified in a 1km-radius of the buffer zone. On Thursday, 26 teams of the health department conducted survey of 2,297 houses in the 3km-radius of the patients’ house.In the last four days, 91 teams have done door-to-door survey of 7,695 houses. The teams found four symptomatic cases there, with fever, cough and respiratory distress. Officials said their samples will be collected for Covid-19 test too.