13-month-old girl, youngest Covid-19 casualty, among five dead in PMR
2020-05-11
PUNE: Five deaths due to Covid-19, including that of a 13-month-old girl and an 82-year-old Yerawada jail inmate, were reported on Sunday. 

Health officials said the girl from the Mhada colony in Warje was admitted to B J Medical and Sassoon General Hospital on May 4 and died at 7.30 am on Sunday. She’s the youngest Covid-19 casualty in the city so far. 




The cause of her death was cited as “pulmonary haemorrhage secondary to ARDS (Acute respiratory distress syndrome) with pneumonitis with megaloblastic anemia with severe acute malnutrition”.

Health officials said all the five persons succumbing to the contagion had comorbidity factors. The five casualties have taken the number of people dying of Coronavirus in the Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR) to 156. The officials said 138 of the casualtes were in the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) limits. 

The Yerawada prisoner, originally a resident of Akkalkot in Solapur, was admitted to Sasooon on May 7 and died on May 9. His report came positive on Sunday. He suffered from respiratory failure and was also had history of tuberculosis.

Among the other deceased was a 70-year-old woman from Tadiwala Road. She died at the district hospital in Aundh. A 37-year-old man from Ganjpeth died at Sasooon hospital on May 9, while a Kondhwa resident (53) died at Kashibai Nawale hospital the same day. 

The reports of both the men on Sunday confirmed that they were Covid-19 positive. Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) officials said the two men were suffering from pneumonia and other respiratory diseases. 

When contacted, PMC commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad said a decline was seen in the number of the Covid-19 positive cases. “On May 9, the number of cases was 1,414. As many as 102 new cases were recorded on Sunday, while 194 patients were discharged during the day. The total active cases is now 1,318. The net number is going down in the PMC areas,” he told TOI.

Mayor Murulidhar Mohol said, “It is a welcome sign. The doctors and health department officials working to check the virus spread deserve accolades.”

District administration officials said the total number of positive patients in the PMC was 2,475, while in the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) limits it was 170. The civil surgeon and cantonment boards have 147 cases, while the district heath office of the zilla parishad has recorded 65 cases. 

Last Sunday, the total number of Coronavirus positive cases had crossed the 2,000 mark in the Pune Metropolitan Region.


48 fresh cases in Solapur

Solapur district recorded 48 fresh Covid-19 cases on Sunday, the highest number reported in a day. Of the 48 Covid-19 patients, 45 are from the city, while three are from Mohol taluka.

Out of the 48 patients, nine are police personnel, three are state health workers, 25 were contacts of the person who tested positive earlier, six are Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI) patients and four are contact people in the hospital, among others, as per a report from the Solapur health department. 

The total number of cases has gone up to 264—152 men and 112 women—including 14 death. The active number of cases is 209. As many as 41 patients have recovered. 

District collector Milind Shambharkar set up four teams, headed by specially appointed government officers, who will be held responsible for the control of the infection. The team for each containment zone comprises officials of health, civil supply, revenue, and municipal corporation. 

 The Sangli district registered another Covid-19 case on Sunday. With this, the total number of Covid-19 cases rose to 38 while 10 cases are active, 27 patients have recovered and one died.

A 30-year-old woman tested positive for Covid-19 and her husband tested negative. They have a travel history to Ahmedabad. The couple had come to Salshingi village in Khanapur taluka. Their health check-up was done at Vita Rural hospital following which they were referred to Miraj Government Medical College and Hospital,

Sangli district collector Abhijeet Chaudhary, said a health squad has been deployed at the village for contact tracing..

(With inputs from 

Kolhapur)

