13 more test positive for Covid-19 in Bihar, tally rises to 126
2020-04-22
PATNA: For the second day in a row, Bihar recorded a double-digit spike with 13 new Covid-19 cases, including eight women, on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases in the state to 126. There are altogether 82 active cases now with two deaths and 42 discharged from hospitals so far.


Of the 13 new cases reported on Tuesday, seven are from Munger, four from Buxar and one each from Patna and Rohtas, according to the state health department. None of the new patients have any recent travel history. Contact tracing of all the new cases are going on and follow up action is being taken by the health department.

“Buxar, Patna and Munger, cases came in contact with Covid-19 positive patients. The contact tracing of Rohtas is yet to be confirmed,” health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar stated in a statement issued on Tuesday evening.

He added, “ A 31-year-old man in Patna, three males aged 28, 34 and 36 and four females aged 20, 28, 34, 37 respectively in Munger were tested positive for the virus. In Rohats, a 60- year- old woman and in Buxar, a 32-year-old male and three females aged 12, 12 and 39 respectively tested positive on Tuesday.”

Dr Ragini Mishra, state nodal officer for Covid-19, told this newspaper on Tuesday that the Patna man had come in contact with the husband of a 32-year-old woman from Khajpura locality, who had tested positive on April 18. “The swab samples of 10 people, including 31-old-year driver, who works for a private cash van with Covid- 19 positive woman’s husband were taken on Sunday,” she said.

The sample result of others, including the family members of the corona positive woman, came negative. The woman from Khajpura and the new positive case are symptomatic patients, having mild fever and cough.

Dr Ragini said the positive cases in Munger and Buxar came in contact with the positive cases with a travel history, whereas a female from Rohtas had earlier gone to a private hospitals in Rohtas for pneumonia. “She had no travel history but she went to private hospitals for treatment. Later she went to Narayan Medical College and Hospital, Rohtas where her sample for Covid- 19 test was collected.”

She added: “The woman’s report came positive today. Now, we are trying to trace the hospitals where she had earlier gone for treatment.

Meanwhile, most of the cases in Munger are from Jamalpur city, which is the hotspot for Covid- 19. All patients have been admitted to the Nalanda Medical College and Hospital, Patna.

According to the health department, of the 126 positive cases, Siwan topped with 29 cases closely followed by 28 in Nalanda, Munger (27), Begusarai (9), eight each in Buxar and Patna, Gaya (5), three each in Gopalganj and Nawada and one each in Saran, Lakhisarai, Bhagalpur, Vaishali, Bhojpur and Rohtas. Total active cases in Bihar stands at 82 whereas 42 got cured and two died.

CM asks people not to be jittery

CM Nitish Kumar on Tuesday asked people not to be jittery because of the sudden increase in the number of positive cases of covid-19 in the past 24 hours because most of these cases are related to an infected person.

“State government is maintaining a close vigil on the situation and all necessary steps are being taken,” the CM said after holding a review meeting with the chief secretary.

The CM further called upon people to be alert from those people who are spreading rumours through social media. He also called upon people to continue to maintain social distancing to defeat the covid-19 virus in the state. 


