13 more cases take Covid-19 positive to 40 in Central Tamil nadu
2020-04-04
TRICHY: An additional 13 cases among the Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) delegates from Tiruvarur, Nagappattinam and Karur took the total number of Covid-19 positive people in central Tamil Nadu to 40 on Friday. Of these, 36 were attendees of the TJ meet in Delhi.


The latest bulletin from the ministry of health and family welfare showed that five cases each were reported in Tiruvarur and Nagappattinam while Karur recorded three cases. Tiruvarur collector T Anand said that of the five, three belonged to Mannargudi while two others hailed from Muthupettai. “We had already kicked off containment activities in those areas presuming that they might turn positive considering their symptoms,” he told TOI.

A total of 48 TJ delegates in Tiruvarur have been identified so far. All of them have been kept in hospital quarantine pending results. The district already has eight positive cases of which seven were participants of the TJ meet. Nagappattinam joined the club with five Covid-19 positive cases all of whom were attendees of the TJ conference. The district had 29 suspects hospitalized as on Thursday. With Karur already having 17 Covid-19 cases of TJ delegates, three more residents of Pallapatti were added to the list. Trichittes were anxiously awaiting the results of Covid-19 suspects admitted to Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) for the past few days. Friday’s bulletin, however, had no mention of the cases raising doubts about the credibility of the announcement. MGMGH said the hospital administration relied on the viral research and diagnostic laboratory (VRDL) at government medical college in Villpuram for the results of all the 110 patients as MGMGH was equipped only with the screening test facility. However, Trichy district administration has provided a couple of equipment worth Rs 12 lakh to MGMGH to carry out confirmatory tests.

The lab finished the tests for some of the patients only but that have to be reconfirmed. TOI has learnt that the VRDL lab revealed the results of 29 patients including 28 from Trichy and one case from Perambalur on Friday. Sources said that 18 cases including the Perambalur patient tested positive. However, it was yet to be confirmed by the health ministry. MGMGH sources also said they will conduct the confirmatory test of 110 patients including the 29 patients. All the 126 people except around ten including the Covid-19 positive patient of Erode were delegates of the Tablighi Jamaat congregation.


