13-yr-old’s family, health workers of pvt clinic quarantined
2020-05-12
Ludhiana: A day after a 13-year-old student of Class VIII Of Sacred Heart Convent School, Khanna, tested positive, her mother father and eight-year-old brother were quarantined at the community health centre, Khanna, on Monday. Besides, more than 10 health workers of a private health centre were also quarantined, where the girl had visited following respiratory problems.

Talking to TOI, father of the girl said, “We have been isolated at the Sub-Divisional Hospital, Khanna. Our samples were taken in the morning and reports are awaited.”

After knowing that the 13-year-old had tested positive, on Monday, his father visited the DMCH to hand over the mobile phone to his daughter so that they could communicate with each other.

He said, “I have handed over the phone to my daughter and it’s been over a month that we have not stepped out as she is an introvert and doesn’t play with children. We are worried about her.”

Girl’s mother said said , “ She was complaining of cough, cold and fever and breathlessness from last 5-7 days and we got her diagnosed from Khanna Nursing Home near our home . We got through CT scan and they were doubtful that there is infection in the lungs. Further, they recommended us to get the medication from Apollo hospital.On May 10, she was taken to Apollo hospital via ambulance. But after reaching I have realised to get her tested at DMCH.” After reaching DMCH, her X ray and samples were and she was admitted in the isolation ward of DMCH.

Dr Sandeep Sharma Medical Superintendent of DMCH said , “ She has been admitted in isolation ward and her health is stable.”

Health department officials said that thirteen year old girl had respiratory problem and she had gone to a private clinic few days ago. They added that after the doctor there took note of her symptoms, he referred her to a private Hospital near Sherpur Chowk but her family took her to DMC.

The health department officials further said that on Sunday, the authorities at DMC got her test done before starting her treatment. They added that in the evening report of the girl came as positive after which Health Department officials at Khanna were informed about her report.

The Civil Hospital authorities at Khanna said that after the report of the girl came as positive, they traced five of the immediate contacts of the girl including her parents, grand parents and six year old brother. They added that samples of the immediate contacts of the girl have been taken and same have been sent to Ludhiana for testing. 

Senior Medical Officer (SMO) Civil Hospital Khanna, Dr Rajinder Gulati said that more than ten health workers at a private healthcare centre have been quarantined and their samples will be taken after five days as it just about one to two days that the girl had visited the centre. 


