13-year-old girl Vadodara’s youngest Covid casualty
2020-04-15
Vadodara/Rajkot: A 13-year-old girl became the youngest Covid-19 casualty in Vadodara city that registered two deaths on Tuesday. The girl from Pratapnagar died in GMERS Hospital, Gotri, on Tuesday evening, within a couple of hours of testing positive. A 58-year-old Nagarwada resident in Vadodara, Mohammed Hanif Pathan, who had tested positive on April 8, also died at a private hospital. Pathan is the second victim from Nagarwada-Saiyedpura area. The death toll in Vadodara now stands at five. In 24 hours ending Tuesday evening, Vadodara saw addition of six new cases, taking the total number of positive cases since the outbreak to 114. Of this, as many as 96 are from the densely populated Nagarwada-Saiyedpura stretch. Meanwhile, a 50-year-old man died of the infection in Bhavnagar’s Sir T Hospital on Tuesday. According to official sources, the victim Ashraf Harun, who was under treatment since March 28, also had co-morbid condition including diabetes. He was on oxygen support since admission, but shifted on ventilator on Monday after his health deteriorated. Harun was a resident of Bhilwara circle.Few hours before he died, Harun released a video message exhorting people to remain inside their homes to protect themselves from the deadly virus and describing his suffering and pain.Meanwhile, three other persons - all in the age group of 18-25 years - tested positive since Monday night, taking the total number of cases to 26 positive cases in the city. One of them is from Shihore town of the district.2.91L in containment zone in SuratSurat: The Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) on Tuesday declared nine more clusters as 'red zones' and warned people living there to keep themselves 'home quarantined' or face legal actions under the Epidemic Disease Act-1897. Also, seven new positive cases were reported from different parts of the city, taking the tally to 45. With this the SMC has put total 12 clusters with population of 2.91 lakh and 61,982 houses under mandatory home quarantine. “Total 68 teams are engaged in contact tracing of Covid-19 positive patients in red zones ,” said SMC commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani.On Monday, 590 samples were taken for testing as part of the mass testing drive and their reports awaited. Two Covid patients recoverRajkot: 65-year-old Usman Multani who was admitted on March 29 and Shabnam Multani, 29, who was admitted on April 7, have fully recovered and discharged from Sir T Hospital. “These two patients were motivated by the medical team during their isolation so that they remain mentally strong,” district administration said in a release.Anand numbers touch 10Vadodara: With a 54-year-old man, a resident of Aling crossroads area in Khambhat testing positive on Tuesday, the coastal town, now accounts for five Covid-19 cases out of total 10 in Anand district. The man lives in the same area of Khambhat from where four cases have surfaced in the past.‘Police Mitra’ to ease cops’ burdenRajkot: In order to unburden the overworked cops, the Rajkot police has decided to seek help of concerned citizens after the lockdown period got extended to May 3 on Tuesday. “We have decided to form a unit of citizens under the name ‘Police Mitra.’ Each police station will have a unit consisting of 15 to 20 people. ‘Police Mitra’ will be deployed along with the cops,” said Rajkot police commissioner Manoj Agrawal.