Coronavirus outbreak: 1,300 hand sanitisation points in place across south Delhi
2020-03-20
NEW DELHI: After the invocation of the epidemic clause of Section 376 of the Delhi Municipal Act, 1,374 hand sanitisation points with soap-water and alcohol sanitisers have been set up across south Delhi. 


According to the latest progress report on hand sanitisation, till Wednesday, 271 residents welfare associations (RWAs), 595 eateries and restaurants, 41 banquet halls, 46 market associations, 23 malls and 398 hotels have operational points. The west zone is the poorest performer while Najafgarh leads in the drive. A health official said the Najafgarh zone was the most vulnerable due to the presence of the IGI Airport and a large number of hotels. 

To strengthen the fight against novel coronavirus, the health department of South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) has issued a warning to all these entities to provide hand-washing infrastructure. “Enough time has been given and punitive actions under Indian Penal Code will be initiated now,” the official said. 

Among the RWAs, 195 in the Najafgarh zone, 41 in the west, 25 in the central and just 10 in the south zone have complied with the direction. In terms of markets, too, both central and south zones are lagging with just five and six associations complying with the order. 

Not all RWAs are happy with the directive. Chetan Sharma, who heads the Confederation of National Capitial Region RWAs, said these were voluntary organisations with no provision for funds. “The corporations should provide us resources and we can facilitate setting up such points. They charge taxes from us while we don’t have any provision for funds collection,” he added. 

Rajeev Kakria of the GK-I RWA, said the commissioner should request, and not order, for the services RWAs provide due to SDMC’s shortcomings and inept functioning. 

Under Section 376 of DMC Act, it is mandatory for all such entities, including malls, to set up proper sanitation facilities. The directions will remain applicable till March 31 for now. 

“Violators will be deemed to have committed an offence under IPC 188 for causing danger to human life, health or safety and can be punished with a fine or an imprisonment of up to six months,” a senior official said. 

Last time the provision was used was in 1997 to deal with the dengue outbreak when people were said “mosquito-genic” conditions on their premises could lead to severe repercussions.


