131 passengers, close contacts advised home quarantine
2020-03-18
Nagpur: The divisional commissioner office on Tuesday said it has advised self-isolation to 131 first-point contacts and passengers who have landed in the city since last week when the first novel coronavirus positive case was reported here.

The administration would now keep a check on these people through local police stations, beside stamping ‘home quarantine’ on their hands.

On Monday, state health minister Rajesh Tope had said that flyers advised self-isolation would be stamped to deter them from stepping out. Over 600 people from the state have been directed to be home quarantined.

Of the 131 persons, 35 have completed 14 days in self-isolation as per the data released by the commissioner’s office. 

Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar told TOI, “Besides stamping, a list of such people is also being forwarded to local police stations. People can report in case they find ‘home quarantined’ persons loitering or mixing with others.” 

Even as the divisional commissioner’s office came out with a detailed list of number of people being quarantined after reaching Nagpur airport from different entry points, there remains ambiguity over the home quarantine process and guidelines among officials as well as citizens.

When TOI checked with officials manning the district administration control room, they sounded unaware about the ‘home quarantine’ advisory. Despite clearing asking if international flyers were being stamped, they said first one has to go for a test only after which ‘home quarantine’ can be advised.

“Suspect has to be kept separate and the room has to be hygienic. He shouldn’t be allowed to mingle with other family members. If they have any kind of fever, cough or sickness, get them to one of the government hospitals for a test. You can also call and inform NMC helpline for further assistance,” an official said.

Kumar clarified that no one has to go to Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital or Government Medical College and Hospital. “All such persons have to stay back at home only. In case they are found to be out, police action under section 188 of the IPC can be taken,” he said.

On Tuesday, the health officials screened 22 passengers at the airport here. Of these, seven were quarantined at the MLA hostel. So far, 1,004 have been screened of which the 131 were advised self-isolation and total 13 at MLA hostel.

During the day, the commissioner held a meeting with district collector Ravindra Thakre, deputy director of health services Sanjay Jaiswal, DCP Shweta Khedkar, DCP Vikram Sali, PWD executive engineer J Bhanuse, revenue deputy commissioner Sudharkar Telang, and civil surgeon Devendra Paturkar.

The meeting was called in the wake of increase in number of incoming international passengers, especially those coming from notified nations.

In figures

People quarantined | 131

People completed 14-day quarantine | 35

Passengers screened at airport on Tuesday | 22

Total flyers screened | 1,004

Flyers quarantined at MLA Hostel on Tuesday | 7

Patients quarantined so far at MLA hostel | 13


