137 held for breaching lockdown restrictions in city
2020-03-26
T’puram: Intensifying their vigil against those who breach lockdown protocols, the city police have started taking steps to suspend the registration of vehicles that are taken out for unnecessary trips. City Police Commissioner Balramkumar Upadhyay informed that vehicles taken out for unnecessary trips will be confiscated, invoking Section 53 of Motor Vehicles Act that deals with suspension of vehicle registration. 

On Wednesday, the second day of state lockdown, the city police registered as many as 134 cases and recorded the arrest of 137 persons for breaching lockdown restrictions. They also confiscated 117 vehicles from motorists in connection with these cases. Among these, 85 are two-wheelers, 19 autorickshaws and 13 cars. 

The vehicles were given back to owners after case was registered. If the same vehicle is caught again for the same offence, its registration will be suspended, the Commissioner said. The police have also taken measures to check the unwanted outings of individuals that go undetected by the cops on roads. The security personnel of all apartment complexes in the city have been directed to keep a register in which the entry and exit of all residents must be recorded. The local police personnel will check this register every day and find out who all are going out unnecessarily. The residents’ association office bearers and caretakers of apartment complexes that do not comply this direction will have to face legal action. 

The Commissioner has also requested people to arrange accommodation facilities at homes for home nurses and palliative care volunteers instead making them travel every day for the remaining days of the lockdown. As movement of people is restricted, the police are also taking steps to bring various services of the police to the doorsteps. Henceforth, people can register their complaints or file applications for police clearance certificates via e-mail, phone or Whatsapp. Janamaithri Community Relations Officers at each police station have been entrusted with the task of the providing the email ids, phone numbers and Whatsapp numbers of the police among the public through residents’ associations

The rural district police on Wednesday registered 460 cases, 365 people were arrested and 120 vehicles were seized. Also in the rural police district, the Deputy Inspector General awarded good service entry to four officers attached to Parassala police station, including SI Sreelal for arresting a group of DYFI activists for violating lockdown restrictions. The police had taken action against them on Tuesday evening, which had made way for a minor clash. The DIG awarded good service entry to the officers at a time when DYFI local leadership at Parassala has launched a campaign to transfer the cops involved as a retaliatory measure. 

The Kollam city police on Wednesday registered 210 cases and arrested 180 people. As many as 195 vehicles including cars, autorickshaws, and motorcycles were seized .


