Rajasthan: 14-day home quarantine must for flyers
2020-05-25
JAIPUR: The state government on Sunday night clarified that all passengers arriving in the state by scheduled commercial flights from Monday will have to undergo home quarantine for 14 days. The move comes a day before domestic flight operations resume across the country.

 


Altogether 19 flights are scheduled to land in Jaipur and the same number of flights will depart to various destinations from Monday.

The guidelines issued by the home department state that flyers who are quarantined would be monitored and any breach of the conditions could land them in institutional quarantine and fine or legal action. However, such passengers who are visiting any place in the state for work or other purpose for a period less than a week and have already undergone a RTPCR test up to two days before arrival and are carrying the report of negative shall be exempted from home quarantine and permitted for return journey.

Meanwhile, the airport authorities have been asked to maintain a database of passengers including the addresses of places they visit in Jaipur and their phone numbers. “We will conduct thermal screening and will get full details of passengers to share with the state government,” said Jaipur airport director Jaideep Singh Balhara.

“For symptomatic patients, there would be direct isolation to the nearest health centre. Those with moderate to severe symptoms would be sent to a dedicated Covid-19 treatment centre,” said an officer, while quoting the guidelines of the ministry of health and family welfare. “I am travelling to New Delhi to bring my son back who studies in Noida (Uttar Pradesh). I have no idea if on arrival I would be quarantined. Still, I have booked the tickets,” said Ramesh Sehajwani, a businessman.

Meanwhile, Mumbai and Pune, for the time being, have refused flight arrivals at their airports. “This means that we would have 19 departures from Jaipur and 16 arrivals except for Pune and Mumbai on Monday,” said an officer.


