Lockdown: 14 kitchens ready 1.5 lakh meals for Bengaluru’s workforce daily
2020-04-20
BENGALURU: Some 14 kitchens across Bengaluru, each manned on average by 55 volunteers, kitted in protective clothing, light fires to prepare 1.5 lakh meals for the city’s workforce. It’s an operation that stretches from dawn to dusk each day.
 

They start at 3am and work until 9pm, when the last of the orders is dispatched. They’re reaching every corner of the country’s IT capital, from Electronics City to Mysuru Road and BTM to HRBR layouts. They’re sweating it out with a smile, all to feed those hungry.

The Atria Foundation’s Free Meals campaign kick-started on March 28. It has served close to 2 million meals since.

The kitchens are connected to a central system either by laptops or cellphones. The daily requirement, finalised by the previous evening, is conveyed to a point person by Kaushik Raju, director of the group, who personally oversees the operations. When an NGO places a request for say 1,000 or 2,000 meals, the kitchen closest to the delivery point is tipped off to prepare two meals per person — brunch and early dinner.

The menu varies on a daily basis, depending also on the produce available; each packet weighs between 400 and 500 grams. The early meal is often puliyogare or khara bath and the second packet contains lemon rice or rice and sambar.

Volunteers, numbering almost 800, get the show on the road each day. The costs of acquisition and production have been quite high, but they’ve been able to lower the total operating costs by small margins every day. Even so, they are expensing a little over Rs 40 lakh a day.

“Our original plan was to have one or two kitchens, but that would have meant having over 300 people within a constrained area,” Kaushik said of the exercise. “The challenges of maintaining hygiene in such a situation seemed an improbable task.”

Sunder Raju, founder and managing director of the group, said they were particularly encouraged by people coming forward to help. “At first we needed more kitchens, so when we reached out, outlets like Nandhana and A2B and even wedding halls offered their kitchens and staff free of charge,” he revealed.

Production, however, is only half the job. The most important part of the operation is taking all that is prepared to the people who need them the most.

The complexity of coordinating deliveries to the appointed locations or arriving at the closest possible point meant they needed an online system. Using technology, they linked kitchens to delivery points, totalling 250 locations.

The Rajus have worked out a standard operating procedure that takes no more than four days to put in place with the help of non-government organisations in a bid to give the exercise wider reach. Anyone willing to help, people whose kitchens can prepare 3,000-5,000 meals or even those who can provide 50 a day can be of immense help to the drive that has been at the heart of Karnataka’s Covid-19 campaign.

“We’ll provide the raw materials. What we are looking for is hygienic places having the manpower to join the fight,” Kaushik said, adding, “There are places that need just 10-20 meals a day and others that ask for 1,000s, so any offer helps complete the task.”

