14 new Covid-19 cases in Madurai, 29 in south Tamil Nadu
2020-04-14
MADURAI: Twenty-nine new cases were reported in the southern districts on Monday, of which 14 were recorded in Madurai district alone on Monday. The total cases in Madurai has gone up to 39, while the total cases in southern districts is 268.

The 14 from Madurai included seven who had participated in the Delhi conference. Two people, whose relatives had attended the conference in Delhi had also tested positive in Madurai.

A 62-year-old SARI-Covid-19 person from Yagappa Nagar in the city, is also stated to have a contact history. The only person whose contact history is yet to be traced in the district is that of the 54-year-old victim from Madurai. Both Yagappa Nagar and Gomathypuram were completely sealed off by the authorities two days ago, as a containment measure.

Six new cases in Virudhungar took the total number in the district to 11. Among them, a 62-year-old man from Rajapalayam was successfully treated and discharged, hence the district now has 10 positive cases. Four of his contacts, however, tested positive

They included his male friend, a male doctor and two female medical staff of a clinic which the man from Rajapalayam had visited before he was diagnosed for the disease. Virudhunagar collector R Kannan said the clinic was closed on March 27 after the man tested positive and the three medical personnel were quarantined. Now that they had tested positive, officials would be identifying all the people who had visited the clinic between March 22 and March 26.

He further said that Rajapalayam town with 42,000 houses and a population of 1.30 lakh people would come under the containment zone. 

Ramanathapuram reported three new cases on Monday, including a 66-year-old woman and a 44-year-old man, both relatives of the 71-year-old Covid-19 positive man who had succumbed to the illness in Stanley Medical College Hospital in Chennai on April 2. They were among the 254 who had attended his funeral on April 3 in Keezhakarai. The third person, a 45-year-old driver from Paramakudi, had attended the Tablighi meet. This took the tally in Ramanathpuram district to five. The three have been admitted to the isolation ward in the Sivaganga government hospital.

Meanwhile, a 42-year-old man who had recently returned from Malaysia and was under home quarantine, died of cardiac arrest on Monday morning. The man was a resident of Andalpuram. According to health officials, as per protocol, his body was brought to the mortuary at Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) and his samples were sent for testing. They are also monitoring all his close contacts.


