14 new Covid-19 positive cases reported in Varanasi
2020-06-01
Varanasi: As many as 14 new positive cases of Covid-19 including 10 migrant labourers, three policemen and a woman sari trader were detected in the district on Sunday.

With the arrival of Sunday’s reports from Banaras Hindu University laboratory, the Covid tally of Varanasi reached to 182. The number of patients cured and discharged from hospitals rose to 117 after six more were discharged on Sunday. Now, active patients in the district are 61 while 92 areas have become hotspots.

DM Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “A total of 200 test reports were received by the district administration, out of which 14 are positive. Three of them are police constables who were deployed as followers of CO Sadar. The three had been quarantined after one of their colleagues had tested positive four days ago. They all lived in barrack-8 of police lines. After the arrival of their reports, they were admitted to isolation ward of DDU district hospital.”

A 40-year-old woman sari trader of Chhamuhani area under Jaitpura police station also tested positive on Sunday, DM Sharma said.

“Contact tracing is in progress to ascertain the source of infection,” he added. 

Other 10 patients are migrant labourers, informed the DM

A 60-year-old man of Umraha Barai village of Chaubeypur was found positive. He had returned home from Mumbai with fellow labourers in a car and one of his his friends had already been tested positive. Similarly, a 30-year-old woman of Hiramanpur in Phoolpur area was found positive. She had also returned home from Mumbai in a car with her husband, who had been tested positive.

A 42-year-old labourer of Mokalpur village of Chaubeypur had returned from Mumbai with other migrants. One of his companions tested positive earlier. A Surat-returned 30-year-old migrant of Chhitampur village in Chaubeypur area. A 23-year-old Mumbai-returned labourer of Amilo village in Badagaon, a 48-year-old Bharatpur (Rajasthan)-returned vegetable vendor of Tikari village of Chaubeypur. A 36-year-old native of New Colony Soyepur of Cantonment police station area who had returned from Delhi by flight on May 25 and had tested positive.

Apart from them, Mumbai-returned 32-year-old youth and his companion. A comparision 35-year-old native of Ratanpur village in Badagaon area and a 27-year-old man of Hariharpur in Jansa area were found infected.

DM said that after a fresh rise in reports from areas around it, many localities Chhitampur, Amilo, Sarai Tikari, Soyepur, Ratanpur, Hariharpur and Chhamuhani have been declared new hotspots. 

Now, total number of hotspots in the district have become 92. Of them 28 have turned to green zone.


