140 quarantined people return home after testing negative
2020-04-21
NAGPUR: Around 140 suspects including Delhi returnees have been allowed to go home after they completed 14 days of institutional quarantine and tested negative twice.

Some of the them were from neighbouring districts and due to shortage of ambulance besides long distances involved are allowed to go back in hired vehicles as public transport is shut.

As on date, 538 suspects are under institutional quarantine at six centres across the city. The MLA Hostel is hosting 293, Ravi Bhavan 78, Lonara-based Central India College of Pharmacy 31, Symbiosis Campus 74, Vanamati 52 and 10 staying in paid centre set up at a hotel.

The city has at present 1,281 beds for institutional quarantine including 409 paid beds offered by Nagpur Residential Hotels Association at 18 hotels. Rest of the 872 are free of cost managed by city administration.

The suspects were dropped home in buses and ambulances under monitoring of doctors and officials from public health department and civic body. “Proper care was taken while sending them home even though they have twice tested negative and completed more than 14 days in quarantine. We have seen many times the virus showing up even after 20 days. The chances of infection to them or spreading through them are low but we maintained social distancing while dropping them off. Several buses were deployed and they made mutilple trips during the day to ferry people,” said an incharge doctor.

At some quarantine facility, the inmates helped collect funds for those hailing from other districts to hire cars. The inmates were issued letters by the doctors of being Covid-19 free. Yet, some of them faced problems in getting entry in their towns and villages.

“Villagers didn’t’ allow even natives to enter fearing spread of coronavirus in their area. They called back and it took several hours for us to convince the local bodies to let the persons in,” said incharge of a quarantine centre.

Those relieved on Monday included people from Satranjipura connections, Mominpura, Jaripatka, Hingna while people from Katol, Narkhed, Pulgaon in Wardha districts, Kamptee and Wardha Road were among those dropped off.

In last couple of days, most of the over 200 Delhi returnees have been discharged but not without them putting intense pressure on the officials for early release. However, 74 new persons were brought to MLA Hostel, Vanamati and Ravi Bhavan for quarantine.


