149 passengers arrive from London, sent to quarantine
2020-05-23
JAIPUR: Altogether 149 migrant Rajasthanis stranded in the United Kingdom arrived here on a special flight from London on Friday afternoon via Delhi under the Centre’s Vande Bharat Abhiyan. 

Soon after landing, all passengers were sent to quarantine of 14 days for which they have to bear the charges including Covid-19 test, lodging and food. Relatives who came to receive them were not allowed to meet. A number of passengers complained that they were not informed about paid quarantine facility. 

The passengers first arrived at Indira Gandhi International Airport in Delhi and from there they were brought to Jaipur in another flight. 

“We will receive 13 flights till June 1 in which around 2,000 expatriates will return to Rajasthan from Britain, Canada, Russia, Kazakhstan, Philippines, Kyrgyzstan and Georgia,” said Jaideep Singh Balhara, Jaipur Airport told TOI.

Immediately after arrival, the passengers were taken into the security area for medical examination including thermal screening. “Thermal screening and other tests were carried out keeping all passengers in groups of 20-20. We got the teams from the state government, police and others at the airport. Likewise, in batches of 20, these passengers were sent to different hotels across the city,” said an officer. 

However, the relatives of the passengers who had come to the airport were anxious and complained of poor treatment and fleecing by authorities. “ My brother Danish Hussain was studying at Manchester Metropolitan University. He has paid for his flight and they are charging Rs 3,000 per day for the quarantine. This is clear fleecing,” said Daniyal Chishty, who came from Ajmer to receive his brother. 

After customs clearance, the CISF officer handed over the passengers in groups of 20-20 to police. Passengers were given choices to choose the quarantine centres . The state government has placed three categories of standard, medium and high-class hotels for quarantine. These include major hotels like Marriott, Hilton, Bella Casa, Fern and Neerja Inn. Travelers will have to stay in the hotels for 14 days, whose costs will also be borne to them.

The corona test will be done on the last day, which will also be paid by the passengers. Passengers will be able to return home only when the corona test report is negative.


