15 days into lockdown, salon owners flooded with home-visit request in Dehradun
2020-04-08
DEHRADUN: After almost 15 days of lockdown, the salon owners in Dehradun are flooded with requests from customers asking them to visit their homes for haircut.


While some of the salon owners are accommodating the requests, there are others who have refused to do so. 

Salim, who owns a salon at Chakrata Road, said, “I have received a lot of phone calls from my old clients, but since the lockdown is in place I could attend only to a few clients in the past 15 days. I have only attended to customers who live near my house. During my visit I not only carried face mask, surgical gloves but also sanitised the equipment.”

Salon-owner Manvendra Rawat has gone an extra mile to motivate around 1,500 customers to stay safe at home. He has shot several videos of himself updating his customers on the lockdown and easy methods to groom themselves. Talking to TOI, he said, “There is no question of opening the shop before the situation is under control. I am in touch with the customers via WhatsApp. Since many of my clients are from other districts, I have requested them to not visit any random barber or call them home as a preventive measure.”

Manvendra has also drafted a visitor’s guide for customers who will be visiting his salon once the lockdown is lifted. “I have included basic procedures such as hand washing, use of hand sanitizer and chemical solution to sterilize the scissors and blade that we use every day. I have prepared a visitors guide after consulting some doctors who are my clients. I have also placed bulk order for disposable cutting sheets which will dent my pocket but it is important for safety,” he added.

Dr Himanshu Arora, eye surgeon and a resident of Green View Apartment, said, “Getting a haircut is important but not more than keeping ourselves alive. If we follow all guidelines now, the situation will be better soon and we will be able to go back to our favourite salon.”

Some confusion prevailed among the salon owners two days ago, after rumors that the administration has decided to allow salons to open. Later, the administration clarified that salon services have not been notified under essential services and will open only after the lock down is lifted.

