15 fresh cases in two days take Lucknow’s Covid-19 tally to 233
2020-05-03
LUCKNOW: Fresh cases of Covid-19 from four new localities on Saturday took the total number of city areas with at least one patient to 26 ever since the first case was reported on March 11.

Authorities are worried not only because four cases have been reported from four new localities but also for the fact that they have not been able to trace the source of infection in these cases.

With 15 new coronavirus positive cases on Friday and Saturday, the total number of patients in Lucknow has touched 233, of whom 77 have recovered and one has died.

One of the patients tested positive on Saturday is from Rajasthan and had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi. He was in quarantine at GCRC Institute. A 15-year-old boy from Sadar, quarantined at FI Medical College, also tested positive.

“Eight patients reported on Saturday include a nurse from Khadgapur village in Gomtinagar Extension who works at a private hospital on Faizabad Road. The total number of health workers infected in the city has climbed to five,” an officer said. Two elderly patients, including one from Shravasti, under treatment in the same hospital had tested positive on April 24. They were shifted to SGPGIMS where one of them died during treatment.

Dr Raj Gopal Reddy, medical superintendent of the hospital where the nurse works, said she was on leave since April 21. “The other patients included two from Top Khana Bazar and one each from Alambagh, Sarfarazganj and Khadra,” he added.

“The new areas from where virus infection was found on Saturday are Khadgapur, Alambagh, Sarfarazganj and Khadra,” said Dr KP Tripathi, district infection disease unit in charge. The 27-year-old man is from Sarfarazganj. He had returned from Mumbai before lockdown. The 44-year-old woman found positive in Alambagh had also visited a private hospital with breathing problem.

A 57-year-old man from Khadra was diagnosed with Covid-19 when he went to SGPGI for dialysis.

Among seven Covid-19 cases reported on Friday, six were the contacts of KGMU nurse who was tested positive on April 26. So far, 14 of her contacts, including six family members, have been found positive. All of them are residents of Nakhas.


