15 medics among 43 home quarantined; 3 Chanda areas sealed
2020-05-04
Chandrapur: Civic administration has sealed Krishna Nagar, adjoining Sanjay Nagar and Durgah ward localities after a resident of Krishna Nagar was found positive for Covid-19 on Saturday evening. Three members of the 50-year-old patient’s family have been put into isolation ward and their samples have been sent for testing.Total 28 members of six families from residential apartment in posh Shivaji Nagar area where the patient worked as security guard and 15 medics including 10 doctors who came in his contact during initial treatment have been put into home quarantine.Collector Kunal Khemnar issued a statement urging people not to panic and told none from the containment areas will be allowed outside except for medical emergencies.Sanjay Nagar and Durgah ward, both adjoining Krishna Nagar having population of over 10,000, have been declared as containment zone. Surrounding 7km area has been declared as buffer zone and health department will carry out screening in this area also to track people with symptoms of coronavirus infection.Civil surgeon Dr ND Rathod informed that different teams, comprising 40 employees of health department, have started house-to-house screening of people to detect Covid patients. Around 2,500 people were screened on Sunday. The process of contact tracing in the area is underway, he added.Entire area has been sanitized by spraying disinfectants.Dr Rathod claimed that the patient had visited GMCH complaining of chest pain and many doctors and nurses had come in contact with him during initial treatment. “We have asked 10 doctors, three staff nurses and two attendants to stay in home quarantine,” he said. Total 28 persons belonging to six families from an apartment where the patient worked as security guard have also been put into home quarantine, he said adding that swab samples of all these suspected contacts will be taken after six days.As per information furnished by the security guard, he was suffering from fever since April 23. The guard also claimed that he had not gone outside the district in the last 15 days. Authorities are trying to ascertain his claims and the source of infection. His condition is stable now. Meanwhile, district collector along with senior officers visited the containment area on Sunday morning. Guardian minister Vijay Wadettiwar reviewed the situation in the evening. Photo captionKrishna Nagar and neighbouring areas in Chandrapur have been sealed and being sprayed with disinfectantsNBPhotos sent on WhatsApp group 