15 Tablighi Jamaat men booked in Moradabad, 25 sent to jail in Amroha district
2020-05-07
BAREILLY: Police in Moradabad have booked at least 15 Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) members who are already placed under quarantine centre. 

The police said that they had participated at Markaz congregation in Delhi and after that they visited Ramnagar in Uttarakhand before reaching Moradabad. Besides, five people who are residents of Nagphani area were also shifted to temporary jail on Wednesday after completing quarantine period.

“They were traced by a surveillance team and shifted to quarantine centre. Now, we have lodged an FIR under section 188 of IPC and Epidemic Diseases Act,” said additional superintendent of police (traffic) Satish Chandra. ASP Chandra is also nodal Covid-19 officer in the district.

According to police sources, all TJ members were taken to quarantine centre from Kanth area where they had taken shelter at Eidgah locality under Nai Basti.

All the TJ members had reached the Markaz on February 12 and after participating in the event there they reached Ramnagar in Uttarakhand. After staying for a few days, they came back to Kanth and took shelter at the mosque. Beside, one Riazuddin who is caretaker of Banjaran mosque, is also booked for hiding information.

Notably, eight TJ members, who are Indonesian nationals, have already been sent to jail after completing quarantine period in Moradabad.

ASP Chandra said that after completing quarantine, the TJ members are being shifted to temporary jail and till now 71 accused, including Jamaatis, have been lodged there.

On the other hand, police in Amroha district booked as many as 23 TJ men - all residents of Gujarat. Among 23, three TJ men and a local man who had given shelter to them were tested positive for virus. 

Joya outpost in-charge Pramod Pathak filed a complaint against the TJ men following which FIR was lodged against them in Amroha. 

According to the police complaint, some TJ members of Gujarat had stayed at a madrassa in Joya while others had taken shelter at Musharraf Husain’s residence in Fattepur Mafi village.

“Despite repeated announcement, neither TJ members nor the person who had given them shelter informed the health department about their arrival from Markaz. Later on, they were traced after the Centre had shared mobile phone numbers with UP government following which police took them on surveillance,” the police officer said.

Inspector Sharad Mallik said that an FIR under sections 188, 269, 270 of IPC, Disaster Management Act and Epidemic Diseases Act was registered against the 25 accused and they were shifted to temporary jail set up at Kanth road from the quarantine centre.


