15 thalassaemic major foetus aborted amid lockdown in Gujarat
2020-06-10
SURAT: Rachna Kakkad (name changed), pregnant with her second child, was extremely worried after the lockdown was announced in March. With the 40-year-old Jamnagar resident’s first child being a thalassaemia major, she was on tenterhooks fearing that the crucial prenatal tests would get suspended too.

Not from a well-to-do background, the Kakkads have been through the wringer trying to keep their first born alive through regular blood transfusions and seeing the child suffer. The emboldened mother put a lid on her emotions as she didn’t want to take a second chance.

Her prenatal diagnosis by the Indian Red Cross Society (IRCS, Gujarat Branch) in Ahmedabad in April confirmed her worst fears — she was carrying another thalassaemia major foetus. After being counselled, Kakkad agreed to abort and end misery for both the unborn child as well as the parents.

Like Kakkad, 14 other women, whose tests confirmed that their unborn children were thalassaemia majors, too decided to go for abortion. Preventing birth of such a foetus is also a major way to ‘delink’ the genetic blood disorder.

Dr Bhavesh Acharya, chairman, IRCS, Gujarat, told TOI: “"We cannot afford to wait for long as abortion has to be carried out before 21 weeks of pregnancy according to the law. So, amid the lockdown, we continued with our prenatal diagnosis services at our laboratory in Ahmedabad. Also pregnancy-related services were exempted under essential medical services.”

“Time is of essence here and we need to prevent any kid from being born with the disorder. We conducted 53 prenatal diagnosis tests of pregnant women, of whom 15 foetuses were found thallasaemic major while remaining normal, he said.

According to an estimate, there are over 10,000 children are diagnosed as thalassaemia major, and every year, around 1,000 newborns are added to that list.

ICRS vice-chairman Sumit Thakker said that 1,837 prenatal diagnosed of pregnant women were conducted under the thalassaemia Prevention Programme since 2010, of which 486 were found to be thalassaemic foetus’ which were aborted.

“Of the 15 women found to be bearing thalassaemic major foetus’, nine were already mothers who have first-born’s with this blood disorder,” said Dr Prakash Parmar, general secretary of IRCS.


Prevention programme
Red Cross with the support of the state government has been running the programme since 2010 under which thalassaemia tests were conducted of 6.46 lakh pregnant women till date. If a pregnant woman is found to be thalassaemia minor, then the husband is tested. If both are thalassaemia minors, a prenatal diagnosis is conducted to check the foetus. If it confirms thalassaemia, then the would-be parents are counselled for abortion. The programme is being implemented in eight districts at present and being expanded every year.

