157 Covid patients discharged on coast
2020-06-11
MANGALURU/UDUPI: Dakshina Kannada recorded four Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, while Udupi, for the second day in succession, recorded no positive cases. Udupi however still tops the state chart with a total 946 positive cases, while its active cases has since dropped to 486, with the discharge of 155 patients on Wednesday.

Udupi deputy commissioner G Jagadeesha said that a 3-member task force has been set up in gram panchayats to monitor those in home quarantine. In urban areas, ward level committees will fulfil this task, he said. Flying squads have been given the responsibility of filing cases under The Epidemic Diseases Act, against people who violate quarantine norms. Revenue and health officials, as well as police personnel will visit sealed houses daily, as per a new arrangement, and submit a report, he said. 

The Seva Sindhu portal will provide automatic approval for people from other states, barring Maharashtra, wanting to enter Karnataka. Those from Maharashtra need to obtain permission from the respective DCs, he said. Their health check-up will be conducted at the border, and they should proceed directly to the district receiving centres. The district has 6 receiving centres at Kaup, Brahmawar, Byndoor, Kundapur, Udupi and Karkala, he said.

To reduce the number of people visiting the DC’s office at Manipal, the district administration introduced a helpline number. People who have work at the DC’s office, rather than going there in person, may call 0820-2574931 or 0820- 2571500 and get their work done. Staff at the helpline will note public queries and revert to them with action taken by the district administration. To submit documents, one may WhatsApp it to 9880831516 or email it to udupidc.helpline@gmail.com.

The four cases that Dakshina Kannada recorded, included two people who had returned from Saudi Arabia and two others from Maharashtra. There are 97 active cases in the district, against 212 total positive cases, said DC Sindhu B Rupesh. Two patients, including a teenager, were discharged from Wenlock Hospital on Wednesday, said the DC. 


