16 cancer patients in Delhi under Covid-19 cloud
2020-04-08
NEW DELHI: At least 16 patients admitted at Delhi State Cancer Institute (DSCI) have been tested to find out whether they are Covid-19 positive. Some of them have fever and cough, the classic symptoms of novel coronavirus infection.


“We collected their swab samples and sent them for testing. The results are likely to arrive by Wednesday,” said Dr BL Sherwal, medical director of DSCI. Depending on the test results, the patients will either be shifted to Rajiv Gandhi Super Specialty Hospital (RGSSH), which is designated for Covid-19 treatment, or another cancer hospital, he added.

Recently, DSCI shut down its OPD services and new admissions when a senior resident working in preventive oncology tested positive for Covid-19. Later, 18 more staff members tested positive for the disease, triggering a major scare.

However, in a major reprieve, Sherwal told TOI that the test results of 42 staff members, who were suspected to have contracted the disease, came out negative. “As a precautionary measure, we have advised all staff members to remain under self-quarantine for some days. If someone tests positive, we will take care of them,” he added.

Sherwal said new admissions and OPD services have been shut to save patients from contracting the infection because of lack of surety about the source. 

“We are still exploring whether the infection spread from the senior resident who was the first to test positive or someone else,” said another doctor. Cancer patients are immune compromised and, therefore, the hospital staff said they were most concerned about their well-being.

Four days ago, there was a major scare at Sir Ganga Ram Hospital (SGRH) when two patients there tested positive for Covid-19. More than 100 staff members, including doctors and nurses, were advised quarantine. The hospital said in a statement that so far only one of the quarantined workers, a technician, had tested positive.

SGRH has designated one its units, which is separate from the main building, for Covid-19 treatment. It has also started testing for the disease. The chairman of the hospital board, Dr DS Rana, said 32 people have been tested so far, of which three have come out positive.

In the last few days, several hospitals and their staff members have been affected by the disease, triggering demands for stricter screening and availability of personal protective equipment for healthcare providers.

On Tuesday, AIIMS issued an order stating all healthcare workers would be provided five N-95 masks each, which they would have to disinfect and re-use at least four times over 20 days. Directions were also issued to the staff for collecting hydroxychloroquine tablets to be used as a prophylactic drug by those involved in direct care of patients. DRDO has installed a disinfectant chamber at AIIMS to manage the spread of the disease in hospitals.

Delhi has reported 576 Covid-19 cases, including 51 positive ones on Tuesday. Of this, 333 are connected to the Nizamuddin cluster. A worrying fact is that 35 people admitted in various hospitals need ICU support. Another 27 require oxygen support, which shows their lung function is compromised. Till date, Delhi has confirmed nine deaths, but this number may increase sharply given the high number of seriously-ill patients.


