16 more test positive for Covid-19 in Agra region
2020-04-08
AGRA: At least 16 more people, including 11 with links to Tablighi Jamaat, tested positive for novel coronavirus in Agra region on Tuesday. Of these, 10 were in Agra district while three each were confirmed positive in Mainpuri and Firozabad districts.

With the 10 new Covid-19 cases in Agra on Tuesday, five of whom had come in contact with Jamaat members, the tally for the novel coronavirus patients in the district went up to 63. 

The new positive cases in Agra include a 76-year-old woman, whose grandson had returned from Europe on March 15. Three others, who tested positive, had contacted the disease from infected patients. 

Agra chief medical officer (CMO) Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All patients have been shifted to the isolation ward and attempts are on to identify people, who came in contact with them, for screening.” He added that out of 55 active coronavirus cases in Agra, 39 are related to Tablighi Jamaat and their contacts.

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “The areas in the vicinity of the places where the infected people were staying are being sanitized. We have marked 25 places in the city as coronavirus epicentre. All these places have been sealed by the police. We have planned massive sampling to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine.” 

In Firozabad, three local residents tested positive on Tuesday, taking the total tally of Covid-19 cases in the district to seven.

All three hail from Durgesh Nagar and Sheshgran of Rasoolpur police jurisdiction, where the four Jamaat men were putting up, after their return from Delhi on March 21.

Firozabad CMO Dr S K Dixit said, “As soon we received the test report, we sanitized the area where the trio was staying. Our 30 teams are engaged in tracing their contacts in a 5km-radius.”

In Mainpuri, three members of Tablighi Jammat were found positive for Covid-19 and all of them were shifted to the isolation ward of a community health centre in Bhogaon. While two of them are in their teens, the third is 69.

Mainpuri district magistrate Mahendra Bahadur Singh said that all of them had been staying in Mainpuri for the past few weeks. They had initially stayed in Shahi mosque and later shifted to mosques in Karhal and Ghiror area. Their contacts are being traced.

The DM told TOI that so far 4,200 houses have been screened in the Ghiror area where the infected people had stayed. He said the area is being sanitised.


