16 suspects tested, 40 quarantined, no positive case in Vidarbha
2020-03-18
Yavatmal/Chandrapur/Nagpur: No fresh positive case of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) was reported from across Vidarbha on Tuesday.

In Nagpur, 16 suspected cases were reported from GMCH and IGGMCH. Swabs of nine were sent to the lab for testing including all eight from GMCH. The results are awaited, said officials. 

All the 16 have been kept at the isolation wards of both the government hospitals. Total 131 suspects have been tested so far. Of this, 96 had to be kept under observation. As on date, the Mayo lab has so far conducted tests on 104 samples of which only four have turned positive. 

All four positive patients at Nagpur’s Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) and Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) were doing well, doctors said. 

The Nagpur district administration quarantined 13 flyers at MLA hostel on Tuesday. 

The 16 suspected cases include a 30-yr old woman, her 6-yr-old daughter and one-year-old son who got themselves admitted to Government Medical College and Hospital GMCH on Monday night. Their test results are awaited. 

In a curious development, Sevagram’s Kasturba Hospital too sent some samples suspecting them to be coronavirus cases. The hospital sees close to 2,500 patients every day. Over the last few days, the hospital admitted some patients with pneumonia, but they lacked travel history and had no contact with corona virus-positive patients. Their samples sent to the regional diagnostic centre at Mayo hospital were returned because the lab felt that they did not fulfil the criteria required for testing them.

The 50-year-old woman from Yavatmal, who tested positive on Monday, and two others kept at the isolation ward of GMCH there were reported to be stable. Two other positive patients too didn’t show any problem.

Yavatmal district recorded 19 new home quarantines on Tuesday taking the tally of such persons to 56.

Chandrapur district administration identified eight new foreign-returned citizens and home quarantined them on Monday evening. The administration announced the development only on Tuesday. The administration has also ordered to close down all the religious places in the district. Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve and Anandwan in Warora have been closed down for tourists.

Chandrapur civil surgeon Dr ND Rathod said those quarantined on Monday include two who had returned from Saudi Arabia, five from Dubai and one United States. None of them have any kind of symptoms, but they have been quarantined as a preventive measure. The number of quarantined people in district has risen to 32.

Offence registered against rumour mongers

A fresh offence has been registered at Gobarwahi police station of Tumsar taluka in Bhandara against unknown persons for allegedly spreading an edited version of broadcast news stating that there was a corona patient at Pathri village, reports Soumitra Bose.

The offence was registered on the complaint of tehsilder who had lodged the complaint under the relevant sections under the Disaster management Act, 2005 and Information Technology Act. The edited news was circulated in the social media by the group members.

This is the third offence registered in such rumour mongering cases in Bhandara district. A gram panchayat committee member too has been booked in the first in one of the three FIRs. 


