17 co-passengers of Covid +ve patient quarantined
2020-03-28
Trichy: A day after a 24-year-old Dubai returnee from Erode tested positive for Covid-19, public health and preventive medicine department officials identified 17 of his co-passengers from Dubai to Trichy here on Friday.

Meanwhile, a doctor and 14 others have tested negative. “Considering the necessary one-metre distance, we have picked up the details of 18 passengers including the affected patient in three rows of seating on board the flight. Of the 17 passengers, two are natives of Trichy district. They have been identified and quarantined. None of them had symptoms of Covid-19,” Trichy collector S Sivarasu told reporters.

The officials traced the 15 other patients to Nagappattinam, Tiruvarur, Thanjavur, Perambalur, Ramanathapuram and Sivaganga. The flight which landed at the airport in the early hours of March 22 had a total of 86 passengers and six crew members including pilots. “The information about the co-passengers has been conveyed to the respective district collectors. All the crew members are from other states and they have also been alerted,” said the collector.

As the man travelled on seat number 13C, officials picked up passengers in rows 12 and 14. As the man had symptoms of cough and fever, he was rushed to the isolation ward of Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital. The swab test at viral research and diagnostic laboratory at Tiruvarur government MCH and reconfirmation test at King institute of preventive medicine and research showed he was infected.

“The health condition of the positive patient is stable. The doctors will decide on his discharge after tests on 7 th and 10th day after the confirmation of the disease,” said the collector.

As on Friday evening, the lab at MGMGH confirmed that 15 people including a dentist, four in the isolation ward and others on home quarantine tested negative for Covid-19.

The doctor had a recent travel history to Madurai. As he had the symptoms, he got himself admitted to the isolation ward at the six-storey building at MGMGH on Friday.

A doctor told TOI that he will be kept under observation for a few more days. A list of 4,120 passengers of Trichy district who returned from foreign countries has been prepared and they have been quarantined. “None of the quarantined people violated the curfew,” said the collector.


