17 contacts of Covid-19 patient tests negative
2020-04-08
Kolhapur: Test reports of 17 people, who were institutionally quarantined after third positive Covid-19 case, have come out in negative. 

Five of these 17 people are family members of the lady-infected with coronavirus. Though the test reports have turned negative, they will continue to be under quarantine centre for two weeks and will be tested again before discharge.

The other 12 included, doctors who she had approached and people who had come in contact with her, since her arrival in Kolhapur on march 20 

A similar exercise is being carried forward for the contacts of the 63-year-old woman, when she had visited Satara and another village.

Civic chief Mallinath Kalshetti said that they surveyed 3,000 people from the containment zone on the first day itself. “No new suspect has been found. The immediate contacts have already been quarantined. They are under observation. We will cover 25,000 population in the coming days. Our teams are on the ground checking everyone. The people are asked not to come outside.”

He said that the screening of people from Belbaug area, where the driver of an ambulance took her from Satara to Kolhapur will also be done. 

Meenakshi Gajbhiye, in charge of Covid-19 hospital said that the woman is suffering from tuberculosis from the last several years. She was given oxygen for some time but has not yet been put on a ventilator. Gajbhiye said the lady is responding to the treatment effectively.

The locals have declared to observe 100% lockdown in both these areas. On the first day, the police had to carry out mild lathi-charge in Kasba Bawda to make people stay inside. Most of them came outside to buy milk or essential materials. 

Before the registration of the case many people from the area were seen talking and walking on garden tracks. However after the first case are worried and staying indoors. 

Due to strict lockdown, the supply of essentials is affected. Only medical shops were open. The milk supply did not take place which made many angry. 


