Gujarat: 17-day-old baby girl from Vyara tests Covid-19 positive
2020-06-14
SURAT: A 17-day-old baby girl from an interior village in Tapi district was tested positive for Covid-19 at the New Civil Hospital in Surat on Saturday. Tapi district had become coronavirus-free after the last Covid-19 positive patient got recovered and was discharged on May 11. 

Official sources said that Saroj Gamit, 27, a resident of Patel Falia in Kapura village in Tapi’s Vyara taluka delivered a baby girl at the Janak hospital in Vyara on May 26. Saroj was discharged from the hospital on May 28. A few days after coming home, the new-born suffered from high fever and severe coughing. 

The baby girl was rushed to the Janak Hospital in Vyara for treatment. However, the hospital authorities referred the baby for treatment at the Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC)-run SMIMER hospital on June 11. Again, the baby was referred to the New Civil Hopistal (NCH) in Surat on June 12, where she was tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday. 

Sources said that parent of the baby have tested negative for Covid-19.

Dr Yogesh Parikh, nodal officer of the NCH’s paediatric department told TOI, “The baby girl was brought with high fever and cough and that we decided to test for Covid-19 on Friday. Sample was collected and sent for laboratory testing which confirmed her positive for the virus.”

“The baby is non-critical and that she is responding well to the treatment. The baby may have contracted the virus either from the hospital where she was born or after coming in contact with a positive person in the village,” added Parikh. 

Chief District Health Officer (CDHO), Tapi, Dr Harshad Patel told TOI, “The parent of the baby girl are farm workers and they do not have any travel history. The baby was suffering from high fever and that she was referred to NCH in Surat. Meanwhile, the Kapura village in Vyara, which has about 300 population has been put under containment.”

Meanwhile, four fresh Covid-19 positive cases were reported from Bharuch district on Saturday. The cases were reported from Haridwar society in Bholav, Goa Tekri in Ankleshwar, Shriji Falia in Netrang and Malhar Green city in Bharuch town. The total Covid-19 positive cases in Bharuch has reached 77. 


