17 fresh cases take Covid figure in state to 143
2020-04-23
Patna: Seventeen more persons, including eight in Patna district, were found infected on Wednesday, taking the total number of Covid-19 cases to 143 in the state. Four of them were from Bhagalpur, three from Nalanda and one each from East Champaran and Banka. Also, for the first time, three migrant workers have tested positive for coronavirus in the state.

Principal secretary (health) Sanjay Kumar said two of the migrant workers are from Bhagalpur with travel history from Maharashtra while one from Salimpur in Bakhtiyarpur has come from Delhi. Another Bhagalpur man who tested positive is a health worker who worked at JLNMCH at Bhagalpur.

There were 99 active cases in the state on Wednesday. While 42 people have recovered and got discharged from hospitals, one each from Munger and Vaishali died. 

In Patna, Khajpura area emerged as the Covid hotspot as six fresh cases were reported from there while one tested positive in nearby Jagdeopath area and another in Salimpur near Bakhtiyarpur in the district. East Champaran and Banka districts reported their first cases on Wednesday.

Sanjay said in Patna district, seven of the eight persons got infected from the same Khajpura resident who had tested positive on Tuesday. While six of them are from the same lane in Khajpura, one is from Jagdeopath and they are all related to one another. 

Patna district magistrate Kumar Ravi said all the cases from Khajpura were related to the 31-year-old man who was found infected on Tuesday. “While four of them are his relatives and include his father, mother, brother and uncle, two are his colleagues as well as neighbours. The one from Jagdeopath is also related to him,” said Ravi, adding, “The man found infected on Tuesday is also a contact of Khajpura woman who had tested positive on April 18 at AIIMS-Patna. Her husband and this man worked for the same ATM cash transfer company.”

As the number of Covid cases increased in Khajpura locality, the DM issued fresh instructions asking people to remain indoors. “We have already sealed the area, but will enforce restrictions more strictly,” Ravi said.


