Delhi: 17 with coronavirus symptoms hospitalised
2020-02-16
NEW DELHI: Delhi government has identified 17 local residents with history of travel to China who showed symptoms of coronavirus infection. They have been hospitalised.


According to state health officials, till February 13, over 5,700 such passengers were approached after being informed by the Delhi airport authorities. “As many as 4,707 passengers were found asymptomatic and advised for home isolation (self-quarantined). Total 17 patients were found symptomatic and isolated at hospitals,” a senior official of the Delhi health department said.

The number of passengers, who remain untraced, stands at 817, the official said, quoting the data collated by the health department.

The number of passengers pending surveillance stands at 68, according to the data. Passengers arriving from China, Hong Kong, Thailand and Singapore are being screened for possible exposure to the respiratory virus at 21 identified airports in the country, including Delhi airport, from January 17.

“Anyone, who gets flu-like symptoms should immediately contact the nearest control room,” the official said.

The death toll in China’s novel coronavirus epidemic has climbed to 1,523 with 143 new fatalities reported mostly from the worst-affected Hubei province while the confirmed cases jumped to over 66,000, health officials said on Saturday. India has so far reported three confirmed cases of the virus, all in Kerala.

One of the three medical students, who had tested positive for novel coronavirus infection and were treated at a hospital in Kerala, has been discharged after recovery, union health minister Harsh Vardhan had said on Thursday. About the other two, he said subsequent tests indicated significant reduction in “viral load”.

The Centre had airlifted more than 600 persons, mostly students, from China in the aftermath of the outbreak of coronavirus infection about a fortnight ago. A total of 406 people of them are housed at a quarantine facility of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP). Officials at the ITBP facility said all quarantined persons tested negative in the first round of tests. On Friday, final samples were taken to conduct repeat tests.

“Based on the reports, a decision will be taken to discharge the travellers,” PRO of ITBP, Vivek Kumar Pandey, said in a statement.

