17-yr-old is sixth Covid-19 case in Amravati; Vidarbha at 119
2020-04-19
Nagpur: A 17-year-old son of a deceased auto-driver in Amravati tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday taking the total number of cases in Amravati to six, including one death on April 2. The total number of Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha also went up to 119, with 22 of them getting discharged and four deaths. Apart from Amravati and Nagpur, no new case was found in Vidarbha on Saturday. Four patients were discharged in Yavatmal after full recovery.

The 57-year-old auto driver from Noorani square locality in Hyderpura in Amravati was a heart patient and died at home two days ago. Health department team of Amravati Municipal Corporation could not take his throat swab or tissue swab for "technical reasons", sources said.

“AMC team came to know about death of the auto driver late. By the team it reached the deceased’s home for collecting the swab, the saliva in the throat had dried up,” said a highly placed source. AMC team could not even take a tissue swab as it had no equipment to do so. 

The source however said that throat swabs of the four members of the deceased's family were taken and sent for testing. One of the four reports came around 12.30 last night in which this 17-year-old boy tested positive. Reports of other three members are still awaited.

The administration is now checking the medical history of the deceased who was stated to be a heart patient by doctors of a private hospital where he had taken treatment. The family of the deceased, which was home quarantined earlier, has now been admitted to the Covid-19 hospital.

The administration has decided to put members of a family where any death occurs for any reason into institutional quarantine until their swab reports come negative.

Six discharged from Yavatmal: Yavatmal looks set to come out of red zone as four out 10 positive patients were discharged from GMC isolation ward on Saturday. All of them have been asked to remain in home quarantine for next 14 days. Now, total number of patients discharged in Vidarbha region is 23. District collector of Yavatmal M D Singh said that six patients in GMCH were also improving. “Only one is critical, but he too is stable,” said Singh. 

Washim patient positive again: The only Covid-19 patient in Washim, who had tested negative in the seventh day report, was tested positive in 14th day report on Saturday. Due to this, his hospital stay has increased for another six days. Now, doctors will collect swab sample of this 65-year-old patient on 20th day.


