173 people from Uttarakhand who attended different Jamaats in past 28 days quarantined
2020-04-02
DEHRADUN: As many as 713 people from Uttarakhand attended regular jamaats in different parts of the country since January 1 this year and police are in the process of verifying the identities of all of them, according to Uttarakhand police.


Of the 713, 173 have been quarantined after they returned back to their respective homes in the Himalayan state in past 28 days.

Speaking to TOI, Ashok Kumar, director general (DG) law and order, said, “People who attended the jamaats and returned in January and February itself are in safe zone, as lots of time has passed since their arrival. However, 173 people who returned in the past 28 days are being quarantined.” Speaking about the people who participated in Tablighi Jamaat event at Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz, Kumar said, “There were 26 people from across Uttarakhand who participated in the Tablighi Jamaat and all of them have not returned and currently are in New Delhi. We have cross-verified this fact from their homes and their mobile location.”

‘Markaz Nizamuddin’, the Delhi headquarters of the Tablighi Jamaat has been in the limelight after thousands of people took part in a Tablighi Jamaat congregation from March 1 to 15. Over 100 positive cases and seven deaths are reportedly linked to the congregation.

According to senior police officials, strict action is being taken against people who attended the jamaat and returned back home without informing the authorities.

“We received information that five people from Pauri district participated in the jamaat recently. All five have been booked under relevant sections and kept in quarantine. Similar cases have been reported from Udham Singh Nagar district and action is being taken against them too,” said Ashok Kumar.

The DG law and order said that he has also made an appeal to everyone who has attended jamaat in past 28 days to intimate the district authorities or police immediately.


