174 new cases take Covid count in state to 8,762
2020-06-05
BHOPAL: With sudden spurt in Covid-19 cases, Sagar district has crossed the 200 mark on Thursday. Directorate of medical education (DME) official confirmed that dean of Bundelkhand Medical College and Hospital has been removed from his post after the district reported 10 more cases.

Dr GS Patel’s replacement would be decided by the divisional commissioner soon, said the official. 10 persons undergoing treatment for Covid-19 have died in the hospital. Removal of the dean is being attributed as a move to improve hospital’s administration. Most of the cases were late presentation and arrived with aggravated SARI complication, said a hospital consultant. 

Number of cases in Sagar has touched 207. Half of them are active cases. Three new cases were reported from Shahpur Tehsil and four from Khurai in Sagar. Sadar area in Sagar near Railway station is considered to be the hotspot. It has reported more than 120 cases alone. These cases, however, are limited to a few families living in adjacent quarters. 

The spurt came to the fore with the death of a BJP corporator Jilani Makrana. He allegedly received treatment from a quack, Ashok Khatri, who is himself hospitalised with Covid-19 infection. The quack’s family is infected along with 34 members of Keserwani family and 10 members of Lalwani family. Two members of Siddiqui family have died, a local doctor said. 

Four cases reported from Khurai near Bina junction are said to be people who had returned from Delhi and Pune. One of them was admitted to Sagar College Hospital on Thursday night. Meanwhile, 174 more people were diagnosed with Covid-19 across Madhya Pradesh, here on Thursday. Total number of Covid-19 cases in Madhya Pradesh has jumped to 8,762 since the pandemic. Six more people died due to the infection, taking the death toll to 377. 

State’s recovery rate from corona is among the top states of the country and is also higher than the country’s average recovery rate. There are 21 testing labs in the state with the capacity of 6,000 tests per day. Only one third of the ICUs and bed systems are in use, according to a government press release.


