1,782 vehicles seized in Ernakulam district for lockdown violations
2020-04-04
KOCHI: Police station compounds in the district have been getting filled up with vehicles of those caught violating lockdown. As many 1,782 vehicles have been seized in Ernakulam till April 2.

Assistant commissioner of police, Ernakulam, K Laljy said those who are roaming around without any particular reason are the ones facing police action. “We are keeping the surveillance tight and vehicles of only those who raise flimsy reasons during checking are seized. The whole aim of the process is to discourage people from moving around without a valid reason,” he said.

Additional superintendent of police, Ernakulam Rural, M J Sojan said rural police are not showing any lenience as they have to enforce the law in a vast area compared to the city.

“We usually send a person home on bail after arresting him for violating the lockdown. The exercise wouldn’t have any purpose if we give him his vehicle back when we send him home as he would be back on the street the next day. So, we keep their vehicles till the lockdown is over,” said Sojan.

Police officers feel youths and elders alike, many are still violating lockdown. “We have come across youths as well as senior citizens who have violated the lockdown. Everyone has one reason or the other and many aren’t valid ones, leading to action like vehicle seizure,” said Siby Tom, circle inspector, Ernakulam North.

According to statistics provided by the police department, more number of violations are being reported in rural areas than that of city. A compilation of daily statistics released by rural police shows a total of 1,301 vehicles have been seized so far. City police, meanwhile, has seized as many as 481 vehicles till Tuesday.

“I guess people in the city are more aware compared to rural areas and hence are adhering to the norms,” said ACP Laljy.

However, ASP Sojan said the rural police have been showing no lenience as their jurisdiction is vast. “If a vehicle is seized, it would be given back only if the offender comes up with a valid reason. For instance, if he had forgotten his ID card at the time of the seizure and if he later produces it, then the vehicle would be given back. Vehicles seized for flimsy reasons would stay in police custody till the lockdown is over,” he said. 

City police officers, however, said vehicles seized are given back in a reasonable time. “We don’t give back vehicles immediately. By the time the violators get their vehicles back they would’ve understood the mistake that they made,” said a city police officer.


