18.5 lakh lacked access to abortion during lockdown
2020-06-13
HYDERABAD: Around 18.5 lakh women across the country did not have access to gynaecological consultation for abortion because of the lockdown norms and hospitals focusing more on Covid-19 patients and putting on hold elective surgeries.


A study conducted by Ipas Development Foundation (IDF), which works among women for legal and safe abortions, had focussed on the medical access to women in India in the first three months of lockdown. The study revealed that access to abortion was highly compromised during lockdown 1 and 2 (March 25 to May 3) in which around 59% of women seeking abortion could not access hospital for the services. With the unlock phase starting on June 1, the situation is improving with only 33% abortions being compromised.



“Abortion access for 18.5 lakh women was compromised at all points of care, including public and private sector facilities and chemist outlets,” said Vinoj Manning of IDF. He said as Covid-19 turned into a pandemic, everyone’s attention and effort went to the containment of the virus, which pushed a lot of health conditions and their management, including safe abortion, to the back seat. Also, closures of private health facilities have compromised the access to safe abortions, which is a time-sensitive procedure.

He said the model of the study strived to quantify the reduced access to abortions across three different points of care, public health facilities, private health facilities, and chemist outlets. Dr Sushanta Kumar Banerjee, who was part of research, said telephonic surveys and consultations were held with several experts from the Federation of Obstetric and Gynaecological Societies of India (FOGSI) and social marketing organizations like PSI India Private Limited to arrive at the estimation that 18.5 lakh women could not have access during the lockdown.

“After careful analysis of the data received from the gynaecologists, we have concluded that of the 3.9 million abortions that would have taken place in three months, access to around 1.85 million was compromised due to Covid-19 restrictions,” he said.

Researchers highlighted the need to assess facilities’ preparedness for second-trimester abortions, improving referral linkage, and streamlining the supply chain for medical abortion drugs.


