Rajasthan: 18 migrants, back from Mumbai, test coronavirus positive in Pali
2020-05-14
JAIPUR: Migrant labourers returning from Maharashtra and Gujarat to Rajasthan turned Covid-19 positive on Wednesday, giving the administration a shock on what to expect as the tide of returning workers continues in the coming days.


All the 18 passengers of a bus, which came from Mumbai and reached Pali on May 7, tested positive for novel coronavirus on Wednesday, taking the tally of migrant workers who were found infected across the state to 165 since May 1.

The workers were employed as labourers in Mumbai and had got stuck in the lockdown. “All of them have been admitted to hospital for treatment. Almost all of them are asymptomatic,” said Dr Ram Pal Mirdha, chief medical health officer, Pali. Over 40,000 migrant labourers have already reached Pali , and 1,300 people, travelling in a train from Vasai in Mumbai, are scheduled to reach there on Wednesday night.

The health department confirmed that an 85-year-old woman from Ramnagar of Pali, who had returned from Mumbai earlier, died of Covid-19 on Tuesday. 

The influx of migrants has become a major challenge for health authorities at a time when Covid-19 cases are constantly increasing in the state. Labourers returning home from other states will make the task of containg the spread of the disease even more difficult.

Gauging the severity of the issue, health minister Raghu Sharma alerted officials on Wednesday. “Nearly 19 lakh migrant workers -- 6.5 lakh who wanted to leave the state and the rest who wanted to come here -- have registered. We have directed our officials in all districts to ensure sufficient quarantine facilities for those entering the state, including labourers and residents stuck in other states,” said Sharma.

Health department officials are taking all possible measures to contain the spread. “Rajasthan welcomes migrants with open arms and we will provide them all support, including the best possible healthcare. At the same time, it is also a fact that many migrants are arriving in Rajasthan from hotspots like Mumbai, Indore, Surat, Ahmedabad and, hence, the possibility of them being Covid-19 positive cannot be ruled out,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

“While the migrant population is being screened for influenza-like symptoms at the border and being quarantined as per protocol, many are testing positive. Since May 1, a total of 165 migrants have tested positive and are under treatment. With early detection and quality care, we expect all of them to be treated and discharged soon,” Singh said. 

In Sikar’s Khandela area, the district administration imposed curfew on Wednesday after two persons, who had returned from Mumbai and Ahmedabad, tested positive. A 40-year-old man, who was staying in Ahmedabad for one year, returned to his village Kotdi Luharwas in Khandela of Sikar on May 5. His samples were taken on May 11. He was found infected with the virus on the next day. A 42-year-old, who had returned from Mumbai, also tested positive in Khandela block of Sikar. On Wednesday, health authorities conducted door-to-door survey of houses along with contact tracing of the two infected persons.

Sirohi had not reported even a single case until a 25-year-old person tested positive for Covid-19 two days ago, the first case in the district. “The vegetable seller had come from Ahmedabad on May 2,” said a health department official. He travelled in a bus with 63 other passengers. The health department has all the details of his co-passengers. In Churu, Jhunujhunu, Dungarpur and Jalore also, migrants have tested positive for Covid-19. 

