18-month-old is youngest Covid-19 patient in Nagpur
2020-04-27
NAGPUR: An 18-month-old boy from Mominpura in the city is among the 22 new Covid-19 cases reported from the region on Sunday. With this, Vidarbha has recorded new cases in double digits for the third consecutive day.


The new cases include highest 16 from Yavatmal, which has emerged as a new hotspot, four from Nagpur and one each from Amravati and Akola. 

The Mominpura boy happens to be the youngest Covid-19 patient in the city. Vidarbha’s youngest patient is from Buldhana — a three-and-a-half-month-old who is recovering fast.

With this, total number of Covid-19 confirmed positive cases in Vidarbha region have reached 247 on Sunday. These include 60 patients who recovered and discharged, nine deaths and one suicide. The only person who got discharge today is a patient from Satranjipura connection who was admitted in the GMCH isolation ward. 

Yavatmal has been brimming with fear as the number of the active positive patients jumped to 50 on Sunday. Total 16 patients tested positive in a day on April 26, which is in addition to the Saturday’s figure of 20. 

According to district collector MD Singh, he has received reports of seven positive patients in the wee hours of Sunday. “At 5.30pm, we received nine more positive reports from Nagpur. Now, the city has 50 active Covid-19 patients admitted in Vasantrao Naik Government Medical College and Hospital (VNGMCH),” the collector said. The city has so far recorded 60 active positive cases of whom 10 have recovered and discharged. 

A total of 264 swab samples have been sent to Nagpur on Sunday and the reports are awaited. Meanwhile, the collector and SP held a joint review meeting in the hotspot area of Indira Nagar. Municipal council members of ward no. 10 Javed Ansari and Pravin Prajapati attended the meeting. Collector has authorized the councillor duo to create mass awareness among the residents of the containment areas to remain at home and maintain social distancing always. He has also urged Muslim community to offer their Ramzan prayers as per the set norms in their own houses. 

Case from rural Amravati: Novel coronavirus that claimed six lives in Amravati seems to be spreading its tentacles in rural parts of the district as a new Covid-19 positive case came to fore from Nandura Pinglai village in Morshi tehsil. This took the number of positive cases from Amravati to 20 which include six deaths and four recovered. At present, 10 are in the Covid-19 hospital.

“We received reports of five suspects late Saturday night and four of them came negative while the one of a 58-year-old man from Nandura Pinglai came positive,” said collector Shailesh Naval. With this, the number of Covid-19 positive cases has gone up to 20 in the district, which includes six deaths and four recovered. At present, 10 patients are in the Covid-19 Hospital.

The district administration clarified that the Covid-19 positive person has been living with his family in a house on Bhatkuli Road near Pathan Chowk under Kholapuri Gate police station area for the last five years. Though it was learnt that he had returned to his village a few days ago, the administration said he did not visit the village for a month now. Yet, as a precautionary measure, a health survey has been conducted in the village that falls under Mahuli Jehangir Primary Health Centre, the administration said.

Four members of his family have been institutionally quarantined and their swab samples sent for testing. Administration said the man, a TB patient, was admitted to Covid-19 ward on April 22 and tested positive on Saturday night.

One of the three cases that came to light on Saturday evening include a 52-year-old man from Noor Nagar locality of Old Badnera. He is a teacher at an Urdu school in Kamargaon town in Washim district and had returned to Badnera as the school was closed due to lockdown.

Inquiries revealed that he had travelled with family to Baitul Naka residence of his relative in Paratwada and made a night’s stay there. However, his health deteriorated next morning and he was rushed to a private hospital which advised him to go to Covid-19 Hospital where he tested positive last evening.

Following this, Amravati Municipal Corporation health authorities have put Noor Nagar, Baripura, Khatikpura and Malipura localities in containment zone and sealed the entire area.

