Hyderabad: 18 new coronavirus suspects, separate wards for treating severe cases
2020-02-07
HYDERABAD: On a day when the city reported 18 new suspected cases of Novel Corona Virus (2019-nCoV), sources at Gandhi Hospital — one of the three nodal hospitals identified for tackling nCoV cases — said that they have started maintaining separate isolation wards for patients displaying ‘severe’ and ‘non-severe’ symptoms. 


“Two patients came to the hospital on Thursday with severe fever and cough. They have been kept in a separate isolation room than the rest,” said the source adding that authorities are making all attempts to increase the staff and capacity of isolation wards, to prepare the city for any possible outbreak.

 
 
A team of five microbiologists too, sources said, are being moved from Urban Primary Health Centres (UPHCs) to the ICMR lab at Gandhi Medical College. “Since testing began in the city three days ago, 12 samples have been tested at the ICMR lab. But with the increasing load of samples of suspected nCoV cases and given the strict protocol for collection of samples as well as testing, more manpower is required. An MD microbiology is also likely to be deputed for the job,” said a highly placed source.

But health officials maintain that there is no reason to panic just yet. Allaying all fears, they said all the 37 samples collected so far have tested negative for the virus. “Up to Wednesday, 37 samples had been tested, including 25 tested at the National Institute of Virology, Pune. The report for all the 37 are negative, while 18 more reports are awaited. The 18 new suspected cases were traced by the district teams of the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme and airport health officials. Some also self-reported to Gandhi and Fever Hospitals. There are no positive cases so far,” said Vijay Kumar, state nodal officer for Corona. The state however, is yet to begin the second round of tests for the suspected cases, which have turned out to be negative. This was specified in the orders issued by the Centre to ensure a confirmatory test.


