18 new coronavirus cases in Punjab, 9 linked to Jamaat
2020-04-10
CHANDIGARH: Across Punjab, 18 new cases of Covid-19 were reported on Thursday. The total number of cases in the state thus rose to 130, and with one more death reported the toll reached 10. 


Maximum six cases were detected in Mansa, which were all related Tablighi Jamaat. In Ludhiana, four new cases came to light, of which two were related to Tabligh Jamaat. Four cases of coronavirus infection were confirmed in Jalandhar too. Mohali, Muktsar, Sangrur and Barnala, all reported one new case. The case in Muktsar was related to Jamaat as well. 

So far, 3,192 samples have been sent for testing in Punjab, of which 2,777 were found negative. Results are awaited in 285 cases. Punjab has also been able to declare 18 patients cured, while 102 are still under treatment. 

Health officials said sample of a 50-year-old woman from Mehal Kalan village in Barnala, who had died two days ago at Ludhiana, has tested positive of Covid-19. The sample of the deceased was collected after her death and report was made public on Thursday evening. 

Before being admitted to the hospital, the woman was living at her parents' place at Pakhowal area of Ludhiana. She had complained of high fever and breathlessness due to which she was admitted to the Fortis Hospital, Ludhiana, where she breathed her last on Tuesday night. Her husband is away in Guwahati.

After her death, the Ludhiana deputy commissioner had directed the hospital authorities to put the body in the mortuary and sample was obtained as she had complained of high fever and breathlessness.

Barnala civil surgeon Dr Gurinderbir Singh said the area where she lived in Mehal Kalan had been contained. The administration was looking into her travel history and the persons who came in her contact. 

Meanwhile, the report of the husband and maid of another woman of Barnala, who had Covid-19 dieases, is negative whereas the sample of her daughter has been sent again. 

In Mansa, six more persons have been found positive who had come in contact of the five members of Tablighi Jammat, who were tested positive earlier. The Tablighi Jamaat members had stayed at a mosque at Budhlada town of Mansa after they had come from Delhi on March 19. They belong to Chhattisgarh. 

Now, out of the six persons found positive is a couple, two women and two children, all resident of Budhlada. They have been admitted at Mansa civil hospital in isolation. The areas where they lived in Budhlada have been contained and administration is on contact tracing. 

Similalrly, a 23-year-old man from Jandiala town near Amritsar was tested positive for coronavirus on Thursday. The medical superintendent of Guru Nanak Dev Hospital Dr Raman Sharma said the patient had returned from England and was asymptomatic.

He was advised for quarantine at Jandiala but fled from there, Dr Sharma said, adding later he was held by the authorities which brought him to Amritsar where his test was conducted.

 He is the fifth positive Covid-19 patient admitted in the hospital, said he.

As many as 13 family members of the man, whose father runs a shop in Jandiala, were brought to Amritsar for quarantine.

The 65-year-old resident of Sangrur district, who tested positive on Thursday was already quarantined after the health department from Ludhiana had put them on alert that a resident from Sangrur had returned in a flight in which a Covid-19 positive patient from Ludhiana has also travelled.

The patient hails from Gaggarpur village of the district and had returned in a special flight on March 24 from Delhi to Sahnewal. The health authorities claimed they are trying to locate his contacts during this period, even though he was kept home-quarantine.

Sangrur deputy commissioner Ghanshyam Thori said, "The patient who tested positive on Thursday was home quarantined and was asymptomatic but his samples were taken two days ago as a precautionary measure."

Three patients in Jalandhar do not have any travel history and till Thursday evening it was not clear from whom, where and when the three might have contracted the infection. 

Those who tested positive included operation theatre assistant of Sacred Heart Hospital, Maqsoodan and the health department asked the hospital administration to quarantine the doctors and other staff members who had been in contact in the last few days. 

However, the health department officials are suspecting that he might have contracted the infection from outside the hospital. This patient is also a resident of Anand Nagar in Maqsoodan.

One of the women (42) is from Old Sabzi Mandi and the other is from Bhairoan Bazaar. A Covid-19 patient Parveen Kumar Sharma, who died in the wee hours of Thursday in the civil hospital, also did not have any travel history. It was not clear from whom he could have got the infection.

