180 migrant workers reach Moradabad from Haryana in four buses, quarantined
2020-04-27
Bareilly: As many as 180 migrant labourers, who arrived in Moradabad from Haryana late on Saturday evening, have been quarantined at different centres. According to health department officials, the labourers will be allowed to go to their homes after completing 14 days in quarantine and testing negative for Covid-19. Meanwhile, no fresh case of novel coronavirus was reported in Moradabad district on Sunday.

Well-placed sources with the district administrative told TOI that the labourers hailing from different villages of Moradabad district arrived in four buses. 

Additional district magistrate (executive) Lakshmi Shankar Singh said all labourers were sent to their respective sub-divisions, where they were quarantined at centres especially set-up for them. 

“The labourers are placed under quarantine at the centres located in Sadar, Kanth, Thakurdwar and Bilari sub-divisions. During the quarantine period, they will be provided nutritious food and our experts will make them practise yoga to keep them fit,” said the ADM. 

After completing the 14-day quarantine period successfully, the labourers will be given Rs 1,000 cash and ration packets before they leave for their homes. 

On the other hand, in a big relief, no fresh positive case was reported on Sunday, said Moradabad chief medical officer (CMO) Dr MC Garg.

The CMO said they received 199 reports on Sunday, of which 192 tested negative; the samples of three people will be sent for the test again, while four other positive cases have tested positive again. 

Director (medical & health) Dr Akhilesh Kumar, who visited Moradabad from Lucknow, told the media that they were satisfied with the arrangements made at the quarantine centre. 

Asking families of the Covid-19 suspects not to panic, the director said the quarantined people were being provided with best facilities at the centres. 

The director further said that the health department had started a telemedicine clinic, where anyone could consult doctors over the phone in two shifts between 8am to 8pm. 

“In the morning shift, 8am to 2pm, Dr GL Mangoi (physician) will be available on 8218064766, while orthopaedic surgeon Dr SS Kakar can be consulted on 9412746147. Similarly, ENT surgeon Dr AK Srivastava can be contacted on 8077857192 and paediatric Dr Veer Singh on 9412635176 in the evening shift starting from 2pm to 8pm,” added the director. 


