19 Covid-19 patients in Karnataka are below 14 years
2020-04-14
BENGALURU: One out of every 13 Covid-19 patients in Karnataka is a child under 14 years of age and was infected because of proximity to an infected adult family member or acquaintance.

The 19 children (7.6%) among the 248 infected patients in the state till Monday have had no travel history abroad and were found infected as they were primary or secondary contacts of Covid-19 positive patients. Only two, including a 10-month-old baby boy in Dakshina Kannada, have recovered so far.

The number of children found with the infection increased in the last two days, with four cases each being reported on Sunday and Monday. 

The youngest of the child patients was a 10-month-old boy from Dakshina Kannada, who had a travel history of Kerala. Strangely, the baby’s parents and grandparents tested negative for the infection. The child recovered well and was discharged last week. 

The oldest among the affected children is a 14-year-old-boy from Raibag, Belagavi, who was a primary contact of a Covid-19 positive case, who was Tablighi Jamaat congregation participant. The other affected children include a boy, 10, and a domestic help. 

There have been three paediatric cases each from Bengaluru, Bagalkot, Dharwad and Vijayapura. One case each has been reported from Dakshina Kannada, Tumakuru, Ballari, Mysuru, Dharwad, Mandya, Belagavi and Kalaburagi. 

According to Dr BN Gangadhar, director Nimhans, the degree of concern over the infection is less among children. “They won’t worry like adults. It is believed that Covid-19 infection has so far been mild among children. Children generally being indoors are not much affected by the virus,” he said.


13-year-old girl was state’s first case
Karnataka’s first paediatric case, a 13-year-old girl, was hospitalised along with her parents and had no symptoms throughout. She was found infected after her father and mother tested positive; her father had tested positive on March 9 after returning from the US. Her entire school was shut after the girl tested positive. 

Another 13-year-old boy from Sira in Tumakuru district tested positive a week after his father, a Tablighi Jamaat delegate, died after being found to be infected. The boy is being treated at Tumakuru district hospital and is stable.

In Bagalkot, three cousins are infected and in the same hospital. “It’s tough to look after these children for 14 days in hospital wards without their parents,” a treating doctor told TOI. 


‘Physical distancing with children is tough’

According to Dr Giridhar Babu, professor and head of lifecourse epidemiology in Public Health Foundation of India, Bengaluru, practising physical distancing with children is practically tough. “A child would not understand the concept of physical distancing. For persons in home isolation, changing interactions with family members won’t be easy. How would you stop a child from hugging parents, its tough,” said Dr Babu, who is also a member of the expert committee on Covid-19 studying the epidemiology of cases reported in the state.

However, there have been instances where strict home isolation have resulted in zero spread of infection. “The ideal example is of Karanatka’s fourth patient, a 50-year-old man who isolated himself in a room soon after returning from the US. His daughter wrote the II PU exam with government support, despite herself being a suspected case. She, however, tested negative,” a senior health officer said.


