19 more, including 2 docs, test positive for Covid-19 in Agra in a day
2020-04-10
Agra: With 19 more people testing positive for Covid-19 in the district in the past 24 hours, the number of patients in Agra jumped to 84, the highest in the state, on Thursday. A new case also surfaced in the neighbouring Aligarh.

Out of the new cases, five were related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi’s Nizamuddin. 

Another seven were associated to a private hospital on the National Highway 2 where a patient who later tested positive was admitted.

Another three cases are family members of the 76-year-old coronavirus infected woman who died on Wednesday. 

Besides, a doctor at the SN Medical College who was treating the infected patients and a ward boy of the isolation ward have been tested positive. A doctor of Sainya block community health centre (CHC) too tested positive. A silver trader at Rajamandi locality also tested positive. 

Chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the 19 confirmed coronavirus infected patients have been shifted to the isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. We are screening people in the areas around their residences and the places they had visited and their contacts are being identified.”

Out of the total 84 cases in Agra, 43 are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contracts. The health department teams had shifted 137 people from eight different mosques of the city to three quarantine centres. Police have sealed areas around mosques in the city. Drone-mounted cameras are being used to ensure strict enforcement of the lockdown in densely populated localities. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 84 coronavirus cases have surfaced in Agra. Eight people have been cured of the infection and discharged from the hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patient are being screened. We have marked 23 places in the city as Covid-19 epicentre and sealed them. We have planned massive sampling to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine. Citizens are advised to strictly follow home quarantine so that the spread of coronavirus can be stopped.” 


