19 pvt Covid-19 testing labs in Maha, not a single in Vidarbha
2020-04-20
Nagpur: Nagpur has the highest 73 confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Vidarbha as on Sunday and is among the top five cities having patients in Maharashtra. Yet, unlike Mumbai and Pune where Covid-19 tests are being done at 19 private laboratories, no private laboratory is conducting it in Nagpur. 

As per ICMR data released on Sunday, Maharashtra has 22 government and 19 private facilities where Covid-19 tests can be conducted. 

Out of the 22 government facilities, six are in Vidarbha. These include labs at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH), All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Veterinary College of Maharashtra Animal and Fisheries Sciences University (Mafsu), National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (Neeri) and GMCH, Akola. 

All the 19 private facilities are in Mumbai, Pune and Thane. 

“Maharashtra has the highest government viral testing labs in India. We’ll attempt to increase this further,” said Dr Sanjay Mukherjee, secretary of Department of Medical Education and Research. 

Private Covid-19 laboratory in Nagpur still appears to be a distant dream. According to officials, at least two applications from private labs in Nagpur are pending with the DMER and ICMR. One of them is Dhruva Pathology Lab.

“Our NABL audit got over today. We should be able to get NABL certification for molecular lab in the next four days and subsequently permission from ICMR immediately. If everything goes well, we will be able to start testing by next week,” Dr Shailesh Mundhada, director of this lab, said. 

According to experts, testing capacity increases significantly with private labs joining in. “Currently, we are conducting tests of symptomatic suspects, high risk contacts of positive patients, and their relatives. But, with private labs, random testing also gets promoted which is very important,” physician Dr Rajesh Agrawal said. 

The Supreme Court has ordered private laboratories to conduct free tests of poor people under Ayushman Bharat scheme. Labs can charge fees from others. These labs have been told to charge standard Rs4,500 per test, but they can give further discounts too. 


