Covid-19: 1,994 households in Ahmedabad complete quarantine
2020-03-29
AHMEDABAD/ GANDHINAGAR: In a positive step taken to reduce stigma associated with Covid-19 infection, the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC), from Saturday started applying green stickers on the residences where occupants have completed the 14-day quarantine period and are now deemed healthy.


According to AMC officials, 1,994 such households were provided green stickers. A total of 3,558 residences have red stickers, identifying it as an isolation zone, asking persons apart from the family members not to approach it.

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), on Saturday said that 13,742 in the state completed the 14-day quarantine period. “In a good news, three patients, all from Vadodara, were tested for viral load by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) two times at a gap of 24 hours and they are negative now. They will soon be discharged,” she said.

“We are following ICMR guidelines when it comes to testing and we want to assure that all persons showing symptoms such as severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) associated with Covid-19 are being tested,” said Ravi. “The persons tested include those who have travel history – domestic or international, those who have contacted helplines and those who were identified by our statewide survey which has covered over 4 crore in Gujarat.”

The principal secretary said that there is no shortage of protective gear for Covid-19 in Gujarat and they were scheduled to receive an air cargo full of fresh supplies on Saturday.

Meanwhile, AMC continued the food packet distribution in Ahmedabad. “As on Saturday, all families of 212 households are in quarantine. AMC is providing essentials to these families,” said an AMC official. “On Saturday, we provided 6,300 food packets and 968 kits.”

In addition, 47,850 kits were distributed to the homeless in Ahmedabad and 1,850 packets of vegetables and 4,400 packets of grocery in slum areas. AMC’s green autos, carrying vegetables to doorsteps of citizenss, supplied over 15,000 kg vegetables, said AMC officials.


