1st Covid death in Jharkhand; BGH docs & workers put in isolation
2020-04-10
Bokaro: The death of a 75-year-old Covid-19 patient at Bokaro General Hospital (BGH) on Thursday morning sent the hospital authorities and doctors looking after him into a tizzy. The man was admitted to the hospital on Saturday with shortness of breath and chest pain, but was being treated like any other patient in the hospital’s critical care unit (CCU). 

Hospital sources said they recommended a Covid-19 test on the man on Sunday.“Due to the delay in getting the report, he could not be admitted to the Covid-19 ward. This ended up exposing others to the virus,” said a BGH doctor.

Detailing the chain of events, another BGH source said that after the patient was admitted on Saturday, he was shifted to CCU owing to his weakness. Within half an hour, he was put on ventilator. 

The source added, “His ECG and troponin reports indicated he had suffered a heart attack. He was transferred to the cardiology unit. On Sunday, he got a mild fever. A bedside chest X-ray was done while he was on ventilator, which indicated he had lung infection. This caught the attention of the cardiologist, who sent his samples for Covid-19 tests. Doctors continued the cardiac treatment and antibiotics were given for his lung infection.” 

The patient died while he was being shifted to the Covid-19 ward, soon after his test reports came out. 

On Thursday morning, after his samples tested positive for Covid-19, BGH started sanitising the CCU and the areas near the hospital on a war-footing. The medical staff that came in contact with the man were also put in isolation immediately. 

While the district administration has begun efforts to trace the likely source of infection, officials suspect he may have caught the virus while offering namaz at a local mosque. “The man had no travel history. However, he visited the mosque before lockdown. Perhaps he got infected by some other carrier there,” said an administration source.

BGH sources said they have begun sterilising the medical equipment and devices used in treating the patient and a large number of doctors and nurses have been put in quarantine in hotels. Bokaro deputy commissioner Mukesh Kumar did not wish to divulge the number of people put in quarantine, but said, “All those who have come in contact with the deceased are being screened.”


