1st RPF man succumbs to Covid
2020-05-30
Ludhiana: Almost 24 days after Railway Protection Force (RPF) personnel started testing positive for Covid-19 in Ludhiana, a 49-year-old constable with the force died of the virus on Thursday.

Belonging to Jalandhar, the constable had tested positive for Covid-19 on May 18. He had fever for the past eight days and breathlessness for the past three days. He was first admitted to the mother and child hospital, near Vardhman Mills, on May 19, from where he was referred to Christian Medical College and Hospital (CMCH) on May 22.

Dr Anil Luther, medical superintendent, CMCH, said, “He was a known case of Covid bronchopneumonia and was referred from the civil hospital on May 22. He had fever and breathing difficulty.”

“The constable was put on antibiotics, anti-pyretics and other supportive treatment. In view of respiratory distress, he was put on non-invasive ventilator. But he still continued to have fever and respiratory distress. So, he was intubated and put on mechanical ventilator. He suffered sudden cardiorespiratory arrest after which CPR was given as per the protocol, but the patient couldn't be revived. He was declared dead at 2.05 pm on Thursday.”

Dr Amita Jain, senior medical officer, MCH, said, “He had high sugar levels on the date of referral and he was undiagnosed about diabetes. He complained of breathlessness on May 21, and his oxygen saturation was 92 but the required level is 95. He had been admitted to our hospital on May 19.”

Other personnel worried

So far 57 RPF personnel, who had come to Ludhiana for duty on Shramik Special trains, have tested positive for the virus.

All other RPF personnel who had tested positive but now have been discharged under the new discharge policy are a worried lot. A 31-year-old personnel who had been quarantined at Diesel Shed said, “A total of 45 RPF personnel who were discharged recently want to undergo testing. This will give us clarification and satisfaction that we have defeated this deadly disease.”

Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “This is the eighth death in the district due to Covid-19. The infection spreads in blood and damage other organs. However, other RPF personnel cannot be tested as we have to follow norms of Union and state governments.”

The district has witnessed 13 deaths so far, including five from other district and states.


