Tamil Nadu: First Covid-19 death in Ramnad, 8 new cases in Tirunelveli
2020-05-10
MADURAI: One more Covid-19 related death was reported from the southern region from Ramanathapuram on Saturday, taking the total in south Tamil Nadu to six. With 13 new cases reported on Saturday, of which eight from Tirunelveli, the total number of cases in the region has climbed to 541.


A 50-year-old woman from Keelakarai in Ramanathapuram district died on Saturday at Sivagangai Government Medical College Hospital. An 85-year-old neighbour of the patient has also been tested positive for Covid-19. Ramanathapuram district collector Veera Raghava Rao said that the district currently has 25 confirmed cases, 15 discharged cases, one death and nine active cases. “We are doing all we can to trace all contacts of the Covid-19 patients and test them. In Ramanathapuram, around 250 people are being tested every day, including frontline workers. Around 1,200 frontline workers who were deployed in containment zones across the district have been tested for Covid-19,” he said.

In Tirunelveli district, eight fresh Covid-19 cases were reported, which include four men, two women and two girl children under 18. “They were all primary contacts and family members of a Covid-19 patient who tested positive on Thursday. They all had returned from Chennai and Tiruvannamalai. While testing all the primary and secondary contacts of the patient, eight of them tested positive on Saturday. Contact tracing of all Covid-19 patients is being done actively,” said Tirunelveli district collector Shilpa Prabhakar Satish.

Meanwhile, Theni reported two more cases and Dindigul reported one case, all contacts of Covid-19 positive patients. According to Theni district officials, the district is set to permit all hotels and stand-alone shops outside the containment zones to open as per the prescribed timings from Monday allowing only take-away orders. In Madurai district, during the past three days, two Covid-19 positive pregnant women gave birth to babies.


