First critical Covid +ve case reaches Salt Lake hospital
2020-04-07
KOLKATA: A 57-year-old patient from Howrah was shifted to the annexe building of AMRI Hospitals, Salt Lake, on Monday, making her the first Covid-19 positive case at the private facility acquired by the state government to treat those with co-morbid conditions. The patient, who was referred from Beliaghata ID Hospital, is now admitted in the critical care isolation ward and is on ventilation.

According to sources, the patient was initially brought to another private hospital off EM Bypass. But the hospital had referred her to ID Hospital. As the patient developed severe breathing distress, she was shifted to AMRI, Salt Lake. “Our critical care unit exclusively for Covid-19 patients is yet to be ready. Therefore, the patient was shifted to AMRI after consultation with officials at Swasthya Bhawan,” said an official at ID Hospital.

On Saturday, the state health department came out with a circular on hospitals earmarked for treatment of Covid-19 patient. The circular also categorised the type of patients to be admitted in the four facilities in the city created for the care of corona patients. 

“She is the first patient to occupy the CCU with 12 beds. The patient’s condition is critical as she is on ventilation support,” said a source at AMRI Hospital.

The annexe building of the hospital chain’s Salt Lake unit, which will be used for treating only Covid-19 patients, has 50 beds. While 12 critical care beds are on one floor with facilities like ventilation and dialysis support, there are 38 other general isolation beds spread across three floors.

While the state government will be supplying PPEs to the healthcare providers and medicine for patients, the medical team for the unit and other infrastructures are being provided by the hospital. For patients referred from other private hospitals, the cost of treatment will be borne by the individuals, but the cost will be reimbursed by the government through the West Bengal Health Scheme for the ones referred from government hospitals.


