1st Covid-19 death in Vidarbha, 3 more positive in Nagpur
2020-03-30
NAGPUR: The first Covid-19 death in Vidarbha was reported on Sunday after swab samples of a 45-year-old Buldhana man, who passed away on Saturday, tested positive at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) lab.


The Buldhana man was undergoing treatment at the district hospital there. This is the first Covid-19 death outside Mumbai and 8th in Maharashtra. The deceased was a diabetic and had no travel history even within the country in recent months. Now, authorities are tracing his contacts and have started door-to-door surveillance in Buldhana city.

In Nagpur, three more positive cases were reported on Sunday, including the first patient from central Nagpur, taking the city’s tally to 14. Earlier cases detected were all from south-west Nagpur and north Nagpur areas. 

Divisional commissioner confirmed three new positive cases in the city.

The central Nagpur patient, a 55-year-old man from a housing society near Gandhisagar, had travelled to New Delhi and some other places in North India in March and returned to city on March 15.

The other two cases are of a 12-year-old girl and her paralysed uncle. The girl is daughter and paralysed man is elder brother, respectively, of the 33-year-old patient detected in Jaripatka on Saturday. They were all living in the same house. 

The Jaripatka man is assistant at the shop of a Khamla businessman who had tested positive on Thursday. The shop assistant’s daughter is also the youngest Covid-19 patient in the city. 

On Saturday, swabs of 15 close contacts of Jaripatka man were collected. The report of the man’s elderly father, wife, and younger daughter are negative. The elder son of his paralysed brother tested negative. Confirmation regarding other reports is awaited. 

In a big relief for the city, two maid who used to work at the house of Khamla businessman tested negative on Sunday. One of the maids is from Gautam Nagar, a slum adjacent to Khamla, and another from Jaitala village. This implies there is no community spread of Covid-19 in slum areas and outside Khamla.

In another welcome development, wife of the first Covid-19 patient from the city, who was admitted at GMCH from last two weeks, was discharged on Sunday after complete recovery. With this, all four patients of the city, who were detected between March 11 and 13, have recovered and discharged.

All others, including neighbours and close friends of positive patients from Khamla — businessman, his wife, mother, son, manager and his daughter — have tested negative. According to NMC authorities, 27 of them tested negative on Friday while 15 others on Saturday. 

Till late on Sunday evening, the NMC’s health department officials were tracing the close contacts of the latest three cases. These include the paralysed man’s wife and two sons. The test reports of his mother and younger son are awaited. 

The 12-year-old girl used to play with the younger son of the paralysed man. This is the only high risk identified from the two new cases from Jaripatka.

The paralysed man was initially admitted to a hospital in Jaripatka and general ward of GMCH, as per NMC officials. People at high risk from these hospitals would be identified and tested on Monday. 

Officials are also tracing close contacts of the Central Nagpur’s patient. He along with his wife and daughter had travelled to Vrindavan in Uttar Pradesh on March 15. The man had picked his son from hostel on way back. 

As per the district information office, 71 suspects were identified by 3pm on Sunday. 

