First suspected coronavirus case in Ahmedabad
2020-02-05
AHMEDABAD/GANDHINAGAR: A 28-year-old woman from the Ambli area became the first suspected case of coronavirus in Ahmedabad on Tuesday. The woman has been quarantined at an isolation ward in Asarwa Civil Hospital, after being referred from a private hospital on SG Road on Tuesday evening.

The state government sent seven samples of suspected coronavirus patients to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune for testing. Four have returned negative, while the results of three are awaited.

 
 
On the woman quarantined at Ahmedabad Civil Hospital, a senior hospital official said, “We are yet to gather details on the case. The woman has shown symptoms associated with coronavirus and was thus screened by the private hospital. She was immediately sent to Civil Hospital. Her biological samples have been collected and sent to the NIV in Pune.” The official added, “Her condition is stable, and she is under observation.”

Asarwa Civil Hospital in the city is the nodal centre for coronavirus and a ward has been earmarked for quarantine. City health officials said they will get details on the woman’s travel history, and if needed, advise her relatives to undergo check-ups.

“There is no positive case of coronavirus in Gujarat. Those with suspected coronavirus are under observation. We are taking all preventive measures. We are going to start holding video conferences with community leaders in the state to create greater awareness,” principal secretary, health, Jayanti Ravi said.

State health commissioner Jai Prakash Shivhare said, “Till Tuesday evening, after screening 769 passengers who had returned from China, Singapore, Thailand and other coronavirus-affected countries, we sent seven samples to NIV to test for coronavirus infection. Four have returned negative and the results of three are pending,” he said. Shivhare added that the samples of the woman admitted to the Asarwa Civil Hospital had also been sent to the NIV.

Emphasizing that there is no need for people to panic, Shivhare said all passengers arriving in the state from China and other countries are being screened. “Through data-sharing with the government of India, we are also screening passengers arriving in Gujarat from other countries via Mumbai, Delhi and other cities in India,” he said. Shivhare added that directions from the Union government on coronavirus are being followed on a daily basis through video-conferencing.

As of Tuesday evening, India had recorded three confirmed cases of coronavirus, all from Kerala.


