First Covid-19 case in Nanded, Jalna gets second patient
2020-04-23
AURANGABAD: Nanded district reported its first confirmed coronavirus case after a 64-year-old man from the Pirburhan area tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday.

Jalna district, meanwhile, reported its second positive patient on Tuesday night with a woman from Partur testing positive for the infection.

With these two cases, the tally of confirmed Covid-19 cases in Marathwada’s eight districts went up to 60. The number includes 28 active cases with Aurangabad district having the highest number (18), followed by Hingoli (6), Jalna (2), Parbhani and now Nanded (1 each).

Nanded district deputy collector Prashant Shelke said the 64-year-old patient was admitted to the state-run health facility on April 20 following symptoms that included fever, cough and breathlessness.

“The patient belongs to a large family of more than 15 members. All his close relatives have been quarantined as a precautionary measure. The patient has denied having any travel history and, therefore, we are trying to trace the possible source of his infection. An area of 5km-radius around his residence has been sealed,” Shelke said.

In Jalna, the second confirmed Covid-19 patient hails from Shiroda village in Partula taluka. The 39-year-old woman was admitted to the state-run health facility for fever and cough on April 13.

“The woman had sought medical treatment at two separate private hospitals since April 6 and had turned up at the government health facility as a suspected Covid-19 case. Her throat swab sample sent to the laboratory had tested negative on April 14, but her symptoms persisted. Another test for Covid-19 was done and she tested positive on Tuesday night,” an official release said.

The Jalna district administration said eight high-risk contacts of the woman and another 41 low-risk contacts have been under observation and their throat swab samples have been sent for the lab-testing.

On Tuesday, six jawans of SRPF, Hingoli, had tested positive for Covid 19 after returning from bandobast duty in Malegaon town of Nashik district. One Covid-19 patient from Hingoli was released from the hospital after recovery.

Similarly, Latur and Osmanabad districts have recently reported recovery of eight and three Covid-19 patients, respectively.


