2.29 lakh people in Surat at high risk of coronavirus infection
2020-06-12
SURAT: As many as 2.29 lakh people in Surat city are at ‘high risk’ of contracting Covid-19 infection, according to an elaborate health survey carried out by the Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC).

The survey named APX was carried out to trace people, mostly elders above 60 years, having co-morbid conditions, said municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani.

“The implementation of this special strategy is aimed at early identification and isolation or quarantining of the individuals to break the chain of transmission and early containment of the disease,” said Pani. 

In all, 1,000 teams of 2,200 members fanned out across the city and covered a population of over 41 lakh people.

During teams’ visits, houses having patients suffering from acute respiratory infection (ARI) were marked with ‘A’ and 417 such households were found. Houses with people with co-morbid conditions and those aged above 60 years were marked with ‘P’. A total of 1,97,007 houses were identified under this category 

“Houses with none of the above-mentioned conditions were marked with ‘X’ and 8,93,939 houses fell under this category. There were 6,142 houses were the residents refused to provide any information,” Pani told TOI. 

“Our top priority are 2.29 lakh people who are in the high-risk category, and we are focusing on their health. Special teams have been assigned to look after them and they are visiting their houses regularly to find out if they require any medical assistance. We are distributing immunity booster medicines and ensuring that they get their regular medicines as well,” Pani explained. 

Most of the people who were found to be with co-morbid conditions are suffering from diabetes and hypertension.

“We are giving medicines and masks to people suffering from HIV, and TB among others at their doorstep so that they don’t need to step out from their homes. Pensioners have been spared from visiting offices to submit life certificates,” he said.

