West Bengal: 2.7k km away, coronavirus scare keeps foodies from Chinatown
2020-02-14
KOLKATA: India’s biggest Chinatown, in the east Kolkata district of Tangra, has ended up being an unwitting victim of coronavirus that has already claimed more than 1,300 lives in mainland China.


Tangra, the origin of “Tangra-type Chinese food” that now has a pan-India presence, has not had a single coronavirus infection so far (like the rest of Kolkata and Bengal). But the district — home to nearly 40 eateries big and small — has seen a significant dip in footfall despite being 2,700km from the disease’s epicentre in China’s Wuhan, with a large section of foodies suddenly having lost their appetite for Chinese food.

Tangra has around 2,500 Chinese-Indians and Kolkata’s other (and older) Chinatown, Tiretta Bazar, has around 2,000. But not a single family may have any direct link with the mainland, as most of the younger generation has emigrated to countries like Canada, Australia, the US and Sweden. That, however, does not seem to have stopped foodies from establishing some link between the disease in China and the Chinese cuisine in Kolkata.

The result: a nearly deserted Tangra last weekend (February 7-9), with several restaurants reporting a 50%-60% drop in footfall from usual weekends.

China imposed a lockdown in Wuhan on January 23, putting curbs on people entering or exiting the city from where the virus spread. A fortnight later, just when China is planning to ease some curbs to get the workforce back on its feet, an irrational phobia seems to have pushed gastronomes away from the Cantonese, Manchurian, Hunan and Schezwan dishes that can draw up to 10,000 visitors on a busy Saturday.

Mathew Chen, owner of Shun Li, a small family-run restaurant located opposite the Chinese Kali Mandir deep in Tangra, said customer count had gone down from 81 on the first Saturday of the month (February 1) to 43 this Saturday (February 8), which resulted in a Rs-17,000 loss for a single day. For larger restaurants, like Big Boss and Kim Ling that are situated closer to Chinatown’s entrance and receive over 1,000 customers on Saturday, the loss was in excess of Rs 4 lakh.

“Our business is steady round the year with sales spiking during festive seasons and weekends, particularly between October and February when the weather is pleasant. I cannot recall a single weekend-to-weekend dip in recent years like the one between Febraury 1 and 8,” Chen said.

Customers who reach Big Boss after 2 p.m. for lunch or after 8 p.m. for dinner on weekends have to usually wait for a table. But, on February 8, the restaurant went almost empty with only a few tables occupied at peak hours. Manager S Chang said he had read the signs when regular customers started calling to inquire whether they would contract the flu if they came over to dine.

“Guests have become curious about what sauces and ingredients are used and from where they are sourced. I assured them that everything was locally sourced but many decided to stay away,” Chang said.

Owners of Beijing and Golden Joy, two high-capacity restaurants, acknowledged footfall was down but claimed they were not as badly impacted as some others. “It is a little bit up and down. Kolkata has no connection with this flu. Not a single case has been confirmed in the city. So what is this scare about?” wondered Monica Lieu, owner of Beijing and Kim Ling restaurants in Tangra. “In any case, we do not source anything from China,” Robert Liao of Golden Joy said.

Chinese Indian Association president Bean Ching Law said several of his friends, all well-educated, had asked about the threat of contracting the virus if they visited Chinatown.

“Chinese-Indians in Tangra have no family ties with mainland China for at least a couple of generations. Only a handful has re-established business ties. Chinese-Indians come over to Tangra during the Chinese New Year from Canada, the US, Australia and Sweden. The fear, therefore, is completely irrational,” Lieu said.

Medical opinion supports this view. No virus would survive the Tangra Chinese food cooked at high temperatures on a blazing flame, virologist Amitabha Nandy said. “There can be no justification for not going to Chinatown either because there are Chinese-Indians living there or Chinese food is served,” he said.

