Two ASIs succumb to Covid-19 in 24 hours in Delhi
2020-06-01
NEW DELHI: Two policemen, both in their 50s, passed away due to Covid-19 in the past 24 hours taking the death toll in the force to three. The two assistant sub-inspectors were posted in Central and Outer districts. While one death was reported on Saturday night, the other officer died on Sunday morning. Contact tracing in both the cases has been initiated.

Meanwhile, 13 police officers in West district, including the SHO of Moti Nagar, tested positive for the novel coronavirus on Saturday.

Extremely saddened at the death of two Delhi police bravehearts in the line of duty.Their untimely demise is grea… https://t.co/SdI4xuAlSM— LG Delhi (@LtGovDelhi) 1590980488000

Police commissioner SN Shrivastava expressed his condolences on Twitter. “Delhi Police family mourns the loss of 2 brave police officers in our fight against corona pandemic despite best efforts to save them. We pay homage to ASIs Vikram and Shesh Mani Pandey and may their souls rest in peace. We are committed to providing all help to their families,” he tweeted.

ASI Vikram (52) was posted at Sultanpuri police station and died on Sunday morning. He was on highway patrol duty since May . His two Covid tests conducted till May 22 tested negative, but after not feeling well on May 25 he went to a hospital in Mongolpuri where doctors advised him bed rest for a week. The next morning he started feeling breathless.

His family rushed him from his Suleman Nagar residence to a nearby hospital. Later, he was taken to the Army Base hospital where he was tested for the third time. This time his result came out Covid-positive and he died around 11.30am on Sunday. He is survived by his wife and three sons aged 15, 19 and 24.

On Saturday evening, ASI Shesh Mani Pandey, a fingerprints expert with Crime Branch attached with the mobile crime team at Kamla Market police station, passed away due to the viral infection.

DCP (Central) Sanjay Bhatia said, “Pandey was earlier in the Army and had joined Delhi Police in 2014. He was a native of Madhya Pradesh and lived in Naraina village. He was tested at Lady Hardinge Medical College on May 26 as he had fever and cough. His reports came out Covid-positive on May 28 and he was admitted to the Army Base hospital where he passed away on Saturday evening.”

Pandey is survived by his wife and three children. His elder son and daughter are married and settled in Madhya Pradesh. His younger son is a Class XII student and lives with his mother at Naraina.

In the first week of May, a constable posted at Bharat Nagar police station in Northwest district had died due to Covid-19. Later, his wife and son also tested positive for the virus.


