Chennai: 2 Chinese test negative for COVID-19
2020-02-20
CHENNAI: After a minor scare over COVID-19 infection of two crew members of a Chinese ship that berthed off Chennai port on Tuesday, state health authorities have declared that both tested negative for the infection.

Chennai Port Trust said the vessel M V Magnate with 19 Chinese crew visited Chinese ports before being berthed off Chennai. Its last port of call was Shanghai. After the ship was berthed, a health team with the Port health officer boarded the vessel and examined all the crew members. 

During the examination, it was found that two crew members had mild fever without other respiratory symptoms. Otherwise, both of them were healthy, a release said.

The crew members were isolated on the ship, which has been kept out of bounds for people from the shore. No crew from the ship is allowed shore access.

The health team and health officer visited the ship on Wednesday morning and collected blood samples after taking due precautions as per standard operating procedures. The samples were sent to King’s Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy. 

Port Trust authorities said with the two crew members testing negative for COVID-19, the ship will now be allowed to unload its cargo as per standard operating procedures for safe port operations. Crew members will be monitored 24X7 till the ship sails out of Chennai port waters. However, the Chinese crew has been denied landing permission as per government regulations and it will be strictly followed during their stay in the port, the authorities added.

Meanwhile, passengers of flights from China, Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Japan and South Korea are being screened through thermal screening at airports. More than 50,000 passengers have been screened at the airports in Chennai, Trichy, Madurai and Coimbatore.

As per health department records, 2,324 passengers are under home quarantine for 28 days. All 46 samples obtained from the passengers tested negative for COVID-19 infection. The health condition of the passengers under observation at home was stable.


