2 civil hosp attendants among 23 test positive for Covid-19
2020-05-19
Ludhiana: Twenty-three more persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Ludhiana on Monday. They include two attendants of civil hospital — a 36-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man — deployed at the isolation ward.The woman, a resident of Kartar Nagar, said, “I used to serve food to the patients and would take all the precautions. I stay here with my daughter, husband and in-laws.”Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “As many as 69 pending samples of Sunday were tested on Tuesday. Of them, 22 were positive. Their reports were received from Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. Another positive report was received from DMCH virology lab. The 22 include two RPF men, six jail inmates, two rape and drug cases’ accused, two civil hospital employees, four civil hospital patients one traveller, and four untraced cases.”A 22-year-old sex assault case accused, who has caught the virus, is being put up at the police post near bus stand.A 27-year-old woman of Noorwala Road, who has tested positive, said, “I had visited the civil hospital on Saturday with complaints of breathlessness, fever, cold and cough from the past 10 days.”A body, too, tested Covid-19 positive at the civil hospital a day after the authorities stated, “The sample of a body should be taken only in very suspicious cases with the prior permission of Dr Avneet Kaur, director, health services.” The 27-year-old man of Bhattian Colony had died on May 15. His sample was taken on May 16 and sent to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. He had complained of cough, fever and cold from the past six days. He died due to Covid-19, his report suggested, said the civil surgeon.These directions have put the staff in a catch-22 situation. These can put at risk the healthcare workers, mortuary staff and policemen. The civil hospital, which is the only hospital catering to such deaths, receives about two unidentified bodies daily and in such cases it is difficult to claim suspicion. Prior permission from higher authorities takes two to three days. After about three days, the chances of getting positive reports will be lower. On the other hand, if sampling is skipped due to this tedious protocol, it will increase the chances of staff getting infected as post-mortem is mandatory before cremation of unidentified bodies. 