2 Covid-19 deaths each in Agra, Meerut; 6 new cases in Bareilly
2020-06-05
Agra/Meerut/Bareilly: Two Agra residents, who tested positive for Covid-19, died while undergoing treatment at SN Medical College on Thursday. Also, at least 13 new cases surfaced in Agratill Thursday evening, taking the district tally to 937. While there were two cases of deaths and at least eight fresh positive cases in Meerut, taking the total tally to 482.

The two Agra residents who died were a 69-year-old man from Shahganj and a 60-year-old man from New Agra locality. According to the health department, the two patients died due to comorbid conditions.

Also, three Covid-19 patients were discharged on Thursday. Of the 937 cases, 86.23% have been declared "cured". There are now 81 active cases in the district. Chief medical officer (CMO) RC Pandey said, "So far, 802 people have recovered and discharged. Health department teams are conducting door-to-door checks of those in hotspot areas."

In Meerut, a 17-year-old girl died on Thursday while a 50-year-old man succumbed late on Wednesday - taking the death toll to 32. Meerut district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, "As many as eight cases were reported on Thursday. These included residents of Dabai Nagar, G block of Shraddha Puri, Shatabdi Nagar, Shastri Nagar L block, and two lodged in temporary jails."

Six people tested positive in Bareilly on Thursday, taking the district tally to 58, including 35 active cases and two deaths. District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, "All new cases are migrants who recently returned to Bareilly. Of these six cases, one person belongs to Pratagarh district."

In Pilibhit, the health officials received on Thursday evening the positive reports of three more people aged around 25. Of the three, two belong to Pansoli under Amaria block and had come from Delhi on May 29 while the third youth of Meerpur under Bilsanda block had returned home from Surat, Gujarat. Their samples had been sent for testing to Indian Veterinary Research Institute on June 1.

There were 18 new cases in Bijnor district, taking tally to 136. Of them, 72 are active. Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav said the patients are from Afjalgarh, Najibabad, Noorpur, Seohara and Jalilpur areas. Family members and contacts of patients are being quarantined.


