Two Covid-19 patients at GMCH to complete 14 days, first test today
2020-03-26
NAGPUR: Two of the three Covid-19 positive patients admitted to Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) are completing their 14-day isolation period on Thursday. Their samples will be tested on Thursday and Friday (March 26 and March 27). If tested negative both the times, they will be declared free from the coronavirus infection. 


Meanwhile, on Wednesday, first positive Covid-19 patient, who is on road to recovery at the IGGMCH, was tested one more time as per protocol. His reports were pending. If tested negative, doctors will conduct physical check-up and chest x-ray of this patient on Thursday. “If the patient is found free from any lung infection, he will be given discharge,” said IGGMCH dean Dr Ajay Keoliya.

Earlier in the day, food delivery cos stopped their services temporarily. Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has taken proactive steps and started health check-up of 1,200 delivery agents of various food delivery firms. First batch of 300 delivery agents reported at the MLA Hostel where they were screened for any symptoms like cough, throat infection and fever. They were also counselled about the food safety practices and hand hygiene. After all the delivery personnel are examined, food delivery app services will be restored in the city. 

In door-to-door containment drive conducted in 3km radius of houses of four positive patients, NMC found that five persons have been admitted to private hospitals. NMC team collected swab samples of these persons and sent to Mayo Hospital. The NMC had made it mandatory for private hospitals to inform it in case any patient with severe acute respiratory illness was admitted with them. Accordingly, the civic body received information about 12 such patients. The civic officials have also sent swab samples of these patients for testing to Mayo Hospital.

NMC’s assistant medical officer (health) Dr Praveen Gantawar told TOI, “As of now, 13 samples have tested negative and reports of the remaining four is awaited.”

It’s was another good day for Vidarbha as no new positive patient was recorded for ninth consecutive day on March 24. Four patients in Nagpur and three in the isolation ward of GMCH Yavatmal are also showing considerable improvement in their health. Two more isolated patients were discharged on Wednesday in Yavatmal.

“Now, only four patients are there in the isolation ward. Three of them are positive and one a presumptive case. The swab sample of this suspect has been sent for testing and the lab report is awaited,” stated district collector MD Singh. 

In Chandrapur, six new persons with foreign travel history were quarantined on Wednesday. This has taken the number of total people under home and institutional observation to 44 in the district. So far, 48 persons have completed their 14 days of quarantine. No positive patient has been found in the district so far.

Amravati collector Shailesh Naval informed that out of the 73 throat swabs tested for coronavirus to date, 68 have been found negative while reports of the rest five are awaited.


