Two days after easing of lockdown, MP green islands turn orange
2020-05-07
INDORE: In the green all through lockdown 1 & 2, Jhabua and Neemuch were hit by five Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, just two days after travel restrictions were eased in the third phase of lockdown.


Red flags went up in the administration of both districts, as they were considered two of the last bastions in the fight against coronavirus in MP. Curfew was clamped immediately in Neemuch, giving its residents the first taste of the restrictions most of the country has been under for over six weeks.

All relaxations given on May 3, after lockdown 2.0, have been revoked, said Neemuch collector Jitendra Singh Raje.

Four members of a family have tested positive for Covid-19 in Neemuch. They had hosted 11 relatives from Gujarat’s Dahod at a wedding on March 20. The Dahod family got stuck in Neemuch after the lockdown, but managed to return on April 29 by road; it reached Jhabua by bus and crossed the state border to Gujarat on a private vehicle.

Seven of the group tested positive upon returning to Dahod, triggering alarm in the Neemuch family. They, too, were tested and Wednesday’s report found four of them infected.

Officials launch contact tracing, 29 fresh samples sent for test

Curiously, a woman from Jhabua, who had travelled on the same bus with the 11from Dahod, tested positive on Wednesday. Officials are trying to figure out how these 12 people were infected and what’s the common link.

The Neemuch collector told TOI that the Dahod family had stayed for 40 days in Madhya Pradesh due to the lockdown. “It is yet to be ascertained how the family from Gujarat got infected. But four members of the host family in Neemuch have tested positive,” he said.

As many as 37 primary contacts of both families have been tested for Covid-19. “We have launched contact tracing of more people, and 29 fresh samples have been sent for tests,” Raje said, adding curfew was imposed in Neemuch.

The Jhabua woman is a resident of Naharpura village in Petlawad tehsil. She had visited her parents in nearby Kesharpura village before testing positive. Jhabua collector Prabal Sepaha has declared Naharpura and Kesharpura villages as containment areas – the first in the district. Villagers are being screened. 


