2 days after recovery, Kolkata doctor in UK goes back to Covid frontline
2020-04-19
KOLKATA: A young Bengali doctor in the UK, who got infected with Covid-19 while treating patients at a south London hospital earlier this month, has re-joined work, barely two days after testing negative.

For Niladri Konar, who hails from Burdwan and is an alumnus of SSKM Medical College and Hospital, the decision to go back to the frontlines, less than 48 hours of his last “negative” test result, was simple. “There is an extreme dearth of doctors in London at the moment,” he told TOI. “Close to 30%-40% of staff at any hospital is in quarantine. Hence, the moment I was cleared of the infection, I went back.” The 32-year-old general medicine specialist now exclusively treats Covid-19 patients.

A student of Narendrapur Ramakrishna Mission, Konar moved to the UK in 2017 with his wife, Ritika, who’s a paediatrician. He first developed symptoms on March 31. “I was on night shift, when I felt fatigued,” he recounted. “I returned home and, over the next two days, my health worsened. I developed fever, cough, headache and anosmia (loss of smell) — all signs of the infection, and so I stayed back. I got myself tested on April 3; the result came on April 5, and I was asked to stay in home isol-ation.”

Unlike in India, where Covid-19 patients and their immediate families are being hospitalised, only patients who need oxygen support are advised hospitalisation in the UK. 

Also unlike India, UK has also revised its quarantine norms. In India, Covid-19 patients have to undergo two back-to-back tests in 24 hours before they can be released, following which patients are advised at least 14 days of home isolation. In the UK, there is no retesting. After seven days of treatment, if the patient doesn’t have any fever for 48 hours, he is declared fit.

“I got better over the week,” Konar said. “Ritika also had mild symptoms but she was tested negative. But both of us were in home quarantine. My seven days of treatment got over last Monday and on Wednesday night, I re-joined duty, back to treating Covid-19 patients exclusively.”

The situation is so grim that he “just couldn’t stay back”, Konar said. “Every day, at least 100 new patients are arriving at our hospital, and several hundreds are dying all over the UK. There is a severe shortage of healthcare professionals.”

There is one area of concern, though: lack of personal protection equipment (PPE), a vexed issue in India, too. Konar says this shortage is exposing doctors to a high level of risk.

“We were initially given PPEs, but there is now an immense shortage and the government has rolled out a fresh directive that says full-body PPEs are no longer needed for doctors. We, at the emergency department, are provided with only rubber gloves, surgical masks, a plastic gown and protective goggles. I don’t think it’s enough.

“To make things worse, the airport here is still functional, people can still use the Tube, some buses are still running and people are allowed to move out once a day to exercise in the open. We are doing our best but I just pray the government also does its part in containing the pandemic,” Konar signed off.


