2 French nationals among 4 quarantined in Coimbatore
2020-03-18
Representative imageCOIMBATORE: Two French nationals and as many city residents with travel history and fever were quarantined to test for Covid-19 on Tuesday. With this, the number of people who are isolated and being tested for the virus in the district rose to six. While two other people were quarantined earlier, their test results are yet to arrive.


Public health department officials said the French nationals were in the city for ayurvedic treatment. “They reached the city via Mumbai. The treatment centre referred them to us and they have been quarantined in the ESI Medical College Hospital. Their throat swabs are being collected for tests and they will be sent to Chennai,” said an official. 

In another instance, a 15-year-old boy from Mettupalayam who returned from Sharjah on March 5, and a 49-year-old man from Cheranmanagar with a travel history to Hyderabad have also been also quarantined in the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH). Their throat swabs were collected on Tuesday. 

Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said, “The boy has been having fever on and off for the past 10 days. He passed the thermal scanner at the airport because he had a paracetamol earlier. He was, however, suffering from high fever for the past two days and that prompted him to come to us.” 

The 49-year-old man had travel history to Hyderabad and Kochi by flight and bus. He has been suffering from fever, accompanied by cough and dry cough, for the past two days. He had approached Kovai Medical College Hospital, from where they referred him to CMCH. 

Earlier, a 35-year-old man from Udumalpet with a travel history from Singapore, and a 67-year-old woman from Valparai with a travel history to Kottayam, were put in isolation and their test results are awaited. 

District collector K Rajamani, meanwhile, said the testing centre that is being set up at Coimbatore Medical College, Peelamedu, would become functional by Thursday. 


