2, including beggar, die of Covid-19 in district
2020-05-31
Nagpur: For the first time since the district registered maiden Covid-19 case 81 days ago, two positive patients including a beggar died son Saturday. The district also recorded 13 more Covid-19 cases on Saturday, increasing total number of cases to 515.s

The death toll from Covid-19 increased to 11 in the district. Of them nine deaths happened in May and remaining two in April.

The second death recorded on Saturday was of a 73-year-old man who passed away at Covid-19 isolation ward of Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). He was a resident of Bhusawal and had come to his son’s residence at Lekchand Nagar, Hingna around 11 days ago. 

Suffering from meningitis, he was admitted at a private hospital in Dhantoli on Monday. He was on ventilator since Wednesday following fever and breathlessness. He tested positive on Friday and shifted to GMCH on ventilator. He also had diabetes and other health problems.

The beggar, 50, died at Covid-19 isolation ward of Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH). He was suffering with distension of abdomen and liver cirrhosis. He was found at Gandhi Putla, Itwari on May 22. He tested positive on May 23 and was on ventilator for last two days. 

Now, total five patients have died while undergoing treatment at Covid-19 isolation wards. Samples of remaining six tested positive post death. All the 11 deceased were comorbidity patients.

A 36-year-old woman from Tandapeth, another congested slum of East Nagpur, tested positive. She was admitted at IGGMCH on Friday due to fever and cough.

Tandapeth, situated between Mominpura and Naik Talao containment zones, will be a new containment zone.

With two more testing positive, the number of infected State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) personnel has increased to 10. A 45-year-old man from Satranjipura tested positive, taking tally of this locality to 129.

Three from Nagpur rural tested positive. A 44-year-old man from Ghumgaon admitted at AIIMS due to fever, dry cough and breathlessness tested positive.

The other two patients are from Mannatkhedi, a remote village in Sawargaon Primary Health Centre Area in Narkhed tehsil. Their swab samples were collected in a special camp after their return from Mumbai and Pune. Now, 15 cases have been registered from Nagpur rural.

Six persons from Mominpura containment zone tested positive, increasing cases from the area to 247.

Five patients were discharged — 3 from Gaddigodam, one from Mominpura and one of Butibori, increasing total to 374. 

Vasant Nagar and Rameshwari road in South-West Nagpur were notified as new containment zone as two from this areas had tested positive on Friday. Number of containment zones in existence increased to 25. Mundhe also reduced area of containment zone of Parvati Nagar and Kashi Nagar.

Reports of two NMC officials — deputy commissioner and veterinary officer — came negative.


