2 intern docs test + at Rims, dir goes under quarantine; state tally past 700 with 49 new cases
2020-06-03
Ranchi: The coronavirus scare reached the state’s lone Covid-19 tertiary care centre with four persons —two female intern doctors and two admitted patients — testing positive at Rajendra institute of Medical Sciences (Rims) on Tuesday. The infected interns had met Rims director Dr D K Singh recently and he said he will go into isolation immediately.

The third floor of the new girls’ hostel at Rims where the interns lived has been converted into a micro containment zone. In a bigger concern, sources at Rims said that the two had interacted with several hospital staff, including Singh, in the last couple of days. 

Talking to TOI, Singh said: “Two of our intern doctors and one patient each from orthopaedics and Covid-19 ward have tested positive. The third floor of girls’ hostel has been converted into a mini containment zone and the orthopaedics department is being sanitized. I had met the infected interns recently and will be going into quarantine immediately.”

“The other who tested positive in Ranchi apart from intern doctors and patients has undergone treatment at Medica hospital in Ranchi in last few days and both were being traced right now. The rest who tested positive on Tuesday are migrants who have arrived from various parts of country,” said a health department official.

The four were among 49 fresh coronavirus cases detected in nine districts on Tuesday. This is the second biggest single-day spike in the state since 72 cases were recorded on May 30

Along with the 11 cases reported from Dhanbad around midnight on Monday, the total number pf positive cases in the state now stands at 724, of which, 398 are active, 321 have recovered (including 24 on Tuesday) and five have succumbed to the infection, according to the Covid-19 bulletin issued by the state health department at 9pm on Tuesday.

On Tuesday, Ramgarh recorded its biggest single-day spike with 20 cases, Ranchi recorded six (including the four at Rims), Dhanbad nine, Hazaribag five, East Singhbhum three, Dumka two and Bokaro, Saraikela, Garhwa and Palamu one each.


