2 lakh migrant workers crossed state borders during lockdown
2020-05-01
Hyderabad: Nearly two lakh migrant workers are believed to have crossed the state’s borders on foot, cycle or any available means of transport to return to their respective native states during the 40-day lockdown period. A day after the Union ministry of home affairs (MHA) allowed inter-state movement of people with riders, some migrant workers were spotted walking along national highways.

After the MHA’s decision and instructions of TRS government to allow inter-state movement of migrant workers and others stranded, the state has started collecting data of migrant workers working in Telangana through the labour department.

According to estimates, over six lakh migrant workers from 24 states have been working on various projects and industrial units in Telangana. “We could collect details of 4.10 lakh migrant workers, who are now in camps, shelters and other locations. Their names, address native states and phone numbers were also collected, which will be shared with respective states. Nearly two lakh people might have crossed state borders for their native places due to long lockdown period,” a senior labour department official said.

Of 4.10 lakh migrant workers, the highest, 26%, were from West Bengal, 20% from Jharkhand, 18% from Bihar, 14% from Odisha, while 3% were from Chhattisgarh. Of them, two lakhs migrant labourers were working in Greater Hyderabad and peripheral districts.

Though the Centre has allowed movement of migrant workers and the state appointed a state nodal officer, the Telangana government was yet to get any requisition from either the states or migrants. “ The states or respective groups have to make their own transport arrangements,” labour minister Ch Malla Reddy told TOI.

Interestingly, the state government has instructed district collectors to discourage the migrants from returning to their respective states. “The district administration should not provide and facilitate transport arrangements to the workers. If they make their own arrangements, the administration should only give transit passes to them. They should not disembark and stay en route in states or cities while travelling,” an official said.


