2 more Covid deaths inMeerut, toll reaches 17
2020-05-15
Meerut: There were two more Covid-19 deaths reported in Meerut on Thursday, taking the total death toll to 17. Also, at least 10 new cases surfaced in Meerut, taking the tally to 285 - which includes one admitted in Kanpur.

Significantly, a Delhi police constable from Ladpura (Garh) tested positive in Hapur. He had returned home in Hapur for a day and then left for duty later. His contacts have been quarantined and the area sanitised. Also, one person tested positive in Bijnor, taking the tally to 46, including three admitted in Kanpur.

With the cases on the rise, in a late night decision, Dr RC Gupta, principal of Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College, was removed. Dr SK Garg, head of the department, community medicine at LLRM, was given the responsibility of officiating principal at LLRM. This comes a day after Dr Garg was made the vice-principal of the medical college. The decision was taken by Alok Pandey, UP special secretary, medical education.

Meerut's chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Raj Kumar said, “Two persons died in Meerut on Thursday, taking the toll to 17. They included a 65-year-old man from Ishwarpuri (Brahmpuri). He was admitted to LLRM Medical College on May 11 with bilateral pneumonia, respiratory distress syndrome and septic shock. He passed away early on Thursday. Also, 21-year-old man from Ahmed Nagar area died at 9:30am on May 10 in Delhi’s Lok Nayak Hospital. However, the hospital did not inform us about the death, until we emailed them asking about the case on Thursday.”

He is the youngest person to have died in Meerut and had comorbidity of intracranial abscess. While the family of the 21-year-old man, who had disability in both his legs, claimed that the body was kept at a morgue in Delhi as the hospital did not "bother to tell them about the death", the family of the 65-year-old man alleged that despite being admitted on May 11, the samples of his family members are yet to be taken.

Detailing about the positive cases, Meerut district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, “At least 10 more cases tested positive in Meerut on Thursday. Their locations are being traced.”

District magistrate of Hapur Aditi Singh said, “Ladpura, Garh, is the latest Covid hotspot on the list after a Delhi police constable was found positive in national capital late on Wednesday. He had visited his family here on May 7.”

Bijnor's chief medical officer Dr Vijay Kumar said, “A fish-seller from Najibabad’s Rampura colony tested positive on Wednesday night. He has been admitted in Moradabad for further testing. His contacts are being quarantined and the area where he lived is being sanitised.”


