2 more Covid-19 suspects admitted to LLR hospital
2020-04-19
Kanpur: Two more persons suspected of coronavirus were admitted at the Covid-19 unit of Lala Lajpat Rai hospital on Saturday. With them, the total number of suspected cases rose to 272. Among them, 37 persons have been discharged, according to the health bulletin issued by the health department.

Though none was found positive among the quarantined persons but two more corona positive cases were admitted in the hospital. With them, a total 30 persons were found to be infected with the corona virus.

 Meanwhile, district magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari, using his powers under the Epidemic Diseases Act, declared Vidhya Bhawan College of Pharmacy building as a temporary jail and directed the police, chief medical officer, Kanpur municipal corporation, district jail superintendent and several other government departments to convert the college building into a temporary jail and arrange all things which were necessary for a temporary jail.

To enforce the lockdown strictly in the city, police caught several persons moving on roads and took action against them. Police checked 2719 vehicles, challaned 644, seized 22 vehicles and slapped and realised Rs 12,500 as fine for violation of the Motor Vehicles Act. Police also registered cases against 69 persons in 30 cases, said the police bulletin. SSP/DIG Aanant Deo inspected the hotspot and red zone areas under Colonelganj police station and issued necessary directions. He also witnessed aerial inspection by drones.

Kanpur Municipal Corporation sanitized areas between Bakarmandi crossing and Yateemkhana, Lakad Mandi and other places of the city.

Meanwhile, medical teams visited several houses in Baripal village under Sajeti police station and another village in Kakwan block and screened around 1000 villagers and told them how to maintain social distancing. 

The administration distributed 1000 kg oranges, 980 kg banana and 1060 kg cucumber among policemen on duty at the hospital and other places.

Meanwhile, Kanpur Municipal Corporation staff fed 1449 stray dogs and gave fodder to street cattle.


