Coronavirus: 2 more test positive, tally rises to 60 in Bihar
2020-04-11
PATNA: Two more persons from Siwan tested positive on Friday, taking the total number of coronavirus cases in the state to 60. Both the persons — a 10-year-old girl and a 28-year-old man — contracted the virus from the same Siwan man, who was tested positive on his return from Oman. Siwan district has the maximum 29 positive cases so far, including 22 from the same family.


When asked whether Bihar has entered the 3rd stage, also known as community transmission stage of Covid-19, especially after the surge in number of cases in Siwan and cases with no travel history in Begusarai, state health department additional secretary Kaushal Kishor said, “As of now, there is no signal of community transmission.” 

State nodal officer for Covid-19, Dr Ragini Mishra said all those tested positive in a village under Raghunathpur block in Siwan are relatives or neighbours of the Oman-returned person.

The man tested positive on March 31, along with three others of his district with travel history from the Middle-East. Before him, a Siwan native with travel history from Dubai had tested positive on March 27. On April 3, another 30-year-old Siwan native with travel history from Bahrain had tested positive for the virus.

However, on April 7, four of his close family members tested positive for Covid-19, which included his mother, wife and two first cousins. This chain kept on increasing and 16 other relatives tested positive on April 9. The same day, another 30-year-old from Siwan, who had returned from Dubai on March 18, tested positive.

Earlier, a 38-year-old Munger native with travel history from Qatar had infected 13 people. This person who is tentatively considered as ‘patient zero’ in Bihar, died on March 21 before his test report came positive the next day. Those who tested positive after coming in his contact, included his three relatives, eight employees of two private hospitals and two family members of one of the hospital employees.

