2 more test positive for Covid-19 in dist
2020-04-02
Thiruvananthapuram: Two more persons were tested positive for Covid-19 in the district on Wednesday.

 There are ten persons presently in isolation wards after being tested positive for Covid-19 in the district. The two persons who were tested positive on Wednesday are residents of Pothencode and Manacaud. One of the patients, aged 30, was under home isolation and another person, aged 61, was admitted to isolation ward in General Hospital. 

The 61-year-old person who is a resident of Kallatumukku at Manacaud is a staff at Dubai airport. The second person arrived from Sharjah. He was included in the primary contact list of the Malappuram native who was earlier tested positive and is currently under treatment at Medical College. He was asymptomatic. The 61-year-old person also did not show any symptoms. Both of them arrived on March 22. 

This is the second positive case from Pothencode, which is currently under complete lockdown for 21 days, where all residents of 18 wards along with people in border areas of other local bodies have been asked to maintain strict home quarantine. The health authorities have begun contact tracing of both the cases. Abdul Azeez, the Pothencode resident who died on Tuesday was admitted to Medical College Hospital on March 23. The latest positive case from Pothencode had travelled in the same flight in which the Malappuram native, who was tested positive, had travelled. 

A total of 17,981 persons are under home quarantine in the district at present. As many as 77 persons have been put under observation in hospital and 20 persons were admitted to hospital on Wednesday. The authorities said that the condition of two kids aged eight and 13, who were tested positive on Tuesday, is stable. 

Meanwhile, district collector K Gopalakrishnan visited the border and inspected movement of goods here on Wednesday. The collector held discussion with the officials of the checkpost at Kaliyikkavila. As per the discussion held with Kanyakumari district administration, an agreement was made to allow goods movement. People’s movement across borders is also being regulated. 


