2 more Covid-19 deaths in Malegaon, Nashik division now has 162 patients
2020-04-23
Nashik: Two Covid-19 patients who were undergoing treatment at the sub-civil hospital and Jeevan Hospital in Malegaon died on Wednesday taking the total number of coronavirus-related fatalities in the town to 10. Meanwhile, three fresh cases in Nandurbar and six in Dhule pushed the number of confirmed patients in Nashik division to 162.

According to the officials, two individuals, who had been taking treatment for coronavirus, succumbed on Wednesday, taking the total numbers of death to 10 in Nashik district – all of them from Malegaon town.

The deceased individuals are a 45-year-old man and a 49-year-old woman, who were admitted to the isolation wards on April 16, the official said. Another 35-year-old man, who had symptoms of Covid-19, also succumbed. His throat swab samples have been sent to the Government Medical College and Hospital laboratory in Dhule and results are awaited.

The Nashik division comprises Nashik, Dhule, Jalgaon, Nandubar and Ahmednagar districts. Nashik district alone accounts for 111 patients, followed by Ahmednagar (31), Dhule (8), Nandubar (7) and Jalgaon (5).

Ahmednagar has 20 individuals who have been cured of the disease, while Nashik has two. Jalgaon too has two patients who have recovered.

The first sample tests of the first 10 patients in Malegaon have reported negative. This means the patients are on the path to recovery. Another test of the patients will be done over the next few days. If the reports are negative then, the patients could be released from the hospital, the officials said.

In Dhule, five patients from the city and one person from Shindkheda tested positive for the virus on Wednesday, the officials said. All of them were quarantined on Monday.

In Nandubar, three cases were registered after the patients’ swab samples tested at GMCH, Dhule, returned positive. A 32-year-old woman from Akkalkuwa taluka and a 45-year-old woman and a 32-year-old man from Shahada taluka were found positive. The areas around their residences have been turned into containment zones.

Nandurbar collector Rajendra Bharud has requested people to stay at home. “There were only four patients in Nandurbar, all from the same family. We suddenly have three more cases. This means people are travelling,” Rajendra Bharud said in a televised address.

Jalgaon district has had five positive cases of which, one has been cured and two persons are recuperating. Two persons had died before their swabs test reports came back positive.


