2 more Covid +ve in Nagpur, Vidarbha cases now at 113
2020-04-17
Nagpur: Samples of two suspects admitted in one of the institutional quarantine facilities in Nagpur tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday taking the total number of coronavirus cases in Nagpur to 58, including one death. Total 11 patients have recovered and discharged till date.

Civil surgeon Dr Devendra Paturkar confirmed that two persons were tested positive. “Both the persons from the city were already under institutional quarantine,” he said. 

One of the two positives is a 25-year-old youth, a resident of Gittikhadan. He had gone to Ajmer Sharif and returned via Delhi. Another person is a 61-year-old man from Kanhan. He too has Delhi travel history. Both were traced and quarantined on April 2 as they were among the digital footprints of single source in Delhi.

Though both the new patients were already in the quarantine facility, but now authorities will trace their close high risk contacts. Active surveillance will start at both the locations — Gittikhadan and Kanhan — from Friday. 

Apart from the two cases in Nagpur, no other place in Vidarbha reported any confirmed Covid-19 case on Thursday. Total 70 samples were tested at the AIIMS laboratory. These include 41 from Yavatmal and 29 from Amravati. Total 68 of them tested negative. Two samples, one each from Yavatmal and Amravati, were rejected due to improper collection.

GMCH laboratory tested 32 samples from Gondia and Bhandara. All tested negative. The IGGMCH laboratory tested 68 samples on Thursday from Nagpur city and district. Most of them were of the people who have been kept in the institutional quarantine facility at Ravi Bhavan. Except two of them, all tested negative. MAFSU laboratory started testing 46 samples from Wardha, but results were pending. 

Migrants run away from Patur: About 30 youths from Telangana, who were staying in shelter facility in Patur town of Akola district, allegedly ran away from the facility on Thursday. District collector Jitendra Papalkar said these were not Covid-19 suspects, but migrant labourers. “They were staying in Maulana Azad Bhavan from March 30. Most of them are young boys desperate to go their hometowns. We are searching for them,” he said. Patur is a place from where seven men had tested positive for Covid-19 on April 9.

118 negative in Yavatmal: April 16 was a promising day for Yavatmal as 118 swab samples tested negative. Twenty-six persons have been discharged and home quarantined for 14 days. Though 118 persons have tested negative, 13 swab samples would be sent again for a second opinion. Today, only three persons were admitted to the isolation wards which takes the total number of isolated persons to 75. Also, 136 swabs have been sent to Nagpur on Thursday. There are 152 persons in home quarantine and 104 have been placed in institutional quarantine so far. The 10 positive patients in the isolation wards are stable and their health condition is satisfactory, informed district collector MD Singh.

From Amravati, 465 samples have been sent for testing till date. Out of these, 358 have tested negative and 39 were rejected because of improper collection. The administration has decided to recollect 32 of them and send again for testing. Total 63 reports are pending. 

In Chandrapur, 65 samples have been collected and 50 of them have been tested negative so far. Results for remaining 15 are pending. 


