2 more Indian crew on cruise ship test positive for Covid-19
2020-02-25
Madurai: Two more Indian crew on board quarantined cruise ship Diamond Princess at Yokohama in Japan tested positive for Covid-19 positive on Monday, taking the number of Indians infected by the virus in the ship, to 14.

After disembarking passengers, the mandatory test for all crew members on board was conducted on February 20 and results of the PCR test is being released in a phased manner. Four Indians tested positive two days ago and two more names were added on Monday.

Indian crew members on board complained that proper quarantine measures were not carried out inside the ship. A couple of those who were later quarantined after they tested positive were having food with the other crew members in the common mess area. 

There is fear of the numbers climbing as the official Twitter handle of the Indian Embassy in Japan has stated that the results of all crew members will be out by February 25 or 26. In a series of tweets and messages on Twitter and Facebook, the Indian embassy confirmed that all 14 Indians who tested positive for Covid-19 are responding well to treatment.

“Indian Embassy is awaiting test results and is coordinating with Japanese authorities and ship management company for safe return of all Indian nationals who do not test positive for Covid-19,” they stated on their Facebook page.

 It received strong replies from the crew on board Diamond Princess.

“Many of us have already completed quarantine and tested negative. Are you waiting for all of us to test positive?” asked a crew. “Why is the embassy not replying to our mails. You are saying that you are in touch with us but when we mail you with our concerns, we are not getting any response from anybody,” said another.

Responding to the messages, the embassy thanked the crew for their patience and reassured that they are working on their early and safe return.

Stating that there has been no official announcement on crew members affected by Covid-19, the crew said that 64 have tested positive till Monday.

 Princess Cruises, the parent company of the ship that provided daily updates on the status of the quarantine on their official website has not given any update after February 20, raising concern among crew members.

“On Monday the (ship) captain announced that Philippines will evacuate its crew members on Tuesday and asked Philippines crew to be ready with their baggage. We await a similar message for the Indian crew members. It’s a week since we filled up the forms sent by the Indian Embassy in Japan asking interest to prematurely leave the ship if the government arranged a chartered flight,” Anbalagan, 41, a chef from Madurai said.


