Two months into lockdown, BMC’s added little capacity for moderately-to-seriously ill coronavirus patients
2020-05-16
MUMBAI: Two months after Mumbai went into lockdown, the BMC’s infrastructure for serious Covid-19 patients appears tragically inadequate. 


With more and more patients and families complaining about difficulties in finding a hospital bed in the city, civic officials admit most BMC centres and hospitals for moderate to serious patients are “95% occupied”—and even the remaining 5% are primarily on account of the lag between discharge and admission: Only 21 of 438 ICU beds at BMC’s disposal were free when TOI checked, and those, too, were in various stages of being allotted.



It’s the same with even non-ICU beds for Covid patients: About 95% of the 4,678 beds reserved for moderately-to-seriously ill patients are occupied, said civic officials.

Queries about capacity enhancement of ICU bed (with oxygen support) and ventilators in the last couple of months have failed to yield a clear picture. But from the look of things, there has been little or none despite grandiose announcements. As a result, BMC and the state government are still “racing” to expand infrastructure for seriously ill patients.



On paper, the BMC looks prepared. “We have almost 60,000 beds distributed across Covid Care Centres-1. Many centres with oxygen-supported beds and ICUs are in various stages of completion,” additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said on Friday. But the reality of the Covid Care Centres (CCCs) is that they are quarantine centres that have come up from scratch and till now have only basic medical facilities.

A close look at BMC’s Covid infrastructure shows the crisis is in hospital beds—of which ICU beds are a small subset—and not for CCCs.

In early March, the BMC’s recently-transferred commissioner Pravin Pardeshi had told TOI that the city had 300 ventilators, while Kakani had said 1,000-odd ICUs in the city’s public and private hospitals would be utilised for Covid treatment.

An internal BMC report dated May 14 shows the civic body hasn’t ramped up the capacity of these two vital aspects by much. An estimated 4% to 5% of Covid patients turn critical and need ICU and oxygen or ventilator support.

The BMC has 248 ventilators for Covid patients at its disposal, of which 132 are said to be available. Due to the treatment focus on oxygen support, many patients need to be upgraded to ventilator support (see box).

Considering the Centre’s observation that only 1.5% of the 1.3 lakh critical care beds (either ICU or oxygen-supported) are in use across the country, Mumbai’s stretched statistics underline its status as India’s Covid hotbed, where bed capacity has to be upgraded on a daily basis.

“We are adding new Covid wards in KEM Hospital and Sion Hospital every other day,” said a senior civic doctor. These two hospitals, the biggest in the BMC healthcare pyramid, were initially meant to be non-Covid zones, but the grim ground reality has forced a policy change.

The BMC’s update on May 13 said of the 7,016 patients admitted in hospitals and quarantine facilities, 6,340 tested positive. The remaining beds are in various stages of being allotted.

Manisha Mhaiskar, principal secretary on deputation to BMC, said 20-25% of the bed capacity gets churned every night as patients are discharged or transferred to step-down facilities after becoming asymptomatic.


