2 Mysuru-bound trucks carrying masks, sanitisers caught in lockdown
2020-03-26
Mysuru: Two trucks, which took off from Bengaluru and Coimbatore on Tuesday morning carrying the increasingly elusive masks and hand sanitisers, failed to reach Mysuru within the scheduled time. The consignment is expected to considerably ease the shortage of these two items which were declared as essential commodities following the outbreak of Covid-19. The two vehicles are believed to be stuck as the state and district borders are sealed as part of the measures to check the spread of coronavirus.

After the delay, the district administration tried contacting the local authorities for the earliest entry of these vehicles into Mysuru. Department of legal metrology department assistant controller K M Mahadevaswamy said the deputy commissioner is trying to trace the drivers. “If the trucks reach Mysuru, then there will no shortage of these items and people will have no problem in buying them,” he said.

Eye on overpricing

In the wake of the outbreak, the Centre included masks and sanitisers under the Essential Commodities Act which makes certain commodities available at fair prices. However, there have been complaints that they are sold at higher exorbitant prices at some stores. People also resorted to panic buying as pharmacies are running out of stock.

On Monday, the legal metrology department raided a medical store in NR Mohalla and fined Rs 5,000 for selling masks and sanitisers at higher prices. The shop was selling masks for Rs 25 instead of Rs 10 and sanitisers for Rs 250 against the MRP of Rs 50.

An officer in the legal metrology department said there have been several complaints regarding overcharging. “The drug control department and food and civil supplies department authorities have the right to file criminal case against such medical stores for violating government directions. If one or two such violators are sent to jail, then there will be no such violations. Till then, such violations will continue as they take advantage of the fear in the minds of the people,” the officer said.

Mahadevaswamy said the raids will continue.


