Two new cases, three more from Satranjipura test positive for Covid-19
2020-04-23
NAGPUR: Five more persons tested positive for Covid-19 in the city on Wednesday, taking the district’s total to 98. In some worry, two of the positive patients are new cases, and not from existing chains. Also, one positive patient is a tuberculosis (TB) patient and one from Timki, the first positive case in this locality.


The officials of Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) told TOI, “The 33-year-old woman, who is a TB patient, is a resident of Takia Deewanshah, Mominpura. She was having health problems and was being treated at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH). She started to get fever and her samples tested positive on Wednesday,” they said.

NMC officials have started investigations as the woman resides in the same area as the 16 who had tested positive, including cap seller, son of his landlord, seven Jabalpur-based Tablighi Jamaats (TJs), two persons in service of the TJs, and five family members of one of the two persons. NMC will trace, examine and quarantine family members of the woman, and find if any of them has had contact with earlier 16.

With the latest case, the number of cases from Mominpura has increased to 18, with one TJ, who was camping at city’s Markaz Lal Building, testing positive on Tuesday.

The worry is that TB is considered as high-risk in Covid-19. The 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura, the city’s first and only death, was also a TB patient. The 56 persons who came in contact with the deceased and his family members had tested positive till Wednesday.

The second new case is from Timki, which is situated between containment zones of Mominpura and Dalalpura. This 38-year-old man was also admitted at IGGMCH earlier and tested positive on Wednesday.

NMC will declare Timki as new containment zone and trace, examine, and quarantine all his family members and close contacts.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI, “Two new cases does not mean community spread. We are investigating and the two case might have links to either Mominpura or Satranjipura.”

The remaining three positive tests — aged 20, 80 (males) and 55 (female) — are connected to the Satranjipura case. Here too, there is a worry as one of the three is 80-year-old, the oldest among all positive cases in the district as yet.

With latest three, the number of positive cases from Satranjipura has increased to 57. Many reports in the case are awaited.

Due to large number of cases from single patient, NMC has continued containment zone at Satranjipura despite completion of 17 days. Four more containment zones — Dalalpura, Bairagipura, Shanti Nagar and Rajiv Gandhi Nagar — are continuing due to Satranjipura.

NMC on Wednesday notified Bhaldarpura as new containment zone with boundaries at Chitnis Park, Agrasen Chowk, Tarekar Bhavan Post Office, and Tata Parsi School. Dawa Bazaar has been excluded as it supplies wholesale medicines to entire city and Nagpur division.

There are now eight containment zones in the city. Timki will become the ninth, when notified on Thursday.

One containment zone is at Gittikhadan, where a youth had tested positive.

Scared Covid-19 positive woman tries to flee

One of those from Satranjipura link found positive attempted to flee from IGGMCH around 9pm on Wednesday. The woman in her 30s was brought from Symbiosis Campus quarantine centre. “Doctors and cops had to hold her as she was crying and nervous,” said a doctor.

She was alone when brought and perhaps got frightened. Actually, she had to be admitted at GMCH but was by mistake brought to IGGMCH," said a doctor. The patients was surrounded by cops and doctors inside the IGGMCH campus. As doctors were discussing to send her to Mayo, she attempted to flee.


