2 new coronavirus positive cases reported in Varanasi, tally now 87
2020-05-14
VARANASI: With the confirmation of two more coronavirus cases in the district on Wednesday, the total tally of infected persons reached 87. 

The number of active cases reduced to 31 with the discharge of Shivpur quarantine home’s ward-boy after getting cured at DDU district hospital’s isolation ward. A total of 55 Covid-19 patients have recovered in the district so far while one had died on April 3.

DM Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “The BHU lab released 65 reports on Wednesday in which two were tested positive while other 63 were negative.”

Among two new Covid-19 positive cases one is 58-year-old fourth grade employee of additional director health Varanasi division office, who lives in Jaitpura area. After suffering respiratory problem he had gone to SSL hospital BHU’s Covid-19 OPD voluntarily when his sample had been taken.

Other one is a 73-year-old native of Nariya Sunderpur. When the team sent by CMO Dr VB Singh investigated his case for contact tracing it came to light that his son had returned from Delhi 10 days ago, although he had no complication. But, on suffering problem of cold and coughing he had gone to SSL hospital BHU’s OPD where his sample had been collected.

The CMO said that after getting first report of the Shivpur quarantine home’s infected ward-boy, his second sample was sent to lab which also came out to be negative after which he was discharged from DDU district hospital. CMO said that till Wednesday 55 infected persons had been discharged after getting cured and the total active cases in the district has become 31 only.

With the confirmation of a new positive case from Nariya Sunderpur, this area was declared as new hotspot. Jaipura had already been declared as hotspot after detection of a weaver as positive in past. The total number of hotspots has reached 30. Initially, declared hotspots Bajardiha, Gangapur and Lohta have now become green zones and active hotspots are 27.

CMO said that 94 more samples had been sent to BHU lab for test on Wednesday and reports of 181 samples are awaited


