2 New Mkt blocks may remain shut after trader tests Covid +ve
2020-06-11
Kolkata: News of a New Market trader testing positive triggered a day-long drama with KMC’s markets department first sealing off two blocks and then announcing that it would shut down the entire market for three weeks. Finally, they reversed the decision to shut the entire market after the civic health department said such a stringent containment measure was unnecessary. 

“We will decide on Thursday on exactly how much of the market needs to be contained. The rules of containment have changed, and hence, shutting down the entire market does not make sense. We have been advised by the KMC health department and will act accordingly,” a KMC markets department official told TOI late on Wednesday evening. 

Earlier in the day, the SS Hogg Market Traders’ Association had learned about the trader’s Covid positive report and informed the market authorities. Following this, two blocks — E Block where cake and confectionery range is located and E(N) block that houses shops like Maggi (formerly Magnolia) and Shobha — were sealed. The Covid-infected trader runs a dairy shop in E block.

After the twin blocks were disinfected by KMC staff, the markets department decided to shut down the entire market for 21 days and asked traders in the old complex to take out any goods they wanted to before the entire market was to be sealed. The common toilet and drinking water facility was the reason cited by the authorities as the infected trader had come to the market till Sunday and would have used both. 

The decision led to disgruntlement among a section of traders who questioned why the entire market that had opened only 10 days ago was being shut when only affected buildings in neighbourhoods were being sealed. “Some business was just about beginning to happen. A few customers had started coming in. This is so very unfortunate,” said SS Hogg Market Traders’ Association president Ashok Gupta. 

Association joint secretary Ashraf Ali also argued that shutting down the market wasn’t a solution. “What if there’s another Covid case after 21 days? Will the authorities shut the shops again? What happens to the traders then?” he questioned.

Faced with such questions, the markets department decided to consult with the civic health department. The latter made it clear that only shutting down the affected block was sufficient to dispel any fears of the contagion from minds of shoppers and traders. Accordingly, the markets department reversed its decision.

Earlier in the day, speaking to TOI, the infected trader said he might have got infected from an asymptomatic person either in the market or on the way to and from it. “I think I got infected on the second day itself. I had a slight temperature and throat infection from Thursday. Then when I had breathing problems, I suspected it could be Covid. So I went to a private hospital and got myself tested. The results came on Tuesday. I have quarantined myself,” he said, adding that his family members had also gone for Covid test after he tested positive. 


