2 patients succumb to Covid-19, cop & wife test positive in Malegaon
2020-04-25
(done)

Nashik: Two Covid-19 patients died in Malegaon while 10 fresh coronavirus cases, including a policeman posted in the powerloom town and his wife, were reported from various parts of Nashik district on Friday. 

The total number of coronavirus patients in Nashik district has now reached 134 and the death toll has risen to 11.

“Two people who had tested positive for Covid-19 died during treatment in Malegaon. Besides, 10 fresh positive cases were reported from the district, of whom one is a migrant labourer based in Nashik city and another in Yeola. The rest are from Malegaon,” district collector Suraj Mandhare said.

The police personnel who tested positive for Covid-19 along with his wife was on bandobast duty in Malegaon. 

“It is a matter of concern that a cop on duty has contracted the virus. He and his wife were unwell for the past couple of days and now the swab tests have come positive,” said superintendent of police Arti Singh.

“We are trying to segregate the people who have been in contact with the policeman and his wife and are monitoring the health of the police personnel,” she added. 

The policeman and his wife have been admitted to the Nashik Civil Hospital. 

The other person admitted to the civil hospital is a woman from Yeola. She had been to the home of her daughter-in-law in Malegaon to see her newborn grandchild. She returned to Nashik city a few days back anmd was feeling unwell before being quarantined. 

The labourer who tested positive in Nashik city is a migrant labourer and a resident of Bhandara. The 21 year-old youth, currently resident of Mankhurd, along with 10 others was walking home when the Nashik police picked them up on Wednesday. All of them were quarantined. While the swab of the youth tested positive, the results of others are awaited. 

5 new cases in Jalgaon 

Meanwhile, Jalgaon district recorded five new cases on Friday, all from the family of a woman from Amalner who had died and later tested positive two days back. Four of them are men, aged 27 to 28, and a woman, aged 36 years. The district has 11 positive cases and three deaths while one person has been cured. 

2 test positive in Ahmednagar 

Ahmednagar district has recorded two more Covid-19 patients on Friday, taking the total count to 40. Both the patients are among high- risk contacts of two sons of a positive person who had succumbed before swab test results reached. The district has registered two deaths while 24 patients have recovered. 

MHADA to the rescue

Houses constructed by MHADA in the Malde area, near Malegaon, will be used for quarantine and other facilities for patients in Malegaon. District collector Mandhare reviewed the same. 

The collector appealed to the people to come out and get tested if they have slightest symptoms of coronavirus to ensure early treatment and recovery.


