Coronavirus scare in Jaipur: 2 patients develop lung ailments, doctors say condition okay
2020-03-27
JAIPUR: Radiological test reports of two of the patients admitted to Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital for Covid-19 treatment have shown bilateral lung infiltrates. These patients are facing difficulties in maintaining normal oxygen saturation level. While other 38 patients do not have such complaints so far, the 69-year-old Covid-19 positive Italian tourist, who died of cardiac arrest last week, had pre-existing lung ailments. 


According to doctors, virus has infiltrated into the lungs of the two patients and caused hazy lung opacity. 

One of the two patients is a doctor who was rushed from Bhilwara where he was finding it difficult to maintain oxygen saturation. When his condition deteriorated, he was admitted to SMS Hospital two days ago. However, doctors claimed that his condition is improving. “In radiological investigation, it is found that he has patches on his lungs due to lung infiltrate,” a senior SMS Hospital doctor said. He is also living with diabetes and taking insulin.

Another patient, who was also brought from Bhilwara and was working as a nurse in the same hospital where 17 persons contracted Covid-19 infection, has also reported bilateral lung infiltrates. He is also finding it difficult to maintain normal oxygen saturation levels. However, he does not have any co-morbidity such as diabetes or hypertension, which may help him in recovery, the doctors said, who are keeping a close eye on the patients. 

However, doctors claimed that the condition of the two patients is improving.

However, SMS Hospital additional superintendent Dr Ajit Singh said, “No patient is on ventilator support.”

Apart from antiretroviral therapy, the doctors are providing them antibiotics for helping them overcome from pneumonia. They are also providing them combination of two drugs— lopinavir-ritonavir, which are useful in treatment of HIV, and hydroxychloroquine, a common anti-malaria drug.

However, there are other patients who are either asymptomatic or they have mild symptoms such as fever and cough.

A core group of doctors for treatment of patients headed by SMS Medical College principal and controller Dr Sudhir Bhandari is regularly monitoring the health of the patients and taking appropriate decisions on line of treatment of Covid-19 patients. However, health experts claimed that bilateral lung infiltrates situation comes at least 7 to 10 days after the infection. 

“Initial symptoms of Covid-19 is fever and then cough and after six-seven days, some patients develop lung infiltrate,” said Dr Virendra Singh, pulmonology expert and former superintendent, SMS Hospital.

