2 persons who travelled from Thailand & Dubai have been quarantined
2020-03-17
Times News Network

Jaipur: Two suspected Covid-19 patients, who have a history of travelling, were admitted to Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital here on Monday. 

According to hospital officials, they have been quarantined at the isolation hospital attached to the institute. 

According to doctors, they were found suffering from influenza-like symptoms. The health department team deployed at the airport, who were conducting screening of passengers travelling by international flights, identified them as suspected Covid-19 cases.

“A person, who is resident of Ranoli in Sikar district, has been admitted to the hospital. He returned from Dubai and landed here on Monday,” said Dr Ajay Chaudhary, chief medical health officer, Sikar. 

Another person, a resident of Dausa who travelled by an international flight and landed here, has also been found suffering from ILI symptoms. “He returned from Thailand. He did not reach Dausa. He was directly taken to SMS Hospital from Jaipur airport,” said a health department official of Dausa district. 

The last confirmed case of Covid-19 of the state was reported on March 13. Since, then no case has been reported. 

The two Covid-19 patients, who have now been recovered from the disease, have been shifted from the isolation hospital to medical emergency ICU on Monday evening. “The SMS Hospital has created a 10-bed ICU for the patients who have recovered from Covid-19 but they still need treatment for other ailments. The 69-year-old Italian tourist, who is now cured, requires further treatment for his lung disease. Also, the 85-year-old resident of Jaipur has also recovered from the disease but requires treatment for his chronic kidney disease, diabetes and hypertension. For the purpose, they have been shifted to emergency ICU,” said Dr DS Meena, medical superintendent, SMS hospital. 

The hospital has also formed a board of senior doctors, specialist in medicine, for reviewing the condition of Covid-19 patients on a daily basis. Moreover, three cottage wards, have been reserved for attendants of the foreign patients undergoing treatment at the hospital. 


