2 quarantined in Pune, NIV to confirm coronavirus infection
2020-01-28
PUNE: Two travellers, who recently returned from Shanghai and another city in China, were quarantined at the Pune Municipal Corporation’s (PMC) Naidu Infectious Diseases Hospital on Monday after they complained of minor influenza-like symptoms including cold and fever. Both are residents of Pune.

Civic health officials on Monday sent the throat swab sample of one of the travellers to the city-based National Institute of Virology (NIV) for testing. The NIV has been designated as a referral laboratory for the testing and confirmation of the novel coronavirus infection in India.

Three more travellers from Pimpri Chinchwad have been quarantined at home as they have been unsymptomatic so far. The samples of three travellers who were isolated at Kasturba hospital in Mumbai turned negative last week.

Ramchandra Hankare, public health expert and PMC health department chief, said, “One of the travellers quarantined at Naidu hospital, a 51-year-old man, had recently returned from Shanghai. The other man, aged 30, had been to a city close to Wuhan in China. Both have developed minor illness in the form of cold and fever. They have been isolated only as a precautionary measure.”

Hankare said that the throat swab sample of the 51-year-old man has been sent to NIV and the report is expected on Tuesday. The sample of the other man will be sent to NIV on Tuesday.

Meanwhile, as many as 3,756 passengers returning from China and other coronavirus-affected countries have so far been screened at Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA) since January 18. Of them, 15 travellers from Pune, Mumbai, Kalyan, Vasai and Virar have been kept under surveillance for the next 28 days. Six of them have been quarantined — four in Mumbai and two in Pune.

"Barring these six travellers, none of the others have developed any illness. We are keeping a track of their health by making telephone calls. We have also asked them to report to us if they develop any symptoms,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate said.

Awate said that any airborne virus usually has an incubation period of 7 to 14 days. “But since this is the new variant of coronavirus, we don’t have conclusive information about its incubation period. Therefore, we have doubled the passenger tracking period,” he said.

The state government on Monday decided to track and follow up on travellers who returned from China between January 1 and 17. The decision was taken during a meeting chaired by the state’s principal secretary Pradip Vyas on Monday. Presently, only travellers who returned from China after January 18 are being screened by state health officials. 

“We have also decided to carry out repeat tests of those who tested negative in earlier tests, including three Mumbai travellers. We will activate helpline 104 to handle people’s queries on coronavirus infection,” Awate said.


Lohegaon airport officials on alert

Airports Authority of India said it was coordinating with the Pune customs officials to monitor potential coronavirus cases. “There are no medical checks in Pune, but immigration officials are monitoring arriving passengers and suspicious cases will be referred to the health department,” G Chandramouli, AAI western regional director, said. 

Pune doesn’t have a flight to/from China or anywhere in southeast Asia. But many foreign travelers arrive here via transit.


