2 succumb to Covid-19, positive tally up to 247
2020-04-11
Pune: Two critically-ill patients succumbed to Covid-19 associated complications at state-run Sassoon hospital in the city on Friday, taking the casualty count in Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR) to 26. 

Among the two, one was the resident of Bhavani Peth that has emerged as the hotspot of Covid-19 cases. Another was the resident of Shrirampur in Ahmednagar district. A patient of Down’s syndrome, he was referred to the Sassoon hospital for diagnosis and treatment after he was suspected to have contracted the contagion. 

The Shrirampur man’s death would be included in the Ahmednagar’s Covid-19 death tally and not in Pune, a district health official said.

Besides, 38 more people tested positive for Covid-19 in PMR on Friday, taking the total case count to 247 so far. A total of 34 of them are residents of the municipal limits of Pune, mainly from Tadiwala Road, Parvati Darshan, Bhawani Peth, Fursungi and Kondhwa. Most of them are family members or close contacts of people who tested positive for the contagion earlier. Three of them are residents of Pimpri Chinchwad.

“None of the two patients had any history of recent foreign travel. The Kasba Peth woman had underlying medical conditions, including diabetes and hypertension. The second patient who died is not a Pune resident. Hence, his death will be counted in the Ahmednagar’s Covid-19 tally,” said district health officer Bhagwan Pawar.

The Bhavani Peth woman (55) was admitted to Sassoon hospital on April 1 after she experienced severe difficulty in breathing. “She was in respiratory distress. Her pre-existing medication condition including hypertension and diabetes precipitated her death. She died on April 10,” said a doctor from the Sassoon hospital.

The Shrirampur resident (33) was referred to the Sassoon hospital for diagnosis and treatment of Covid-19 on April 5 after he was suspected to have contracted the contagion. He succumbed to Covid-19 associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) on Friday. “He was a known patient's of Down’s syndrome,” a doctor said.

More areas sealed

 in PCMC limits

Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) sealed three more areas on Friday as three more individuals tested positive for Covid-19 here in Friday, Santosh Patil, additional commissioner, PCMC, said.

On April 8, the civic body had sealed four areas, namely parts of Gharkul in Chikhli, Kharalwadi in Pimpri, Padwalnagar in Thergaon and Kamalraj Balaji residency in Dighi. The civic body will be sealing one area each in Bhosari, Thergaon and Dighi from 11pm on Friday. “Positive patients were found in these three areas so we are sealing them,” Patil said.

A total of 12 patients have been discharged after treatment at the civic hospitals till Friday, civic health officials said, adding that 14 were undergoing treatment at isolation ward of civic-run Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial (YCM) hospital in Pimpri.

Swabs of 701 persons were sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV) till Wednesday for analysis. Out of these, negative reports of 623 persons were received. A total of 74 people were admitted to YCM hospital on Thursday and their swabs have been sent to NIV for analysis.

A total of 1,922 persons have been home-quarantined till Friday. Field surveillance teams have conducted survey of 8.07 lakh people and 2.92 lakh houses till now. This includes 11,356 houses and 31,986 surveyed on Friday.


