2 Tablighi meet participants among 3 Covid-19 positive in Karur, Tiruvarur
2020-04-02
Trichy: Three more people including two attendees of the Nizamuddin Tablighi conference tested positive for Covid-19 in Tiruvarur and Karur districts in the central region of the state on Wednesday. So far 97 participants of the congregation have been identified in Trichy.

The latest bulletin from the ministry of health and family welfare confirmed that a 58-year-old man from Thogaimalai in Karur tested positive for Covid-19. Source said that he was also a participant of Tablighi conference. He was admitted to the government hospital in Kulithalai, Karur a few days ago. Later, he was shifted to Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH), Trichy and is undergoing treatment at the isolation ward.

A 42-year-old man of Kulithalai, who had returned from the conference, tested positive for Covid-19 earlier in Karur district. He was being treated at the government medical college hospital in Karur and 29 more participants of the conference were isolated in wards pending test results.

Wednesday’s results also revealed Covid-19 infection in two people who have been isolated at the Government Medical College Hospital in Tiruvarur. One among them is a 66-year-old Tiruvarur-based man said to have attended the Tablighi meet.

Another one was a 42-year-old Burmese national. He is also being treated at the government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur. The public health department and the district administration were tight-lipped about the travel history of the patient.

In Trichy, a total of 107 Muslim men have been admitted to MGMGH Trichy late on Tuesday and early on Wednesday. Except 10 people who claimed to have toured Delhi, the rest were participants of the Tablighi Jamaat conference. While some of them came forward for testing, several others have been identified by the public health and preventive medicine department.

Trichy district administration said that they were the residents of Thuvarankurichi, Puthanatham, Inamkulathur, Lalgudi, Thuraiyur, Karattampatti, and South Eachampatti.

MGMGH administration took samples of 43 of them for testing. Trichy district administration has appealed to people to report to 1077 helpline in case of information about any of the Tablighi meet participants in their areas.

In Pudukottai, ten participants of the conference admitted to the government hospital in Aranthangi tested negative. But they were still quarantined, said a public health department officer. On Wednesday, three more attendees of the conference came forward for treatment. An official said that they had no symptoms.

An official in Ariyalur district said that five people who attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation have been identified. They were the natives of Ariyalur and Sendhurai area. They have been isolated at the government hospital in Ariyalur. Perambalur district so far had only one participant who has been kept at the isolation ward in government hospital in Perambalur. The result of his blood sample was yet to be out.

(With inputs from K Sambath Kumar and D Vincent Arockiaraj)


