Two taken into preventive custody for spreading Covid-19 rumours
2020-03-17
AURANGABAD: The Beed police on Sunday took two youths into preventive custody on the charges of spreading rumours that a person had tested positive for coronavirus.


Police said that the possibility of the suspects playing a prank on the complainant cannot be ruled out. But considering the seriousness of the issue, they decided to act on the complaint and went ahead with registering an offence against the suspects.

The duo allegedly morphed the complainant’s pictures claiming he has been infected by the disease. 

Then the duo falsely credited the picture to news channels and shared it on social media platforms like WhatsApp. 

Based on the complaint lodged by the youth, the police have registered an offence against the duo under section 505 (2) (Statements conducing to public mischief) of the Indian Penal Code. 

Beed superintendent of police Harssh Poddar said, “It is crucial in the present scenario to prevent panic and misinformation among the public. Stringent action is being taken in Beed against those who are trying to spread rumours regarding the virus. The administration and police are reaching out to people to provide authentic information about controlling the virus.”

As per the complaint lodged, the complainant received a call from one of the suspect, who is his friend, on Saturday afternoon asking him to check the social media status. He was shocked to see his picture on the morphed graphics claiming him to be Beed’s first positive coronavirus case.

The social media post soon went viral, following which the complainant got calls and messages inquiring about his health and asking him to take care.

The complainant said that despite him trying to convince people that the post was a prank, it failed to convince several of them. This led to mental harassment and stress.

Authorities said that to avoid any law and order situation resulting from the spread of rumours, police and district administration has decided to initiate stringent legal action against those spreading rumours. 


