Two test positive in Spain, take total coronavirus cases to 9 in Rajasthan
2020-03-20
JAIPUR: A couple, who tested positive for Covid-19 in Spain, returned to Jaipur and tested positive again at SMS Hospital late on Thursday.


The two, aged around 30, had reached Delhi via Dubai on March 17. They then hired a taxi from Delhi and reached Jaipur early at 3am on March 18. 

“After an hour’s stay at a hotel in Jagatpura they were moved to Sawai Man Singh Hospital at 4am and kept in isolation. The hotel rooms where they stayed have been sealed and contacts identified,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health. “Two drivers and four hotel staff too are in home isolation. They have not showed any symptoms as of now,” he said.

The two, residents of Jagatpura, had tested positive in Spain. According to health department officials, although they tested positive in Spain, they decided to return to India. When health authorities came to know about their arrival at Delhi airport, they investigated and found that they were staying at a hotel in Jagatpura. The health teams took their samples and took them to SMS Hospital. The two were also brought to the hospital, where they were tested positive. Sources said that they were accompanied by their child.

 So far, none persons have tested positive for the disease in the state and three of them have been cured. Meanwhile, one doctor from a private hospital in Bhilwara has been tested positive in first screening test for Covid-19. However, the health authorities have not declared him as a Covid-19 case as his second test report is awaited. His samples have been sent to Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital for the test. 

A senior SMS medical college official said, “His samples were sent to Udaipur’s medical college for Covid-19 test, where he tested positive for the disease. His samples have been sent to us, the result is awaited.” He is a doctor at a private hospital, and was found suffering from bilateral pneumonia. “He does not have any travel history to foreign countries. His reports for Covid-19 are awaited,” said Arun God, principal medical officer, Bhilwara. 

Moreover, 31 suspected cases were brought from Jaipur airport to Sawai Man Singh Hospital, who landed at the airport, after travelling by international flights. When they were brought to SMS Hospital, they protested and demanded to go home. They did not want to stay at isolation hospital of SMS Hospital. “Some persons who are high risk and are to be kept in SMS Hospital isolation created a scene in the hospital. It is being clarified that they cannot be permitted to go home,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). Finally, health authorities shifted them to isolation facility at RUHS Hospital. They travelled by flights from Oman, Muscat and Dubai. 

