Two varsity officials compelled to undergo quarantine in Nashik
2020-03-21
NASHIK: The Ahmednagar district administration had to compel two senior officials of a university-based in the district to undergo quarantine after having landed in India, recently. 


“Both the officials were admitted in quarantine ward. Their swab tests are negative and now have been home quarantined,” said collector of Ahmednagar, Rahul Dwivedi.

The officials had been to the United States for a conference and had landed in India, recently. After they were screened negative at airports they were told to quarantine themselves at home but they didn’t follow the orders. 

The duo came to Ahmednagar district but their names never featured in the list being circulated by the airport authority. “I got a call from a Tahsildar, who said that the two officers were reluctant to be institutionally quarantined after their land in India. We requested them to follow the protocol and they agreed,” said Dwivedi. 

It was a call by a social activist to the government authorities that set the ball rolling. “We did not receive any message about the names of these officers. It was a call by a social activist that we got the information and hence we approached them. After the intervention of the district collector the things were normal,” another officer privy with the developments said. 

The two officers were admitted to Civil Hospital in the quarantine cell on March 17. After swabs tested negative, they were discharged on March 19 on the conditions that they will now be home quarantined till they complete the 15-day period. 

“The authorities did not bear any mark on their hands about quarantine before. Now they have been inked,” another senior officer from the district administration said. 

The officers have been told about the norms and if they failed to maintain the same, they would be violating the same. The administration has asked the staff of these officers to maintain vigil and even update the movement at regular intervals. 

“We are taking the video calls and selfies on social media from the staff attending them to ensure there is no violation,” the officer added. 


