Two coronavirus positive women deliver while in isolation
2020-05-12
CHENNAI: “It was a depressing 12 days,” says a Chintadripet resident about testing positive for Covid-19, delivering a girl and the time she spent in an isolation ward. “This was not the way I had planned to deliver my first baby. I wish no woman goes through this.”


Another woman, of Perambur, who delivered in an isolation ward, says she was devastated the day she found she contracted the virus, “I was nine months pregnant and already under stress. This made it worse. I was scared something would happen to my baby. I used to get nightmares. It was traumatic.” She delivered a boy.

The two young women, nearing delivery, were referred to the Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology in Egmore after they tested positive for the infection. They went into labour a day after admission and after spending 12 days in the isolation ward, they were declared virus-free and discharged on Monday.

“We took their swabs two days ago and the test results came negative. The babies too are healthy and they are good to go home,” said director Dr S Vijaya.

During their days in quarantine, the mothers were allowed to see their babies and nobody else. They both had one attender each to tend to their needs.

The Chintadripet resident, who had a terrible time dealing with post-pregnancy trauma all alone, says she was also pining for her mother. “I tested positive for the most dreaded disease in the world and I gave birth to a baby. It took me a while to get over my confusion and fear.”

In the beginning, she recalls, she would cry a lot and she later overcame her fears. “I started to sing to my baby, and talk to her. I’d tell her about the beautiful family she’s blessed with and the love she will be showered with once we leave. Self-assurance was the only way to keep going.”

The other woman too had similar concerns. “My son is the first grandson in the family. And my mother especially found it heartbreaking to not being able to touch or hold him.” 

What worried her the most, she says, was the way people would treat her and her son when they went home. “Being born in this time can make people uneasy, they might even take some time to treat us normally. While I can face any challenge, I don’t want any unpleasantness directed to my son. But I hope things don’t get hard,” she adds.

