2 women test positive, city’s Covid-19 count touches 40
2020-04-24
Aurangabad: Two women, both aged 45, contacts of previously confirmed Covid-19 cases have tested positive for novel coronavirus in the city late on Wednesday night. The count of Covid cases in Aurangabad now stands at 40.

Municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey said that cluster containment efforts have been intensified with new task force in place. 

On Tuesday, a 76-year-old woman passed away while undergoing treatment at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). Her throat swab samples were sent for testing. The deceased woman, a resident of Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura, later tested positive for Covid-19. Subsequently, all close contacts of the woman were tested for the infection. 

On Thursday, one of her relatives, a 45-year-old woman, also a resident of the same locality, tested positive for the infection, district civil hospital’s Pradeep Kulkarni said. 

Incidentally, an appalling number of people had participated in the last rites of the elderly woman. More than 100 people had took part in the event despite restrictions imposed by the district administration on large gatherings in view of lockdown.

Around 80 of her close contacts were screened at the district civil hospital and throat swabs of certain suspects were also collected, after which one of the relatives was found to be carrying the virus. 

Meanwhile, a 38-year-old man from Samata Nagar near Kranti Chowk had tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday. One of his close contacts, a 45-year-old woman from Pundalik Nagar, too, tested positive for Covid-19. 

Meghna Jogdand, medical officer of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) said that the Pundalik Nagar and Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura areas have been sealed as part of containment plan. “A total of 10 localities in the city are sealed and 113 health teams are conducting door-to-door screening. Patients having symptoms, travel history or contact history are being referred to the Covid Care Centres for further examination,” she said. 

Of the total confirmed Covid-19 cases, there have been 16 recoveries and five deaths. A total of 19 patients are undergoing treatment as on Thursday. 

New team formed to contain Covid-19 spread

Municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey has formed a new team for Covid-19 comprising officials of the AMC, police department and health department to contain the spread of the infection in the high risk areas. The 12-member team will work on massive contact tracing and institutional quarantine.


