Coronavirus in Kerala: Two years after deluge, Ranni faces another challenge
2020-03-12
RANNI: Ranni town and Pazhavangadi market wore a deserted look on Wednesday afternoon after five Covid-19 cases were reported this week. Only two small shops were opened in the market- which sold vegetables and dried fish. A stationery store was also kept open on the main road. Among the 20 odd hotels in the town only three had opened, however, there were no customers. 


It was only two years ago the town, which is situated on the banks of Pamba River, faced its biggest ever deluge. It took couple of weeks for the people here to bounce back to normalcy. Ranni market is considered as the biggest market in the district and people residing within a radius of 25km depend on this market.

NRI bank deposit and rubber have been the reasons behind the economic growth of Ranni, one of the largest taluks in Kerala owing to its vast forest land. According to a senior official of a leading bank in the region, NRI deposits in the taluk is around Rs 2,000 crore. The nearby Mallappally taluk is much more and is around Rs 6,000 crore.

“A majority of NRIs in Ranni are in the Middle East. Many from the Knanaya community in the region are also in the US and European countries,” said the official. He also said the total NRI deposit in Pathanamthitta district alone is around Rs 22,000 crore which is half of the total deposit in the district.

Mathew C V, president of the Ranni merchants association said though Ranni, which has around 850 merchants, had recovered quickly from the aftermath of the floods, this time it’s uncertain how fast normalcy would be restored. “Markets have been dull. People do not want to come out of their homes,” he said. “Awareness should be created amongst people regarding the spread of Covid-19 virus.”

Sony Zacharias, secretary of Ranni hotels association said the industry is in crisis. “After pressure from the merchants association I opened my hotel around 7am on Wednesday. The first customer walked in by 8.30am. Two more came in after an hour. I closed shop by 9.45am,” he said adding that he had to pay wages to his staff despite closing down the shop early. Hotels in the town have remained closed since Monday. Jose K Abraham, another merchant, said all the 230 shops on the premises of the Ranni bus stand remained closed. “It’s good that people are not coming out of their houses due to the situation. Most of them have stocked necessary products at home. However, they may not last for more than a week,” he said. After the floods, Corona scare has been a setback to the business sector, he added.

