Delhi: 20 chargesheets in Tablighi Jamaat case, 82 foreigners named
2020-05-27
NEW DELHI: Filing the first set of final reports in the Tablighi Jamaat case, the Crime Branch of Delhi Police has filed 20 chargesheets against 82 foreigners from 20 countries who attended the Alami Markaz event in south Delhi’s Nizamuddin. They entered India on tourist visas and participated in the religious event illegally, the cops claimed.


According to the 14,000-page chargesheets, the foreigners deliberately, wilfully, negligently and malignantly disobeyed lawful directions. They also created a situation where a highly infectious disease spread and threatened many lives, it added.

The chargesheets were filed under Epidemic Act, Foreigners Act, Disaster Management Act and IPC at the Saket court on Tuesday afternoon. Metropolitan magistrate Saema Jamil will consider the chargesheets on June 12.

Maulana Mohammed Saad, the head of Tablighi Markaz, and its others members allowed a huge gathering to assemble inside a closed premises over a period of time without any semblance of social distancing or provision of masks and sanitisers despite knowing that the risk from people travelling from foreign countries was higher, police said.

According to the chargesheets, 14 of the accused are from Fiji, 10 from Saudi Arabia, eight from Algeria, seven each from Brazil and China, six each from Sudan and the Philippines, five from the US, four from Afghanistan, two each from Australia, Kazakhstan, Morocco and the UK, and one each from Ukraine, Egypt, Russia, Jordan, France, Tunisia and Belgium.

The punishments range from six months to eight years of imprisonment. These foreigners have been kept at different shelter homes after consulting respective embassies.

More than 900 foreigners related to the Markaz event have already joined the investigation, which has revealed that most of them came on tourist or e-visas, the cops said. In their destination address, they had mentioned the Alami Markaz Banglewali Masjid as their destination. The cops alleged involvement of Maulana Saad and his associates in facilitating this. 

The cops mentioned that 64 foreigners who had attended the Markaz event were found to be corona-positive in their respective countries and were suspected to be the cause behind the death of at least two fellow Tablighi members in India.

