20 held for lockdown violation in Kota, vehicles seized
2020-03-25
Kota: The city police came down strictly to enforce lockdown and Section 144 on Tuesday and arrested nearly 20 people from various areas, including six from Mahavir Nagar and five from Kunhari police station area of the city. Police also seized several vehicles and slapped challans. However, most of the areas and markets across Kota and Bundi districts remained deserted throughout the day on Tuesday, with only emergency services being functional. 

The situation of compliance of the lockdown improved on Tuesday in the city as the people stayed at their homes. However, police teams were deployed at various points to ensure people stay indoors and strict action was taken against those who ventured out in the markets unnecessarily or violated the lockdown, said Kota city SP Gaurav Yadav. Police arrested nearly 20 people from various areas of the city under Section 151 of CrPC for violation and slapped challans over several vehicles, he added. 

“The compliance was nearly 100 per cent in the city on Tuesday and action was taken and challans were slapped in the areas where it was necessary,” the SP said, adding that the exact number of violators arrested and challans slapped is yet to be reported from various police stations of the city. 

Almost complete compliance was observed in the district as the markets remained closed and people stayed indoors. However, challans were slapped on movement of personal vehicles in some areas, yet none was arrested in Bundi, said Bundi SP Shivraj Meena. 

The vegetable markets were open in the morning till 10am when people, hardly half of them masked, thronged the markets, which charged Rs 5-10 higher than the usual prices on almost every item. Emergency services, outlets for essential commodities, including milk, flour mill, grocery remained functional, however face masks were not available in most of the medical stores of the city. 

[Pics 1 - people purchasing necessary items at a grocery shop in Kota on Tuesday 

2. violation - Grain trader in Talwas town of Bundi district unloading trolley on Tuesday 

3. Five persons held for violation of lockdown and section 144 in Kunhari police station of Kota city. ]


