20% of Bhopal’s Covid casualties had no comorbidity: Death audit
2020-05-20
Bhopal: One in five people who died in Bhopal due to Covid-19, had ‘no comorbidity’ or co-existing medical conditions, according to a recent death audit and analysis ordered by health department.The audit results indicate that for those with no comorbidities, average admission to death time was 37 hours of admission in a hospital. Those with existing medical conditions died much later or average of 63 hours of hospitalisation. Twenty three per cent deaths were reported within three hours of hospitalisation, raising a key issue of surveillance and case detection in the communities.“This audit indicates that people who have no comorbidities also need to be quite alert to symptoms of Covid-19,” said Dr Rajiv Singh. Death audit points out that patients with no comorbidities, were hospitalised on fifth day after onset of Covid-19. In case of others, it was the third day. Glucocorticoids - powerful medicines that fight inflammation and work with immune system to treat a wide range of health problems - were given to nearly half of the patients, as per audit. Almost 80 per cent were given mechanical ventilator support. Duration of hospital stay (admission to death) is a major factor that the analysis looks into. Nearly 76 per cent people (two-third) died within 48 hours of hospitalisation, 55 per cent died within 24 hours of hospitalisation. Audit of Covid-19 patients, is a wakeup call to those with notion that this infection is life-threatening for only those with existing medical conditions or comorbidity alongside a primary disorder, say medical experts, requesting anonymity.Audit has ranked diabetes as the most common medical condition in those who died after testing positive. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and hypertension were found in 20 per cent cases analysed. Audit indicates that 17 deaths were reported between May 4 and May 10. It accounts for half of the deaths analysed. Total deaths analysed were 34 from April to mid-May.GFX Covid casualty analysisTwo patients had Asthma12 of the 34 audited had hypertensionThree had oncological conditionsTwo had age-related issuesSeven had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) One person had tuberculosisOne had neurological issuesThree cases had cardiac problems