20 private laboratories to start Covid-19 tests in Maharashtra
2020-03-24
PUNE: Health minister Rajesh Tope has announced 20 more private laboratories to increase the number of facilities testing Covid-19 samples in the state.


“Eight such testing facilities were earlier announced for the state and six of them are functioning. The state is trying to increase the number by adding both government and private facilities,” Tope told TOI on Monday. 

“It is important to boost the testing facilities across the state and involve the private laboratories for support. The administration has to conduct tests on a huge number of samples,” the minister said. He, however, ruled out that Maharashtra has entered the third phase of the virus outbreak.

Seventeen new coronavirus cases in Mumbai, four in Sangli and one each in Pune and Satara were registered on Monday. Tope said the number of coronavirus cases in Maharashtra was higher than other parts of the country because the state was “sincerely carrying” out the sample tests. He added that most of the states did not have adequate facilities to test Covid-10 samples.

The minister said four private laboratories have got the approval for tests and would start functioning in Mumbai. The rest of the laboratories would start functioning in Pune and Nagpur and other cities, he said. 

A state public health department official said each laboratory had to procure adequate kits, prepare a protocol and needed adequate manpower to handle the daily load of samples.

Tope said the state was conducting tests at government laboratories in Mumbai, Nagpur and Pune. With the four private laboratories, the state’s testing capacity will double from the daily average of 1,000.

On Sunday, the Indian Council of Medical Research gave nod to four private laboratories to start procuring kits and test samples from suspected Covid-19 cases. The Centre has said the test cost should not exceed Rs4,500. The private laboratories can test patients with an abroad travel history with symptoms such as cough, cold, fever and breathlessness or people exposed to confirmed Covid-19 cases. Each of the approved private laboratories can conduct 100-200 tests a day.

