20-year-old youth from Mumbai tests positive for Covid-19 in Budaun
2020-04-07
Bareilly: Budaun recorded its first novel coronavirus positive case on Monday — a 20-year-old Mumbai resident who has been living at a mosque in Sahaswan area since February 14. He was quarantined at the district hospital on April 2.Though the youth is a Tablighi Jamaat follower, said district magistrate Kumar Prashant, he had not attended the Nizamuddin congregation. “The youth reached Budaun on February 14 and had been living at the mosque since then. On April 2, we evacuated 21 people from Sahaswan area, and five of the evacuees were living with the youth at the mosque. Although all 20 other people have already been tested negative for Covid-19, we will again send the samples of the five housemates of the patient,” said the DM. After the evacuation, all 21 people were shifted to the quarantine ward at the district hospital, but the youth was moved to the isolation ward on Monday after he was tested positive. Health department officials said they were tracing the people who came in his contact in Budaun. “We are examining the call history of the patient to know about his travel history and the people whom he came in contact with. Their samples will be collected. We are ensuring proper lockdown in Budaun district, which has been divided into different sectors,” said the DM. Officials said as per the directions of the higher authorities, if a district recorded one or two cases, then the patients would be shifted to a division-level government hospital, but if a district reported higher number of patients, then they would be treated there. Additional director (health), Bareilly division, Dr Rakesh Dubey said, “The Budaun patient will be shifted to Bareilly for treatment, while a positive case from Shahjahanpur district will also be brought to Bareilly on Tuesday.”“Besides, one of the two positive cases reported in Pilibhit has been tested negative, while the second patient is also showing signs of improvement. We believe they will be recovered and discharged soon. So, they don’t need to be shifted to Bareilly,” added Dr Dubey.