Coronavirus outbreak: 200 Indian medical students stranded in Manila seek govt help
2020-03-19
AGRA: Nearly 200 medical students from India, who are stranded in Manila after the Indian government stopped flights from Philippines on Tuesday, have sought help from Prime Minister Narendra Modi to ensure their safe return.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Talking to TOI, Udit Bhardwaj, a student from Aligarh who is pursuing MBBS in Manila, said that all the students had booked return tickets to India for either Tuesday or Wednesday after the Philippines government declared a “state of calamity” on Monday, giving them 72 hours to leave the country. He added that they were caught off-guard by the Indian government’s decision to ban incoming flights and have now been left in the lurch.

Bhardwaj said, “I arrived last night at the airport to catch my 1.30 am Air Asia flight to Delhi and was given a boarding pass. However, we were later informed that the flight has been cancelled.” Noting that the local government has declared a “state of calamity” for six months, he said, “We don’t know what to do. We did not get any satisfactory response from the airlines. There was no Indian government representative at the airport either. Many students are still at the airport due to the curfew and they can’t even travel back to their universities.”

Echoing similar sentiments, another stranded student Sudarshan Patidar from Rajasthan said, “We were not given any prior notice. Nobody is able to tell us when the situation will improve or when we will be able to get out.” He also urged the Indian government to either lift the flight ban or take them back home in a special aircraft.

Another medical student Geet Shankar Mazumdar from Assam’s Guwahati told TOI that the suspension of flights by the Indian government came as a huge shock to them. “They could have done this after all the students had left,” he added.

Sharing videos from the Manila airport, the students said that their flight was cancelled after boarding passes were issued to them. “When we asked them to show us the official order, they refused and were very rude to all of us. They even threatened of police action if we made videos of their conversations.”

Meanwhile, the Indian embassy in Manila tweeted that they are co-ordinating with the ministry of external affairs to work out a solution. It said, “It is requested to all to kindly have patience.”

The government had on Tuesday prohibited entry of passengers from Afghanistan, Philippines and Malaysia with immediate effect.


