21 from Dakshina Kannada who attended Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi event traced, quarantined
2020-04-02
Mangaluru/Karwar/Koppal: As many as 21 people from Dakshina Kannada, who attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi’s Nizamuddin were traced and isolated at a hospital here. Their health checkup is being done, and their throat swabs will be sent for testing. No one from Udupi attended the event at the Markaz building in Nizamuddin, according to the Udupi district administration.

In an official communique, deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh said that all the people who attended the event were contacted and brought to the hospital.

Udupi deputy commissioner G Jagadeesha said that he has personally verified the list and found that no one from Udupi attended the event. There were rumours spread that a dozen people from Udupi were part of the event in Delhi.

Jagadeesha added that the central government had declared a hotspot list, where chances of transmission are more. “In the state, there are 1,328 members on the list, and 16 of them are from Udupi, from whom the possibility of transmission is more. They are under home quarantine, and we are observing them. I want to make it clear that they have no connection with the Nizamuddin case,’’ he added.

TMA Pai Covid-19 Hospital at Udupi started functioning on Wednesday. All three patients at Kasturba Hospital, Manipal, have been shifted to TMA Pai Covid-19 Hospital.

The Covid-19 Hospital will be a treatment facility, exclusively for Covid-19 positive cases. The public won’t have access to it. Walk-in patients will not be entertained, and only Covid-19 positive cases shifted from existing isolation facilities will be admitted.

Six Delhi returnees quarantined

Shivamogga: District health officer Rajesh Suragihalli on Wednesday informed that six people, who returned from Delhi on March 28, have been quarantined at McGann Hospital in Shivamogga. The health department is checking their travel history and finding out whether they attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Nizamuddin.

So far, 55 samples have been collected in Shivamogga, of which 46 have tested negative for Covid-19.

Meanwhile, as summer is advancing, water scarcity is looming large. The civic body has hinted at water rationing in the coming days. Opposition leader in the corporation, H C Yogesh, has appealed to people to use water judiciously as the Tunga River is drying up. 

Eight attendees quarantined in Koppal

The Koppal district administration on Wednesday traced and quarantined eight of the 342 people from the state who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi, which has been dubbed as a ‘super spreader’ of Covid-19.

The district was put on high alert after reports emerged that hundreds of people from the state had attended the meet, and that they could be potential carriers of the coronavirus. Deputy commissioner P Sunil Kumar stated: “We have looked into all the 14 people who were suspected of attending the Tablighi Jamaat event from the district. We visited the homes of eight people and tested them. None of them showed any Covid-19 symptoms. Three others are in other states, while three others are using sim cards given by people from Koppal district,” he said. 

“The state government has started testing the quarantined people for Covid-19 symptoms, and begun identifying those who came in contact with them after returning to the state. In fact, some of them have tested negative for Covid-19. More tests are under way,” he stated. 

Throat swabs of 2 sent for testing

The Uttara Kannada district administration has sent throat swabs from two people from Dandeli for testing. Deputy commissioner Harish kumar K said that these two people had returned from Nizamuddin in Delhi after attending a Tablighi Jamaat event. Both of them had returned to Dandeli long back, and were under quarantine and observation. Their quarantine period of 14 days was over, but despite this, their swabs were collected and sent for testing.

Some officials said that the search is on for more people who had attended the religious function at Nizamuddin, as it is suspected that a large number of people from here had attended the function and returned. Meanwhile, the number of Covid-19 cases in Uttara Kannada has gone up to 9, of which 8 patients are being treated in the district and one is in a Mangaluru hospital. All these persons are from Bhatkal. On Tuesday, another person tested positive for Covid-19 here. The new patient is said to be the brother of the person who had returned from Dubai on March 20, and was in quarantine. Of the 8 Covid-19 patients, 7 are being treated at the INHS Patanjali hospital in Karwar, which belongs to the Indian Navy. The man who tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday, too will be shifted to the Naval hospital.


