21 more test positive for Covid-19, toll reaches 130
2020-04-30
Aurangabad: The city on Wednesday reported a spike of 21 fresh Covid-19 cases, taking the tally to 130, with seven casualties so far. Of the total cases, 23 have recovered from the infection.

At present, 91 patients are being treated at Chikalthana-based civil hospital and nine at Government Medical College and Hospital. 

In addition to this, an elderly man, who had recovered 10 days back has again been admitted to Chikalthana-based hospital, after his reports tested positive.

Of the 21 cases registered on Wednesday, 11 were from Noor Colony, two from Qila-E-Arak, five from Asefiya Colony and one each from Bhimnagar and Bhavsinghpura respectively. All the patients have been admitted to Chikalthana-based hospital.

Later during the day, GMCH dean Dr Kanan Yelikar said that till 4pm, 28 patients were screened, of which throat swab sampls of 14 patients were collected. Six of these samples have tested negative, while reports of the other eight are awaited. 

While nine Covid-19 patients are admitted at GMCH, 42 suspected patients are still under observation at the same hospital. 

So far, four patients, who had earlier tested positive, have fully recovered and have been discharged, said the GMCH authorities. 

With the number of cases rising for the third consecutive day, the civic body, the district administration, and the police department have started tightening the noose by strictly keeping a check on the containment zones in the city.

On Monday, a record of 29 people tested positive, followed by 23 on Tuesday and 21 people on Wednesday. This has set alarm ringing in the district administration.

Meanwhile, a woman, who during her advanced stage of pregnancy had travelled from Mumbai to Aurangabad, and ended up testing positive, was discharged from the district civil hospital at Chikalthana on Wednesday. Under treatment, the woman delivered a baby girl through caesarean. The baby was kept in NICU and she managed to remain negative throughout the treatment.


