21 more containment zones sealed, 30 new Covid-19 cases
2020-05-11
Nashik: The Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) has seen a rise in Covid-19 cases with 30 new patients. In addition, 21 new containment zones in the city have been sealed in the last nine days between May 2 and May 10. 

So far, the city has registered death of two Covid-19 patients. The tally of Covid-19 positive patients in the city has reached up to 40 while the number of containment zones in the city has swelled up to 27.

According to civic officials, most people who tested positive for Covid-19 in the last few days are from the high-risk contacts. 

“We are taking all the precautionary measures to curb the spread of Covid-19 as per the guidelines set by the state and central governments. We are sealing the containment areas after a patient from the area is tested Covid-19 positive and are also tracing the high-risk contacts of the patient immediately,” said a senior NMC official. 

By May 1, the city had only 10 Covid-19 patients and the municipal corporation had sealed six containment zones — Govind Nagar, Anandvalli on Gangapur Road, Rajlaxmi lawns area in Nashik Road, Bajrangwadi, Sanjeev Nagar and Mhasrul.

However, there has been a sudden rise in number of Covid-19 cases in the city. Later, the NMC sealed four more containment zones, including three from Cidco division — Savta Nagar, Uttam Nagar and Pathardi Phata — and one in Satpur colony. The city had sealed 10 containment zones by May 2.

Thereafter, two more people from General Vaidya Nagar and Bajrangwadi tested positive for Covid-19, following which the areas were sealed by the civic body on May 3 and 5 respectively. 

On May 6, the city had recorded two more Covid-19 positive patients from Shantinikent Chowk on Gangapur Road and Maneksha Nagar in the Dwarka area. Both the containment areas were sealed by the NMC. 

During the same time, another patient from Samta Nagar along Takli Road in Nashik East division tested positive for Covid-19, causing the area to be sealed off. 

However, there has been a sudden spurt in Covid-19 cases from May 8 onwards as 13 people teste positive for the infection. Of these 13 people, eight were from the existing containment areas and other five from new areas which were sealed by the NMC.

NMC officials said these 13 people who tested positive were high-risk contacts of the six patients who were confirmed Covid-19 positive on May 2. Meanwhile, another six people tested positive for the virus on Saturday with the NMC sealing six more containment zones in the city.


