21 more test Covid +ve in Agra, district tally now 327
2020-04-23
Agra: At least 21 new cases of Novel Coronavirus (Covid-19) were reported in Agra on Wednesday, taking the district's tally to 327. The local administration has also marked 24 fresh "Covid hotspots" in the city. 

Out of these, seven cases are related to a private hospital on National Highway-2, three linked to people who attended the Jamaat event in Delhi, three related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality, two cases are a contact of a medicine wholesaler, a person who had returned from Maharashtra, and two contacts of a health staffer of SN Medical College. The remaining three cases are contacts of people tested positive earlier.

Chief medical officer (CMO) Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

Localities from where the new cases emerged on Wednesday include Mandi Said Khan, Motiya Ki Baghichi, Belanganj, Kedar Nagar, Mandi Sammitti, Ghatiya Azam Khan, Khatik Para, sector 12D Avas Vikas, Naubasta in Lohamandi, Indra Kunj in Baluganj, Sadar Bhatti, Anand Puram in Shahaganj, village Kakua and Kamla Nagar.

According to health department, out of the 327 cases reported in Agra, at least 110 are linked to people who had attended the Delhi's Jamaat event and their contacts. Ninety of them are linked to a private hospital on the NH-2. Thirty are related to another private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan. Besides, 15 are related to health staffers of SN Medical College and their family members. Twenty are linked to people with overseas travel history. 

Earlier this week, two vegetable sellers, a medicine seller and a milk seller were found positive. These people are "unaware of their source of infection".

Notably, four Covid-19 patients were declared "cured" and discharged from hospital. They include three doctors - head of Sainya block community health centre, a junior doctor of SN Medical College and a private doctor. 

“So far, 30 people have recovered from the infection and discharged. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. The area in the vicinity of the places where the infected people were staying is being sanitised. The district administration has marked 86 places in the city as Covid epicentres. We are conducting massive sampling in these areas to identify all those infected and send them to institutional quarantine," the CMO said.


