Covid-19 in Andhra Pradesh: 21 trains cancelled, coaches go empty
2020-03-18
VISAKHAPATNAM: Visakhapatnam railway station has incurred a loss of around Rs 2 crore in the past week as the fear of coronavirus spreads in the state.


Passenger footfall at the station has also fallen to 50,000 against an average of 75,000 on regular days. 

Waltair railway senior divisional commercial manager G Suneel Kumar said, “We have decided to cancel 21 special trains passing through Visakhapatnam till March-end keeping in view poor patronisation due to outbreak of Covid-19.”

Resumption of services will be announced next month depending upon the situation, said Suneel Kumar.

Sources in the Railways said occupancy rates on Godavari Express, Garib Rath, Tirumala Express, Ratnachal Express, Duranto Express and Mumbai LTT have fallen by 30 to 40 per cent, while sleeper class coaches on several trains have been running empty.

“Visakhapatnam station alone incurred a loss of Rs 2 crore in the last week due to the coronavirus scare. This was in terms of sale of passenger tickets. The loss may continue in the summer if there will is no improvement,” said a Railways source.

Meanwhile, vendors at the railway station said their businesses had taken a hit due to the coronavirus scare. “Passengers are reluctant to purchase food items and even drinking water from us due to the corona scare but we have to pay rent to the Railways in spite of our loss,” said a vendor at platform number 1.

As part of preventive measures, an isolation ward has been set up at the Railway Hospital in the city. Ambulances have been kept on standby at Visakhapatnam, Srikakulam and Vizianagaram railway stations and a reserved lounge at Visakhapatnam railway station can be used to quarantime passengers till April 15.

The Railways has also planned 200 thermal scanners to check temperatures of passengers at Visakhapatnam station, each costing Rs 16,000. There is no hike in the price of platform tickets for the time being.

