22 flyers put up at Kallikudi facility sent for home quarantine
2020-03-24
Trichy: All the 22 passengers who had been quarantined at the makeshift facility at the central market for vegetables, fruits and flowers at Kallikudi in Trichy were allowed to go home late on Monday. However, they were told to be on home quarantine. Meanwhile, the isolation ward at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) in Trichy had six patients, while two others tested negative for Covid-19.

The public health and preventive medicine department in Trichy released 10 men and 12 women from the facility after thoroughly checking their health condition from morning. They had landed at Trichy international airport from Sharjah, Dubai and Singapore early on Sunday. An official from the public health department said that none of them had symptoms of Covid-19. So, they were advised to get to their residences in Trichy and neighbouring districts.

“As of now, 381 foreign returnees residing in Trichy have been home quarantined at their houses. Of them, 20 passengers have crossed the 28-day mandatory period. Rest of them will be monitored at home quarantine for 14 days. Their left hands will be stamped and stickers will be put up on their houses,” Trichy collector S Sivarasu told ToI this afternoon.

The condition of passengers from other districts will also be followed up by the public health department officials of the respective districts. As of now, there was nobody at the quarantine facility as all the international flights to Trichy have been cancelled. The domestic flights to Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad are being operated.

The isolation ward at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) has six patients awaiting Covid-19 results. A one-and-half-year old baby admitted to the hospital at the isolation ward was also discharged. The uncle of the baby was a foreign returnee and the baby developed some health issues after the uncle had cuddled the baby. As of now, tests were being done at the viral research and diagnostic laboratory at the Government Medical College Hospital in Tiruvarur. With the increasing number of cases of Covid-19 prompting for more testing facility, MGMGH has been given permission for testing. “Pilot testing has been done. Full-fledged testing will commence on Wednesday,” collector told ToI.


