Bhopal: 22-year-old artist takes to streets to spread Covid-19 awareness
2020-05-07
BHOPAL: This 22-year-old artist is using the city streets as canvas to spread awareness on coronavirus. 


His 3D paintings can be spotted everhwere in the city, especially in the areas which are corona-hit. The artist’s — Imran Khan — paintings urge residents to stay at home. Imran is the breadwinner of his family. 

He credits his interest in arts to his great grandfather, who came to Bhopal from Afghanistan and painted the inside of domes in palaces of the nawabs. A resident of Jehangirabad, Imran has made 3D paintings on the roads of Ashoka Garden, Shabban Square and Jinsi Square in Jehangirabad. 

Speaking on how he got this idea, he told TOI that corona-positive patients were detected in his neighbourhood — merely 10-12 houses away from his home. The area was declared a containment zone. Inspite of this, people were not following the lockdown order. Imran said that he had left school after class 7. As he is neither a cop nor a doctor, in order to make people aware, he decided to paint on the streets. On the impact his paintings are making, Imran said DIG Irshad Wali had appreciated his painting at Shabban Square in Jehangirabad and given him a reward of Rs 500. He also asked Imran to paint in Ashoka Garden. 

SHO of Ashoka Garden, Sudhesh Tiwari, appreciated his work and gave him a reward of Rs 1,500.

Speaking about his latest painting at Jinsi Square, Imran said that he started painting around 7 pm on Tuesday and, after working the whole night, finished the painting on Wednesday morning around 9 am. He said that a single 3D painting costs him around Rs 1,500 to Rs 2,000. He uses exterior wall paint so that the paintings last long. Though his family of six, including parents, elder brother and two younger sisters are dependent on him financially, he believes he has to paint on the streets for a greater cause.

Talking about his great grandfather Abdul Shaqoor, who migrated to Bhopal from Jalalabad in Afghanistan around 150 years ago, Imran said he had painted in the palaces of the Nawabs. He died when his grandfather was 12 years old. Imran said that nobody else in the family took interest in painting after his great grandfather’s death. But he saw his great grandfather’s designs and got interested in painting. Imran has been painting for the past 10 years and has taken it up professionally. About his next work, Imran said that now he will paint at Ret Ghat Square, at the start of VIP Road so that his paintings make the most impact on people.


