2,234 held for violating lockdown norms
2020-03-27
Thiruvananthapuram: With police continuing its strict measures, it seems Keralites have finally got the message. On day three, the number of people who were out on roads dipped significantly, compared to the first two days. As many as 2,234 persons were arrested in 2,098 cases on Thursday for violating lockdown norms and 1,447 vehicles were confiscated. With this, 5,710 cases have been registered in three days. 

While Idukki (245) witnessed maximum number of cases on Thursday, the least was in Kasaragod (27). Alappuzha topped the list in terms of those arrested at 214, while the lowest number was in Wayanad (31). 

In the capital, where the past two days had evoked lesser response, police took stricter measures like confiscating vehicles and registering cases. "We will confiscate vehicles and return them only after 21 days. For the purpose, we will use a ground if required," said commissioner Balram Kumar Upadhyay. 

The police have also launched several security measures including asking all apartment complexes to maintain a register at the gate, in which the details of an inmate leaving the complex will have to enter his name, details of the vehicle and purpose, that will be checked by the beat police periodically. 

If anyone is found moving around and his/her details are not found in the register, police have warned that not only the person, but also the office bearers of the apartment association will be booked. 

Meanwhile, state police chief Loknath Behera instructed all policemen not to stop vehicles carrying transporting soaps, sanitizers, gloves that are essential for fighting the disease. Vehicles, which are transporting employees of organizations manufacturing such products, will be allowed to travel from their homes to their office after obtaining police clearance. Behera specifically instructed not to disrupt the movement of those persons engaged in the cleaning process and waste management. This will be applicable to such workers in the private sector as well. He said that those working in such sectors are part of essential services. 

All policemen, engaged in vehicle checking, should mandatorily wear masks and gloves. The responsibility of ensuring that all personnel are obeying instructions will be on respective district police chiefs, he added.

Behera also instructed that not every vehicle should be checked for documents leading to a long chain of vehicles waiting on the road. Instead of concentrating on one or two junctions, police should split and concentrate on several places, he said.


