225 related to Tablighi Delhi meet quarantined in West Bengal
2020-04-03
KOLKATA: The state government has quarantined 225 people, including attendees to the Tablighi Jamaat meet in Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz and people they have met on their return to Bengal. Two among those kept in an isolation facility in New Town were shifted to ID Hospital and MR Bangur after they showed symptoms of fever and respiratory distress.


The state says even though a bulk of these people had arrived in Bengal much before the lockdown, everyone will be isolated and medically examined. In addition to the 54 quarantined immediately after the Centre dispatched a list of 71 people, the state has identified and isolated 173 more who had been to Nizamuddin Markaz in March and brought them to the New Town facility late on Wednesday night and on Thursday morning. They were brought in buses and SUVs whose seats were covered with thick plastic sheets and disinfected once they disembarked. “Along with the attendees in Nizamuddin Markaz, some immediate relatives and friends whom they had contacted since their return were also quarantined,” an officer said.

 


Ambulances and a team of medical officers are at the facility 24x7 and no one from outside is allowed inside the 10-storey building that has been converted into an isolation centre. A 35-strong security detail from the Techno City police station is guarding the facility.

Five couples from Bhatpara, who had left for Delhi in mid-February for a Nizamuddin Markaz congregation, were sent to this facility on Thursday. They had returned to Bengal on March 16. They were first checked at the Bhatpara state general hospital and then sent to the New Town facility, local councillor Md Maksud Alam said. 

Authorities in West Midnapore on Thursday identified and placed under quarantine seven people, including two Imams, who met seven Indonesians who were sent to Kolkata and quarantined on Wednesday. The Indonesians and two Indian translators accompanying them reached Kharagpur mid-March from Delhi. Police has also learnt that 51 persons from Purulia, who attended the religious congregation at Delhi and have since spread out to Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Purulia SP S. Selvamurugan said, "We have spoken to police administrations in Rajasthan and UP. We have been told they have been quarantined in mosques they were in.”

In Murshidabad, the district administration has identified two persons who attended the congregation at Delhi's Nizamuddin. Prashanta Biswas, the district chief medical officer of health (CMOH), said, "They had returned on March 11 and we have instructed them to remain under home quarantine. Already, 22 days have passed since their return. No symptoms of Covid-19 have been found in either of them.”

“Many have also come from Mograhat and Maheshtala areas in South 24 Parganas. They comprise some Nizamuddin attendees and some of their immediate relatives and friends,” said another officer.

(Inputs by Tamaghna Banerjee, Suman Chakraborti and Sanjib Banerjee in Kolkata, Sujay Khanra in Midnapore, Amit Singh Deo in Purulia and Sukumar Mahato in Berhampore)

