229 coronavirus cases in a day: Maharashtra sets national record
2020-04-10
MUMBAI: Maharashtra on Thursday reported its—and by any state in India—biggest one-day spike in the number of Covid-19 cases (229) and deaths (25), taking the total cases in the state to 1,364. Of 25 deaths reported by the state government in its tally for the day, 10 from Pune had been reported by TOI in its Thursday edition. The previous high for cases was 150 on Tuesday and for deaths was 18 on Wednesday. 


The state’s death toll now is 97, just three short of the 100 mark. The case fatality rate as on Thursday was 7.1 % as against 6.2% on Wednesday.

 

Mumbai still contributes most of the cases. It added 162 new ones, the highest reported for a day, taking its tally to 876. The city now has 64% of total cases in the state. Nine deaths were reported from Mumbai, taking the total deaths here to 54. Five deaths (excluding the 10 reported earlier) were from Pune, one from Malegaon and one from Khed. 

Of the nine deaths, 3 occurred on April 8, 3 on April 7 and one each on April 4, 6 and 9. At least three victims were in the age bracket of 35-45 years. A 101-year-old bedridden woman was perhaps the oldest to fall victim to the virus in the city and state. She was a known case of hypertension and had been admitted to Brahman Sabha Hospital in Girgaum on April 2. She died on April 6; the hospital has since been shut.

The congested Dharavi area recorded four more cases and one death, taking the cases there to 17. The deceased was a 70-year-old woman who lived in Kalyanwadi, which is around a society where a doctor had tested positive last week. Civic authorities said the husband of the deceased had passed away recently and many persons had gathered at her home to offer condolences. She died in KEM hospital on Thursday. 

The BMC, however, didn’t include the death in its official toll.

Among the other deceased were a 38-year-old woman who died at Bandra’s Bhabha Hospital. A known case of diabetes, she had come to the hospital with breathing difficulty. She died on April 7. A 35-year-old man died at Sion Hospital on April 4. He was a patient of epilepsy. There have been at least four deaths in the city where the person has had a history of epilepsy.

Two of the dead were in their 60s. A 62-year-old died at Kasturba Hospital; he had a history of diabetes and hypertension and died after 8 days of treatment. A 60-year-old woman at Rajawadi died on the day of admission at Rajawadi hospital. She had a history of diabetes and hypertension.

KEM dean Dr Hemant Deskhmukh said though increased cases are being reported, it cannot be said community transmission has begun. “Most cases are still first and second contacts of infected patients. We can still call it localized (transmission),” he added.

Seven people tested positive from the Thane corporation limits, marking the highest single-day jump in Thane and taking the tally there to 33. A 68-year-old man from Nerul’s Sector 23 also tested positive, taking the count of cases from Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation areas to 31. “The latest patient was in touch with a patient from Nerul, a 72-year-old man, who had succumbed five days ago. The two had gone together to a religious site in Nerul earlier. We are now observing swab results of family members of the 68-year-old,” said a civic health official.

The four deaths in Pune took the total there to 24. Late evening, Pune authorities confirmed one more death, which was not part of the state tally. Two of the dead were women aged 65, one a 58-year-old woman and another a 44-year-old man. All three women had underlying conditions. Pune also registered 13 fresh cases, with the tally climbing to 204.

Nashik district recorded its first death with a man succumbing at the Malegaon government hospital on Wednesday. The victim was admitted to hospital along with five others, all residents of Malegaon town, with respiratory problems; the swab reports of five returned positive. One death, reported from Khed, was mentioned by TOI earlier but recorded in the state tally on Thursday.

A 59-year-old Aurangabad man tested positive on Thursday. He is the father of a 22-year-old man who tested positive a day earlier. The tally in Aurangabad city has touched 18. Of these, a 59-year-old woman has recovered, while a 58-year-old man died on Sunday.

A 30-year-old man from Shahuwadi taluka in Kolhapur, who attended the Tablighi Jamaat event last month, tested positive on Thursday. The man had left Delhi on March 14 and reached Kolhapur two days later by train. He travelled by a private vehicle the next day to Malkapur before returning home on March 18.

Out of 30,766 laboratory samples, 28,865 were negative and 1,364 had tested positive until Thursday. 125 patients have been discharged till date after recovery, 35,533 people are in home quarantine and 4,731 in institutional quarantine. 


