23 booked for violating lockdown order
2020-03-31
Bhopal:Bhopal police on Monday registered 23 cases against people violating lockdown order. On Sunday, 10 cases were registered against those violating the order. The accused have been booked under sections 188, 269 and 270 of IPC. 

Since March 22, after the lockdown order was issued, 142 cases have been registered against the violators. 

ASP Sandesh Jain said that since the lockdown order was issued, around 300 people were arrested for violating the order. Around 30 vehicles were seized and more than Rs 15,000 fine was imposed on the violators. Police on Monday booked a grocery store owner and around 25-30 people who were negligently crowding in front of the shop flouting the social distancing norms. 

ASP Zone-1 Rajat Saklecha visited the DMart supermarket in Jehangirabad and instructed the store staff to follow social distancing norms at the store. Meanwhile, cops continued to play the role of good Samaritans while enforcing the lockdown. 

Nishatpura police on Monday afternoon found an 80-year-old Khandwa based woman roaming in the area and sent her to old age home in Shahjehanabad. The woman was roaming on streets around 3 pm when police spotted her and asked about her family she was not able to give satisfactory answers. She was hungry and depressed. Police provided her with meal and also counselled her. After much efforts, she told police that her daughter and son-in-law, who reside in Laxmi Nagar, had brought her to Bhopal from Khandwa around 10 days back. But they assaulted her and foced her out after taking her ornaments. She told cops that her husband also retired from police department and passed away in the past. When police couldn’t find the address of her relatives, they took her to old age home. The woman told police that her son resided in Khandwa with his family but couldn’t provide proper address. She denied to return to her daughter’s home. 

BOX- 

Cops cook to feed migrant labourers

Bhopal: City police on Monday continued to distribute food and masks to needy. TT Nagar police are already distributing food packets prepared at the police station itself to needy. Crime branch also started preparing food packets in the police station premises in association with an NGO and distributed them to needy people, who were stopped at outskirts checking posts. Crime branch cops said that many organisations were distributing food items inside the city but at the city outskirts where people coming from outstations on foot including migrant labourers the situation is worse. As such, the crime branch has started preparing food and were distributing around 500 food packets in that area. ASP Crime Branch Nishchal Jharia said that the capacity of the kitchen at crime branch will be extended and more packets will be distributed. Gandhi Nagar police distributed food packets to more than 200 migrants from Rajasthan, who had been residing in tents in the area. TNN


