23 fresh cases takes Aurangabad district’s coronavirus tally to 105
2020-04-29
AURANGABAD: As many as 23 new confirmed Covid-19 positive cases were reported on Tuesday, a day after the city recorded 29 cases in a single day on Monday. The addition of the fresh cases has taken the tally of Covid-19 patients to 105 in the district. 

Meanwhile, a 77-year-old woman, who was brought dead to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) early Tuesday, confirmed positive for Covid-19, taking the death toll to seven in Aurangabad. 

According to Arvind Gaikwad, GMCH’s nodal officer for media interaction, the woman was a resident of Qile Ark area of the city. “The woman had fainted at her residence around 7.30pm on Monday and was brought dead to the hospital around 1.30am on Tuesday. She was a suffering from diabetes and a mental condition. Her throat swab sample tested positive for the contagion,” said Gaikwad.

GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar said while 13 people confirmed positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday morning, 10 others tested positive in the evening. Of the 23 confirmed cases, 13 are from Qile Ark, four from Paithan Gate, two from Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura, two from Mukundwadi and one each from Daulatabad and Bada Takiya Masjid. 

Yelikar added seven of the confirmed cases identified were aged less than 15 years and four were above 50-years-old. 

Of the 105 Covid-19 cases in the district, 23 patients have recovered, seven have died and the remaining 75 patients are undergoing treatment at the district civil hospital and the GMCH. 

As many as 88 people were screened at the 13 fever clinics of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) on Tuesday. 16 people were referred to the district civil hospital. Of the 158 throat swab samples collected from GMCH, district civil hospital and the fever clinics and sent for Covid-19 analysis, 23 returned positive and 10 tested negative for the contagion. Reports of 125 patients are awaited.


10 locations in Aurangabad city sealed 
Municipal officer of health Nita Padalkar said that the containment zones have been chalked out in localities which have reported confirmed cases. “Covid-19 cases have been reported for the first time from Mukundwadi-Sanjay Nagar, Paithan Gate and Bada Takiya Masjid. The process to trace the source of infection and contact tracing has been initiated in these localities,” Padalkar said.

As on Tuesday, Noor Colony, Kiradpura, Panchkuva-Qile Ark, Baijipura, Asifiya Colony, Bismillah Colony, Hilal Colony, Samata Nagar, Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura and Pundalik Nagar localities were sealed under the cluster containment plan. A total of 81 teams have screened 22,058 people in 4,583 households in these 10 localities. As many as 97 people have been placed under institutional quarantine at Sant Tukaram hostel in Padampura and Kalagram.

Menwhile, commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad said that the shops would remain open from 7am to 11am on Wednesday. The decision was taken after Aurangabad MP Imtiyaz Jaleel held a meeting with divisional commissioner Sunil Kendrekar, district collector Uday Chaudhari and municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey on Tuesday. Jaleel jumped into action after the city registered a surge in the number of Covid-19 cases. He sought the cooperation of religious and community leaders in asking people to stay at home. 


5-year-old boy tests positive in Hingoli 
A 5-year-old boy from Government Quarantine Centre, Sengaon in Hingoli district tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday. This has taken the tally of Covid-19 cases in the district to 14. 


