23 people quarantined after Moradabad DU student who tested Covid-19 positive admits to visiting Sambhal in March
2020-04-14
Bareilly: It has emerged that a resident of Lal Nagri, Karula in Moradabad, who recently tested positive for the novel coronavirus, had attended a funeral in Sambhal earlier in March. The 21-year-old, pursuing his masters degree from Delhi University, had tested positive for the virus on Sunday.

After the fact emerged on Monday, Sambhal district administration and health department swung into action to trace all those who had come in contact with the infected person during his visit.

Health department officials said so far, 23 such people have been traced, and they have been put on home quarantine for 28 days, while three others have been isolated in district hospital and their samples collected.

Speaking to TOI, Sambhal chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Amita Singh said, “It came to our notice that earlier in March, a Moradabad resident who recently tested Covid-19 positive, had attended a funeral of his relative in Deepa Sarai locality of Sambhal. District administration and health department officials visited the location and identified the place he had visited. As many as 23 people, who are identified to have come in contact with the infected person, have been home quarantined for 28 days. Strict directions have been issued to them to comply with the orders given for the period. Police personnel will keep a tab in the area to ensure compliance. Three other people, suspected to have been in closest contact of the patient, have been isolated in district hospital and their blood samples collected for examination. Based on their reports, further course of action will be decided.”

Sambhal health department officials said ever since the matter came to light, administration has swung into action and people are being sensitised about the development. While civic authority took up sanitisation of the locality, neighbours have been asked to keep a check on the people quarantined. They can inform police should anyone violate the home quarantine orders.”

Moradabad CMO Dr M C Garg told TOI, “The patient had visited Sambhal some time ago. He tested Covid-19 positive recently. As of now, he is admitted in quarantine ward, where his condition is stable. His family has also been home quarantined.”


