23 test positive for Covid-19 in central region, 9 patients discharged in Karur
2020-04-14
TRICHY: While 15 more patients tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday in Karur, the discharge of nine patients after their recovery from the viral disease brought smiles on the faces of the officials of Karur district administration and the medical team at the government medical college in Karur. As on Monday, the number of positive cases in the central region stood at 144.

The news about the discharge of 28 patients including nine positive cases came as a relief for the district. Karur collector T Anbazhagan, medical college dean Rosy Vennila and the medical team gave them a send-off on Monday afternoon.

“Nine positive patients have completely recovered. Nineteen close contacts of those who tested negative were kept in hospital quarantine. As they completed their 28 days of quarantine, they were discharged on Monday,” said collector Anbazhagan.

The media bulletin released by the state ministry of health and family welfare said that 15 more patients including three children, nine women and three men in the district tested positive for Covid-19 in Karur. They belonged to Pallapatti area in Karur. 

They had already been quarantined at the hospital. Monday’s test confirmed their infection. In Karur, a total of 41 patients are undergoing treatment. Among them, nine people were discharged on Monday.

Five people from Nagapattinam district tested positive on Monday. All the five were relatives of the Tablighi Jamaat delegates. With this, the number of Covid-19 positive cases touched 32 in the district. The toll included one pregnant woman and a 4-year-old boy, hospital sources said. 

In Tiruvarur, three more people, residents of Koothanallur in the district, tested positive on Monday, taking the toll to 16. All the three cases were also contacts of TJ delegates. The patients included a 17-year-old girl and a 38-year-old woman.

No case was reported in Trichy district on Monday, which had 43 Covid-19 positive cases till Sunday. The district administration said the results of the 40 symptomatic patients are likely to be out on Tuesday.

Other districts –Ariyalur, Perambalur, Pudukottai and Thanjavur recorded no new positive cases on Monday.

(With inputs from D Vincent Arockiaraj)


