Covid-19 scare: 236 Indians from Iran to land in Jaisalmer today
2020-03-15
JAISALMER: Two hundred thirty six Indians airlifted from Iran will arrive at Jaisalmer civil airport in two flights via Delhi on Sunday. They will be taken to Jaisalmer Military Station’s wellness centre-cum-isolation ward on early Sunday morning for quarantine facilities. 


With the increasing global threat of coronavirus, the government of India has decided to airlift Indians stuck in many affected countries, including Iran. The Indian Army is also ready to help the government in the task. The Indians airlifted from Iran will be brought to Jaisalmer military station and preparations have started for the same. 

An isolation ward has been prepared at the military station and on Sunday, 236 Indians will be brought here. The flight will come to Jaisalmer via Delhi. 

Security arrangements have been made by the Jaisalmer police from the airport to the military station, and additional police personnel have been deployed looking to the protests by some people on social media against bringing these Indians from Iran to Jaisalmer.

Confirming this, district collector Namit Mehta said that the flights are likely to arrive from Delhi on Sunday. He said they will be kept at the isolation ward at the military station and will be under observation. The district administration is in touch with military officers and are ready to coordinate on the matter. He added that the isolation and wellness centre is far from the city at the military station, and thus there is no need to be scared.

SP Kiran Kung said strict security arrangements have been made to safely bring the Indians from Iran to the military station from the airport. Additional police force will be deployed so that there is no nuisance on the route. Army has made all arrangements to keep them in isolation.

According to senior army sources, the evacuated persons will be kept under the supervision of expert doctors at the military station. Resources, equipment, doctors and nursing staff from various military hospitals from Jodhpur, Pune etc. have been brought to Jaisalmer for the purpose. Army source said the citizens will be transferred from the airport post their initial screening to a wellness facility with coordination of civil administration. 

