Coronavirus scare: 236 Indians, who returned from Iran, kept in isolation in Jaisalmer
2020-03-16
JAISALMER: In all, 236 Indians were airlifted from coronavirus-hit Iran and brought to Jaisalmer by two Air India flights on Sunday amid elaborate preparations made by the civil airport authorities, the army and the district administration.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Doctors from Jodhpur Medical College were deployed at the civil airport here when the passengers were taken to the wellness centre of army’s military station in four buses.

Two flights carried 118 passengers each, out of which 139 were students and 97 pilgrims. Airports Authority of India director B S Meena, district collector Namit Mehta, SP Kiran Kung and other officers were present along with the doctors at the airport.

One more flight carrying Indians airlifted from Iran is expected to arrive at Jaisalmer on Monday.

Meanwhile, two of the 236 Indians were found to be suffering from cough and cold. They have been admitted to the Air Force Hospital and their samples will be sent to check for the virus. Both are under medical observation.

Meena said the Indians arrived in Delhi from Iran in two flights at 3am, and after immigration and customs clearance, they reached Jaisalmer at 7.30am and at 8am. Meena added that the SOP was made in such a way that they did not need to come to the main terminal and were screened at the apron and were made to sit directly in the bus and were sent to military station.

District collector Namit Mehta said that these Indians were tested coronavirus-negative and there is no need to be scared and that they are kept at the military station as a routine medical process. The district administration and the army have been coordinating in this regard.

SP Kiran Kung said that security arrangements were made so that no nuisance takes place and the buses were sent to the military station under security cover. World-class arrangements have been made at the centre in military station.

Army official said, “As a precautionary measure, these evacuated persons are to be kept under quarantine for a period of fourteen days. The Indian Army has set up a wellness centre at various locations to provide a credible response to Covid-19.”

Defence spokesman said, “The wellness centre at Jaisalmer is fully equipped to help the Indian citizens undertake the mandatory quarantine period under the supervision of skilled medical authorities. Soldiers have volunteered to provide care and support to our countrymen returning from overseas.”

The source added, “The wellness centre is working in total synergy with the civil administration, airport authorities and Air Force, to ensure proper care is provided to all evacuated citizens. Prophylactic measures are being taken to prevent the spread of the contagion. There is no need to panic as requisite medical infrastructure is in place to handle any eventuality.”

