236 Covid-19 deaths in Chennai not recorded by Tamil Nadu government
2020-06-10
CHENNAI: At least 460 people have died of Covid-19 in Chennai till June 8, which is more than double the 224 announced by the directorate of public health (DPH), a scrutiny of the city corporation death registry has found.


A team of officials from the DPH who visited Ripon Buildings on Tuesday found the death register maintained by the health officer of the Greater Chennai Corporation had recorded 236 more deaths than the state register. If these deaths had been added, the fatality rate in the state would be close to 1.5%, against the 0.7% reported by state officials.

 

On Tuesday, TOI had reported that at least 20 Covid-19 deaths logged by the Railway hospital in Perambur were not reported to the state nodal office for Covid-19.

“We have no intention of hiding any deaths. We are transparent. This revision exercise also shows that,” health minister C Vijayabaskar told TOI.

All government medical college hospitals and some private hospitals have to report deaths to the state and city corporation through email. “Many have not submitted it and we are finding out why. We will add the cases to the death registry after verification,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh. “A committee has been formed to reconcile the issue within a week,” she said.

The DPH has issued showcause notices to hospitals and set up a committee to “streamline” death reports. It also directed the Greater Chennai Corporation to send all Covid-19 death reports to the state health agency in a prescribed format. Public health officials have also been directed to analyse all domiciliary deaths and see if they could be described as “probable Covid-19”, as per ICMR guidelines.

The director of public health Dr TS Selvavinayagam in a letter to the Greater Chennai Corporation Commissioner G Prakash said the state has constituted a 11-member expert committee under the chairmanship of DPH (OSD) Dr P Vadivelan to “analyse and streamline the Covid-19 death reports with regard to Chennai Corporation.”

In the two-page letter, he has asked the civic agency to send reports of all Covid-19 deaths reports as per prescribed format. “All Covid-19 deaths since March 2020 should be shared. From now on all deaths of Chennai Corporation have to be notified on a daily basis to this office by identified officials – City health officer or health officer”. Deaths will be scrutinised by the 11 –member committee, the letter said. Dr Selvavinayagam had also enclosed the format of reporting to the commissioner.

Officials in health department of Chennai Corporation said they had nearly 75% less deaths, partly because they have not updated the state death registry as they were short staffed.

Epidemiologists say doctors have to declare Covid-19 deaths and probable Covid-19 deaths along with a list of comorbidities. Like in every other death declaration sheets, the forms 4 and 4 (a) will also ask doctors to write down underlying cause, contributing factors and immediate cause. WHO has provided codes for Covid-19 deaths -- U07.1 for all Covid-19 deaths and U07.2 for probable Covid-19 deaths. In second case, Covid-19 virus is not identified through test, but doctors have clinically or epidemiologically diagnosed and suspect the virus.

“Accurate data is necessary to measure the public health impact, plan for timely health interventions and protect communities. At the same time, other health conditions affecting populations need to be also monitored so that the health system is prepared for responding to the needs of the population,” said a senior health official.

