24 cases registered in Bhopal for lockdown violation
2020-03-27
Bhopal: City police on Thursday registered 24 cases at eight different city police stations, against people violating lockdown restrictions enforced in view of Covid-19 spread. In all, 53 cases have been registered since Sunday, March 22, after lockdown orders were issued by district collector. 

The violators were booked under section 188, 269 and 270 of IPC along with section 51 of National Disaster Management Act. Kamla Nagar police booked two men, who were found loitering close to Upper Lake, near Van Vihar. Bajaria police registered two cases against two people loitering on roads near Habibia school and near Bhopal railway station without valid reason. 

Habibganj police also registered two cases against two such people violating the lockdown order. Bairagarh police booked a hardware shop owner for opening his shop in lockdown. Similarly, Nishatpura police registered a case against a vendor for opening shop in Karond mandi. Berasia police booked a man for loitering near bus stand. Eintkheri police registered a case against a farmhouse owner for allegedly renting two rooms in which 30-35 labourer were residing in pathetic conditions. 

DIG Irshad Wali said thanked people for supporting police by following lockdown restrictions. He appealed to people of the to follow social distancing for their own safety and asked them not to go out in crowded areas. He said that lockdown will be for long time, but it will save many lives. He asked people not to buy goods more than requirement and stay safe at home. 

Box- Cops distribute food packets and masks to the needy

A group of daily wage labourers approached Awadhpuri police station and told the cops they didn’t have any food supply. Acting on information, CSP (Govindpura) Ankit Jaiswal and other policemen arranged for necessary food items and distributed them among the labourers. Similarly, a group of daily wage workers, who had come to city from Chhindwara for work, left for their native place on foot due to no work and scarcity of food stuff. Misrod police, however, arranged for their food. Many cops distributed food packets and masks to the needy in their respective jurisdiction.


