24 Pune cops recover from Covid-19, ready for duty
2020-06-02
PUNE: As many as 24 Pune police personnel have recovered from Covid-19 and are ready for duties. 

Most were discharged by May-end and have been placed under the mandatory 14-day home quarantine before they resume work.

Traffic constable Sanjay Abanave, attached to the Mundhwa traffic division, was discharged on May 13 and is back at work. 

“I resumed duty on May 27. I had been waiting for the quarantine to get over quickly to resume work and share the workload. I developed fever on April 27 and my report came positive on April 29. I was on nakabandi duty at Keshavnagar and I stay at Bhawani Peth police lines. In hospital, I practised yoga every day and consumed warm water.” 

Raju Pawar, a sub-inspector at Dattawadi police station, was discharged from the hospital last week. 

“I am waiting to resume duty. I was at a nakabandi on Satara Road and was patrolling around Parvati Darshan. On May 14, I started feeling the symptoms and when medicines did not help, I went to Naidu Hospital where my sample was taken and I stayed in isolation for two days. When I tested positive, I took my wife and children for tests. They were free of the contagion. My condition was bad for the three days, but I recovered. I focused on devotional songs and Bollywood music until discharge,” he added.

Head constable Dattatreya Yele was on nakabandi and patrolling duty in Kasba Peth. “Our colleague tested positive on April 16 and 14 of us were kept under institutional quarantine. On April 20, I was among the four to test positive. I was stuck in the ambulance for almost an hour. I was asymptomatic, but fear made me feel things. I could not eat dinner or sleep the first night. A youth in the ward encouraged me to battle this virus,” Yele said. 

He said he walked, exercised and practised yoga till he was discharged on May 6. 

A police naik attached to a police station in central Pune said four hospitals and 25 days later, he is ready to resume duty. 

“Two tests on April 22 and April 23 came inconclusive. I was taken to Sassoon, then moved to Bharati Vidyapeeth, then KEM Hospital and finally Symbiosis. I am under home quarantine now. Nobody in contact with me caught the virus,” he said.


