24 from Kolhapur attended Tablighi event, 5 returned, others still in Delhi
2020-04-02
KOLHAPUR: The Kolhapur district administration has identified all 24 persons who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat conference in New Delhi last month. 

Five out of the 25 returned to Kolhapur on March 16. A screening process — after they entered Kolhapur — found that they did not have any symptoms. But authorities put them under quarantine on Wednesday as a precautionary measure.

Abhinav Deshmukh, the superintendent of police, said: “These five individuals who had returned after attending the New Delhi conference were screened in Kolhapur and sent home. But they were placed under quarantine on Wednesday, a day after we received an alert from the central government.” 

Daulat Desai, the district collector of Kolhapur, said: “The 19 remaining participants are still in Delhi. We are in touch with them and they are safe there. We have asked them to alert us as soon as they are back in Kolhapur.”

The district administration said the first five individuals were part of a group of 10 people who had returned to Kolhapur from Delhi on March 16. All the 10 were screened upon their return. 

Seven persons from Satara had attended the programme in Delhi and all have been sent into institutional quarantines.

Shekhar Singh, the district collector of Satara, said: “The seven people from here were tracked down after we held meetings with the community heads. Their throat swab samples have been sent to NIV in Pune. Three of the reports have come back negative. We are now waiting for the other reports. All are under institutional quarantine.”

In Sangli, the district administration said two persons from the district had participated in the conference. Both have been quarantined. Their swab samples will be sent to the laboratory, district administration officials said. 

And finally, the Solapur district administration has traced all the 17 people who have travelled to Delhi. They have been quarantined too. Sangli officials said they are in the process of collecting the samples from the 17 individuals for testing.


