Coronavirus scare in Kolkata: 24 ID cabins with attached toilets have hosted over 50
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: A woman from Beniapukur, who had returned from Saudi Arabia last Sunday, was sent to Infectious Diseases & Beliaghata General Hospital, popularly known as ID Hospital, after health officials at the airport found she had fever and cold. But she initially fled the hospital, refusing to get admitted to the government facility, fearing dirty wards, unhygienic toilets and poor services. 


But a visit to the hospital’s isolation wards, earmarked for treating Covid-19 patients as well as those suspected of being infected with coronavirus, presented a picture in contrast: 24 small, clean, single-bed cabins line Ward IB6, completely isolated from each other. Each cabin has an attached toilet. Though the nursing station is common, the facility has separate sets of portable equipment,like ventilators and ECG machines. This 24-bed quarantine ward at the state’s nodal hospital for infectious diseases was the first lot of isolation beds that the state health department had reserved for treating coronavirus suspected cases as well as those infected. 

 
 
Till Monday, the hospital had dealt with more than 50 people suspected of being infected with coronavirus but none had tested positive. However, on Tuesday Bengal recorded its first Covid-19-positive patient. “These isolation wards are designed for highly contagious diseases. While one section of the ward at the hospital was created when Nipah virus cases were reported, the other section is meant for swine flu patients. These wards are barely used as they are kept for only an outbreak like this,” said ID&BG Hospital principal Anima Haldar. The hospital has another isolation ward with 12 cabins, which was set up when Ebola cases were reported. “That section was never used. This, too, can be used for Covid-19 patients if need be,” Haldar added.

 Four beds in the intensive care unit have also been kept aside in case someone does test positive for the virus and needs intensive care unit support. In addition to the nursing and para-medic staff, a small team of doctors has been formed to deal with Covid-19 suspected cases. The core team comprises only three doctors—Shekhar Ranjal Paul from the department of medicine who has been trained in handling Ebola cases, microbiologist Kheya Muherjee and chest specialist Koushik Chowdhury who recently attended the WHO workshop on Covid-19 in Delhi. “As the number of patients increases, manpower shortage could be a crisis soon,” said a hospital insider. 

