24 more test Covid-19 +ve, tally surges to 231
2020-05-18
Ludhiana: Twenty-four more Covid-19 cases were reported on Sunday, taking Ludhiana’s count to 231, including 72 from outside the district. Besides, 10 Hazur Sahib, Nanded, returnees have tested positive in their second test. Ludhiana civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “Of 57 reports received from Rajindra Hospital, Patiala, 23 are positive and 33 negative. The 23 include 13 Railway Protection Force (RPF) personnel, who had come from Delhi; two Ludhiana railways employees; a 19-year-old New Kundanpuri resident; two civil hospital ward attendants; four relatives of Covid-19-positive employees of a tyre factory here; and a 14-year-old girl, whose details are yet to be ascertained.”Panic gripped civil hospital after the two ward attendants — a 37-year-old woman and a 44-year-old man — tested positive. The woman was working at Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) of mother and child wing of civil hospital and the man at Covid-19 isolation ward. “They were in contact with 50 employees, including doctors, nurses and Class IV employees,” said a doctor. “The woman’s contacts also include hundreds of mothers and babies. In May, more than 316 babies were delivered at the hospital and most of them were admitted to NICU. On an average, eight babies are admitted to NICU every day and mothers visit the unit to feed them,” the doctor added.The 44-year-old ward boy said, “I was posted at male ward, where positive patients were tested. I would work for six to 12 hours while taking all precautions. I am a contractual employee and have been working here from the past six years.”Senior medical officer Dr Geeta Kataria said, “Dr Ripudaman is preparing a list of their contacts.”The civil surgeon said, “Of 164 samples sent on Saturday, 131 were sent to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. They included 118 fresh samples and 13 repeat ones. Besides, 27 repeat samples were sent to virology lab of Dayanand Medical College Ludhiana and six to PGI, Chandigarh.”4 kin of tyre unit staffThe father, 65, of the tyre unit auditor, 35; wife, 36, son, 9, and father, 65, of a record keeper, 37, have contracted the virus. 13 RPF menThe 13 RPF men, who were quarantined at Meritorious School, Civil Lines, have now been shifted to the isolation ward of Mother and Child Hospital, Vardhman, Chandigarh Road. Of 79 RPF personnel who had come to Ludhiana from Delhi by Shramik trains, 47 have contracted the virus so far.2 railways employees The other two railways employees are a 33-year-old track maintainer and a 41-year-old loco pilot. Both are Railway Colony residents. The track maintainer had come from Delhi on May 13 by a parcel train and visited civil hospital the next day with complaints of breathlessness and fever. He was tested on May 15. “I was staying in Delhi with my parents from the past one-and-a-half months. I did not come in contact with any RPF personnel,” he said.The loco pilot had returned from UP on May 14 to join his duty. He is admitted to Vardhman hospital. “I live here with my wife and an 18-year-old son. I have fever and cough. I was screened at civil hospital before I joined duty,” he said.2 city residentsThe New Kundanpuri resident said, “I had visited civil hospital on May 14 with complaints of breathlessness and cough. I stay here with my parents, brother, 20, and sister, 15.”The details of the 14-year-old girl were not available till the filing of the report.6-year-old succumbs  A 6-year-old boy of Haibowal, who was admitted to PGI on May 15, passed away around 11pm on May 16. He tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday.