24 new Covid cases & 1 more death in city
2020-05-06
Aurangabad: The number of Covid-19 positive cases in Aurangabad rose to 321 following a sharp spike on 24 new patients on Tuesday morning. As many as 21 patients were reported from Jai Bhim Nagar alone and one each from Ajab Nagar, Sanjay Nagar and Budhha Nagar. Meanwhile, a 58-year-old patient died while undergoing treatment in a private hospital, taking the city’s Covid-related death toll to 11.

On Tuesday, until 4 pm, 45 people were screened for Covid-19 at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) and throat swabs of 20 were collected for testing.

Currently, 21 Covid-19 positive patients are admitted to the dedicated Covid hospital. Of them, 19 patients are stable and two are critical, Arvind Gaikwad, the nodal officer for media interaction at GMCH, said.

A 58-year-old man died while undergoing treatment at a private hospital on Tuesday morning. The man, a resident of Badhkal Gate area, was admitted to the private hospital on April 27 and had tested positive for coronavirus on May 1.

According to the hospital medical superintendent, he was admitted to the hospital with complaints of shortness of breath and fever. “He was a classic case of Covid-19. The cause of his death is pneumonitis as a result of severe acute respiratory infection and Covid-19,” the doctor said. The treating doctor added that the patient was on a ventilator for eight days. The hospital has two more Covid-19 positive patients one of whom is critical.

Officials request people 

to stay indoors

Over the past two days, senior officials including divisional commissioner Sunil Kendrekar and district collector Uday Chaudhari have been accompanying AMC administrator Astik Kumar Pandey and other officials of the civic body to virus hotspots like Jai Bhim Nagar and Sanjay Nagar Mukundwadi. On Tuesday, the officials were accompanied by MLA Pradeep Jaiswal and MLC Ambadas Danve. They appealed to people to stay at home and addressed their queries regarding the provision of essential services.

Meanwhile, 2,512 people looking to go out of the district were checked and issued medical certificates through AMC’s health centres across the city.


