24-year-old man tests positive for Covid-19 in Pilibhit
2020-05-05
PILIBHIT: A 24-year-old man of Bhuda Magrasa under Jahanabad police station in Pilibhit district has tested positive for Covid-19, taking the district's tally to four.

The man was asymptomatic. He was admitted to district government hospital on April 29 after his bike had reportedly collided with a Nilgai, and he sustained bone fracture. Thereafter, he remained admitted at Swastik hospital in Pilibhit for a day before moving to a private hospital in Bareilly on May 2 where his test report for Covid was received on Sunday.

The man is at present in Bareilly's L 2 hospital. His second sample was sent to government lab in Lucknow on Sunday night. The report's results are still awaited.

Health officials in Pilibhit have now quarantined six members of his family and other contacts, five staff members of district government hospital and 29 staff members of Swastik hospital who had come in direct contact with the infected man. The Swastik hospital itself has been transformed into a quarantine facility.

Their samples will be sent for testing to Lucknow. The district government hospital's premises has been completely sanitised as a precaution. Any further action would depend upon the disclosure of quarantined individuals’ test reports, said Dr CM Chaturvedi, the additional chief medical officer (ACMO).

District magistrate Vaibhav Shrivastav said that the administration ensured prompt action in accordance with the protocol of containment zone in and around Bhuda Magrasa. “We have announced one km area of Bhuda Magrasa as containment zone while four villages situated within 3 km radius is part of the buffer zone," he said.

ACMO Chaturvedi said thermal screening of villagers is in progress.

Tehsildar of Pilibhit sadar circle Vivek Kumar Mishra said that movement of people in Bhuda Magrasa has been restricted. The village's main entry and exit points have been barricaded with presence of police personnel.


