Covid-19: 25 health experts from Thiruvananthapuram leave for Kasaragod
2020-04-06
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With the number of positive cases increasing, a team of 25 experts from Thiruvananthapuram medical college has left for Kasaragod to help the healthcare professionals there. After two weeks, a second batch of experts will leave from MCH here. Earlier, when cases were reported from Pathanamthitta, an expert team from Thiruvananthapuram and Kottayam medical college hospitals had taken over the healthcare activities in the district.

Health minister K K Shailaja said the expert team comprising 10 doctors, 10 nurses and five paramedical staff would be stationed at Kasaragod medical college hospital which has been fully converted into a Covid-only hospital. The team headed by Dr Santosh Kumar, deputy superintendent of medical college hospital, will be stationed in Kasaragod for two weeks.

The bus that was carrying the team from Thiruvananthapuram to Kasaragod faced battery complaint when it reached near Haripad bus station around 11am. 

The complaint was rectified by the technicians of the Haripad depot and the bus continued its journey by 12 noon.

The chief minister has urged to make operational the hospital this week itself. Hence, with the arrival of the expert team it would be helpful for Kasaragod health administration to streamline the healthcare activities, she said. 

Presently, Kasaragod district has more number of Covid-positive patients in the state. Hospitals in Kasaragod have admitted 123 positive cases, 13 cases admitted in various hospitals on Kannur and one in Kozhikode hospital. Apart from this, 10,555 people are under observation in Kasaragod, of which 195 are in hospitals. 

“The aim of sending an expert team to Kasaragod is to provide the best possible treatment to those under isolation. We want the maximum number of people to get cured at the earliest. Hence, the expertise of these doctors and nurses will help the healthcare givers of the district strengthen the activities,” said the health minister.

The Kozhikode medical college hospital has been equipped with 200 beds and also with isolation rooms. The district health administration is ready to meet any emergency here, she added.


