25-year-old man among dozen more Covid deaths in Mumbai; toll rises to 76
2020-04-12
MUMBAI: The city recorded its youngest Covid-19 death when a 25-year-old man died in the BMC-run Rajawadi Hospital in Ghatkopar. He was brought to the hospital on April 7 with severe breathing difficulty. He had no co-morbidities but died within a few hours of being admitted.

The city death toll rose to 76. BMC officials said three of the 12 deaths on Saturday’s list had occurred between April 5 and April 9.

A 34-year-old woman who died in Sion hospital had diabetes and hypertension. She passed away two days after she was admitted on April 4.

All new deaths occurred in BMC hospitals. “Ten cases had co-morbidities and agerelated factors,'' a BMC official said. The Saturday deaths included four women.

Among the five healthcare workers to test positive on Saturday were a Thane gastroenterologist, three nurses — one each from Breach Candy, KEM and Bhabha — and a Jaslok Hospital attendant.

Among three persons from Badlapur who tested positive were the wife and daughter of a policeman posted in the city. In Ambernath, two more tested positive.

The BMC said it would start collecting samples at 17 parking lots even as the government decided to increase the number of tests done daily by “pooling” samples in batches instead of individual tests. Health minister Rajesh Tope said a few changes in the treatment protocol will have to be made. Hospitals would be segregated into three categories for asymptomatic patients (70%), patients with mild symptoms (25%) and those critical (5%).

Tope said the Centre had permitted the use of tele-medicine and mobile hospitals for non-Covid patients.

Paramedical staff who had volunteered to work in the current situation would be given training online.

“The high death rate in the state is a cause of concern and the most cases are those with co-morbidities and from the high-risk age group. We are working with experts to see if changing treatment protocols helps,” Tope said.

Patients discharged after a full recovery numbered 208.

( Inputs: Pradeep Gupta)


