250 in home quarantine, 10,000 food packets to meet emergency in Udaipur
2020-03-23
Udaipur: Around 250 people have been quarantined in their homes here while medical teams are reaching out to over 3,000 others who arrived here from different cities of Maharashtra and other states. So far, there have been no positive cases reported from Udaipur.

Meanwhile, people confined themselves indoors throughout Sunday. The streets and markets of the lake city were completely deserted. Talking to the media collector Anandhi said that the district administration is taking all necessary measures to check the outbreak of Covid-19. The collector also ensured the people that ample food and essential goods supplies are there.

“We will ensure that no one should starve due to lockdown. In the first phase we have arranged for 10,000 food packets to be distributed to the needy through Sahkari Upbhokta Bhandar in case of any emergency,” the official said. A helpline and control room would be set up soon and modalities would be developed to manage supply of essential goods and services during the lockdown period, Anandhi said.

She said that all public and private transport services would remain suspended during the period, however, limited vehicles would be permitted to carry patients to hospitals. Similarly, to avoid rushes and gatherings in vegetable markets, Udaipur will follow Bhilwara pattern of vendors going door-to-door in colonies for vegetable supplies.

The official also appealed to people not to unnecessarily rush to banks for non-commercial activities such as updating passbook. They should visit banks only for necessary transactions, she added. SP Kailash Chandra Bishnoi said that not more than 5 persons would be permitted to assemble at public places during the lockdown. Numbers limiting the assemblage of persons permitted during Section 144 has been amended and curtailed from 20 to 5 now, in view of few instances where some groups were found distributing kaadaa (herbal decoction) and masks at public places.

The SP also appealed to people not to fall prey to rumours on social media and spread them. “We have received two cases and arrested 8 persons so far for spreading false news,” Bishnoi said.


