Patna: 26 foreigners among 70 quarantined in four hotels
2020-03-29
PATNA: Altogether 70 people are under quarantine in four hotels in the state with Hotel Patliputra in Patna holding the maximum number of 44 suspects. The rest 26 are foreign nationals, who have been put up in Siddhartha Vihar, Sujata Vihar and Ashoka Atithi Griha hotels in Gaya.


Expenses of those quarantined in the four hotels is being borne by the state government. “Three meals, tea and drinking water is being provided to people quarantined in these hotels. A medical team is also deployed in each of these hotels and cops and magistrates have been deployed to ensure no one runs away from the quarantine centres,” a government official said.

Unlike other states, where private hotels have come forward and offered their premises to be used as quarantine centres, no such offer has been made by any private player in Bihar. Patna DM Kumar Ravi said he will hold talks with the management of private hotels in this regard. “Till now no one has come forward with such proposal, but we will explore the possibility,” he said. 

Patna civil surgeon Dr Raj Kishore Chaudhary said those quarantined in Hotel Patliputra Ashoka are the staff of a private hospital on Bypass road, which has been sealed after it was found that a Covid-19 positive patient had gone there for treatment and later two of its employees were also found infected.

Dr Chaudhary further said, “We are taking care of their food and other basic needs. They are being sent packed food and have been told not to come out of their room together. People should cooperate with us at this time and understand if there is slight delay in anything.”

Gaya DM Abhishek Singh said a total of 83 people have been quarantined in the district, including 57 Gaya natives who recently returned from Jaipur and are lodged in a government school. “The rest 26 are foreign nationals who are staying either at Siddhartha Vihar, Sujata Vihar or Ashoka Atithi Griha. While Siddhartha Vihar and Sujata Vihar in Bodh Gaya are managed by the state tourism department, Ashoka Atithi Griha in Gaya is managed by district administration. Food and other basic need of these tourists is being looked after by Gaya district administration,” Singh added.


