26 kin of Tablighi Jamaat attendees test positive for Covid-19
2020-04-11
COIMBATORE: The total number of Covid-19 cases in the district touched 86 on Friday when it reported 26 fresh cases - 21 women, two children and three men. They will be admitted to the ESI Hospital. 


All the 26 are family members of Tablighi Jamaat conference attendees, who tested positive for the virus a little over a week ago, from the district. Their nasal swabs were tested at the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital, along with samples of other 180 people. 

Of the remaining 180, 62 have tested negative, while the results of 113 are still awaited. 

Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said 20 of the 26 fresh cases were from Mettupalayam and the rest from Annur. The results of another five from these blocks were found to be inconclusive and are likely to be tested once again. 

“Of the 206 people, whose nasal swabs were collected, the results of 93 people have arrived. While 26 tested positive, 65 have tested negative. The results of remaining five are inconclusive,” he said. The tests of another 113 people, including those from corporation limits and other suburbs, were being run on Friday. 

Pointing out that the six patients from Annur have arrived at the ESI Hospital, Dr Ramesh Kumar said they were in the process of bringing the patients from Mettupalayam to the facility. He said those who tested negative have strictly been advised to remain in home quarantine. 

“We will now start tracing contacts of the 26 people who tested positive today (Friday). However, since they must have been infected after the lockdown began, we hope their contacts will not be too many,” the official said. 

Speaking to TOI, the deputy director of public health said the 206 samples - 93 from Mettupalayam, 22 from Annur, 82 from corporation limits and a few from other suburbs – were collected on Wednesday and Thursday. “All of them are family members of the people who tested positive for the virus more than a week ago.” 

Meanwhile, the health department has identified around 719 people from across the district, some of who had contact with positive patients, but tested negative, to take the rapid card test, which checks the presence of antibodies to the virus. “We have made the list of 719 people and are working on the modalities to administer the card test for all of them,” Dr Ramesh Kumar said.


