26% of 447 Covid-19 victims in Maharashtra had no health condition
2020-05-02
MUMBAI: The share of individuals with no underlying health conditions succumbing to Covid-19 has been steadily rising in the state. An analysis of 447 deaths by the medical education department on Friday showed that 26% of the victims didn’t have any co-morbid conditions such as diabetes or hypertension. About two weeks ago when there were 178 deaths, this share was around 19%. 

State data also shows that while a majority of the deaths continue to be in the elderly age groups, mortalities are being recorded among teenagers and young adults. There have been two deaths in the 11-20 age bracket, and 10 in the age-group of 21-20 years. The worst hit are those between 51 and 60 years; 124 of the 413 analysed deaths took place in that age bracket. 

Dr Anup Kumar Yadav, commissioner of the National Health Mission, said cases of younger people dying of the infection are being closely analysed in the state. “In some, we found a history of alcoholism, kidney or liver problems. But our audits largely point towards a delay in seeking care,” he said.

“In several, we found that they hadn’t accessed healthcare till about 12-13 days after the onset of symptoms,” Yadav added.

”In another tricky subgroup, there were some who were asymptomatic and by the time they reached hospital, they collapsed in hours,” Yadav added. A 53-year-old man, who was the first to receive plasma therapy in the city but died in Lilavati Hospital, had delayed coming to hospital by at least 10 day. Doctors said by the time he had reached, his lungs were done for.

Accounts of families show that crucial time is often wasted as patients are shunted between hospitals. The brother of a 25-year-old Girgaum resident who died told TOI how they were turned away by two private hospitals. Kasturba Hospital finally admitted his brother, but he succumbed in three days.

Dr Sanjay Mukherjee, medical education secretary, said there were some social factors at play. “Many are delaying seeing a doctor as they are worried about being quarantined and taken away if Covid-19 is suspected. We are getting this feedback from several parts of the state that fear is keeping people away from seeking care,” he said. AIIMS director Dr Randeep Guleria had said in Delhi the stigmatising of Covid-19 patients and their relatives were keeping people away.

Doctors are also not ruling out the possibility of genetic predispositions making some healthy individuals more susceptible than the rest. Dr Mukesh Desai, chief immunologist at Wadia Hospital, said the severity of the disease often depends on how the host responds to the virus. “Genetic defects could make people more susceptible to a severe form of the infection. An international consortium is already studying that,” he said. Infectious diseases expert Dr Om Srivastava said the immune system of a healthy individual, if rendered dysfunctional due to lifestyles choices, could also see a critical manifestation of the disease.


