26 quarantined after coming in contact with family of 6 who tested Covid-19 +ve
2020-04-02
Bareilly: After a family of six were found to be infected with Covid-19 in Bareilly, 26 other people were quarantined in Bareilly and Moradabad as a precautionary measure. Of these 26, most of them are railway staff members.Notably, among the family of six, a 54-year-old man, who tested positive, is a loco-pilot and he apparently went to work till March 25. The man even brought empty coach rake (ECR) on March 25 to Bareilly and came in contact with nine other individuals in Bareilly and 15 in Moradabad.After the loco-pilot was tested positive on Tuesday, the health department in Bareilly informed its divisional railway manager (DRM) in Moradabad. “At least 15 people who came in contact with loco-pilot have been shifted to quarantine centre of the Railways in Moradabad and their samples have been collected for Covid-19 test,” said Maan Singh, additional divisional railway manager.Station superintendent, Bareilly Junction, Satya Veer Singh said, “The man last came on duty on March 25 when he brought ECR to Bareilly. Nine people who were in close contact are now placed under home quarantine.” Apart from Railways staff, two relatives who met the family have also been home quarantined.According to officials, a 34-year-old man, who works at a Noida-based firm from where several cases of Covid-19 have been reported, returned to Bareilly on March 22. Officials said he claimed that he learnt on March 26 that his colleagues have contracted the virus and hence, he went to district hospital on March 27 to get himself tested. Though, the 34-year-old man tested positive on March 29, his father (loco-pilot), mother, wife, brother and sister were found positive on Tuesday.Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “We have identified 11 people, including railway staff, in Bareilly who came in contact with the family. Teams from several departments have been deputed to trace more contacts of the family.”Officials said as six members of the family tested positive, they have been under stress and are undergoing counselling. Khush Ada, a clinical psychologist, said, “The patients had become anxious as they were worried about their treatment and cure. So, I conducted tele-counselling.”Meanwhile, the health department constituted around 70 teams to conduct active case surveillance in three-kilometre radius from the patients’ house. Initially, after the first case was reported from Subhash Nagar, 10 teams were conducting active case surveillance in one km radius, but it has now been widened with the increase in the number of cases.