26-year-old from Pune quarantined to rule out coronavirus infection
2020-02-10
PUNE: A traveller who recently returned from China was isolated at the civic-run Naidu hospital on Sunday after he complained of minor illness, to rule out the novel coronavirus infection. 


“The newly-quarantined traveller is 26-years-old. He is a local resident and retunred from Hong Kong in China on February 2. He had been under our surveillance every since he came back. We quarantined him on Sunday when he developed cough and fever,” Ramchandra Hankare, the chief of the Pune Municipal Corporation’s health department, said. 

 
 
The man’s throat swab sample will be tested at the National Institute of Virology (NIV) for the novel coronavirus infection, he added. 

A total of 21,203 passengers returning from China and other affected countries have so far been screened at Mumbai’s Mumbai's Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA) since January 18. Of them, 151 travellers, who are residents of Maharashtra, were put under 14-day surveillance.

Of the 151 travellers, 36 were quarantined in Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur and other parts of the state only after they developed minor illness in the form of cold, cough, fever, weakness and body ache. 

“Of the 36 travellers who developed minor illnesses, 31 have tested negative for the coronavirus infection in the state so far, following which they were discharged. The remaining five travellers are still under isolation as their reports are awaited,” a state health official said. 

Pune was reeling under acute shortage of N95 masks because of the significant rise in their export to novel coronavirus-affected countries. The city got some relief after the Union government banned its export on January 31.

N95 masks are considered effective in preventing the airborne virus from entering the human body. 

However, experts said that only those working in close proximity with isolated travellers and in their close contact need the N95 masks. 

“As per the WHO guidelines, only medical staff involved in the care of isolated travellerers and their immediate contacts should use these masks. Other people should not panic and rush to buy masks,” Sanjay Patil, an eye surgeon and the president of the city chapter of Indian Medical Association (IMA), said.


