26-year-old tests positive, cops say he is Tablighi attendee
2020-04-06
LUDHIANA: A 26-year-old man from Rajgarh village, Payal block, tested positive for coronavirus on Saturday evening.

“He is one of the 20 people who returned to Ludhiana after attending a religious congregation from March 13 to 15 at Tablighi Jamaat Markaz in Hazrat Nizamuddin, Delhi,” stated the additional director general of police in a letter to deputy commissioner Pradeep Agrawal, commissioner of police Rakesh Agrawal and senior superintendent of police (rural) Vivek Sheel Soni on April 1.

With this, positive cases in Ludhiana district have reached six. Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “On Saturday, 46 samples were sent, one tested positive and the report of another is pending. The source of infection is yet to be traced.”

“He had travelled outside Punjab and we are tracking it. We have taken the samples of his family and admitted him to the civil hospital isolation ward late on Saturday night. We will also trace his contacts.”

The 26-year-old told the TOI that he visited Guntur district, Vijayawada, Hyderabad, from March 16 to 23 and stayed at an acquaintance’s house there. On March 23, he took a flight from Hyderabad to Delhi and returned to Ludhiana the next day.

 He denied attending Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi.

The deputy commissioner said, “The health department is keeping a check on his family. His locality has been sealed and police force deployed there.”

SSP (rural) Harpreet Singh, “His call records show that he was in Ludhiana from March 13 to 15. He had gone to Hyderabad on March 16. He was in Delhi on March 23 and came back to Ludhiana on March 24.” 

Apart from him, five women have tested positive for Covid-19 till now. They had no foreign travel history. The first was a 55-year-old from Gurdev Nagar who tested positive on March 24 and was admitted to Dayanand Medical College and Hospital. On Sunday, her throat swab was again sent to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. The second patient is a 72-year-old Jalandhar woman admitted to Christian Medical College and Hospital. Her condition is stated to be stable. The third patient, a 42-year-old woman from Amarpura Mohalla, was referred to Rajindra Hospital on March 30. She died the next day. Her 72-year-old neighbour is the fourth case. The fifth case is a 69-year-old woman from Shimlapuri. She too has succumbed to coronavirus.


‘Admitted, tested, discharged, picked up next day again’

The 26-year-old said, “The health department picked me up from my house on the evening of April 2 and admitted me to the civil hospital isolation ward. They took my throat swab and didn’t serve me dinner. I was told that my report will be out the next day. When I inquired that day, they said it will come on April 4. On April 4 morning when I asked them, they said I tested negative and I was released at 11.30am.” 

“I requested the health department to drop me home in an ambulance, as it was difficult to get a transport in the curfew. But they refused. I then walked till Dholewal Chowk, from where my father picked me up,” he added.

On April 4 night, health department officials called him up and said they were coming to handover to him his reports. “When they came, they said I had tested positive and that they had come to pick me up. I have no symptoms like cough and fever. I am perfectly fine. I didn’t go out during the lockdown.”

 On whether he attended the Islamic congregation in Delhi, he said, “I never went there. On March 16, I had gone to Delhi by Shan-e-Punjab Express. From there the next day, I boarded Vijayawada Express to reach Hyderabad.”

He lives with his parents, two sisters, wife and two sons. They have been admitted civil hospital isolation ward. 

Balbir Singh Sidhu, health and family welfare minister, said, “An inquiry will be marked against those who discharged the patient. Patients will now be told about their report status.”


