27 Covid-19 cases linked to 1st deceased in Satranjipura
2020-04-15
Nagpur: Nine more persons from the city tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday, taking the district’s total to 56. All nine are close contacts of the 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura, the only death registered in the district. Total number of positive persons from this single case has increased to 27, including the deceased, making it probably the second highest figure from a single patient in the country. This single case accounts for 48.21% of all positive cases of the district.Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe confirmed nine positive cases from the city and that all were related to Satranjipura deceased.Nagpur Municipal Corporation records show 58 persons were traced, examined and quarantined between April 6 and 12 after the death of the 68-year-old on April 5. The reports of the deceased came positive a day after his death.Earlier, 17 persons, including deceased’s son, daughter-in-law, unmarried daughter, married daughter with her two children, her husband, and widowed daughter with her three children had tested positive.Reports of 13 persons in this case have been negative as of now. Reports of remaining 18 are still awaited.NMC has declared two more containment zones — Rajiv Gandhi Nagar on Kamptee Road and Dalalpura-Itwari — as couple of positive persons from this case are residents of these areas. Now, NMC has started to also trace close contacts of these persons.Among the nine who tested positive on Tuesday, 6-year-old is daughter of the deceased’s son-in-law. Earlier, son-in-law’s wife (deceased’s daughter) and two children had already tested positive.Also, the son-in-law’s brother and wife have also reportedly tested positive.Deceased’s nephew, who runs a travel agency, tested positive a couple of days ago. His wife also tested positive on Tuesday.Of remaining five positive, one is daughter of one brother of the deceased and one is daughter-in-law of another brother.One is a person from the mosque in the area and a close contact of the deceased. One of the remaining two is a relative of the deceased’s daughter-in-law and one a close contact.NMC is yet to finalize source of infection to the deceased. The family members had ruled out any travel history of the deceased out of the city in last few months.At Mohali in Punjab, 38 persons from one case had tested positive at Jawaharpur village, making it probably the highest in the country so far. All were infected by a member of the village panchayat. The 42-year-old man contracted the virus after interaction with a member of Tablighi Jamaat, who had visited him from New Delhi. Then the panchayat member’s extended family, who all live next to each other, got infected. Of 38 cases in the village, the extended family has 36 cases, including him. The remaining two cases are close neighbours.Mundhe said, “All these positive cases were traced due to containment drive launched by me and my team immediately after the death of the 68-year-old. All positive persons are under hospital or institutional quarantine. Therefore, there is no risk of spreading from these persons. Now, our door-to-door survey to identify any more close contacts or suspected or high-risk patients from the area is underway. Another major advantage is that all have started to get treatment,” he said.