27 foreign Tablighis booked in Amravati, Gadchiroli
2020-04-14
Nagpur/Amravati: Continuing the crackdown on foreign nationals violating tourist visa norms, Amravati and Gadchiroli police have booked 27 Tablighis for indulging in religious activities. While 18 of them have been booked by Amravati police, 9 have been slapped with a case in Gadchiroli.

With this, the total number of Tablighi Jamaat members booked by the state government has gone up to 156.

Earlier, the police in Nagpur and Chandrapur had initiated similar action against foreign nationals.

Amravati police booked 18 foreigners, including five women, who were hiding in the city, for violating visa conditions, curfew and provisions under the Epidemic Prohibition Act.

Acting on a tip off, the police had traced them camping in Sabanpura locality under Kholapuri Gate police station. The cops have quarantined them after registering offences.

While one group had been camping in the city since January, the other since February.

All of them have been quarantined in a government building about 10 days ago. Of these, 10 are from Myanmar, one each from the USA and South Africa and six from Togo, said deputy commissioner of police Shashikant Satav.

The administration had sent throat swab samples for testing and the reports are still awaited, collector Shailesh Naval told TOI on Monday.

Police said even if their samples test negative, they will remain quarantined until their second swab test report comes.

In Gadchiroli, seven Kazakhstan and two Kyrgyzstan nationals were booked last week for violating tourist visa norms by participating in religious preaching and related activities. They had arrived in the Maoist-affected Gadchiroli via Delhi on March 11.

It’s learnt that local hosts of the foreigners had intimated police following which the health department had collected their swab samples for testing in the backdrop of the Delhi incident involving Tablighi Jamaat members. Following a state government decision, an offence was registered against them at Gadchiroli police station subsequently. 

Gadchiroli SP Shailesh Balkawade said the Tablighis, whose samples have been tested negative, have been told to remain in home quarantine.

“The Tablighis who had come to Gadchiroli had not attended the Markaz at Nizamuddin in Delhi in March. In fact, the Tablighis were in Gadchiroli when the Markaz was being organized in Delhi,” said Balkawade. The SP said the nine foreigners have been placed in institutional quarantine now.


