274 autos detained as drivers violate lockdown orders in Nagpur
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: Following Maharashtra government’s directives, the Nagpur district and civic administration have ordered all businesses to down their shutters and private transport operators to stay off the roads in a full lockdown in the state’s second capital amid the coronavirus pandemic.


The borders have been sealed and only those people who are in a list of what is considered as “essential services” are being allowed to move freely.

The decision has been taken as a part of the preventive measures to contain spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. Though directions have been issued for lockdown across the city along with its 15km radius till midnight of March 31, autorickshaw drivers were seen ferrying passengers. 

Now, the traffic police have started detaining such transport vehicles. On Monday, the traffic police stopped an autorickshaw driver at Law College Square ferrying six passengers in his three-wheeler from Wadi to Maharajbagh. 

After making the passengers to deboard, the traffic police detained the autorickshaw of Anis Khan. Not only Khan’s autorickshaw, the traffic police from all 10 zones on Monday detained 273 more autorickshaws for violating orders to keep the vehicles off roads. 

“There’s a lot of panic among autorickshaw drivers across the state. Earlier, we used to earn anything between Rs 500-Rs 800 a day. Now, the new rule means no ferrying of passengers and no livelihood until the situation improves,” said Vidarbha Autorickshaw Chalak Federation president Vilas Bhalekar. 

According to him, the city has around 18,000 autorickshaws and the coronavirus scare has directly hit their livelihood. 

“The federation has written to the chief minister Uddhav Thackeray demanding his immediate intervention in providing monetary assistance to the affected autorickshaw drivers. The federation also demanded supply of ration to autorickshaw drivers across the cities where their business has been prohibited. Besides, the government should also waive at least two EMIs of those who have purchased their autorickshaws by availing loans, he said. 

Besides autorickshaws, the traffic police also detained 36 e-rickshaws, 20 app-based taxis, 21 motorcycles and three private buses for violating the collector’s order. 


