275 people undergo rapid anti-body testing, all -ve
2020-04-20
Coimbatore: As many as 275 people had undergone rapid anti-body testing in the district as on Sunday and all of them had turned negative. Most of them were from Pollachi region. The rapid test kits have come as a relief not just to health workers who could cover more people in a shorter duration, but also for the public who undergo testing. The rapid test kits eliminate the anxiety and stress the public undergo waiting for up to 24 hours in the usual lab test results to come. With 1,700 more test kits remaining with Coimbatore district health officials, they have decided to intensify testing using these rapid test kits in the coming days. “The district received 2,000 rapid test kits as first instalment. We are using the kits in containment areas. As on Sunday, we had tested about 275 people and it would be intensified from Monday” collector K Rajamani said. In the coming days, health officials expect more rapid test kits to be given. “On an average, 100 kits would be used for each containment area,' Rajamani said. Ten areas in the city and eight areas in the suburbs were declared as containment zones. The collector said that they would be covering all other containment zones right from Anaimalai to Mettupalayam, police personnel and health workers from Pollachi government hospital.The officials have already tested about 2,075 people from the containment zones, including from RS Puram, Madukkarai, Kinathukedavu and Vettaikaranpudur, in the last few days using Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR). In total, over 3,000 people were tested across the district. An official from health department said, “It is a blood test which checks for the level of anti-bodies against the virus in the blood of an individual. The test would be done almost seven days after a person develops Influenza Like Illness (ILI) – the average time taken for the anti-bodies to develop.” If a person tests positive, then he/she would be directed to be in home quarantine for a week and if many people from an area, then measures would be intensified, the official said, pointing out that the rapid anti-body test is a surveillance test. “Until recently, we have been collecting nasal and throat swabs of the persons suspected to have symptoms and it takes hours to know the results. So, we could do the test only to limited number of persons. As results of the rapid test would be known within 15 minutes, we could do numerous tests a day and both the patients and doctors need not wait for long time to know the results,” the official added. 