28 quarantined in RUHS, no positive case reported from Walled City
2020-03-30
JAIPUR: In all, 28 people from Walled City were sent to RUHS quarantine facilities on Sunday. The good thing however is no more persons tested positive for Covid-19 from the area in the past two days. 

After reporting two cases of Covid-19 from the Walled City area recently, the health department has intensified screening of people for the virus. 

“We have identified 28 people who came in contact with the second Covid-19 case reported from Phhuta Khurra in Walled City. They have been sent to RUHS quarantine facility,” said a senior health department official. 

However, the health department has found two persons who came in contact with the second patient and now have complaints of fever and cough. They have been sent to Sawai Man Singh Hospital. The doctors admitted them and took their samples. The report is awaited. 

In two days, the health department’s teams conducted survey of the houses have conducted screening of 1 lakh people of the Walled City. The health department has adopted the same strategy in Jaipur which they had planned for Bhilwara to contain the spread. They have completely blocked entry of any person inside the Walled City and also outward movement is restricted. The health department has created a containment zone in Walled City area to allow the health department’s team to visit houses of the people to find out if anyone is suffering from influenza-like illness. 

Roads in the Walled City are wearing a deserted look as curfew entered its third day on Sunday. 

Police said they were allowing supply of essential commodities in areas where curfew had been imposed. The vendors under public distribution system are supplying grocery and other items such as milk, bread and vegetables have been made available at door steps of the people. 


50 quarantined in pvt hospital 

JAIPUR: In all, 50 people from Ramganj have been quarantined in a private hospital. The authorities counselled them and they agreed to stay in quarantine for 14 days. They were served with idli sambhar. Most of them called their homes and got books to pass their time and other glued to mobile phones. 


Medicine at doorstep

Health department has introduced a facility to provide medicine at the doorstep of patients at a time when the entire state is under lockdown. For helping patients, who are at home, a control room has been set up with the number 0141-2228600. A patient can call the number and provide information about medicines he requires. The control room will provide Whatsapp number of the chemist close to his house. The patient will send the information to the Whatsapp number of the chemist who will supply the medicine to the patient at his doorstep. 


