29 Aurangabad jail inmates test positive for Covid-19
2020-06-07
AURANGABAD: A total of 29 inmates lodged in the 'sealed' Aurangabad central prison tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, sending alarm bells ringing in the prisons administration. 

The jail, located in the Harsul area of the city, had imposed a complete lockdown on April 19 and the report showing the prisoners positive, though asymptomatic, for the virus has raised many questions.

A random screening started three days back in the prison and swab samples of 78 prisoners were taken. Out of these, 29 tested positive for the contagion, said the jail authorities.

"We are looking in to it and utmost precautions are being taken to ensure that the disease does not spread in the jail," deputy inspector general (prison) Dilip Zalke told TOI. 

The officer said that as a precautionary measure, 50 swabs of inmates as well as the jail staff will be taken on a daily basis from tomorrow.

Additional director general of prisons Sunil Ramanand said, "We have screened 90% prisoners in jails across the state. The remaining will be screened on Sunday. Our doctors are visiting prisons daily for monitoring the health of the inmates."


29 Aurangabad jail inmates test positive for Covid-19

The officer said it has been made mandatory for prisoners to wear face-masks and that systematic arrangements have been made for their stay in barracks, but social distancing is not possible in prisons. “No symptomatic cases have been reported at the eight prisons where the lockdown has been enforced. For instance in Arthur Road jail, 66 inmates have tested negative for the virus,” added Ramanand.

Aurangabad prison sources said among the 29 who tested positive are suspects remanded in judicial custody for last fortnight.

Prison superintendent Hiralal Jadhav said, “We have been taking precautions. Things entering the sealed prison include vegetables, groceries and milk and the virus may have penetrated while handling the same.” The officer said the staff working in the prison was not allowed to go outside after the jail was sealed. “We had tested our men before getting them posted inside,” he said.

(
With inputs from Asseem Shaikh)



