29 days into lockdown. Community kitchens starved of resources & support, seek subsidized grains from govt
2020-04-29
Nagpur: The extended lockdown has raised serious challenges for authorities as well as NGOs providing food and other services to the needy.

Several NGOs and trusts operating community kitchens and providing food to over 30,000 needy persons, including migrant labourers, have stopped the service because of lack of cooperation from authorities, and their own resources drying up after 29 days of service. Many others will follow as they can hardly sustain for 3 or 4 more days.

Jasmeet Singh Bhatia, president of Gurdwara Guru Nanak Darbar, said, “Our gurdwara was feeding around 22,000 people with an expense of Rs1.25 lakh daily. We began providing nutritious food to poor and homeless from second day of lockdown. All the expenses were taken care of by donations from all communities. Now, we are short of resources. Neither government is acknowledging us nor are we getting any grant or support from them. Forget support, even after several requests, they didn’t even send a team to sanitize the place where around 200 sevadaars were working.”

Honey Bhandari, member of the darbar, said, “Last week, many organizations had a meeting with district collector Ravindra Thakare regarding the problems community kitchens, individuals and trusts were facing. He was very positive and assured us all possible help, but no efforts have been taken yet.”

Ram Joshi, additional municipal commissioner, clarified the issues to TOI. He said, “The collector has made ration available to such organizations through FCI and fair price shops as they are entitled for the benefit. These trusts can apply and procure food grains on subsidized rates. As far as sanitization issue is concerned, we have sufficient stock of sanitizers and public places are being disinfected every day. Had they informed, due arrangements definitely would’ve been made.” 

“Under the guidance of our president Dilip Singh Dhillon, we were providing food from our kitchen to almost 5,000 people every day, but now we are able to feed only 600-700 people. Wherever we were asked to provide assistance, we religiously delivered food twice a day till April 14. We got unprecedented support through donations from all communities, but we can’t continue asking for more,” said Balwinder Singh Jaggi, member of Gurdwara Guru Tej Bahadur Ji, Baba Budhaji Nagar.

Anu Kale Chhabrani, a social activist, said, “There are around 1,800 families in Pardi and Bhandewadi who aren’t getting benefits of government scheme. We are providing them food and ration kits through our organization. If NGOs and individuals can work effectively, then why government bodies are lagging behind? It is only because of NGOs that these civic bodies are able to function efficiently. Even NMC kitchens are being run by NGOs and grains used to come through donations.”

TOGETHER WE CAN, a group of over 100 organizations, sent a list of suggestions to Maharashtra CMO, raising concerns about the closing of community kitchens due to lack of funds. According to the list received from NMC, almost eight lakh people require food daily and to cater to such a big population, all government/NGOs require money and foodgrain support from the state.

“We started distributing ration kits and cooked food from March 23. Initially, it was smooth but as time progressed we realized our resources would not last. So, we stopped distributing ration kits and continued distributing food boxes. We all would appreciate it if we could get ration at subsidized rates in coming days, or else it is going to be difficult to continue,” said Arshad Dalla, who is individually providing help to the needy.

Joshi added, “I am not denying the fact that many organizations providing cooked food are running short of resources, and finances. A common appeal should be made to people, industries and offices for donations, be it financial or raw material. I urge people to come forward and help these NGOs. Recently, MOIL extended financial support to ISKCON for their operations.”


