29 families account for 25% of total Covid-19 cases in Dharavi
2020-05-02
MUMBAI: The BMC, which has undertaken a vulnerability analysis of Dharavi area where the number of Covid-19 cases has been on a steady rise, has found that 29 families have 97 of the total 369 coronavirus patients or about 25% of the total cases.


Many of these families are those residing in the five high-risk zones identified by the civic body in Mukund Nagar, Madina Nagar, Social Nagar, Kalyanwadi and Muslim Nagar.

In an instance of the virus spread in the area, authorities said a 31-year-old patient from Kalyanwadi is the relative of a 70-year old woman residing in the same locality who had died on April 9. The elderly woman’s husband had died a few days ago and the 31-year old had visited her to offer condolences and is learned to have contracted the virus then.

In another case from Mukund Nagar where the BMC had held a health camp after a father-son duo tested positive, five more persons who were their high-risk contacts tested positive later.

The analysis, which is still underway, will identify areas which are seeing maximum growth in Covid-19 cases and also parts where community toilets are most burdened, among other things, so that a strategy to curb the cases can be worked out. The total number of Covid-19 positive patients in Asia’s largest slum stands at 369, which includes 18 deaths.

Kiran Dighavkar, assistant municipal commissioner of G North ward said, “While analysing the data of positive patients, we found 29 families had contributed to almost 97 of the total patients who have tested positive so far. We have conducted nearly 1,900 tests. While we immediately isolate the high-risk contacts of patients, often they develop symptoms during the 14-day quarantine period. Hence, we are expanding the quarantine capacity and have also taken over the administrative building of Mahim Nature Park where 500 beds will be set up.”

Other quarantine centres that are already operational include Rajiv Gandhi District Sports Complex with 300 beds, the 700-bed isolation facility at Dharavi transit camp school, 130 rooms in 11 lodges in the locality and 100 beds in a community hall. In addition, the BMC has also acquired a private school where it plans to set up a 1,000-bed institutional quarantine facility in the next five days.

