29 kids were born in 108 ambulances during lockdown in south Tamil Nadu
2020-05-09
MADURAI: Amid the lockdown, the GVK-EMRI 108 ambulance service in south Tamil Nadu has handled as many as 6,223 pregnancy cases between April 1 and 28 while 29 babies were delivered in the ambulance. Because of the risk involved, undertaking delivery in an ambulance is a last resort and the ambulance personnel hope to avoid it with more awareness among the public.

Madurai district saw the highest number of pregnancies with 1,113 cases while Dindigul had the most number of babies delivered in the ambulance with eight cases. On Friday, a 19-year-old wife of a farmer from Palgudi in Melur gave birth to her baby at home with the help of an emergency medical technician (EMT) of the 108 service. “When I reached there, I found people saying the delivery is already happening. I immediately ensured safe normal delivery and provided necessary aftercare. I took them to the nearest PHC as well,” said Sekar P, the EMT who was accompanied by ambulance pilot C Sakthivel. He said that in many cases, they receive calls only after the woman’s labour pain becomes intense, which makes it tough for them to reach on time to the PHC or hospital.

“When the expected date of delivery is known, we insist the public call us when the pregnant mother experiences mild pain. Otherwise, we insist the pregnant mothers to get admitted a day before the expected due date. Even the last screening check-up within the week before due date, we urge them to make use of ambulance to be on the safer side,” said R Prasad, regional manager, Madurai region of the ambulance service. He added that even on the 104 Health Advice Helpline Services, also run by GVK-EMRI, pregnant mothers are urged to make use of 108 Ambulances anytime. Ambulances ferry pregnant mothers either from their residence to the PHC or secondary or tertiary care centre, or from PHC to a tertiary care centre in case of complications.

Though the 108 ambulances and EMTs are fully-equipped to handle deliveries, deliveries in ambulances are done only in case of emergency. “It is just like staff nurses taking over in PHCs when the doctor is not available. All our EMTs have been provided training to conduct safe deliveries. A delivery kit is provided in all ambulances which carries a disposable gown for the EMT to use and all that is required to provide care for the newborn as well. The deliveries are also done after the vehicle is stopped,” said Prasad.


