Coronavirus in Tamil Nadu: 29 of Tenkasi’s 33 infected hail from Puliyangudi
2020-04-25
MADURAI: Puliyangudi has turned a Covid-19 hotspot with 29 of Tenkasi district’s 33 positive cases hailing from four streets in the town. The worst hit is Muthu Street where a 72-year-old man tested positive on April 11.


It is strongly suspected that a 30-year-old man from Kollam in Kerala who came to attend his uncle’s funeral could have been the prime source of infection for nearly 25 others in Puliyangudi. “But we as well as our counterparts in Kerala are unsure if he had contracted the infection in Kerala and brought it here or vice versa,” a health official told TOI. 

A 76-year-old man from Puliyangudi who was not suffering from Covid-19 passed away in the third week of March. The 30-year-old man and his mother, his close relatives, came for the final rites on March 19. While Kerala was a hot bed of the infection at that time the lockdown was yet to be enforced in Tamil Nadu since there were not many cases here. Around 40 people attended the funeral. 

A few days after his 16th day rites, the 72-year-old man, suffering from bronchial asthma, diabetes and hypertension, tested positive on April 11. “He may not be the first person to contract the infection. But for him, others were asymptomatic,” the official said and added that they tested over 1,000 primary and low risk contacts in the vicinity of whom 29 tested positive. On cross verification it came to light that the Kollam native tested positive on Wednesday.

“What we need is ensuring that all positive cases and their contacts have been tested and if the area is properly contained. These are the priorities we have been asked to focus and we are doing it,” Tenkasi district collector G K Arun Sundar Thayalan told TOI. One man in the town who attended the Delhi religious conference and his neighbour also had tested positive. Those who tested positive are under treated in the Tirunelveli government medical college hospital and there has not been any casualty till date. Health officials recalled that one of the 10 Malaysian nationals who travelled from Tenkasi to Chennai on a van to fly to Kuala Lumpur earlier this month had tested positive.

