Delhi: 2,000 Covid cases in 7 days, no new red zones
2020-05-08
NEW DELHI: Though the number of Covid-positive cases has risen sharply, no new containment zones were created in the city since April 30. In the past seven days, over 2,000 cases have been reported. While there were 3,515 cases till April 30, the numbers rose to 5,532 by May 6.

Compared with Mumbai, Delhi has a negligible number of containment zones with nearly half as many cases. The capital currently has 86 containment zones, while Mumbai has 2,473 red areas with 10,527 positive cases.

On April 14, when Delhi had 1,500 positive cases, there were 55 containment zones. Their numbers rose to 100 when over 3,300 positive cases were reported on April 28. The first containment zone was created in Dilshad Garden and Seemapuri on March 26.

The authorities converted localities into containment zones when three or more Covid-positive cases were reported from the area. Some apartments were made into containment zones after a single positive case was detected. The areas were sealed and barricades were placed at the entry and exit points. Policemen were deployed to ensure no one entered or exited the sealed area. An extensive sanitisation and screening exercise was mounted to ensure that coronavirus didn’t spread.

While the government maintains area-wise information of the positive cases, it is not disclosed even to the media. Most of the 2,000 positive cases that have been reported since April 30 have not come from the existing containment zones.

Delhi government’s “Operation Shield” has been quite successful. Under it, extensive screening, testing, sanitisation and delivery of essentials has been done in the containment zones. A few red zones witnessed a spurt in cases, but the infection didn’t spread outside the sealed area.

“The creation of containment zones made people in neighbouring areas careful. It prompted them to follow social distancing out of fear. It also exerted a positive pressure on the district administration to intensify the fight against coronavirus,” said a senior IAS officer.

Countering apprehensions that no new containment zones were created despite over 2,000 cases, a government source denied any adverse pressure by the government on the authorities. All 11 districts are in the red and creation of more containment zones would keep them that way. No economic activity is allowed within a containment zone.

A senior official said the strategy to fight novel coronavirus was evolving and the focus had shifted to multiple aspects, like home isolation. “The 700-odd homes where people were under home isolation couldn’t be made into containment zones,” he added.

Delhi Medical Council member Dr Harish Gupta said that surveillance is extremely important. “Delhi has made significant achievements in the fight against coronavirus and the creation of containment zones has been very effective. Such zones should be increased, if required,” Dr Gupta said.


