3 areas have bulk of Covid-19 +ve cases in Madurai district
2020-04-25
Madurai: Madurai has been witnessing alternate periods of highs and lows in the number of cases in the last one month ever since the first Covid-19 positive case was recorded in the district on March 23. As on Friday, as many as 56 cases have been reported. 

The spread of cases has so far been sporadic across the district with Elumalai, Melur and Anna Nagar areas showing a concentration. While initially the rise in Covid-19 cases was mainly from single source infection, post mid-April more cases started to spring up from other primary sources.

The first positive case and death in Madurai was a 54-year-old man from Anna Nagar. While just six cases were reported in March, the number in April till Friday stands at 50. There has been an alternative rise and fall in cases every five days throughout the month so far. If one spell of five days saw around five cases, the successive period saw a rise up to over 10 cases with the maximum at 16. The most cases to be reported in a day in the district was 14 on April 13. The second death of a Covid-19 patient here, the 70-year-old mother of a priest at Meenakshi Amman Temple, was reported 30 days after the first.

In terms of age and gender, the district has seen more men than women patients, while the most number of cases are of people aged between 30-50 years at a total of 27 cases. Only four positive cases of those below 18 have been reported. As many as 18 positive patients were aged between 50 and 80 years who also include the two casualties. Out of the 56 Covid-19 positive cases, 27 patients have been discharged so far, indicating that more than half of them have been discharged already, apart from the two deaths.

Three Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) staff tested positive recently. As many as 21 different localities in the district have recorded Covid-19 cases so far. A total of 27 cases have been reported in rural limits while the corporation limits have seen slightly more cases with 29.

With various measures including strict lockdown and active screening in place in the containment zones, district officials are set to crack the whip further on violators and halt the spread. With Madurai corporation slated to enforce complete lockdown from April 26 to 29, the situation is expected to turn for the better.


