Coronavirus in Gurugram: Three auto majors shut operations till March 31 but a few firms still open
2020-03-23
GURUGRAM: All three auto giants based in the city — Maruti Suzuki, Hero Motocorp and Honda Scooters and Motorcycles — will remain shut till the month-end. 


 Coronavirus in India live updates

A statement issued by Maruti stated, “The company will shut the production and office operations at its facilities in Gurugram and Manesar with immediate effect till further notice. The research and development centre at Rohtak will also remain closed as per the government policy.” All the original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) will also be shut till March 31.

At a time when the authorities taking all precautions to avert the spread of Covid-19, a few organisations in the city continued to operate even after the Centre declared Janta Curfew on Sunday. Several employees of FIS Global located in Sector 18 alleged that their organisation was forcing them to work despite the government’s shutdown orders.

“We have more than 500 employees in our office, and there will be more staff strength from Monday. Though the company is providing a pickup-and-drop service, it is not enough to transport all staff who are working,” said a woman employee of FIS Global.

Another employee told TOI that the company asked the staff to come on Sunday and even offered double the pay for these days. “The management is not providing paid leaves during the lockdown period as it said we would have to use our casual leaves if we needed an off,” he said.

When TOI visited the office of FIS Global on Sunday, security guards confirmed that the operations were underway inside its building. Many employees even took to Twitter and complained to the deputy commissioner that the company was forcing them to work.

When contacted, an FIS Global representative said, “The health and safety of our employees are our primary concerns during this crisis. FIS is designated as a government-sanctioned critical infrastructure provider within the financial services industry. This means we have the responsibility to operate all financial systems. We are taking utmost care to protect health and wellbeing of our critical support staff who are working in our offices. This includes enhanced cleanliness drives in our offices. The company is also following the social distancing protocols.”

An employee working with IGT Solutions — a business processing management company — in Sector 19 alleged that the management was forcing people to come to work despite the government curbs. “Our organisation is operating round the clock, and even paying extra money for those who work during the lockdown period,” said an employee, who doesn’t want to be named. Queries sent to IGT Solutions were also not answered.

TOI talked to the deputy commissioner. He said the administration is looking into employee’s complaints.


