Covid-19 in Delhi: Three corporations invoke emergency clause, insist on hand wash points
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: For residents’ welfare associations, market bodies, restaurants, banquet hall, hotels, guesthouses and mall managements, it is now mandatory to have a sanitation facilities at various points where hands can be properly washed with soap and water and spritzed with hand sanitisers. On Monday, the three municipal corporations issued these instructions under the rarely invoked Section 376 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, which empowers the municipal commissioners to issue directions to be observed by public or a particular section to prevent outbreak of a disease.


 Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The requirements will remain applicable, for now, till March 31. The managements of restaurants, banquet halls, hotels, guesthouses and mall have also been instructed to ensure no crowding at any particular site on their premises. “Any persons who commits the breach of these directions will be deemed to have committed an offence under Section 188 of Indian Penal Code dealing with disobedience of an order duly promulgated by a public servant and will be prosecuted in court,” a municipal official asserted. “Violators are liable to be punished with a fine and imprisonment up to six months.”

The order specifies locations where sanitation points need to be installed. RWAs and commercial establishments have been told to have these at entry points, while market association will should do so at multiple points, including entry points and existing piaos (water dispensers).

“Checks on compliance will begin from Tuesday. The goal is to control the spread of the novel coronavirus before it overwhelms the health system,” said a health official. “The last time Section 376 was resorted to was during the dengue epidemic of 1997 when people were warned that mosquito breeding conditions on their premises was punishable.”

While North Delhi Municipal Corporation commissioner Varsha Joshi said the facility should offer either soap and water or sanitisers, a health official said the former was preferable.

Not all RWAs are happy with the order. Chetan Sharma, head of Confederation of NCR RWAs, said that its members were voluntary organisations with no funds for such requirements. “The municipals should provide us resources to set up sanitary points,” he said. B S Vohra of the East Delhi RWA Joint Front pointed out that this order could be suitable for group housing societies, not plotted colonies. “EDMC and Delhi government should provide the RWAs with sanitisers and masks,” Vohra added.

Rajeev Kakria of Greater Kailash I RWA felt that instead of ordering the RWAs, the corporation commissioner should have requested the residents’ associations to help gap the shortcomings and functioning of the civic bodies. “RWAs do not have half the funds that civic bodies squander on endless meetings,” he snapped. “The government doesn’t want to empower RWAs through some statutory laws but turns to them for everything.”


