Three Covid-19 cases reported in AIIMS-Rishikesh, all from non-covid wards
2020-04-29
DEHRADUN: In an unprecedented rise, three new positive cases of Covid-19 were reported from All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Rishikesh – the biggest healthcare institution in the state -- in one day, on Tuesday. 


All the new cases were reported from non-Covid wards of the hospital, including a patient of brain hemorrhage. The hospital administration is planning to quarantine around 70 hospital staffers who have come in contact of the affected patients. With the three new cases, the total number of coronavirus patients reached 54 in Uttarakhand. Meanwhile, with one patient getting discharged from a Haridwar hospital on Tuesday, total cured cases have now touched 34. The state currently has 20 active cases. According to the AIIMS-Rishikesh administration, a 56-year-old woman from Nainital, was admitted here on April 22. The hospital authorities said that the patient became symptomatic on April 27 and her samples were thereafter sent for test.

"She tested Covid-19 positive on Tuesday. The patient was suffering from brain hemorrhage since March 2 2020 and was initially admitted to Brijlal hospital in Haldwani. On March 28, she was moved to Vivekanand Hospital and the family has also taken the patient to Rammurthi hospital in Bareilly. She is currently in ICU in AIIMS," informed AIIMS dean hospital affairs, UB Mishra who added that both the hospitals where she was treated initially have mentioned her status to be ‘Covid-19 negative’.

Meanwhile, another 26-year-old female staff nurse in General Surgery Ward was found corona virus-positive in AIIMS on Tuesday. She was on duty till April 27. Her roommate and others who she came in contact with in the past 10 days are being tested and quarantined. 

The third Covid-19-positive case reported at AIIMS Rishikesh on Tuesday was an attendant of a 56-year-old female patient admitted in the hospital with gastric outlet obstruction, in urology ward."We are expecting that the staff nurse must have come in contact with the Nainital woman while the attendant was in Urology department from where one of our staff nurses found to be positive two days ago. All the cases have no travel history," said an official of AIIMS. 

Meanwhile, panic gripped the medical fraternity of the hospital after two cases of Covid-19 were reported from non-Covid wards. Over 70 doctors, nurses and residents have been ordered to be quarantined in AIIMS.


