3 Covid-19 deaths in a day in Akola, 44 new cases in Vid
2020-05-27
Nagpur: The series of Covid-19 deaths in Vidarbha since May 21 continued on Tuesday with three deaths in Akola, taking the death toll to 56. Akola accounts for 28 of these 56. Akola also reported 20 new cases, followed by Amravati (7), Nagpur (5), Bhandara (4), Buldhana (3), Wardha (3), Gadchiroli (1) and Gondia (1), taking total number of Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha to 1,353. 

Total 45 patients — including 38 from Akola, 4 from Amravati, and 1 each from Nagpur, Buldhana and Chandrapur — recovered and were discharged on Tuesday. With this, 859 patients have recovered out of the 1,353 patients. Recovery rate is 63.48%, which is more than double of Maharashtra’s 30.60%. 

Of the three deaths in Akola, a 56-yr-old man from Balapur, who was admitted on May 22 and tested positive on May 25, died during treatment late on Monday night. A 66-yr-old man, resident of Old city, who was admitted on May 18 and tested positive on May 22, died on Tuesday afternoon. Third death was of a 71-yr-old man from Akot File area. He was admitted on May 23 and died on May 24. His swab samples tested positive on Tuesday. Apart from these three deaths, Akola also reported 20 new cases and surpassed Nagpur by one case. Now, Akola has 435 cases against Nagpur’s 434.

Nagpur recorded five new cases today, including a 23-yr-old pregnant woman from Mominpura. Gondia and Gadchiroli reported one positive patient each. Gondia now has 49 cases and 48 of them are active cases. On Tuesday, the food contractor appointed by Gondia district collector at the GMCH Covid hospital failed to provide food on time. Patients remained without food for almost the full day. District administration lodged FIR against the food contractor in the evening.

Bhandara reported three new cases, all travellers from Mumbai and Pune. 

In Wardha, three people from Mumbai who reached on Monday tested positive on Tuesday. The victims are from Hinganghat and Wardha tehsil. A 28-year-old nurse from Sion area in Mumbai came to Sawangi in Wardha on May 16. The woman was admitted to a general hospital with symptoms like fever, cough, etc and her swab samples rested positive. Now she is undergoing treatment at Acharya Vinoba Bhave Rural Hospital, Sawangi.

A couple from Shirud village in Hinganghat taluka came from Chembur on May 18. They were placed under home quarantine. The swab samples of five persons from his family were taken on May 24. Out of these, samples of husband and wife have tested positive for Covid-19. The patients have been admitted to Kasturba Hospital in Sewagram and are undergoing treatment.

In Amravati, seven new cases, all from different localities in the city were reported. It took the district’s count to 185, including 15 deaths, 79 active cases, 3 referred to GMCH, Nagpur, and 88 discharged. 

Shiv Nagar grabbed attention on Tuesday morning with three females, aged 21, 45 and 4, and a male aged 31 contracting the virus. In the evening, shock waves spread in Camp area as a 61-year-old male from Frezerpura tested positive along with a 64-year-old male from Ratanganj and a 20-year-old girl from Masanganj. Ratanganj thus posted its third case while Masanganj its 27th. Shiv Nagar’s count went up to 11 in a week with morning’s four cases.

On the brighter side, four patients — three from Lalkhadi and one from Masanganj, were discharged from Covid hospital this evening, taking the count of discharged patients to 88.

Three women from Nandura and Chikhli of Buldhana tested positive on Tuesday taking total cases in district to 48, with 27 discharged and three deaths. Buldhana collector Suman Chandra said returnees from hotspot areas are not following home quarantine properly. “Such violators would be put in strict institutional quarantine for violation of 14 days home quarantine. Some people are treating people returning to their legitimate houses or villages as some kind of vile existence. Such discrimination is unnecessary,” she said, adding that safety precautions are necessary.

No new positive case was reported in Yavatmal on Tuesday and hence the total positive in the isolation ward is 15 for the third consecutive day. Washim also remained free from coronavirus for the eighth day in a row, with all 14 samples testing negative.


