Covid-19: Three deaths in AP, 54 positive as cases rise in Visakhapatnam city
2020-05-09
VIJAYAWADA: Andhra Pradesh reported three deaths and 54 new Covid-19 cases on Friday as coronavirus made inroads into Visakhapatnam city. The state’s tally has increased to 1,887, and toll has gone up to 41.


In a departure from the ongoing trend of red zone districts registering more cases, Anantapur and Visakhapatnam, which have so far reported fewer cases contributed to the state’s Covid-19 caseload on Friday. While Anantapur reported 16 cases, Visakhapatnam registered 11 cases. There has been a steady increase in the number of cases in the three north coastal Andhra districts, which earlier remained relatively coronavirus free.

Visakhapatnam district for the first time witnessed 11 new cases in a single day. Covid-19 cases emerged from several new areas in Vizag city, including Pithapuram Colony, KRM Colony, Prahladapuram, Gajuwaka, Relli Veedhi, Vepagunta and Jalaripeta. With this, the pandemic has spread to almost every part of the city, which incidentally witnessed styrene leak tragedy on Thursday. Two ward secretariat employees and a few sanitary staff in Visakhapatnam tested positive to the disease. Covid19 cases in Vizianagaram district now increased to four after it reported its first case two days ago.

Vizianagaram district officials identified nearly 165 primary and secondary contacts of the four Covid-19 patients and sent them for testing. The district officials appointed an incident commander for each Covid-19 patient to oversee containment measures and surveillance measures.

Kurnool for the last two days reported only single-digit cases providing a major relief to district officials. There has been some downward trend in Guntur and Krishna districts also for the last few days. After a long gap, West Godavari contributed 9 cases to the state’s tally. In Vijayawada, two employees of the city municipal corporation became the latest victims of the pandemic.

As many as 62 Covid-19 patients were sent home till Friday morning, taking the cumulative recoveries to 842. With this, the recovery rate of coronavirus positive cases has now improved to about 45 per cent. Kurnool district discharged the highest number of patients (191), followed by Guntur (164). The state has so far tested 1.56 lakh Covid-19 samples, including the 7,320 people screened for the pandemic between 9am on Thursday and 9am on Friday.

