Coronavirus outbreak: 3 die in Jaipur, 74 test positive across state
2020-04-30
JAIPUR: Three persons died in Jaipur while 74 others tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Wednesday. A 55-year-old woman, resident of Ramganj, passed away after she was admitted to SMS Hospital on Wednesday. A 67-year-old woman, resident of Johari Bazaar who was admitted to SMS Hospital on April 22, also died on Wednesday while undergoing treatment. She was suffering from diabetes, hypertension, coronary artery disease and hypothyroidism.

A 67-year-old woman from Subhash Chowk, who was admitted to the hospital on Wednesday, died on the same day. She was suffering from breast cancer. With three deaths, the total toll has increased to 30 in Jaipur and 55 in the state.

Besides, 74 persons tested positive, taking the total count of infected persons to 2,438 in the state. Of the 74 patients, Jaipur reported 22 cases.

According to the health department, the districts which reported Covid-19 cases are Jaipur (22), Jodhpur (13), Ajmer (11), Pali (9), Chittorgarh (8), Kota (3), Bhilwara (2), Dholpur (2), Banswara (1), Bharatpur (1), Nagaur (1) and Udaipur (1).

In Jaipur, six persons were found infected in Ramganj, six in Johri Bazaar, while one each case was reported from Chandwaji, MI Road, Sodala, Police Line, Tonk Road, Purani Basti, Shastri Nagar, Sikar House and Jamwa Ramgarh, aamong others.

Meanwhile, in Churu, all the 14 patients have been cured of Covid-19. Other than Churu, Pratapgarh and Bikaner too do not have active Covid cases. In Pratapgarh, the two Covid-19 patients have recovered, while in Bikaner, all patients have been cured of coronavirus.

With Covid-19 cases being reported regularly from different parts of the state, the health department has issued directions to all officials across the state to ensure proper care for pregnant women. Additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh has issued guidelines for registering each and every pregnant woman on the online pregnancy and child tracking system.

The department also issued directions to ensure that the outbreak does not in any way affect maternal and childcare. The guidelines emphasised on the need for proper check of hemoglobin count of pregnant women, distribution of iron folic acid tablets, calcium and albendazole tablets. High-risk pregnant women will be taken to hospitals by the 104 ambulance service for antenatal checkups, and blood banks will remain functional. The guidelines also said that high-risk pregnant women should get care from specialist doctors.

It also clarified that suspected pregnant women, who belong to hotspot areas, cluster and containment zones or have come into contact with positive persons, should be treated as per the Centre’s guidelines.


