3 die, 118 test positive for virus in Rajasthan
2020-05-01
JAIPUR: Three persons died, two in Jaipur and one in Udaipur, from Covid-19 infection on Thursday, taking the death toll in Rajasthan to 58. Additionally, 146 persons tested positive for the virus on the day. The total count of coronavirus infected persons in the state now stands at 2,584.

Most of the deaths have occured in Jaipur, which accounted for 32 of the total 58 virus fatalities in the state. A 67-year-old resident of Chandi Ki Taksal of Jaipur, who was admitted to the MG hospital on April 19, died on Wednesday. He was suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Another death was reported from Sodala. A 54-year-old person, who was rushed from his house in Sodala to SMS Hospital on April 25, died on Wednesday. His condition deteriorated as he had diabetes and hypertension. Both deaths were confirmed on Thursday.

Apart from these two deaths, one person died in Udaipur. A 43-year-old resident of Nimbaheda of Chittorgarh, who tested positive for Covid-19 on April 25, died on Thursday. He was undergoing treatment at MBG Hospital. The cause of concern for health authorities is that the person had no underlying condition.

According to health department officials, 146 persons were found infected with coronavirus on Thursday afternoon. Among districts which reported cases are Jodhpur (97), Jaipur (29), Ajmer (4), Chittorgarh (3), Tonk (2), Kota (5), Banswara (2), Dholpur (1), Alwar (2) and Baran which reported its first Covid-19 case. In the state, 29 districts have reported Covid-19 cases so far.

Health department officials in Jodhpur said, “The samples were sent to Delhi for clearing backlog. The reports of these samples were issued today, which is why, increased number of patients have been found positive. They belonged to Bamba mohalla and nearby areas which falls in 3 km radius.”

In Jaipur, out of 29 persons, four were tested positive in Ramganj, five from Shastri Nagar, four from Sadbhawna Nagar, three each from Adarsh Nagar and MD Road, while one each case was reported from Idgah, Sitapura, Gandhi Vihar, Bapu Bazar, Luniyawas, Shyam Sundar Nagar, Murlipura, Bani Park , Malviya Nagar and one from unknown area.

Health minister Raghu Sharma said the threat of coronavirus was slowly but surely fading away. “In the state, there are only seven districts which have reported over 100 cases. There are seven districts where there are no active cases of Covid-19. Other districts have reported sporadic cases. A lot of them have recovered. Currently, only nine Covid-19 patients are undergoing treatment in ICUs. Among them, only two are on ventilator support,” Sharma said.

According to the health department, 836 patients have recovered and 592 discharged so far from hospitals after treatment. 


