Covid-19 in Delhi: Three hotels near IGI Airport chosen to offer paid isolation facilities
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: To quarantine the Indians coming from the countries affected by the Covid-19 disease, Delhi government has asked three hotels in Aerocity near Indira Gandhi International Airport to set aside paid facilities.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In an order issued late on Sunday, New Delhi district magistrate Tanvi Garg asked the IBIS to keep 92 rooms, The Lemon Tree Premier 54 and Red Fox 36 rooms for per day tariff of Rs 3,100 (plus taxes) for the Indians who fly in from abroad and require a minimum of 14-day quarantine.

The orders were issued under Delhi Epidemic Diseases, Covid-19 Regulations, 2020, said a Delhi government official.

The move, said an official, was necessitated after several Indians complained of poor facilities and unhygienic conditions at quarantine facilities arranged by the government. A group of people who were provided accommodation at police training college in southwest Delhi’s Dwarka wrote to the area SDM complaining about unhygienic conditions.

CM Arvind Kejriwal acknowledged that there could be some problems at such facilities. “People flying in from abroad mostly belong to the affluent class. In some cases, the facilities may not be up to their expectations. There are shortcomings also. So, we have made arrangements for them in certain hotels,” he added.

“We have sufficient beds if cases increase and hospitalisation is needed,” he added.

Those availing the hotel facility would get three meals - breakfast, lunch and dinner - two bottles of mineral water per day, tea and coffee and other facilities such as Wi-Fi and TV. Their laundry won’t be mixed with those of others.

According to the orders issued by the DM, meals to such guests shall be served in their rooms only in disposable plates. Security personnel of the hotels shall ensure that the movement of these guests is restricted. The management shall also observe the movement of these guests through CCTVs.

While the payment to hotels would be made by the beneficiary, the orders directed the hotel to “avoid” requesting for advance payment. A Delhi government official said the room occupancy at these hotels had reduced significantly and arranging rooms to quarantine people would not be a difficult task.


