3 linked to Tablighi Jamaat event test positive for Covid-19
2020-04-04
Belagavi: After Bidar, three more people linked to the Tablighi Jamaat event in Nizamuddin in Delhi, tested positive for Covid-19, in Belagavi on Friday. The results for the tests came in on Friday afternoon.

With this the total number of cases associated with the Tablighi Jamaat event rose to 15 in North Karnataka. A total 11 people who were associated with the event tested positive for Covid-19 in Bidar, while the relative of a man who attended the Tablighi Jamaat event, tested positive for Covid-19 in Kalaburagi district. 

It is for the first time that Covid-19 cases have been reported in Belagavi.

District in-charge minister Jagadish Shettar told the media, “Three people who had come to Belagavi from Delhi, after attending the Tablighi Jamaat event at Nizamuddin Markaz have tested positive for Covid-19. Earlier, there was no worry in Belagavi for Covid-19. We will take necessary steps to contain the spread of the disease.” The three people who tested positive for Covid-19, attended the Tablighi Jamaat event on March 13, according to the bulletin released by the state health and family welfare department.

Deputy commissioner S B Bommanahalli said a total 62 people, including 10 foreign nationals were identified, who were associated with the Tablighi Jamaat event, after the district administration received instructions from the state government to isolate them. “We have acted swiftly to identify them, and they are all in isolation.” 

It should also be noted that 10 Indonesian nationals, who were Tablighi Jamaat preachers, who had come here on March 15, were quarantined in two locations. Five men are at a mosque in Auto Nagar and five women are at an undisclosed house.

All the 3 people who tested positive for Covid-19 in Belagavi have been quarantined at Belagavi Institute of Medical Sciences (BIMS) hospital. 

Lab to be set up

District health officer (DHO) Shashikant Muniyal said that the district administration is making necessary arrangements to set up a Covid-19 testing lab in Belagavi. “I am tasked to oversee developments related to the lab,” he said. 

Muniyal said lab technicians from Belagavi were sent to Pune to get trained in using Covid-19 testing kits.


