3 MCH docs, 1 pvt hosp staffer test positive, 7 from SSKM quarantined
2020-04-20
Kolkata: Three doctors of Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata (MCH), have tested positive to Covid-19, while seven junior doctors of SSKM Hospital have been sent on institutional quarantine after they showed symptoms. The three MCH doctors include a post-graduate trainee from the medicine department and two from the gynaecology department. A 47-year-old employee of Apollo Gleneagles Hospitals, too, tested positive. The man from Barrackpore’s Ward 5 used to commute from home in the hospital’s pool car.

“The area where this man lives has been sanitized after we got the information,” said Barrackpore municipality chairman Uttam Das. 

Sources in the hospital off EM Bypass said a cancer patient who was undergoing treatment for about a month has also tested positive. About 10 healthcare professionals, including a senior oncologist under whom the patient was admitted, has been sent to quarantine

At MCH, two patients being treated at the medicine ward tested positive a few days ago. The hospital authority traced the healthcare workers who had come in contact with the two patients, and found that one among them has tested positive. The two other doctors who tested positive were involved in the treatment of a Covid-positive woman who gave birth about a week ago in the hospital’s Eden Building. All the three doctors stayed in the hostel on the hospital premises. The hospital authority has also kept 12 other healthcare workers who had come in contact with the three either at the work place or in the hostel.

“All three are doing well and none has any aggressive symptom,” said an MCH source. 

“This is the third incident where a patient coming for treatment of another ailment has tested positive. The hospital needs to ramp up segregation of patients. If one doctor after another goes on quarantine, the healthcare system will collapse,” said a doctor.

At SSKM, at least seven doctors, including PG trainees and house staffers, have been sent to quarantine. Sources said some patients in the medicine ward are symptomatic and the doctors had tended to them. Swab samples of both patients and doctors are expected to be sent for confirmatory tests.

“Hospitals are becoming hotspots for community transmission. Though measures, like restricting the number of healthcare professionals at the wards, are in place, more preventive steps should be taken. Otherwise we are working on a suicide mission,” said a junior doctor at SSKM Hospital.

Swasthya Bhawan officials said due to measures, like restricting number of healthcare workers in wards, have led to a decline in the number of doctors and nurses who need to be quarantined if a patient turns positive. “For instance, earlier at NRS Medical College and Hospital, we had to put close to 90 people in quarantine and at RG Kar, around 50 were isolated. We are trying to work out the best possible ways so that our frontline medical employees do not get infected,” said a source. 

On Sunday the health department made it mandatory for all frontline healthcare workers in government hospitals to stay in government-arranged lodging facilities on campus or in the vicinity. 


