3 more test positive for Covid-19, state count at 17
2020-04-12
Ranchi/Hazaribag: Three more persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Jharkhand on Saturday, taking the state’s total count toll to 17 (16 active cases and one person has died). One person each from Hindpiri locality in Ranchi, Rajdhanwar in Giridih ditrict and Bishnugarh in Hazaribag district tested positive on Saturday, state health secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni said.

In Ranchi, Hindpiri continues to be the epicentre of the disease with the 62-year-old chief cleric of one of the three mosques with Tablighi Jammat links tested positive. Sources said he had come in direct contact with Jamaat members.

A 22-year-old man from Rajdhanwar and a 35-year-old from Bishnugarh in Hazaribag returned home from Mumbai last month and are likely to have been infected at their workplace or during their travel, officials sais. 

Talking to TOI, Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said: “We collected the sample of the cleric during a contact-tracing drive in Hindpiri on April 7 even though he was asymptomatic. We have now collected samples of six members of his family and sent them for tests. A health department surveillance team has started looking for his secondary contacts based on the inputs from the cleric and his family.”

The 22-year-old patient in Koderma was admitted to an isolation ward at sadar hospital on April 6 after he was referred by a private doctor in Giridih district he visited after developing symptoms a week after his arrival from Mumbai on March 23. Initially, the doctor prescribed him medicine for cold and cough, but referred him to Koderma district hospital on April 5 when his situation didn’t improve.

Koderma DC Gholap Ramesh Gorakh said, “The patient was admitted at isolation ward of sadar hospital on April 6 and his samples were collected the same day. We have now shifted him to our dedicated Covid-19 centre in Holy Family hospital.”

Gholap added he has informed Giridih officials about the developments so that they can take necessary measures in the patient’s village and nearby areas. 

Gholap and Koderma SP M Tamil Vanon visited the border areas of the district and sealed seven routes connecting the district with Giridih. “We have sealed all routes leading to Koderma from Giridih and started door-to-door surveillance and sanitization drive in seven villages along the border. The private clinic in Markachho and Sadar Hospital Koderma has also been sanitized,” Gholap added.

In Hazaribagh, after the 35-year-old man from Kharkhi village tested positive, SP Mayur Patel and SDO Megha Bhardwaj reached his village and sealed it. A health and sanitization team started door to door screening and sanitization across the village.

Talking to TOI, Hazaribag DC Bhuvnesh Pratap Singh said: “The man had returned home from Mumbai on March 20. After he fell sick in his village, he was brought to a quarantine centre on April 6. He is admitted at the Covid-19 block in Hazaribag Medical College hospital.”

On being inquired about his links with the first positive case from Hazaribag, Singh said: “He does not have any link with the man who was tested positive after his return from Asansol on March 29.”


