3 more test positive for Covid-19, Pune case count goes up to 43
2020-03-31
PUNE/MUMBAI: Three persons, including two family members of the 40-year-old critically-ill Sahakarnagar man, tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection on Monday. 

The third case is a 40-year-old resident of Baner who recently returned from Bermuda. He was quarantined at Naidu hospital two days ago. His contacts are being traced. The three fresh cases have pushed up the city’s positive tally to 43.

The Sahakarnagar man suffers from chronic liver disease. He has no history of international travel or any proximity to known infected persons or their close contacts. He has been put on ventilator support at a private hospital in the Deccan area since March 26.

Besides, the civic health officials said a 52-year-old resident of Thane, who succumbed to complications associated with the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection at a private hospital in Pune on Monday, diabetic. 

The man developed breathlessness at his in-laws’ residence on March 22 and was admitted to hospital. “He developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). His oxygen saturation was falling rapidly following which we intubated him and put him on ventilator support the next day. His hypertensive and diabetic condition added to the complications in a short span. We could not pull him off ARDS despite putting in our best efforts,” said a doctor from the hospital.

The source of infection in seven people diagnosed with the contagion in Pune between March 20 and March 29 cannot been linked to international travel or a traceable contact to an infected person.

“Presently, the condition of two of them — a 41-year-old woman living on Sinhagad road and a 40-year-old man living in Sahakarnagar — is critical but stable. Both have tested positive for Covid-19. There is no history of international travel or proximity to known infected persons or their close contacts in their case. They are on the ventilator support,” Wavare said.

Mumbai’s tally of cases witnessed a big jump with the civic body announcing 47 new cases. However, state officials said they were still scrutinizing the civic body’s cases, so a majority of them have not yet been added to the state’s list.

Of the two fatalities from Mumbai, the civic officials chose to report only one -- of an 80-year-old heart patient at Fortis Hospital, Mulund. Sources said the man, who had hypertension and ischemic heart disease, had come to the hospital on March 28 with respiratory distress and died in the next 24 hours. He had no travel history or known contact with a traveller, sources said. 

TOI learnt about the second death, which the BMC said was still under scrutiny, of an 86-year-old woman from Ghatkopar. She passed away at L H Hiranandani Hospital, Powai, at 7am on Monday, almost 10 days after her US-returned son and maid tested positive. 

Despite two deaths of people having no travel history or contacts, state officials said they still can’t be called cases of community transmission. Dr Anup Yadav of the public health department said 39 patients have recovered and gone home.

A member of a Bollywood star’s family passed away late on Monday evening due to acute respiratory distress syndrome. Though his swab sample was sent for Covid-19 testing, the report is awaited. The family member, who is not into cinema, died at a private hospital in the western suburbs, a hospital source said. Though he did not stay with the star’s family, he is believed to have used the same gym in their building.


(With inputs from Sumita DebRoy)


