Three more, including a 9-month-old, test Covid-19 positive in Uttarakhand; tally now 40
2020-04-18
DEHRADUN: With three new cases of Covid-19, the tally of positive cases in Uttarakhand reached 40 on Friday. While one of the new cases is a female doctor from Army, the other is a nine-month-old infant from Bhagat Singh Colony, which was earlier sealed by the administration after three Covid-19 cases were reported from the area. The third case is a Jamaat member from Nainital.


Dr NS Khatri, nodal officer of Government Doon Medical College (GDMC) told TOI that the father of the nine-month-old baby had already tested positive and is undergoing treatment at Doon Hospital. The child is being kept in a separate isolation ward along with his mother who has tested negative but the hospital administration will again send her samples for testing to ascertain the status.According to sources from the office of Director General (DG) health, the female doctor from the military hospital in Dehradun had been to Lucknow for training in March and she had returned to the city on April 9. "She had complained of Covid-19-like symptoms on April 15 when her samples were sent for testing. We have already alerted the Army unit in Lucknow where she had been for training. We are also tracking the people she had come in contact with to ascertain where she got the infection from," said the official, adding that the third patient is a Jamaat member currently under treatment at Susheela Tiwari Hospital, Haldwani. 

The health department had conducted 2,831 tests till April 17 and reports of 2,420 cases turned out to be negative. The swab sample reports of 371 cases are still pending while total 227 samples were sent on Friday itself. 

Meanwhile, the administration has opened the premises of the Forest Research Institute (FRI) which was sealed after three trainee Indian Forest Service (IFS) officers undergoing training there were found to be Covid-19- positive last month after they returned from a foreign study tour.


