Three more Nanded gurdwara langar staffers test positive for coronavirus
2020-05-05
AURANGABAD: Three more employees associated with the langar (a community kitchen) run near the Nanded gurdwara tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday. The new cases have taken the tally langar-related Covid-19 cases to 23.

Earlier, four bus drivers and one attendant, who had travelled to Punjab to transport the stranded Sikh pilgrims, had contracted the infection.

The total number of positive cases in Nanded district too has increased to 34, which includes 28 individuals who have had some connection to the gurdwara. The district has had three Covid deaths so far.

“We are tracing the high-risk and low-risk contacts who were in touch with the new patients. An appeal is being made to such individuals to come forward for health screening voluntarily. The entire gurdwara, the bathing ghats around it and other nearby areas have been declared a containment zone. The area is already sealed and no public movement is allowed,” Nanded district deputy collector Prashant Shelke said.

As per the official data, lab reports of 62 throat swab samples were still awaited by Monday evening. The number includes samples of a few gurdwara staffers and students who have returned from Kota in Rajasthan.

Gurmeet Singh Mahajan, a board member of the Nanded gurdwara, said the shrine authority has been extending all cooperation to the district administration.

“Nanded gurdwara has two langars — one near the main shrine and another situated around 700m from the shrine. The langar, which is relatively far away, has witnessed the outbreak. The main shrine and both the langars are closed for devotees till further instruction,” he said.

Mahajan reiterated the claim that the Nanded gurdwara and its premise had contracted the disease from Punjab. “Bus drivers who travelled to Punjab developed the infection after reaching the destination. Upon their return and before testing positive, the drivers inadvertently came in contact with the langar staffers and spread the disease,” he said.


