3 more test positive for Covid-19 in Agra
2020-04-06
AGRA: Three new novel coronavirus cases surfaced in Agra on Sunday morning, taking the district’s tally to 48. While two of the three latest cases are the mother and brother of a Covid-19 positive Dubai-returnee, the other one is a TB patient with no travel history or known contact with any Covid-19 patient 

With three new cases, the total number of active coronavirus cases in Agra rose to 40 on Sunday. Earlier, eight Covid-19 infected patients recovered and were discharged from hospital. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All three were confirmed Covid-19 positive on Sunday. They have been shifted to SN Medical College. A team of doctors is attending to them. We are also screening the people living around the patients' houses. Health of their contacts is also being monitored.”

Vats added, “We are also investigating how the 40-year-old man, who was suffering from tuberculosis, was infected by the novel coronavirus.” Out of the 40 active coronavirus cases in Agra, 31 are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contracts. The health department teams have shifted 137 people from different mosques of the city to three quarantine centres. Police have sealed the area around the mosques in the city.

Drone-mounted cameras are being used to ensure strict enforcement of the lockdown in densely populated localities. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “All the people who have come in contact with any Covid-19 patient are being screened. The vicinity of the places where the infected people were staying are being sanitised. Health department teams are closely monitoring health of more than 900 people who had recently returned from foreign countries. Those having cough, fever and problem in breathing are advised to call helpline numbers -- 108, 102 or control room number 0562-2600508 and 512. Everyone should fill up and submit a self-assessment form available on the Agra Smart City website. Stepping out of the house should be strictly avoided. We will be taking legal action against those found violating the lockdown.” 

The district administration is not counting the father-son duo, both doctors,who tested Covid-19 positive in a private hospital in Gurugram. They are under treatment at the same hospital. However, a private hospital owned by the father in Agra has been sealed. Samples of 107 of their contacts have been sent for lab testing.


