3 more Covid-19 cases in Malappuram on Wednesday
2020-05-14
Malappuram: Three more Malappuram natives, including two Gulf returnees, were tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday.

The viral infection was confirmed in a 50-year-old man from Maranchery, a 64-year-old man from Tavanur and a 31-year-old police officer from Peruvallur, according to district health administration.

The Maranchery and Tavanur natives, who returned form Gulf in repatriation flights last week, have been admitted to Government Medical College, Manjeri (GMCH). The Peruvallur native, who is working as civil police officer in Mananthavady in Wayanad, has been admitted to isolation ward in District Hospital in Mananthavady.

The Maranchery native was working as tailor in Abu Dhabi for last two years. On May 7, he returned in IX452 Air India flight to Cochin International Airport. After preliminary screening at the airport, he along with 13 others were shifted to international hostel in Calicut University. From there, he was sent to his house in Purangu near Marachery where he was in home quarantine. On May 10, after experiencing difficulties, including cough, he was shifted to GMCH Manjeri where his sample was tested.

The Tavanur native was a contract worker in Sharjah. He returned to the state in IX452 Air India Express flight to Karipur on May 7. After health check-up at the airport, he was shifted to Covid-care centre in Safa Hospital in Kalikavu on May 8. On May 10, he experienced health issues and was shifted to GMCH, Manjeri.

The police officer from Peruvallur got the infection through contact of a truck driver who returned to Wayanad from Chennai.

Now, Malappuram district has six active Covid-19 cases. A total of 28 positive cases were reported in the district, including eight Gulf returnees. Among these, 21 people have recovered from infection, including an 85-year-old man who died due to age-related illness. A four-month-old-baby from Manjeri, who tested positive, died on April 24 at Kozhikode Medical College Hospital.

More than 300 return in repatriation flights at Karipur

More than 300 Indians who were stranded in Gulf countries returned in two repatriation flights that landed at Karipur International Airport on Wednesday night. A total of 155 people returned in the flight from Kuwait which landed at Karipur around 9pm. There were 98 male passengers and 57 female passengers from Alappuzha (2), Ernakulam (4), Idukki(1), Kannur (^), Kasaragod (6), Kollam (2), Kozhikode (77), Malappuram (37), Palakkad (13) Pathanamthitta (3), Thrissur (3) and Wayanad (1) in the Air India flight. Meanwhile, a total of 152 people returned in the special flight from Jeddah which landed at Karipur around 12am on Thursday.


