3-month-old from Akola is Vid’s youngest Covid-19 patient
2020-04-11
Nagpur: Four family-members of Akola’s first Covid-19 patient tested positive on late Thursday night. They include 60-year-old wife of the patient, his 30-year-old son, five year old grandson and a three-and-a-half month old baby boy from the family – another grandson of the patient. This infant is Vidarbha’s youngest Covid-19 patient yet. 

Akola district collector Rajendra Papalkar informed that entire Baidpura area has been sealed since three days. “Apart from this, Akot Fail area where second patient was detected is also sealed. We have identified the high risk contacts of both patients from Akola city and their samples will be tested now,” he said.

On Friday, Union minister Sanjay Dhotre, who is also a member of parliament from Akola, said that local GMCH will start testing swab samples from Saturday. “Covid-19 testing facility at GMCH Akola will start from April 11. Samples from Akola, Buldhana and Washim will be tested here from tomorrow,” said Dhotre. This will save time and effort on institutional quarantine activity, he added. 

Buldhana now has 17 cases of Covid-19, including one death. Eleven close contacts of these patients were tested at AIIMS Nagpur on Friday and all of them were negative. Apart from this, AIIMS Nagpur lab checked 37 samples from Yavatmal and three from Amravati. None of them was positive. 

A 23-year-old patient from Gondia, who was tested positive on March 27 will be completing 14-day quarantine on April 11. He is most likely to get discharged on Saturday as he has tested negative twice during his stay. Bhandara and Wardha are the two districts in Nagpur division where not a single positive patient has been recorded till date. More than 100 samples from these two districts have been tested negative so far. 

Six positive in Chanda was fake news: District authorities have breathed sigh of relief after all six Covid-19 reports awaited by health department turned out to be negative on Friday. Health department had hurriedly collected samples of six people, including five members of a recently died person and a doctor who had treated him after a private lab report allegedly suggested he could be positive for Covid-19. Civil Surgeon, Dr ND Rathod informed the report of the person who had died at Mayo Hospital Nagpur on April 30, had turned out to be negative at government authorized lab. He maintained that any private lab report gathered by private doctor cannot be considered after authorized report from government lab has tested negative. Still as a precautionary measure, samples of five family members of the person and the private doctor from Chandrapur, who had treated him, were taken and sent for testing. 

33k under home quarantine in Yavatmal: Total 33,045 residents of 7078 households in Ward no 10 and 20 of Yavatmal Municipal Council comprising Jafar Nagar, Memon Society and Indira Nagar are now under home quarantine. The stamping on their hands to display their status has been started. A positive patient in Yavatmal was initially admitted in the male intensive care unit (MICU) and over 44 staffers including doctors and staff nurses treated him. They all have been sent to institutional quarantine. Twenty three persons are sent to the Dhamangaon Road based Govt girls hostel while 44 are kept in Boys Hostel of GMC Yavatmal.

AMRAVATI: Even though the district has not reported any new Covid-19 case save the four (including one dead) of a Hathipura family, the district administration is leaving no stone unturned to control the pandemic. District collector Shailesh Naval said that during the special health check-up drive, 24 lakh people were contacted and around 21,000 were found suffering from cold, cough and/or fever. Not every case is coronavirus, but we are providing treatment to all and have opened 118 fever clinics in the district, he said. He urged people to get themselves examined at these clinics if they develop cough, cold or fever.


