Three more traders test Covid-19 positive at Delhi's Azadpur mandi
2020-04-25
NEW DELHI: With three more traders at Azadpur vegetable and fruit auction yard being found Covid-19 positive on Friday, senior Delhi government officials went into a huddle to find ways to keep the highly contagious virus out of Asia’s biggest mandi.

Sources said the two traders had their shops in D-Block of the mandi where Bhola Dutt, who died of Covid-19 earlier this week, ran his office. The third trader ran his business from B-Block.

While the traders were admitted to a private hospital, officials said the district surveillance team was tracking those who had came in contact with them over the past few days. At least 50 people had been identified till Friday evening in the mandi itself. They will be tested on Saturday.

The source from where the three traders got infected couldn’t be ascertained. A large number of people — traders, their staff, labourers, farmers and truck drivers — visit the wholesale market every day. The daily footfall is over 50,000.

“A large number of labourers come from the nearby Jahangirpuri locality, a part of which has been declared a containment zone. We are doing out best to contain the virus here. Several steps have been taken to decongest the area, including ensuring social distancing and keeping the place sanitised,” Delhi Agricultural Marketing Board vice-chairman Sanjay Goel said.

Following the protocol, the shops where the traders ran their businesses were sealed and sanitised along with a few more in the vicinity. Since it is a commercial place, officials said the area cannot be declared a containment zone.

Azadpur Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) officials, meanwhile, said that the government had decided to reduce the number of trucks entering the mandi everyday by at least 20%. “We have decided to create a holding area for trucks at Nirankari Maidan to stop congestion. The drivers can wait there for their turn,” Goel said.

APMC also held a medical camp at the mandi where more than 400 traders, staff and labourers were tested. APMC chairperson Adil Ahmad Khan said the 19-member team included 12 doctors. The team will visit the mandi on Saturday to test more workers.

Anil Malhotra, APMC member and president of vegetable traders’ association, urged that all traders, staff and labourers be tested. “Instead of keeping the mandi open 24x7, the government should allow trading on alternate days. This will help decongest the area and social distancing will be maintained,” he added.


