3 more Tablighi attendees test +ve, tally reaches 14
2020-04-03
Jaipur: Three more people, who attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in New Delhi, have been found to have contracted Covid-19 in the state on Thursday. They belong to three different districts of the state. Bharatpur and Dholpur reported their first Covid-19 cases after one person each from these districts, who attended the Jamaat, were found infected with the virus. The third person diagnosed with Covid-19 is from Jhunjhunu. He is a resident of Mandawa area. “So far, 14 persons who attended the Tablighi Jammat meet have been found infected with the virus. Eleven of them (seven from Churu and four from Tonk) were found infected on Wednesday, while three new cases were found on Thursday,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).In Jhunjhunu, people belonging to Tablighi Jamaat have voluntarily reported to health authorities. “It's a good sign that they are voluntarily coming for screening and testing. There are at least 12 such persons who returned from the Nizamuddin congregation in Delhi recently and they have reported to health authorities for testing. We have kept them in quarantine and their samples will be taken,” said Dr S K Kaler, principal medical officer, Jhunjhunu district.From the under curfew Ramganj area, which has become a hotbed for Covid-19, the health department officials had found 14 persons of Tablighi Jamaat who were stuck in a mosque during the lockdown in the Walled City area. “They belong to Amrawati of Maharashtra and were staying in a mosque in Jaipur’s Ramganj, which now has more covid-19 positive persons than Bhilwara,” said a health department official.They have been quarantined at RUHS Hospital and their samples have been sent to labs for Covid-19 testing. The test reports are awaited. At Jaipur’s RUHS hospital, there are seven Tablighi Jamaat people from Tonk. Four of them have tested positive on Wednesday.In Bhilwara too, more than 30 persons belonging to Tablighi Jamaat but not connected to the Nizamuddin congregation have been quarantined.