Three new Covid-positive cases on Monday as 19 recover
2020-04-14
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: In an indication that the Covid-19 case graph has well and truly flattened, the state recorded more patient discharges than positive cases on Monday. Only three positive cases were reported while 19 people have recovered, after consecutive negative tests. 

The state has so far reported 378 cases since the outbreak. Of the three fresh cases reported on Monday, two are in Kannur and one in Palakkad. The person in Palakkad had travelled from abroad, while those in Kannur are primary contacts. Test results of 19 persons were declared negative. Among these, 12 are from Kasaragod, three each from Pathanamthitta and Thrissur, and one from Kannur.

At present, 1,12,183 persons are under surveillance, out of which 1,11,468 are under home isolation and 715 are admitted to designated isolation facilities. Till date, 15,683 samples have been sent for testing, of which 14,829 came out negative.

Kozhikode has the most number of people under observation, at 17,407, followed by Palakkad (14,787), Malappuram (12,801) and Kasaragod (10,056).

Briefing the media after his review meeting, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said a matter of concern for the government now is the evacuation of people, especially from the Middle East. “I have written to the Prime Minister once again to arrange a special flight for their return. The state government is ready to take up the responsibility of their quarantine and other needs,” the CM said. 

He said the testing of samples has improved in the state. At present, at least 1,000 samples are being tested a day. But the state will need more testing kits if more people start arriving from abroad and other states. “The Centre is providing the kits but this is proving insufficient. Even though the state tried to procure some kits directly from manufacturers, there is a delay due to the huge demand,” Vijayan said.

On people crossing over from Tamil Nadu surreptitiously, the chief minister said the state government has strengthened vigil along its borders. 

Leptospirosis and dengue fever cases reported at the Kottayam Medical College Hospital are a concern. Necessary direction has been given to check the spread of the diseases, he said.

Several people from Lakshadweep are stranded in the state and there are reports of difficulties faced by them. It has been decided to provide them with food from community kitchens.

Steps are on to provide all textbooks from Classes I to X on the online platform, said Vijayan.


