Three new cases, K Chandrasekhar Rao calls for stricter lockdown
2020-05-05
HYDERABAD: Telangana chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Monday called for stricter lockdown after reviewing the Covid-19 status late on Monday, even as the state reported three more positive cases.

The chief minister urged the health department to step up vigil as 66 per cent of the total 1,085 Covid-19 cases were reported from Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy, Medchal, Malkajgiri, and Vikarabad, making up for the 717 coronavirus cases. “There should not be any relaxation on part of the authorities and they should strictly implement lockdown in these districts. About 82 per cent of Covid-19 deaths have been reported from these districts,” the CM said.

Earlier, director of health and family welfare, Srinivasa Rao said the ongoing lockdown helped them bring down Covid-19 cases in the state as 40 more people were discharged from hospitals. “There is a dip in the cases, which denotes that the lockdown was very effective in bringing down the numbers,” said Srinivasa Rao.

Altogether 471 patients are still under treatment at Covid-19 hospitals. So far, 585 persons have recovered and 29 patients with co-morbid conditions have lost their lives.

“The Covid-19 cases peaked in the state in two phases,” said Rao, explaining that the first spike took place around the April 6 mark, when 303 cases were reported, while the second spike was on around the April 20 mark, when 366 cases were reported.

On Monday, two cases were reported from Vanasthalipuram and 168 families were asked to be on home quarantine after contact tracing. Both the patients had small businesses In Vanasthalipuram area. Officials said one patient went to Suryapet on a business trip recently.

Officials said while the recovery rate in the country has reached 22.5 per cent, in the state there are more number of recovered patients as each of them is under care. 

The government said they are spending Rs 3.5 lakh on each patient. On average, each patient is given 80 personal protection equipment (PPE). With each kit costing Rs 2,500, the government is spending around Rs 2 lakh on PPEs. 


