3 non-Muslims tagged TJ members, quarantined
2020-04-09
Nagpur: In another example of harassment, a 24-year-old labourer, a non-Muslim, was picked up from Mouda and has been quarantined under questionable circumstances at Ravi Bhavan for last one week. The man, who works as housekeeping staff in public sector power company at Mouda, is a native of Bhandara. He said he never travelled outside the tehsil since 2012 but all his pleas were ignored.

Beside him, two other Hindus have been tagged as Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) members, along with their three Barelvi Muslims friends with whom they had undertaken a religious tour from March 12 to 14. These five from Saoner have been quarantined at Ravi Bhavan.

These are among the 197 people traced and quarantined by Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) and district officials as Covid-19 suspects having history of Delhi travel. Civic chief Tukaram Munde and district collector Ravindra Thakare didn’t respond to TOI queries. 

The labourer told TOI he was warned of action if he refused to report at Mouda police station. “On March 31, a policeman called me to police station. They took me to a hospital and dropped me home. Next day, they called again but there was no one concerned at police station when I reached. When I came back after waiting for hours, a health official called and again asked me to come. I was brought to Ravi Bhavan by evening. My test results are negative and they have admitted a wrong person has been brought,” he said.

The labourer said there was no one to look after his elderly parents at Mouda.

The five from Saoner said they first visited a dargah at Roorkee and later headed to Haridwar for darshan. 

The two Hindus requested cops and district officials to clarify about their identity as the insinuation has caused harassment to their families at Saoner. The three Barelvi Muslims too said they were facing social boycott from their sect members. The Barelvi and TJ have an acrimonous history where each had alleged the other to be a non-believer.


