Delhi: Three of family +ve, guard with Tablighi link likely carrier
2020-04-09
NEW DELHI: Three members of a family in Defence Colony have tested positive for Covid-19 after possibly getting infected by their security guard who had apparently visited the Tablighi Jamaat congregation at Nizamuddin. A case has been against the guard for hiding information from the authorities. 

Mustaqim, a resident of Okhla, was absconding but was traced and handed over to health officials on Wednesday. All three patients are in hospital and the remaining family members have been advised to stay in home quarantine.

Police doubted Mustaqim after family members told them that he was quite close to them and used to move in and out of their C-Block home frequently. He did not report for duty from April 3 and the following day the three family members were tested positive for the novel coronavirus infection, said a police officer privy to the investigation. 

“Technical surveillance has found that he had gone to the Alami Markaz, the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters. We started suspecting Mustaqim after he stopped picking his phone,” he said. Another guard in the area, he added, told the cops that Mustaqim was not feeling well and had allegedly told him about attending the Jamaat. A driver working for the family said Mustaqim had even gone to buy milk for them. 

The case was registered on Tuesday under IPC 188 (not obeying order duly promulgated by a public servant), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection dangerous to life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection), said Atul Kumar Thakur, deputy commissioner of police (south). 

On Tuesday, two days after the family was found positive, the station house officer of Defence Colony police station circulated a message on the residents’ group asking everybody to avoid public space such as parks and requesting them to stay alert about householdkisPDG helps. The preliminary inquiry has revealed Mustaqim used to help in some household work too, the message read. 

Requesting the residents to follow the directives, the SHO said, “My men will be on patrol in the area and violators will be prosecuted.” 


