3 suspected Covid-19 patients die in Ludhiana
2020-04-09
LUDHIANA: Three suspected Covid-19 patients died in the city on Wednesday. While two passed away at the civil hospital, the third at Fortis Hospital.


So far, the number of coronavirus positive cases in the district is nine and toll two.

A 65-year-old woman from Bawa Colony, Kakowal Road, Jamalpur, was admitted to the civil hospital on Wednesday afternoon with Covid-19-like symptoms. She was gasping when brought to the emergency at 12.30pm. She had cough for five days and breathlessness for three days. She was immediately given high flow oxygen, but she suddenly suffered cardiorespiratory arrest. High-quality cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was given as per protocol, but she could not be revived and was declared dead at 1.20pm, said a doctor.

She is survived by a son, daughter-in-law and two grandchildren, who were also called to the civil hospital for throat swabs. 

Another 65-year-old woman of Tibba Road, a diabetic with cough for 15 days, haemoptysis and breathlessness for one day, was admitted to the civil hospital on Monday. She was stable on Tuesday, but got copious amount of blood in sputum. On Wednesday, she suddenly developed cardiorespiratory arrest. Even as CPR was given, she passed away at 10.45am, the doctor added.

At Fortis Hospital, a 52-year-old woman from Mehal Kalan, Barnala, was admitted on Monday with complaint of breathlessness for the past one week. “She was admitted to the hospital with Covid-19-like symptoms, but we are yet to get her test report,” said medical superintendent of Fortis Hospital Dr Shelly Deora.

Her 33-year-old brother-in-law said, “She had got her gall bladder removed two years ago and ever since suffered multiple diseases, including high BP and weakness in bones. She was diagnosed with pneumonia at the time of admission on April 6 when her X-ray was taken and she was shifted to the isolation ward. On Tuesday, she was put on ventilators. She died early morning on Wednesday.”

She is survived by a 25-year-old son and husband, who works as a truck driver in Guwahati.

Senior medical officer Dr Ravi Dutt said, “They are suspected coronavirus patients. Their reports are awaited. However, throat swabs of patients and their families were taken and sent to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. The bodies have been shifted to mortuary.” 

