Coronavirus: Three who visited Nepal to be screened in Kota
2020-03-08
KOTA: Three persons, including a woman were put in isolation in Kota’s MBS Hospital for screening of suspected coronavirus infection, while four others, including a Sri Lankan tourist and a couple, who were in isolation for screening were on Saturday discharged after report of their samples tested negative on Friday evening. Meanwhile, 10 others foreign tourists, including two from Italy, were screened in Bundi on Saturday and diagnosed with no coronavirus infection. 


Three persons in their 50s, including a woman, all residents of Dadabari area of the city, were on Saturday put in the isolation ward of MBS Hospital, after they reached here with complaint of mild cold and cough, isolation unit in-charge, Dr C P Meena said. The samples of the three have been sent to Jaipur for test and the report is expected on Sunday, he added. The three persons in isolation, had recently returned from a Nepal trip along with around 40 other persons of the city, who had gone to Nepal by a private travel bus last month. However, other persons who were in the bus have not reached the hospital and are yet to be traced for screening, Dr Meena said. 

Meanwhile, four persons, including a Sri Lankan tourist and a couple, who had returned from Malaysia and were in isolation for screening, were on Saturday morning discharged from the hospital after report of their samples, received on Friday late evening, tested negative, the isolation unit in charge said. The four discharged persons have been asked to stay in isolation at their respective places for next 14 days and to get themselves re-screened with sample tests, he added. 

In Bundi, 10 foreign tourists, including two from Italy, were on Saturday screened at various hotels of the city, where they were staying and all the tourists were found with no symptoms of coronavirus infection, deputy chief medical and health officer, Bundi, Dr Avinash Sharma said. The four other foreign tourists, who were first screened on Friday were re-screened on Saturday and were not diagnosed with any corona symptoms, he added. 


