30 Covid-19 tests a day, Telangana govt’s new order
2020-06-13
HYDERABAD: Even as the high court and the Opposition have questioned the low number of Covid-19 tests being done by the government, new directions have been issued to health authorities restricting the number of samples to be taken in a day in districts and in areas falling under Greater Hyderabad. 


According to highly placed sources, the state government has asked the authorities to conduct not more than 30 tests in an area in a day. The government argues that it had to take this step as the load of coronavirus positive cases was increasing. Sources said the instructions were issued — two days ago — orally to the authorities. 

If the samples are tested in Greater Hyderabad limits, the entire area is taken as one unit. Similarly, in districts, the town is taken as one unit.

Under the new testing policy, all samples from asymptomatic contacts of Covid-19 patients will be taken first.

In the existing policy, the authorities were collecting samples of symptomatic first contacts (including family members) of Covid patients.

When contacted, a top health official said they were doing everything as per the ICMR guidelines. “We are following the ICMR guidelines and taking steps accordingly,” he said.

In the new testing policy, a fever survey will also be undertaken around the area where a Covid positive case is found. Unlike the earlier instance where only the patient’s house was taken into account, the fever survey will cover about 70 to 80 houses close to the residence of the person who had tested positive.

“While the fever survey is welcome as it indicates the health parameters of an individual, restrictions on the number of samples is not a good idea,” said an official. Previously, officials were taking the samples without conducting any fever survey in and around the residence of a Covid positive patient. 

Meanwhile, private labs and hospitals in Hyderabad have started conducting Covid-19 tests. “But, if a person tests positive, they are informing him/her personally and mentioning it as ‘some other viral infection’ in their reports furnished to the government,” an official said.


