30 fresh Covid-19 cases take total to 508 in district
2020-05-10
Done

Aurangabad: As many as 30 fresh cases were reported in the district on Saturday morning, taking the total number of Covid-19 cases to 508. A woman who had tested positive for coronavirus delivered a baby on late Friday night at the Government Medical College and Hospital.

A total of 35 Covid-19 patients were discharged on Saturday, of which 22 patients were discharged from the district civil hospital in the morning and 13 people were discharged from AMC's Qile Ark based Covid Care Centre in the evening.

The fresh cases that were detected on Saturday included six from Mukundwadi-Sanjay Nagar, two from Kat Kat Gate, four from Babar Colony, one from Asefiya Colony, one from Silk Colony, one from Ram Nagar, two from Bhawani Nagar- Old Mondha, one from Satara Parisar, one from Panchakki area, one from Juna Bazar, nine from Pundalik Nagar and one from Gangapur. 

Of the total Covid-19 patients detected in the district so far, 311 are men and 197 are women. 

22 Covid-19 patients, who were undergoing treatment at the district civil hospital for the last 14 days, tested negative for Covid-19 for two consecutive tests, said Sundar Kulkarni, the district civil surgeon. 

According to the protocol of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the patients were sent home. 

The ones who were discharged on Saturday included five from Bagwan Masjid, six from Noor Colony, three from Qile Ark, one from Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura, one from Chelipura, one from Daulatabad, two from Samata Nagar, one from Bada Takiya Masjid, one from Satara Parisar and one from Jalal Colony

A 30-year-old woman, a resident of Roshan Gate, was admitted to the obstetrics and gynaecology ward of GMCH on Friday. As per the protocol, the woman was tested for coronavirus as she came from a containment zone, said Shrinivas Gadappa, the head of the department. The woman was treated as a Covid-19 patient until the reports arrived and she delivered a baby girl. 

Weighing 3.7kg, the baby is healthy and kept separated from the mother. The woman later tested positive and was moved to Covid isolation ward in the hospital, GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar said. The woman is also stable, she said.

Of the total 508 Covid-19 cases in the district, 52 have recovered, 12 have died. The rest are undergoing treatment at the district civil hospital, GMCH, Covid Care Centres run by the civic body and at private hospitals.


