30 kin of deceased man test negative for Covid-19
2020-04-25
Kolhapur: The Sangli administration was relieved after it learnt that the throat swab samples of the 30 family members and relatives, who attended the funeral of a man who tested positive for Covid-19 after his death, returned negative on Friday. 

However, the district administration has decided to keep the 30 people under institutional quarantine as a precautionary measure and continuously monitor their health. 

The Sangli health department had collected the throat swab samples of the ones who had attended the last rites of the deceased man on Wednesday night and kept them under institutional quarantine at Kadegaon—around 62km from Sangli city. The last rites were performed without the mandatory protocol of dead body management issued by the Union government’s ministry of health and family welfare.

Meanwhile, taking cognisance of a major administrative lapse, Sangli district collector Abhijeet Chaudhary told TOI that he would report the entire incident to Pune divisional commissioner so that better precautions were taken and such incidents did not repeat in future. 

District health officer for Sangli Bhupal Girigosavi said that the wife of the deceased man and her father were in the ambulance which transported the body from Mumbai to Kheradi Wangi village in Sangli. After the funeral, they returned back to Mumbai in the same ambulance.

Girigosavi added that the driver of the ambulance, the deceased man’s wife and her father have been kept under quarantine in Mumbai. 

Officials from the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje (CPR) hospital, Kolhapur, who have witnessed three to four deaths of Covid-19 suspects, said that if the throat swab sample of the deceased had been taken suspecting he had contracted Covid-19, ideally the body should not have been handed over to his family until and unless the reports came negative. 

CPR dean Minakshi Gajbhiye said, “If the family members were insistent about taking the body, it should have been covered properly in a plastic bag and then taken directly to the cremation site for the last rites. In such a case, since the Covid-19 analysis report is awaited, it is assumed that the person is positive and the last rites are performed accordingly.” 

The deceased used to work as an autorickshaw driver in Mumbai and passed away due to a heart attack at Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Medical College and General Hospital early morning of April 18. His mortal remains were transported via an ambulance to his native village, where the last rites were performed the same evening.

According to Sangli district administration, the family members got to know that the deceased was Covid-19 positive after they contacted the Mumbai hospital where he was admitted four days after performing his last rites. 


