30% private buses hit road but many suffer engine snags after two months of lockdown in Kolkata
2020-06-05
KOLKATA: Additional buses eased commuters’ woes somewhat on Thursday. However, the demand-supply gap remained and queues for buses continued to be long as only 30% of private buses, as opposed to the assured 50%, could hit the roads.


Many buses developed snags and aborted trips midway, leaving passengers in greater trouble. Meanwhile, more than 900 buses of West Bengal Transport Corporation plied on 200 routes, bringing the situation closer to normal.



Sources said the high number of mechanical snags meant fewer buses on the road. “A lot of buses stopped soon after starting trips. Engines of many buses developed faults. The long idle state has resulted in the mechanical problems,” said Joint Council of Bus Syndicate secretary Tapan Bandyopadhyay.

He, however, assured that majority of the buses will be on the road by June 8. “We have made an appeal to all operators to stand by the government in this difficult time even if it means incurring some loss,” he added.

Taking advantage of the demand-supply gap, some buses allegedly charged higher fares from passengers. “After receiving such complaints, Howrah and Sealdah traffic guards, at the behest of the transport department, started permit violation cases against the accused bus operators,” said deputy commissioner of police (traffic) Rupesh Kumar. 

In the northern and southern suburbs of Kolkata, several bus owners told TOI that they were not yet in a position to run buses. At Tobin Road, several minibus owners said the batteries of their vehicles had been stolen during the lockdown.

At Behala Sarsuna, bus owners on routes 18A/B1/C/Drefused to run at least 70% of their 66-strong fleet. “We cannot guarantee that there will be no crowding. Police harassment is not something we are ready to cope with,” said an owner. Most of the buses on 12C/1 route, too, stayed off the roads.

Even where they plied, many allegedly charged extra. Subhajit Banerjee, a passenger on a route 230, said, “I understand that we need to pay more now. But the middle-class has seen job losses and pay cuts too. How can they charge more without a government directive?”

