30 quarantined after inmate tests Covid +ve at Agra central jail
2020-05-08
AGRA: At least 14 prisoners were quarantined in a separate barrack at Agra central jail on Thursday after an inmate was confirmed Covid-19 positive on Wednesday evening. Besides, 16 jail staff were sent to home quarantine. 


The health department has started taking samples of all the prisoners and staffers who had come in contact with the infected prisoner. 

Found guilty under IPC section 506(2) (punishment for criminal intimidation) and 302 (punishment for murder), 60-year-old Virendra Kumar, a resident of Jhansi, was shifted to Agra central jail on December 14, 2019. 

According to jail officials, Virendra Kumar was admitted to the emergency ward of the SN Medical College (SNMC) here on May 3. He had high blood pressure and suffered a brain stroke. His samples were collected and sent for lab testing on May 4. He was confirmed Covid-19 positive on the evening of May 6. 

VK Singh, senior superintendent of Agra central jail, said, “Since March, no visitor is being allowed to meet a prisoner. Besides, Virendra Kumar was not sent out of the prison before March 3, when he was admitted to the SN Medical College. We have requested the health department for re-testing the prisoner for Covid-19. Besides, all the prisoners and staffers who had come in his contact will also be tested. We have been ensuring regular sanitization in all the barracks and other parts of the jail premises. Suitable cleanliness is being maintained. Besides, social distancing protocol is strictly followed." 

According to sources, the prisoner may have got infected at the government hospital. Screening, testing and treatment of Coivid-19 patients takes place at SNMC. 

Earlier, 12 staff members of the hospital, including three junior doctors and a senior resident doctor, had tested Covid-19 positive. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “A total of 14 prisoners have been quarantined at a different place inside the central jail. Besides, more than 12 staffers who had come in the contact with the prisoner have been directed to remain in home quarantine. In the afternoon, the health department team started taking samples at the central jail. Re-sampling of the infected prisoner has been done.”

