30 suspected cases quarantined in Kanpur
2020-04-11
KANPUR: The health department on Thursday quarantined as many as 30 Covid-19 suspected persons.


As many as 4,730 persons out of 4,970 persons, who either came from outside the city or had travelled abroad, have been sent to the quarantine centres by the health authorities.

The city has so far recorded 11 corona positive cases while one out of them has successfully regained health after treatment and sent to his home.

According to the health bulletin, four more persons who had been quarantined were found to be negative. Thus, 488 persons have so far recovered from the virus

Two suspected persons have been hospitalised on Thursday while four are being treated in various hospitals.

Meanwhile, district magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari and SSP Anant Deo visited five hotspot areas of the city. They said that essential commodities in those areas were being made available through respective police stations. The residents on Thursday purchased the required items through door-to door delivery system. The DM also inspected Machharia and Babupurwa areas.

Police are strictly enforcing the lockdown in the hotspot areas and even using drones.

Meanwhile, teams of the health department visited the hotspot areas provided medical aid, checked suspected cases and also got the areas sanitized.

Municipal commissioner Akshay Tripathi while inspecting Babupurwa and Munshipurwa areas under zone-3 saw some drains overflowing due to choked outlets. He immediately called the sanitary staff and got them cleaned.

The HDFC Bank presented 400 masks, 400 pair of hand gloves and many bottles of sanitizers to the municipal commissioner for sanitary workers. He said under telemedicine scheme as many as 76 people contacted doctors on phones and got consultation for fever and nose, throat and fever related problems.

KMC had prepared an area-wise lists of medical stores from where patients could take medical advice through telemedicine, the municipal commissioner said.

To strictly enforce the lockdown, police challaned 311 vehicles, seized five vehicles and collected Rs 7000 as fine amount. They also registered cases against two persons under the Essential Commodities Act.


