30 Tablighi Jamaat meet attendees quarantined in Ramnad, Virudhunagar dists
2020-04-02
MADURAI: Thirty people from Ramanathapuram and Virudhunagar districts who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat conference in Delhi were placed under quarantine.


Speaking to TOI, Virudhunagar collector R Kannan said that 15 people from the district attended the conference in Delhi. Of these, one person is yet to return from Delhi and another person who is at present in Chennai is placed under quarantine.

The remaining 13 who returned to Virudhunagar were identified during the first phase of screening and placed under home quarantine along with their family members since March 24.

 “Though we had monitored them since their return to Virudhunagar district, we had also placed their close relatives under home quarantine as a precautionary measure. People belonging to 135 houses who are connected to these 13 people are kept under home quarantine and they are being continuously being monitored,” said Kannan.

Apart from this, officials from the health department are also carrying out a door-to-door survey around the areas where the houses of these 13 people are situated to identify those who have any symptoms. 

All the 13 are admitted at the quarantine ward at Virudhunagar government hospital and samples collected from them have been sent for testing, he added.

Ramanathapuram collector K Veera Raghava Rao told TOI that 33 people from the district had attended the conference of which 14 are still in Delhi and two in Chennai. The remaining 17 had returned to Ramanathapuram.

“Out of the 17, two of them who are symptomatic are admitted at the Ramanathapuram government hospital and the remaining 15 are kept under quarantine at the government-controlled special quarantine places in the district. Samples were collected from them and are sent for testing,” the collector said.

Rao said the family members of these 17 people are placed under home quarantine in their houses and they are continuously being monitored. As a part of the local containment plan, 415 workers from health department are deployed to check nearly 25,000 houses situated around the seven km radius around the houses of these 17 people in the district, he added.

