30-yr-old among three Covid-19 deaths in Vidarbha
2020-05-23
NAGPUR: After massive single day surge of 99 on Thursday, Vidarbha recorded three deaths in a day for the first time on Friday. Two of the three deaths are from Akola while one is from Amravati. Both deceased in Akola tested positive post-death. Amravati’s Covid-19 victim was a 30-year-old man undergoing treatment in the isolation ward of Covid Hospital and was on ventilator. 

Red zoned Akola (14) and Amravati (5) continued to record new cases. Apart from Nagpur (3) and Yavatmal (2), Wardha also reported a new case. Gondia, where 27 patients were detected on Thursday, also recorded three new patients while four Mumbai-returnees tested positive in Gadchiroli. Together, 32 new cases were reported, taking overall number of Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha to 1143. 

Against 32 new cases, total 37 patients recovered on Friday. They include 11 from Amravati, 15 from Akola, 10 from Nagpur and one from Yavatmal. Now, total 726 patients have recovered from Vidarbha and this comes to 63.51%. The national average of recovery is 40% while the same in Maharashtra is 26.3%. Vidarbha’s recovery rate is way higher. According to Nagpur district administration, the recovery rate in Nagpur district is 74%, highest in India. 

Akola deceased from rural areas: Both deceased in Akola were admitted in critical condition on May 19. They include a 50-year-old woman from Naigaon and 52-year-old man from Balapur road. Both died the same day and their swabs were taken post death. They tested positive for Covid-19 on May 22. 

Amravati’s death is alarming: A 30-year-old man from Patipura succumbed to the virus late Thursday night after being ill for a week since May 15. Admitted to Covid hospital for cough, cold and fever, he tested positive on May 16. However, his health went from bad to worse and was put on ventilator. He died at 11.10pm on May 21, hospital sources said. 

A fourth patient from Patipura, the man became the second casualty from his locality after the home death of a 95-year-old woman on April 21 last, who tested positive two days later. It was also the sixth death at Covid hospital before or during treatment. The rest eight are home deaths, according to civil surgeon Dr Shyamsunder Nikam.

Wardha: One more Covid-19 positive was found in Ashti on Friday. A girl who was stranded in Mumbai brought by her brother by a car eight days ago tested positive. She was admitted to civil hospital with Covid-19 symptoms two days ago. All five members of her family who were in home quarantine have been shifted to institutional quarantine. She is being treated at Kasturba Hospital, Sewagram. The total positive patient of coronavirus undergoing treatment reached 10 in Wardha. 

Two new cases in Yavatmal: Yavatmal recorded two new positive cases from the hotspot area of Indira Nagar on Friday taking the total to 17. One patient in the isolation ward tested negative after 14 days quarantine and was discharged on Friday. With this, the GMC isolation ward has 16 active positive patients. 

So far the district has recorded 112 positive cases of whom 96 have been recovered and discharged. Twenty five swab samples have been sent to lab on Friday and reports are awaited. 

District collector M D Singh has set up village level committees under the chairmanship of the talathi that will take stock of the Covid-19 pandemic and create mass awareness among the villagers. All the liquor shops have opened in the district. Customers are required to maintain the social distancing by the shopkeepers.

There was big rush in front of the liquor shops throughout the day. The country liquor shops have also opened and there was also considerable sale on the first day.


