300 register on portal to help admin fight Covid-19 crisis
2020-04-16
Kolhapur: Within two days of its launch, the Kolhapur Warriors portal has received 300 registrations from individuals and organisations wanting to help the administration combat the coronavirus crisis.

Moreover, the ex-armymen associations have submitted a list of former servicemen who are ready to assist the administration in maintaining order and providing essentials to the needy people during the lockdown.

Kolhapur Warriors has been launched by the district administration jointly with a volunteers’ group called Kolhapur Disaster Management Group (KDMG). The group consists of the technical experts, doctors, hoteliers and many individuals who contribute regularly during disasters. It was formally launched during last August’s unprecedented floods.

Shantaram Surve, a KDMG member, said: “We have received over 300 applications. We have made over 400 service categories available through the portal and any person or organisation can choose the kind of the work they are interested in doing voluntarily. So far, the applications have come from the doctors, medical graduates, social workers, medical shops, ration shops, other groups working to provide relief material during disasters. Currently, since the Covid-19 spread here is relatively under control, we have fewer requirements and the existing administrative capacity is adequate. We are going to use human resources if the spread escalates. We have to be prepared to handle this crisis effectively. Some of the registered organisations have already started their work at the local level to provide ration and medical supplies to the people most hit by the lockdown.”

The administration has sought help from plumbers, nurses, pharmacists, health workers, drivers, data entry operators and non-medical service providers through the portal. Surve said that to publicise the services needed, a campaign is being carried out on social media and at the ward-level by the civic staff.

In his public address on Tuesday, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray had said that the state government has launched similar forum-Covid Yoddha and so far, the state has received over 22,000 applications. The scrutiny of the applications is on. The applications received through the Kolhapur Warriors portal will be exclusively utilised in the district.

District army welfare officer Subhash Sasane said, “We have submitted the list of 206 ex-armymen to the district authorities and local police. At many places, especially in the villages, the former armymen are guarding the boundaries and helping the administration in relief works such as providing food to the workers and essentials to the villages.”


