Coronavirus scare: 300 fishermen from Gujarat, other states stuck in Iran
2020-02-28
SURAT: Over 300 fishermen from India are trapped at Bandar-e-Chiru, Chiruyeh, Hormozgan province in Iran as nearby airports have been sealed by local authorities following coronavirus scare. The fishermen belonging to Gujarat and other states sought help from their family members over phone and also shared videos.

On receiving information MoS forest and tribal development, Ramanlal Patkar, wrote a letter to ministry of external affairs seeking its intervention to bring around 340 fishermen from Gujarat and other southern states back home. 

The fishermen from Gujarat include those from Maroli, Bhatkhadi, Kalgam, Dandi, Nargol and few other villages in Valsad.

“I was informed by family members and community leaders of those stuck in Chiru. Their flights have been cancelled due to coronavirus scare as the airports are sealed,” Patkar told TOI over phone.

"I have shared the details of the fishermen from Gujarat and other southern states with external affairs ministry. The officials are working on it and the fishermen will be brought back soon," added Patkar.

Chiruyeh is a port town of Hormozgan province. The fishermen went to Iran around seven months ago by flight. Forming small groups they hire fishing boats and share 50 percent profit with the owner. They continue fishing for seven to eight months and return to India once the fishing season ends, informed family members of those stuck in Iran.

"I am worried and I don't know what to do now. I wish that my husband returns home safely," said Bharti, whose husband Jayesh is stuck in Iran currently.

"My uncle and few other relatives are stuck in Chiru. The fishing season is over and they have no work since last 15 days. They are trying to return but there are no flights," said Harish Bari, president of Bari Bariya Community in Valsad. "From our community around 150 fishermen are trapped in Chiru," he added.

"The fisherman do not have direct connecting flight to India. They used to take flight to Sarjah and then to Mumbai," said a family member.

"From my village many fishermen went to Iran for fishing. The fishermen have contacted their family members for help," said Lata Marolikar, sarpanch of Maroli village.


Read this story in Bengali

