30,000 houses in 3 km radius surveyed, no new coronavirus patients in Nagpur
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: In some relief of sorts, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s door-to-door containment drive has covered over 30,000 houses situated within 3km radius of the houses of four positive patients.


After receiving fresh guidelines from the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the civic body plans to identify private hospitals for admitting and treating patients in case the situation goes out of hand.

NMC’s assistant medical health officer, Dr Praveen Gantawar, said, “NMC teams surveyed over 30,000 houses in the last two days. These houses are situated within 3km radius of the houses of four positive patients in Laxmi Nagar and Dharampeth Zones. There are no Covid-19 clusters of patients. We plan to target around 1 lakh houses. The exact situation in the remaining areas will be known only after the completion of the drive,” he said.

The city is among the 27 cities in the country where restrictions have been imposed to prevent further spread of Covid-19. 

Till date, only four positive cases have been recorded in the city.

In the last two days, during the containment drive, NMC teams covered nearby houses of the four positive patients. Now, the drive will cover the remaining houses in the 3km radius. It may be extended up to 5-7km.

“NMC teams got information that five persons from the covered 66,000 population are admitted in private hospitals. Our medical officers will visit these persons and take their swab samples. We will decide on the future course of action after getting the reports of the samples,” added Gantawar.

The NMC teams also identified eight persons who are foreign return but not in the list of home quarantine. But they have no symptoms. The NMC took their numbers and will monitor them.

“NMC has directed all private hospitals to inform them in case any patient is admitted with symptoms as per the new guidelines of ICMR. The new guidelines cover patients suffering with severe acute respiratory illnesses. The NMC team will reach private hospitals and collect samples,” he said. 

The NMC is planning to identify private hospitals for treatment

of Covid-19 patients in case there’s an outbreak. This is as per new guidelines of ICMR. 

On Monday, the NMC roped in property tax collectors for the containment drive. On Sunday, staffers of the health department were present.

As of now, the NMC has no plans to cover the entire city. “We will have to conduct a similar drive in other areas only if there are positive patients,” said Gantawar. 

The NMC continued monitoring nearly 500 people who are under home quarantine.

The NMC’s control room received 946 calls between March 13 and 23. Apart from guidance, the control room is facilitating emergency services.

On Monday, Dhantoli police detained two persons who were foreign return. NMC sent an ambulance to the police station to pick them up and dropped them at MLA Hostel which has been transformed into a quarantine centre.

NMC staffers at the control room told TOI that complaints about home quarantine persons have increased. “We are issuing warnings to such persons and monitoring the situation,” an NMC official said.

Gantawar issued a public notice appealing to retired officials and employees of health departments of NMC, district administration, state government and the army to provide services for controlling Covid-19. 

“The NMC, district administration and the state health department are working day and night to control Covid-19. We will fall short of staff in case the situation becomes serious. Therefore, we require help from retired officials and employees,” he said.

For queries and complaints, Gantawar can be contacted on 9822569293.

Mundhe rejigs NMC’s health dept

For effective prevention of Covid-19, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe on Monday rejigged the NMC’s health department. He appointed Dr Yogendra Savai as the medical officer (health). Savai was attached to the state’s health department. Mundhe got him transferred to the NMC. He will be the overall in charge of the health department. Earlier, Savai also worked as district health officer.

In charge of the health department, Dr Bhavna Sonkusre, has been made assistant medical officer (health-I) and given the responsibility of the containment drive and training of Asha workers and anganwadi sevikas.

Dr Narendra Bahirwar and Dr Praveen Gantwar have been appointed as AMOH-II and III respectively. Bahirwar has been given the responsibility of the Covid-19 control room while Gantawar will take care of coordination with private hospitals and utilize the services of retired officials and employees. Dr Vijay Joshi and Dr Gowardhan Navkhare have been appointed as medical officers. Joshi will address issues related to the control room while Navkhare will take care of the preparation of the action plan for the required machinery and medicine.


