Nashik: 31 schools in rural areas to be used as quarantine facilities
2020-03-31
NASHIK: The district administration has identified 31 schools in rural areas that will be converted into isolation wards for suspect patients.


While Covid-19 positive patients will be put up in isolation wards in hospitals across Nashik city, those requiring institutional quarantine will be sent to these facilities spread across 15 talukas of Nashik district.

The health officials have already made arrangements for the quarantine process in which 45 ambulances, three each in every taluka, will be dedicated to transport patients.

According to senior officials from the district administration and health departments, civil hospital has 66 beds and Zakir Hussain hospital has 100 beds for isolation purpose in the phase 1 of the treatment. For phase 2, Covid-19 patients would be rushed to SMBT Hospital in Igatpuri and Vasantrao Pawar Medical College in Adgaon.

In phase 3 of the treatment, if cases rise, patients would be lodged in private and corporate hospitals that will be acquired by the government for the period during which the treatment has to be provided.

“The institutionalized quarantine facility was required for people who have travel history and are violating home-quarantine guidelines or the ones from high risk groups, immediate relatives of Covid-19 patients, or the ones from low risk groups who have met Covid-19 patients,” an official said.

The 31 government and government-aided schools across the district will serve as quarantine facilities for such group of citizens. “The administration will provide food, water, electricity and 
entertainment channels at these centres for the inmates,” the official said.

Every room of the school will havee two beds required for the patients. Apart from this, a quarantine facility will be raised at Barnes School outside Nashik city. The need for institutional quarantine is felt for two reasons — first as precautionary measure and second for those who fail to remain indoors.

District has a total of 517 passengers from with travel history of which 409 have been home quarantined and two are institutionally quarantined in Tapovan. Also 106 people are out of surveillance after having completed the 14-day observation period and failed to show any symptoms. So far, 65 samples were collected of which 60 have been found negative and the reports of five are still awaited.

“Nashik has no positive patient at this point in time,” the official said.


