Covid-19: 32 patients test negative, discharged in Moradabad
2020-05-02
BAREILLY: Health department heaved a sigh of relief on Friday when 32 Covid-19 patients were discharged from three quarantine centres in Moradabad after they tested negative in two consecutive reports. One 55-year-old patient passed away on Friday.


All these 32 patients had tested positive earlier and lodged at the quarantine centres, where their condition was constantly monitored by doctors and medical staff.

District magistrate, Moradabad, RK Singh said now the tally of active patients in the district has fallen from 93 to 60. However, by evening, three fresh positive cases were reported, taking the tally to 63. 

The DM said they hsd got 106 sample reports in the evening and among them, 101 had tested negative while three were positive. 

Among three fresh cases, one is a 47-year-old woman, whose husband succumbed to Covid-19 in the morning. The other two positive patients are also women whose family members are already in quarantine having tested positive after coming in contact with Tablighi Jamaati members.

Among those who were discharged on Friday in Moradabad, 12 were from Tirthankar Mahavir University, 11 from the district hospital while nine from the community health centre at Haldaur, in neighbouring Bijnor district.

These nine patients were shifted to Haldaur CHC after testing positive for coronavirus in Moradabad.

Chief medical officer, Dr MC Garg, said it was a big relief for them as such a large number of patients were discharged in a single day from quarantine centres.

The DM said so far as many as 40 patients have been discharged in Moradabsd while five have succumbed to the virus.

In neighbouring Sambhal district, two patients were discharged while one fresh positive case was reported there.

Medical team in-charge in Sambhal, Dr Neeraj Sharma, said on Friday, two youths – one a resident of Sarai Tareen and the other of Deepa Sarai -- were discharged after their reports came negative. “Both youths had come in contact with Tablighi Jamaati men. On Friday, a 35-year-old man of Sarai Tareen tested positive. Now, the tally in Sambhal is 19,” Sharma said. 

