33 contacts of Covid-19 cases test positive, take south TN count to 225
2020-04-10
Madurai: Thirty-three close contacts of Covid-19 patients tested positive on Thursday, taking the total positive cases in the southern region to 225. Sixteen of these cases are in Tirunelveli taking the total to 56 in the district. All of them are close contacts of patients from Melapalayam who returned from Delhi, with the total positive cases in the locality touching 44.Tirunelveli collector Shilpa Prabhakar Satish said they have got the results of the kin of 28 people who tested positive after returning from Delhi. “Families of 21 persons tested negative. The 16 new cases are kin of seven persons. We will identify primary and secondary contacts of these persons and send it for testing,” she said. Samples are yet to be collected from the secondary contacts of the first set of positive people. Meanwhile, eight fresh cases have taken the total positive cases in Kanyakumari district to 14. “All of them are relatives of already positive persons who travelled from Delhi,” district collector Prashant M Wadnere said. Two of them are four-year-old and seven-year-old children of two positive people. Four of the five new positive cases in Tuticorin district are close contacts of a family of three – including a lab technician in a private hospital – in the city who tested positive on Tuesday. “Three are from a family of tenants living in the first floor of the family that had tested positive. The fourth is a colleague of the woman,” district collector Sandeep Nanduri said. Efforts are on to map the close contacts of these two hospital staff. The hospital is closed from Wednesday to facilitate disinfection. Meanwhile Kayalpattinam government hospital that is closed for five days – after a doctor there who attended the Delhi conference tested positive – will be inspected on Friday and may be reopened on Saturday. Number of positive cases from the family of a 49-year-old man from Ayyanaroothu near Kayathar, Tuticorin district, that resisted isolation climbed to five. His father, mother, son and daughter tested positive.With one case, the positive cases in Madurai touched 25. The 18-year-old is the son of a positive man from Mohamadiyapuram in Melur who tested positive after travelling to Delhi. Two women, one each from Theni and Sivaganga, also tested positive. The positive case from Sivaganga is a 12-year-old girl from Thirupathur. Her father was among five from the district who returned from Delhi and tested positive on April 5. 47 people from Sivaganga had attended the conference in New Delhi. Five tested positive and were admitted to the isolation ward in the Sivaganga government hospital. Forty two others had been quarantined in the hospital and were being monitored. A 60-year-old man from Kariselpatti in Singampunari, who tested negative, died in the hospital on Thursday. 