34 Covid-19 active cases in West Bengal, toll stays 3: Govt
2020-04-03
KOLKATA: There are 34 active Covid-19 cases in Bengal, with three deaths till date, the government said on Thursday evening.


Chief secretary Rajiva Sinha gave these figures at 6.10pm, two hours after a government-appointed medical experts’ panel held that the number of Covid-19-positive cases till date was 53, with seven deaths, of whom four died in the last 24 hours. 

 


Sinha started from the figure of 53 given by the experts’ panel. He explained that three of the 53 Covid-19-positive patients returned home after they were cured. “Another nine tested negative in the second test,” the chief secretary said, bringing down the active cases to 41. 

The state has also not yet accepted the death of four of these 41 affected people as Covid-19 fatalities. “These four had been admitted to hospital with co-morbid ailments such as heart and kidney problems. They were later found Covid-19-positive. The state is yet to confirm that these four patients died of Covid-19. Test reports of two such patients reached after their death. We can’t say for certain that they were Covid-19 victims,” Sinha said.

Sinha, thus, took away the four deaths from the total of 41 cases and brought down the number of active patients at 37. He again removed the three dead from the list of positive patients, saying the total number of Covid-19 cases, till date, was 34. He added that of these 34 patients, a total of 20 came from five families. His statement firmly backed chief minister Mamata Banerjee’s, who had said on Wednesday that there were three Covid-19 deaths in the state, and offered the “clarification” to modify the figures placed by the experts’ panel.

The medical experts’ panel had put the death figures at seven, with four deaths during the last 24 hours. According to the panel, the cumulative Covid-19-positive figure is 53. The panel stated that another 16 patients tested positive on Thursday, against 10 on Wednesday. There was, however, a dip in the collection of swab samples on Thursday. A total of 104 samples were collected, when the figure was 116 on Wednesday. The medical experts’ panel said three Covid-19-positive persons had been cured, while four died in the last 24 hours, taking the death tally to seven.


Bid to streamline management protocol

The medical experts’ panel had put the death figures at seven, with four deaths during the last 24 hours. According to the panel, the cumulative Covid-19-positive figure is 53. The panel stated that another 16 patients tested positive on Thursday, against 10 on Wednesday.

There was, however, a dip in the collection of swab samples on Thursday. A total of 104 samples were collected, when the figure was 116 on Wednesday.

The medical experts’ panel said three Covid-19-positive persons had been cured, while four died in the last 24 hours, taking the death tally to seven.

The state government has released a state protocol for clinical management of Covid-19 cases. It aims at streamlining the management protocol of patients across the state and has been prepared by the expert committee appointed by the state government. It mentions the protocol for identifying Covid-19 patients, lays down and recommends drugs to be used and mentions a high-risk group.

According to the protocol, those above 60 years of age, cardiovascular patients, including those suffering from hypertension, immunocompromised, chronic lung, kidney and liver disease patients were included in the highrisk group, apart from cerebrovascular patients.

If two samples test negative at least 24 hours apart, then a patient could be discharged, it says.

