Kalaburagi coronavirus patient came in contact with 100 in Hyderabad
2020-03-14
HYDERABAD: The Covid-19 patient from Kalaburagi, who succumbed on way to home from Hyderabad, came in contact with 17 people at Care Hospital, where he was in isolation for three hours, and at least 100 others at three other hospitals in the city insiders said. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

State health authorities on Friday night said that 34 people who came into contact with the patient were traced so far, and search is on for others. “Regarding the 76-year-old Covid-19 patient who died in transit, till now 34 of his contacts are traced in the state, and have been put under strict home isolation. All the contacts are stable as of now, and are under active surveillance,” said Dr G Srinivas Rao, director public health, Telangana.

 
 

While health authorities confirmed that the patient had visited three hospitals in the city, the patient also spent a night at Talab Katta area in Old City, at a relative’s house. Among the 34 patients isolated are few members of the family in Talab Katta, it is learnt reliably. 

 Apart from the 17 suspects at Care Hospital, which include ambulance staff, doctors, nurses and guards, at least five people came in contact with the patient at the Apollo Hospitals Jubilee Hill’s isolation facility. 

However, the staff was well prepared having prior knowledge of the arrival of the patient. “Since we had prior knowledge of his arrival, all our staff were prepared. He was immediately transferred to the isolation facility and advised to go to the Gandhi hospital. He was handled as per the prescribed protocol, and was here for less than half an hour,” said a highly placed source at the hospital, adding that none of the contacts have been put in isolation.

Care Hospital in Banjara Hills, where the patient was kept in isolation, issued an official statement saying that the patient left against medical advice (LAMA) at the insistence of his family. “The patient initially had visited three other hospitals in Hyderabad before coming to Care Hospital.

The healthcare professionals who attended to the patient had observed complete PPE (personal protective equipment) protocol. The necessary treatment required to stabilise the patient was initiated in the isolation room of ER. The patient and the family were counselled about further treatment and need of admission in the critical care isolation unit, but the family decided to take the patient back to their native place against medical advice (LAMA) despite being explained the risk to life for non-admission. The matter was immediately notified to the Directorate of Medical Educational (DME) — the nodal agency about the patient going LAMA,” as per the statement.

