Home quarantine for 34 Iythala families
2020-03-12
RANNI (PATHANAMTHITTA): Iythala, the epicentre of the Covid-19 in the state, is a small village in Pathanamthitta district. The three carriers of the novel coronavirus, who arrived from Italy, are natives of this village which come under Ranni’s Pazhavangady grama panchayat. 


Currently, 34 families in Iythala are under home quarantine. These families live in the neighbourhood of the Covid-19-infected family. Already, four close relatives of the family in the village have been tested positive for Covid-19. The members of the 34 families have, in one way or the other, come into contact with the Italy-returned family. 

The Iythala village is geographically divided into two parts. The Covid-19 affected area is called Meenmuttypaarra where there are 95 families residing. The other part Iythala is on the banks of Pampa River where there are more than 300 houses. This part was badly affected during the floods in 2018. In Meenmuttypaarra there is a small stream and a water fall. Though there are no schools in the ward there are two anganwadis.

Joseph Kuriakose, president of Pazhavangady grama panchayat, said the panchayat is taking care of the 34 families and is also monitoring to ensure that none of the members go out of their houses. “Most of these families are either relatives or friends of the infected family,” he said adding that the panchayat has started supplying food grains and grocery for free to the affected families. “Compared to other countries, India it is much better,” added Kuriakose whose daughter resides in California.

Bobby Abraham, a member of the Iythala ward expressed relief as the lab tests coming out are mostly negative. “We don’t fear about the spread of the disease. Only issue we are facing now is that the members of the 34 families are stuck inside their homes. Some have come for vacation. Students studying in other institutions are being asked to furnish medical certificates to re-join,” he said.

Ranni tehsildar Sajan V Kuriakose said situation is under control and normalcy will be restored soon. He also said the district administration is trying to make the shops reopen so that things will return to normalcy soon. He said he had received complaints from the public about the migrant workers chewing tobacco and pan and spitting on roads. 

