34 more quarantined at Kallikudi, four isolated at MGM
2020-03-22
Trichy: Thirty-four passengers who arrived from Sharjah, Dubai and Singapore have been quarantined at the makeshift facility in the Central market at Kallikudi while another four were admitted at the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial (MGM) government hospital isolation centre on Saturday. Seven people who were admitted earlier at MGM have tested negative for Covid-19 on Saturday. Collector S Sivarasu has hinted that MGM may soon have a Covid-19 testing facility. 

Out of 458 passengers who landed at the Trichy international airport on five flights from Sharjah, Dubai and Singapore, 34 passengers including 25 men and nine women have been diagnosed with mild cough and cold. As a precaution, the public health and preventive medicine department sent them to the quarantine facility at Kallikudi. 

In a press meet, collector S Sivarasu said that medical officers will check and decide if they should be kept at the quarantine facility or sent back home with an advice to self-quarantine. They will also be provided with an essential toiletry kit and food during their accommodation. 

“If the doctors find them fit, they will be advised to stay at home for 14 days. I have spoken to nine passengers quarantined and sent from the centre. They are all doing well and have no symptoms,” he added. 

The public health and preventive medicine department has so far quarantined 191 passengers including the 34 on Saturday. The passengers quarantined in the last few days have been let off. 

The results of the four people, admitted in the isolation wards at MGM on Saturday, is expected to be out from the lab at the government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur on Sunday. “All of them are from local areas. One of them had vomiting after taking biryani from a restaurant in the city. Three others stayed in a single room in West Bengal. Their swabs have been taken for tests,” said the collector. 

Deputy director of health services Dr A Subramani has advised people to avoid consuming bottled drinks from outside and instead opt for homemade buttermilk, porridge and other fluids to stay safe.


