34-yr-old man from Bareilly who worksat Noida firm tests positive for Covid-19
2020-03-30
BAREILLY: A 34-year-old man who is a native of Bareilly’s Subhash Nagar locality tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19) on Sunday. This is the first Covid-19 positive case in Bareilly. The man works at a Noida-based private company where his colleagues were earlier tested positive.

Health officials said the man returned to Bareilly on March 22 and he learnt on Thursday through WhatsApp that a few of his colleagues were found to be infected. As he had mild flu-like symptoms, he went to district hospital and gave his sample for test on Friday. The man was later admitted to the district hospital’s isolation ward on Friday and is currently under treatment.

Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Vineet Shukla said, “After the patient returned to Bareilly on March 22, the patient was in close contact with six of his family members. They have been shifted to quarantine facility and their samples were collected for further tests. Medical reports of the man’s kin are now awaited. Besides, two other relatives were in close contact with him and they too have been quarantined.”

The CMO added, “Though the lockdown was in place when the man arrived in Bareilly, we are tracing people who came in contact with him and the places where he had visited before being admitted to an isolation ward on Friday.”

Dr Vageesh Vaish, who collected the man’s sample and is treating him, told TOI on Sunday, “The general condition of the patient is stable now. His breathing difficulties, cough and fever are better.”

Officials said there is active surveillance of people living within one kilometre radius of the man’s house. “We have trained accredited social health activists (ASHA) and auxiliary nursing midwives (ANM) workers. They will visit every house situated within a kilometre radius of the man’s house. They will ask people living here if they have any symptoms, did they come in contact with the patient or any other person who returned home from abroad or other state. If anyone in the area shows symptoms, he or she will be quarantined and sample will be collected,” CMO Shukla said.

A district administration team has pasted a poster in front of the Covid-19 positive man’s house that “no one should enter the place as it is under quarantine from March 29 to April 13”.


