341 booked, 616 vehicles seized for lockdown norms violation in Pune
2020-04-02
PUNE: The city police on Tuesday booked 341 people for the offence of disobedience under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code after they were found violating the lockdown directives.

The police also issued notices to 1,069 people, asking them to show cause why action should not be taken against them for violating the lockdown orders, besides, impounding 616 vehicles of wanderers in the city in the past few days.

Deputy commissioner of police (Zone II) Shirish Sardeshpande told TOI, “We have seen that large number of people, including educated ones, come out on roads without valid reason and give vague replies to justify their act when stopped at check-posts or other places. For instance, people give reasons like appointment with dentist or show old medical prescription and empty LPG cylinders to justify their movement. Peth area residents want to travel to Market Yard for making purchases among other reasons.”

Sardeshpande said, “Apart from registering cases, we have issued notices to large number of people asking them why an offence should not be registered against them for violating the government’s order. The replies given by the individuals will be scrutinised before taking a call on initiating prosecution against them.”

He said, “We have also impounded vehicles and kept them on the premises of the police stations and other places for dissuading people from coming on roads. A policy decision will be taken on releasing the vehicles.”

Sardeshpande’s Zone I counterpart Swapna Gore said,” People are coming out for no reasons. We have issued notices to them for breaching the government’s directives after they failed to furnish passes which the police issue in case of an emergency movement. People are offering funny reasons. A Kothrud resident, whom we issued notice, said he was travelling all the way to Deccan Gymkhana for buying fruits. The others were caught for reasons like purchasing curd and grinding wheat at flour mills, among other reasons.”

She added, “We are using three drones for monitoring the movement of people within the limits of Khadak, Faraskhana and Samarth police stations,” she added.


