347 patients violated quarantine rules in state: Deshmukh
2020-04-07
Nagpur: After receiving a series of complaints from the administration about alleged misbehaviour and harassment by the patients put under quarantine, the Maharashtra government has decided to act tough against such persons.“We’ve found out 347 such patients against whom several complaints were received by various quarantine facilities across the state set up by the government. All of them have violated quarantine measures,” state home minister Anil Deshmukh told TOI.He’s in Mantralaya in Mumbai closely monitoring the entire situation along with officials from his ministry.According to senior officials working in the administration in city, the incidents of alleged misbehaviour and harassment increased manifold ever since the patients who attended the Taglibhi Jamaat (TJ) meeting in Delhi and their relatives were admitted.BJP corporator Sanjay Bangale has even written a letter to district collector Ravindra Thakare to immediately shift the 105 suspects who were related with TJ meet and admitted at Vanamati to any other place. According to him, the citizens residing in nearby localities like Dharampeth and Ambedkar Nagar are under threat of spread of infection due these patients.Thakare, however, clarified that they hadn’t lodged even a single complaint from the city against any quarantine patients. “But we need to confirm from the divisional commissioner if he has received any,” he said.Police commissioner Bhushan Kumar Upadhyay said some complaints were received from the administration, but those of minor nature like suspects loitering in the corridors and not maintaining social distancing. “We’re counselling and advising them on threats due to not maintaining social distancing. Our personnel aren’t supposed to go inside due to lack of protective gears like personal protection equipment (PPE). However, we don’t have the exact number of how many suspects have been booked for violation of quarantine measures,” he told TOI.Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar said there were problems initially as patients didn’t adhere to instructions. “We’re making constant announcements and also deployed cops to prevent anyone from going out or not maintaining social discipline. We’re constantly monitoring the situation. Police may have the record of such cases if any,” he said.The aggrieved officers told TOI that they had already apprised senior officials about bad behaviour from the patients. “One of them threw tea on wall as he disliked the taste. They often complain about food quality. They also spit all over the place despite warnings. They gather near reception throwing all caution to the wind and do not listen to our officers. Even cops don’t go near them as they lack PPE ,” they said, adding that they hardly receive any complain from suspects staying at MLA hostel.Bangale suggested shifting TJ members to city’s outskirts at Mouza Upplawadi where a big township with many flats is vacant and also at Mouza Bidgaon where many homes were built for poor people under the slum rehabilitation authority (SRA).