35 AIIMS docs, nurses asked to self-quarantine
2020-04-24
NEW DELHI: In a major scare for healthcare workers in the capital, more than 35 doctors and nurses working at AIIMS’s gastroenterology division were asked to self-quarantine on Thursday, after it turned out that a male nurse working with them had Covid-19. Some of the patients this nurse attended to have also been tested and their results are awaited, doctors said.

“We are contact tracing each and every person the nurse came in contact with including the doctors, nurses and patients and those considered at high risk are being tested while the others have been suggested to stay at home till the time the exact magnitude of this crisis is clear,” said an official who did not want to be quoted. 

At Lok Nayak hospital, a dietician working in the mess tested positive for the infection, following which the kitchen of the facility was closed till further orders, officials said, adding that all her contacts have been advised to self-quarantine and were being tested.

There was a scare at Safdarjung hospital too recently, when a woman who underwent caesarean section tested positive for Covid-19. All doctors, nurses and orderlies who had come in her contact were tested of which, sources said, at least three have come positive for the disease. The hospital is now planning to perform all emergency surgeries and maternity cases requiring C-section and deliveries at its super-specialty block where Covid-19 patients are being kept.

“All suspects would undergo Covid-19 tests. As soon as results of Covid-19 tests become available if the patient is negative, he or she will be shifted to the respective ward in non-Covid zone and if he or she tests positive, the patient will continue to stay in the super specialty block,” the hospital has decided.

This is not the first time healthcare workers have been exposed to the risk of contracting Covid-19 from patients. A 40-year-old woman, a resident of Jahangipuri in northwest Delhi who was suffering from Covid-19, died during treatment at Baba Saheb Ambedkar hospital in Rohini four days ago. Tests results confirmed she was Covid-19 positive on Wednesday, after which all 57 healthcare workers in the hospital who had come in her contact were advised to undergo self-quarantine.

Before this, a hospital in northwest Delhi had to send 68 staff members, including senior resident doctors, nursing officers, ECG technicians and housekeeping staff, on home quarantine when it turned out that one of the patients who underwent an emergency surgery at the hospital recently was a Covid-19 suspect. She had been advised home quarantine by the DM (north west) but when the 25-year-old pregnant woman suffered from sudden internal bleeding, her family members rushed her to Bhagwan Mahavir hospital in Pitampura. She later died during treatment.

In March, Delhi State Cancer Institute (DSCI) had to shut its OPD and IPD when as many as 27 staff members, including nurses and doctors, tested positive for Covid-19. Similar problem has been faced by other hospitals like Max Super Specialty, Saket, Sir Ganga Ram hospital and Apollo hospitals, too, putting into question how safe it is to attend to non-Covid patients and the measures required to do so.


