Mangaluru: 35% rise in fake news on social media during lockdown
2020-05-08
MANGALURU: Cyber experts have recorded 30-35% rise in fake news on social media during the lockdown while the internet usage has gone up by 30%.

Speaking to TOI, Cybersafe Bengaluru CEO Gagan Jain said the current fake news trend is related to plasma therapy for Covid-19 patients. Fake messages related to the availability of plasma therapy are flooding in the cyber world, he added

“Till the liquor ban was in place, fake messages on the dates related to the opening up of liquor shops were trending. Fake news on social media during this pandemic has increased by 30-35 % as against 10-15 % on normal days,” said Jain who has been undertaking social media monitoring in Bengaluru and few parts of the state.

There have been instances of people trying to introduce fake apps and websites, especially related to Covid tracking. Since many government schemes have been launched, there are platforms where people can claim benefits of the scheme, such links are manipulated by morphing another person’s personality and making people click on it with the purpose of stealing data. Apps like Arogya Setu have to be downloaded from the GooglePlay store only and it is dangerous to click forwarded apk files sent as a link, said Jain. 

Ananth Prabhu G, professor, Sahyadri College of Engineering and Management and cyber security expert predicts a rise in fake messages especially after reports emerged that Pakistan-based groups have launched cyber warfare against India. These groups have allegedly bought hundreds of domains with “in” suffix, which is all likely to be used to spread fake news. “Since these media outlets have an Indian domain name, they carry more trust value among the readers who visit them,” he said.

People need to be more responsible when forwarding messages. Whatsapp too has imposed restrictions on the number of forwards. “I hope WhatsApp soon gives group admins the right to delete posts by members to prevent blindly forwarded posts from getting a wide reach,” said Ananth, who has simplified the Information Technology Act on the website www.cybersafegirl.com. 

In a development related to internet usage, reports suggest that the lockdown has led to an increase in internet usage by 30%. Consumption of child pornography content in India has spiked by 95 per cent amid lockdown, according to a recent report by an NGO India Child Protection Fund (ICPF), he said. 

Meanwhile, Bollywood celebrities have joined hands for “Mat kar Forward Campaign” urging internet users to stop forwarding videos which do not have verified information. 


