35-year-old being treated for Covid-19 first to die of the infection in district
2020-04-30
Bareilly: A 35-year-old man who was admitted to a private medical college on Saturday and tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday, died during treatment at 3.40am on Wednesday. This is first Covid-19 death in Bareilly. The patient had been identified as a quack by the health department.

The deceased, a resident of Hajiyapur in Bareilly city, had visited a 300-bed hospital on Saturday. Doctors referred him to the district hospital, but as his condition was serious, he was later shifted to the private medical college, which has been designated as Covid-19 Level 2 hospital. His test report arrived on Monday. The man had no travel history and his family claimed he did not come in contact with any positive patient.

Though his wife and other relatives tested negative, they were quarantined at the medical college. A poignant video of the distressed wife, singing songs while watching her husband’s body from a window of the isolation ward in the hope he would wake up, has gone viral on social media.

Hajiyapur locals who helped bury the body were given PPE kits. Before the burial, district epidemiologist Dr Meesam Abbas explained to them protocols to follow for the burial, and how to wear and remove the PPE kits. Hospital staff who delivered the body in a polybag wore three hand gloves each as precaution. After the burial, a disinfectant was sprayed over a 3m-radius of the grave.

Meanwhile, a pool test of a healthcare team that included three doctors and three support staff of a private medical college, tested positive for covid. Their individual samples have now been collected to identify the infected person(s).

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “The patient died during treatment at a private medical college. The cause of death is septicemia with hypotension. The person was suffering from novel coronavirus, Type 2 diabetes and bilateral pneumonia.”

He added, “On Wednesday, a pool test of a team of six health staff tested Covid-19 positive. They had earlier been treating a woman at a private medical college in Bareilly, who was later referred to Rishikesh, where she tested positive for covid on Tuesday. We have collected individual samples of these six persons for Covid-19 test to identify the infected person.”


