36 policemen win battle against coronavirus
2020-05-15
Nashik: As many as 36 policemen, who recovered from Covid-19 and discharged from hospital in the presence of health minister Rajesh Tope on Wednesday night, received grand welcome by the senior police and administration officials. “We have got our warriors back after a brief interval. When you are heading a force, there is nothing better to see the men in uniform winning the battle against the infection and raring to perform their duty again," Arti Singh, superintendent of police (Nashik rural), said. The policemen were welcomed by the police band playing ‘Hum Honge Qamayab’ featuring the spirit of the forces fighting against Covid-19. All 36 policemen were infected when they were on duty in Malegaon that has emerged as a hotspot for Covid-19 cases."There was some sort of panic in the force after initial reports of policemen contracting the disease started coming in. But we quickly took over and ensured that they remain mentally strong. The release of the warriors after recovery is acting as a morale booster for the force," Singh said.There are 123 policemen who have contracted the disease and of these 36 were discharged on Wednesday and 11 on Thursday. "Of the total patients 85% are asymptomatic in nature owing to which we will have most of the personnel out of the hospital soon. The rest have moderate symptoms which means they will have to stay at least 10 days under observation. None of the patients are serious," the officer said.Being a medico herself, the SP has distributed personal protection equipment (PPE) kits and shoe wraps for the personnel at the hospitals.The officer has also asked the personnel to stay away from their family members for some time and that when they go home they should follow cleanliness practise like hand sanitising, washing of shoes by sodium hypochloride and washing of clothes to ensure they cut down the chances of infecting others.The officer has issued a list of do’s and don’ts to the police staff so that they remain uninfected from the virus as far as possible.