37 Covid-19 cases in city cause of concern
2020-04-11
Bhubaneswar: With 37 of state’s total 48 Covid-19 positive cases, Bhubaneswar remains the biggest concern area in the fight against the virus in Odisha so far. Within the city, Bomikhal has emerged as the hotspot.

Of the six new positive cases detected on Thursday, three are from Jharpada, all kin of the 72-year-old man, who died of Covid-19 on Monday. It includes a 37-year-old woman and two girls aged nine and five of the same family. 

The other cases include a 20-year-old man from Kalahandi, the second from the district, besides one from Dhenkanal and a West Bengal native admitted to KIMS.

The Jharpada locality where these cases were reported is in the buffer zone of Bomikhal containment area that has reported 14 cases. According to Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) guidelines, buffer zone is the area within 5 km radius of the containment area where surveillance is suggested. Satyanagar, which is also a containment zone having four positive cases, three of which are linked to Bomikhal, is also in the buffer zone of Bomikhal area.

While the health department has said there is link of the cases between Bomikhal and Satyanagar, it is still tracing contacts in the case of Jharpada family.

Health secretary Nikunja Bihari Dhal said the health department has continued door-to-door survey in Bomikhal besides other containment zones such as Suryanagar, Sundarpada, Kapilprasad-Jadupur to detect possible symptoms. “While all those with symptoms are being tested, we are also testing willing people without symptoms at random to find out possible spread. The testing will be intensified because the capability to test samples will go up within the next few days,” Dhal said.

Health department sources said nearly 30% of the total samples tested in Odisha are from Bhubaneswar. As on April 8 when 2,841 samples had been tested, 818 were from Bhubaneswar.

A government statement said up to 9 am on Friday, 3,249 samples had been tested, 48 of which were positive. From among the 45 active cases, two patients in Odisha are on ventilator support. As many as 113 persons are under hospital isolation. 


