38 new cases in city take dist’s Covid-19 tally to 282
2020-05-05
Aurangabad: As many as 38 new confirmed Covid-19 cases were reported in the city on Sunday, taking the tally of positive cases to 282 in the district. 

Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) dean Kanan Yelikar said of the 38 patients who tested positive for the contagion, 21 were from Mukundwadi-Sanjay Nagar, 15 from Jai Bhim Nagar and one each from Nandanwan Colony and Bajipura. 

Asked about the spurt in the number of cases from Mukundwadi-Sanjay Nagar, where 59 people have contracted the infection so far, municipal officer for health Nita Padalkar said that at first, an elderly woman from the area tested positive for Covid-19. “We have found during our probe that most of the elderly people here had no travel history, nor did they come in contact with any positive case,” said Padalkar.

“However, younger people did not follow social distancing and contracted the infection and remained asymptomatic. It is from them that the elders got the infection. Therefore, it is important for everyone to abide by the lockdown rules and observe social distancing,” said Padalkar. 

According to Mukundwadi corporator Bhausaheb Jagtap, the area is full of slums. “40 people living in rented rooms in one apartment were among the first ones to be infected. Wherever there is tap water supply or garbage collection, people come out of their homes and forget social distancing,” said Jagtap. On Sunday, the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) sealed two of the worst affected lanes in the area. 

Menwhile, the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) attributed the spurt in the cases to the vegetable market started by the AMC at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Ground. MNS’ city president Satnam Singh Gulati wrote to the Mukundwadi police station demanding the removal of the vegetable market as it witnessed heavy rush, which was dangerous given the outbreak of Covid-19 in the nearby Sanjay Nagar.

Meanwhile, the AMC discharged a large number of people placed in institutional quarantine on Sunday. Municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey said, “As per the new rules, we have been advised to release all suspects if the throat swab samples return negative. The suspects have been advised to follow home-quarantine for 14 days after discharge.” A 15-year-old boy from Baijipura who had contracted the infection was also discharged from the district civil hospital. 

Of the 282 cases detected so far in Aurangabad, 25 have recovered, nine have died and 248 are undergoing treatment. 

2 more test positive in Latur

Two more people tested positive for Covid-10 in Udgir, Latur district, on Sunday. Currently, 10 positive patients are undergoing treatment in the district, one has died and eight people have recovered from the infection.


