Aurangabad: 38-year-old critically ill patient recovers from Covid-19
2020-05-08
AURANGABAD: A 38-year-old critically ill Covid-19 patient admitted to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) was on Thursday discharged after being recovered from the infection. 

The man tested negative for Covid-19 for two consecutive days on 14th and 15th day of admission. He was placed under observation for two more days and was discharged from the hospital at 11 am on Thursday.

Earlier, the patient consistently had low oxygen levels in his blood stream and had to be kept on ventilator, the hospital authorities said.

According to GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar, the 38-year-old man from Samata Nagar in the city was brought to the intensive care unit (ICU) of Dedicated Covid Hospital at GMCH’s medicine building on April 20 in a critical condition. “He had tested positive for novel coronavirus on April 10 and was undergoing treatment at the district civil hospital. However, the patient was referred to the GMCH after his blood oxygen levels dropped,” Yelikar said.

The blood oxygen levels of the said patient had dropped to as low as 86% as against the normal level of 95% to 100%, Arvind Gaikwad, nodal officer for media interaction at GMCH, said. “He was kept on ventilator and was treated according to the protocol set by the ministry of health and family welfare, Government of India. The treatment was carried out by a medical team headed by medicine HoD Meenakshi Bhattacharya. Gradually, his arterial oxygen level started increasing until it became normal,” Gaikwad said. 

Notably, this is the first recovery registered by a Covid-19 positive case which had turned critical. The medical team at the hospital is motivated with the healing of the patient. The team gave a hearty farewell as the patient stepped out of the hospital in good health. 

Team of doctors at medicine department which were treating the patient included Avinash Munde, Alim Patel, Sandesh Malu, Sandeep Chavan, Dr Chetan Digvijay Chavan and nursing staff comprised of Vimal Kedare, Mahendra, Pratik Joshi and Rohini Thokre.


