39 days on, 13-yr-old tests Covid +ve 4 times, in Mayo ward alone
2020-05-18
Nagpur: A 13-year-old boy is perhaps the only one remaining from the high risk group — immediate neighbours of the city’s first Covid deceased from Satranjipura — to get a discharge. His samples have tested positive repeatedly even after collectively spending 39 days in institutional quarantine followed by admission in Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH).One of the boy’s parents wants to stay with the minor in the ward. Overcoming his fears of being unaccompanied by a relative, the minor himself has asked them to stay away from him. Both the parents have comorbidities and as per doctors infectivity of the boy is still high.The new 10-day discharge policy has, however, come as a ray of hope for the aggrieved parents, who haven’t seen the body since April 12 when the Covid positive results forced their separation one after another. On Saturday when a lot of 11 patients returned home, the parents had gone to the hospital hoping to get the 13-year-old discharged.“He is scared and keeps crying. Yet he doesn’t want us to be with him. Only one of his test results has been negative. They are discharging people admitted at a later date, but not my son,” said the mother.On April 8, entire family was sent to institutional quarantine at Lonara. Four days later, mother and her elder son’s wife tested positive and shifted to GMCH. The boy's brother tested negative. The boy remained at Lonara centre. The 13-year-old tested positive on April 20 and was admitted to IGGMCH. The boy’s parents and his elder brother’s wife returned home after recovery on April 28.NMC sampling record submitted to IGGMCH at the time of admission shows the boy as 15-year-old, though the parents say he is 13 years old and is in Std VII, says the boy’s mother.IGGMCH deputy medical superintendent Dr Sagar Pandey told TOI that the 14th day sampling was already done even before the new guidelines for 10-day discharge were implemented. “His 14th day sample was positive. We took another sample after six days which too was positive and same was the result after another six days. After four days, sample will be taken again and depending on the result decision on his discharge will be taken,” he said.Regarding permitting a guardian in the ward, Dr Pandey said, “The boy’s father stayed back for two days and then left. The boy is also not willing to have any relative with him for fear of infecting them. We have allowed two other parents to stay with their positive minor daughters after taking an undertaking. We can’t force a parent or relative to stay back.”