3D printing firm creates face shields for COVID-19 warriors
2020-04-02
Surat: A 3D printing company is helping the front-line Coronavirus warriors in the city stay protected with a face shield that saves the user from the threat of airborne contaminants. City-based Sahajanand Technologies Private Limited (STPL) has not only devised these lightweight face shields but has also been distributing these for free among police, doctors and nurses in the diamond city amid shortage of safety equipment. In the last two days, the company, using its own 3D printers and laser cutters to make the visors, have delivered many shields to the hospitals for its medical staff. The simple design consists of a laser-cut clear plastic shield that covers the face and a printed visor band that fits across the users’ forehead. A standard-three hole punch is used to make holes in the plastic shield so that it can be clipped onto the visor. The transparent biocompatible polylactic acid (PLA) plastic sheet that forms the shield can be replaced or sanitized. The firm also provides extra plastic sheets. So far, more than 2,000 face shields have been distributed among the police, health workers and doctors in the New Civil Hospital and the SMC-run SMIMER hospital.Talking to TOI, manager of STPL3D, Kuntesh Radadiya said, “While the police force, doctors, nurses, NGO workers and employees in essential services are tackling COVID-19 crisis upfront, we want to help them by making these protective face shields.”Radadiya further said that the face shields can be worn with the face masks. The company has set a target of distributing about 10,000 face shields to the health workers, police and NGO workers involved in the fight against spread of Coronavirus in the city. Appreciating the face shields, police commissioner, RB Brahmbhatt said, “Each police personnel is checking more than 100 people every day and these face shields have definitely been a boon. We are thankful to the STPL3D company for providing the shield free for the police fraternity.”Deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), Dr Ashish Naik said that such masks are used widely in hospitals in the foreign countries. “This is the first time that the company in Surat is providing the shields to the health workers, doctors and policemen. We have appreciated their efforts to fight the virus in the diamond city and especially for distributing the safety gear for free,” Naik added.