Covid-19 scare: 3,000 train passengers screened at Khagaul
2020-03-24
PATNA: With nearly 3,700 passengers, two more Pune-Danapur special trains (01401/01139) reached the Danapur station on Monday. The first one arrived at 9.30am and the other at 1.30pm. 


Altogether four special trains mostly carrying migrants from Maharashtra have reached here after a sudden lockdown in Mumbai and Pune due to the outbreak of coronavirus (Covid-19).

Danapur divisional railway manager (DRM) Sunil Kumar claimed that the railways had made all necessary arrangements for screening a large number of passengers at a nearby school in Khagaul.

“These passengers were made to sit in separate rooms after which government and railway doctors did their medical check-up. Those, who complained of fever and cold, were immediately segregated and sent to the isolation ward of the Danapur sadar hospital by a bus for proper treatment,” he said.

The DRM also thanked the state government for extending full support to the railways. He said, “Officials of the district administration, including Danapur Sadar SDO, were present on the spot and helped conduct the check-up and screening test smoothly.”

He added, “Nearly 3,500 passengers travelled by the Lokmanya Tilak-Patna Express (13202), Lokmanya Tilak-Patliputra Junction (12141), Pune-Danapur Express (12149) and Bengaluru-Patliputra Junction Sanghamitra Express (12295) on Monday. A team of railway doctors conducted their thermal screening after they reached Buxar, Ara, Patna Junction, Rajendra Nagar Terminal and Patliputra Junction. Since no positive case was reported during the check-up, they were allowed to go home.”

Besides, eight other express trains reached their respective destinations in Sonepur (3), Samastipur (4) and Dhanbad (1) divisions of the ECR on Monday. All the passengers were screened properly.

19 suspected cases discharged: Of the 24 suspected cases of Covid-19, who were kept under observation at the Danapur sadar hospital after arriving from Maharashtra on Sunday, 19 were discharged on Monday. No specific symptoms of the disease were found in them.

Hospital superintendent Dr Ashok Kumar Singh told TOI on Monday that the remaining five suspects were still under observation.

Altogether 3,990 passengers of two special trains were screened at a school near the Danapur railway station on their arrival from Maharashtra.

