4 back from Tablighi Jamaat test positive in Meerut, 1 in Hapur
2020-04-03
MEERUT: As many as four people, one from Sardhana and three from Kashi village, all of whom attended the Tablighi Jamaat event at Delhi’s Nizamuddin, tested positive for Covid-19 in Meerut on Thursday, taking the district tally to 24. 


While the one traced in Sardhana is an Indonesian man, the other three are from Jharkhand. Meanwhile, another 71-year-old man from Thailand, who had returned from the Jamaat, tested positive in Hapur for novel coronavirus on Thursday.

“As many as four people, out of the total 76 samples, sent for tests at Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. One person who tested positive was also from Hapur. All the five people in question had returned from Nizamuddin’s Tablighi Jamaat,” said chief medical officer Dr Raj Kumar.

While one of four positive persons from Meerut was traced to Madina mosque in Sardhana, three others were traced to Kashi village in Partapur area here.

“One sample of an already infected person was also tested. He tested positive again. All the positive patients are being shifted from Subharti Medical College to LLRM Medical College immediately and their treatment is being started,” said Dr Kumar.

All the four cases from Meerut are in the age group of 16 to 22 years. 

“On Friday, an outreach campaign will be launched to trace the contacts of the four positive cases. Meanwhile, on Thursday, as many as 263 teams reached out to 1,84,575 people. The 24 contacts, who were traced on Thursday, were put into institutional quarantine,” said district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary.

Meanwhile, in Hapur, the case was traced to Haawal mosque in Dhaulana tehsil. Instructions have been given to the local residents to stay indoors until April 3 morning or action will be taken as per the norms against them,” said Hapur district magistrate Aditi Singh.

Marked as one of the three hotspots for Covid-19 cases in Uttar Pradesh, Meerut has so far reported 24 confirmed cases. Notably, 17 of them were from one group – a 50-year-old man and his contacts. The man with no foreign travel history, travelled from Amravati in Maharashtra to Meerut in two trains, stayed in three localities, attended a wedding and prayed at two city mosques before testing positive here. All the areas he visited have been sealed and are being disinfected while his contacts, which are in excess of a hundred, are being screened. 

