4 Covid-19 suspects who left Mayo hosp traced, asked to return
2020-03-14
Nagpur: The two men, a woman and a 4-year-old boy (and his mother), who allegedly left without permission from Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital’s (Mayo) Covid-19 isolation ward on Friday night have been traced, said district collector Ravindra Thakare. All had reported to the hospital with coronavirus-like symptoms. While the first three are from Nagpur, the mother and child are from Kerala.

Hospital sources said that the four were admitted to the isolation ward on Friday evening. They were all tested negative. 

The woman, aged about 40, works as a domestic help at the house of the city’s first positive-tested patient who is also under observation in Mayo hospital. She was not among the 15 first-point contact of the positive-tested patient who were called to the Government Medical College and Hospital on Thursday for giving swabs.

The two men are not colleagues of the first patient as was reported earlier. One of them is 19 and the other 41 years old. They had recently travelled to Italy and Thailand.

The mother of the boy had travelled to The Netherlands and returned on March 6. She had come to attend a private function in city where the boy showed some symptoms. Her local contacts told her to go to Mayo and get a sample checked.

While the mother and child went back to the hotel they were staying, the other three were found at their homes.

“By Saturday afternoon, three of them have reported back to the Mayo Hospital while one of them, the cook, is on the way to the hospital. Their results are expected to come out by the evening,” said Thakare. 

According to information available, all the patients told police that they were frustrated with the delay in knowing the status of their samples. “Also, being kept on the same floor as the first patient who has tested positive, they were apprehensive about contracting the virus,” said Thakare. 

However, dean of Mayo Dr Ajay Keoliya said, “It is true that the suspects were staying in the same building where the first positive Covid-10 patient is under treatment. But, the patient is kept separately and those quarantined are in another area, even though on the same floor. There is no chance of contact or infection in this arrangement.” 

Police said that the five left the ward one after the other around 10pm on Friday, claiming that they wanted to use the washroom and have tea.

The first patient's wife and colleague, who too tested positive, are in the isolation ward at the Government Medical College and Hospital. All three are apparently recovering well.

Zonal DCP Rahul Maknikar, who was on night rounds on Friday, said that the police were on high alert to trace the four adults and the child.

Meanwhile, city police chief BK Upadhyay said on Saturday that cops would help in escorting coronavirus suspects or positive patients but “will not directly intervene due to high health risks”. He did not want to comment on the issue of security breach at Mayo hospital on Saturday night. 


