4 confirmed Covid-19 cases in Sangli, 1 in Satara
2020-03-24
Kolhapur: Satara and Sangli districts reported their first batch of confirmed Covid-19 cases with five swab samples taken from suspected patients testing positive on Monday.

Four of the five confirmed cases are from Sangli district alone, while one is from Satara district. The district administrations of Sangli and Satara have acknowledged the positive cases and have confirmed that all Covid-19 patients had foreign travel history.

Sangli collector Abhijeet Chaudhary told TOI that the district’s four patients are from the same Islampur-based family and they had travelled to Saudi Arabia.

“The patients — two male and two female — were admitted to an isolation ward in Miraj on March 19. Their positive results were received on Monday evening and the patients are undergoing treatment. All the people they had come in contact with are being traced,” he said.

Chaudhary appealed to citizens to keep calm and said the administration is strictly monitoring the situation.

Meanwhile, in Satara, district civil surgeon Amod Gadikar said a 45-year-old woman had been identified as a confirmed Covid-19 patient.

“The woman had flown into Mumbai from Dubai on March 22. She then took a cab to reach her home in Khandala, Pargaon, in Satara district. She started coughing and feeling uneasy at night and went to the primary health centre in Khandala. She was then sent to the isolation ward and a swab sample was sent to the NIV,” Gadikar said. He added as a precautionary measure, the ambulance driver, who had transported the patient to the Satara-based isolation ward, has also been quarantined.

“We are trying to find the driver of the cab in which she had travelled,” he said.

When asked, whether the woman was screened at the Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Dr Gadikar said that he was unaware of it. He said the district health department has set up a 121-bed isolation facility at six places in the district, including at Karad, Phaltan, Satara, Wai and Lonand.

“We are keeping a close watch on tourists as well. Resorts and hotels have already been told to stop online bookings,” he said, adding that the administration is fully prepared to tackle the situation.

Sangli district collector Abhijeet Chaudhary added the administration is going to set up a swab testing facility at Miraj by March 31. Chaudhary has issued a circular stating immediate closure of all the industries, businesses, except the ones in essential services, across Sangli until March 31.

The district administration said that many workers travel to Sangli for employment and, therefore, the closure of industries will help in stopping the possibility of the virus spread.

Meanwhile, the janata curfew on Sunday saw a drop in fuel demand in Sangli and Kolhapur districts. According to the districts’ respective petrol dealers’ associations, on Sunday, a meagre 5-10% fuel was sold.


