Rajasthan: Four die of Covid-19, 82 more cases, infection numbers rise to 2,666
2020-05-02
JAIPUR: Covid-19 claimed four more lives on Friday taking the total death in the state to 62. This apart, 82 persons tested positive for the virus taking the infected count to 2,666.

In Jaipur, there were two casualties taking the death count in the city to 34. One person died in Nagaur, which was the second Covid death in the district. One died in Jodhpur, which was the eighth death in the city due to the virus.

The Jodhpur victim was a 27-year-old girl from Pratap Nagar who had tested positive for coronavirus on April 22 and died at MDM Hospital on Friday. She was suffering from multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.

A 32-year-old resident of Painter Colony in Shastri Nagar, who was admitted to SMS Hospital on April 28, died the next day. Another death was reported from the city’s Khazane Walon Ka Rasta. A 62-year-old man, who was admitted to SMS Hospital on April 28, died on Thursday.

The cause of concern for health authorities is that they did not have any co-morbidity. In majority of the deaths reported in the state, persons who died of Covid-19 had co-morbidities, but in the two deaths in Jaipur, doctors claimed that no comorbidity was found.

A 26-year-old woman, who was a resident of Basni of Nagaur district and admitted to PBM Hospital in Bikaner on April 25, died while undergoing treatment on April 29. The health department officials said she had pregnancy related complications.

Health department officials said 82 persons were found infected with the virus on Friday. The districts which reported the cases are Jodhpur (35), Jaipur (21), Ajmer (11), Chittorgarh (7), Kota (7) and one in Rajsamand.

In Jaipur, the 21 persons who were found infected were from Ramganj (5), Sodala (3), Shastri Nagar (2), Kishanpole (2), two from unknown address and one each from Sikar House, Agra Road, Gurunanakpura, Dudu, Pratap Nagar, Purana Jalupura and Chand Pole.

Health minister Raghu Sharma said all the migrants from the state who will return to their villages will have to stay at a quarantine facility for 14 days.


