Tamil Nadu: Four guest workers from Aavin test positive for Covid-19
2020-05-23
CHENNAI: Four guest workers from Odisha and West Bengal, who were engaged as loaders at the Aavin dairy in Madhavaram, have tested positive for Covid-19. They were shifted to the Government Stanley Medical College Hospital on Friday. They were among a group of 38 workers from Odisha, West Bengal and Bihar who decided to stay back and work instead of returning home after they were promised jobs in the dairy.

“The remaining workers were asked to continue to stay at Aavin’s old office and not to work. We have alerted the Aavin officials not to engage them,” said a Greater Chennai Corporation official.

But general manager of Aavin, Madhavaram, R S Pugalendhi said no worker had tested positive for the infection. “Some vested interests are spreading rumours. No such guest worker is staying on our campus or have tested positive for Covid-19,” he said.

When TOI spoke to Kaluswain, one of the workers engaged in the dairy, he said: “All of us were staying together for the past two weeks. Though the old building has sufficient space to maintain physical distance, we were sharing a single bathroom. A few of the workers developed fever three or four days ago. Today, four of them tested positive but nobody has screened the rest of us.”

The 32 year-old labourer from Ganjam district of Odisha said he has breathing difficulty and mild cough, while another worker has similar symptoms.

Before taking up the job at the dairy, Kaluswain was staying with 350-odd workers from Odisha and Bihar in Guru Nanak College, one of shelters for guest workers in the city. After contractors from Aavin approached them, promising a job with a monthly salary of Rs 12,000 along with PF benefits, free food and accommodation, 27 of them agreed to work.

They were engaged in the work on the same day and were put in the night shift to load Aavin milk packets and other dairy products on the vehicles. After three days, six of them left. The others continued to work along with 16 workers from West Bengal. They were housed in the old office building in Madhavaram. “We have been working till Tuesday,” Kaluswain said adding that all the workers now want to return home.


