Noida: 4 kids among 10 found to have Covid-19, all from Sector 8
2020-05-02
NOIDA: Ten more people tested positive in Noida on Friday, taking the number of Covid-19 cases to 155. With 90 people having recovered so far, the number of active cases stands at 65. 

The 10 people who tested positive on Friday are all from Sector 8, which was already a hotspot. That includes four children — two 10-year-old boys and two girls who are 12 and 15. Two men and four women were others who tested positive. Eight were admitted to Sharda Hospital and one at GIMS. Information about one more patient could not be confirmed till the time of filing this report.

Chief medical officer Dr Deepak Ohri said eight of the 10 had been quarantined at Galgotias University earlier. “So we had managed to contain the spread as these patients were already in quarantine wards.” A surveillance drive was initiated by the health department in Sector 8, with six teams of three members each screening, monitoring and conducting awareness drives. “One team each will be placed in the four corners of the sector. The two remaining will be stationed right at the centre,” Ohri said.

Information on the seven Covid-19 cases that were reported late on Thursday also came in. One of them, a 36-year-old man from Sector 9, might be from the Cease Fire contact chain, officials said. Another, a 55-year-old man is from Sector Pi 1 in Greater Noida.

Others include a 25-year-old man from JJ Colony in Sector 10, a 27-year-old woman from Bisrakh village who was tested at a private lab in Ghaziabad and a 32-year-old woman whose husband, sources said, is a doctor who had earlier tested positive in Delhi. Two others are senior citizens — a 76-year-old from Sector 55 whose wife had tested positive earlier and a 71-year-old from Sector 150.

Two patients, meanwhile, were discharged on Friday. “In the district, 90 people have recovered so far,” district magistrate Suhas LY said.

With 316 of the 333 reports received on Friday coming back negative, 70 people were discharged from quarantine. “We have discharged 29 patients so far. The others will be discharged on Saturday once surveillance and contact tracing is over in Sector 8,” Dr Amit Kumar from the quarantine ward at Galgotias College of Engineering and Technology said. Those discharged on Friday include medical staff from Sharda Hospital and Sector 39 hospital.


