Coronavirus outbreak: Four kin of critical woman test positive, but not her mother, daughter
2020-03-23
PUNE: Four family members of the 41-year-old woman, who tested positive for the coronavirus infection and is currently on ventilator support at Bharati hospital, were also found infected with the contagion on Sunday. However, the tests of the woman’s 64-year-old mother and 21-year-old daughter, who live with her, turned negative.


The four who tested positive are the woman’s 17-year-old son, her sister and brother-in-law and their daughter. They are residents of Katraj and Sinhagad road. 

The tally of positive coronavirus cases in Pune since March 9 has now reached 28 — 15 from areas in Pune city and 12 from neighbouring Pimpri Chinchwad. The jurisdiction of one case, of an IT engineer, remains uncertain. 

Seven of the 15 patients from Pune are residents of housing societies on Sinhagad road. 

The critical woman, who lives at Vadgaon Budruk on Sinhagad road, has no known history of foreign travel or any proximity to close contacts of people who have tested positive for the novel coronavirus. Her throat swab sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) to rule out swine flu (H1N1) turned out positive for coronavirus on March 20.

A state health official said, “Surprisingly, the woman’s 64-year-old mother, despite living in the same house as her, tested negative for the infection. There are theories that older people are at greater risk of contracting the infection.”

The official said the four family members who tested positive have been admitted to the Naidu hospital. 

“This is the second case in Pune where more than one member of a family has been found infected, the first instance being the other Sinhagad road family whose three members tested positive on March 9 and 10 after their return from Dubai. The three were also the first positive cases in Pune,” he said.

The official said the four who tested positive on Sunday have flu-like symptoms. “None of them are exhibiting any severe symptoms. They have been put on anti-viral medications including oseltamivir which is used in the treatment of swine flu,” he said.

The woman’s sister who tested positive is a nurse at Bharati hospital. “She had got her sister shifted from a private hospital on Sinhagad road to Bharati hospital on March 16 after she was diagnosed with viral pneumonia,” official said.

The 44-year-old sister is a resident of Katraj. “She, her 47-year-old husband and 21-year-old daughter have been diagnosed with the contagion. Their close contacts are now being traced. The report of the 41-year-old woman’s husband and four other close contacts are awaited,” the official said.

Meanwhile, the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) said its team of 244 health officials and volunteers have surveyed 3.37 lakh people in the township. 

Around 910 people who returned from abroad over the last month have been asked to maintain home-quarantine.


