4 more positive cases take Covid-19 count to 53
2020-04-27
Aurangabad: Four women, aged between 35 and 65, tested positive for coronavirus on Sunday taking the total Covid-19 tally in Aurangabad to 53. They are all undergoing treatement.

On Sunday morning, two women, aged 35 and 65, from Asifiya Colony and Samata Nagar, respectively, tested positive. They are being treated at the district civil hospital.

In the evening, 2 more women tested positive. A 53-year-old woman from Daulatabad became the first case from Aurangabad’s rural area. The administration has started the contact-tracing process to find the source of her infection. Meanwhile, a 39-year-old woman, resident of Asifiya Colony, also tested positive. She was a close contact of a confirmed case from the same locality. Both are admitted to GMCH’s dedicated Covid centre. 

According to Pradeep Kulkarni, the medical officer at the district civil hospital, three of the new patients are contacts of previously confirmed Covid-19 patients. Currently, 24 Covid-19 positive patients are under treatment at the district civil hospital and six are at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH).

On Sunday, 75 patients were screened at the district civil hospital. The hospital collected and sent the throat swab samples of 68 individuals to the GMCH. Of them, 11 tested negative and they have been sent home with instructions to quarantine themselves. Results of the remaining 57 are awaited.

At the GMCH, 13 people were screened and swabs of seven were sent for testing in the last 24 hours. The test reports are awaited. 

GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar said one person, who had tested negative for coronavirus, has died in the hospital in the past 24 hours and six non-covid patients have been sent home after recovery.

Meanwhile, the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) is carrying out door-to-door surveys in 11 localities marked as containment zones — Aref Colony, Kiradpura, Yadav Nagar, Baijipura, Bismillah Colony, Asifiya Colony, Hilal Colony, Samata Nagar, Deolai, Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura and Pundalik Nagar. On Sunday, 32 teams surveyed 2,670 houses and screened 11,927 persons. So far, 22 persons have been treated of Covid-19 in Aurangabad and five people have died.

As a preventive measure, municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey has given 226 sanitation employees aged 55 years or more a 10-day leave from Saturday.


