4 more cases take south TN Covid count to 421
2020-05-03
Madurai: Two fire service personnel attached to the RS Mangalam fire station in Ramanathapuram tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, taking the total number of cases in the district to 20. Apart from the two cases, Theni and Madurai reported one each on Saturday and put the tally at 421.

The two firemen, aged 20 and 30, hailed from RS Mangalam and Thiruvadanai respectively. Meanwhile, a 19-year-old boy from R S Mangalam was discharged from the Sivaganga government hospital on Saturday. With these two new cases, the total number of active cases in the district went up to nine.

In Theni district, the same day when it discharged five patients and became officially free of active cases, reported a fresh case. The district had otherwise not reported a new case since April 17.

On Saturday, a 50-year-old lady, who sells idlis in her house in Bodi town tested positive for Covid-19. She was identified through random sampling being done in Theni district in the containment zones. This random sampling method was started in Bodi municipality where three medical teams conducted the sampling using the mobile sampling facilities.

The woman was among the 413 random samples collected by them. Now, samples have been obtained from 106 persons including seven of her family members, her neighbours and persons who visited her eatery. The district had registered 43 covid-19 cases of which one woman succumbed. The last of the 42 patients were discharged on Saturday and they were given a grand farewell by the hospital staff. In Madurai, a 35-year-old man from Sellur, which is a containment zone, tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday. Health officials said that efforts are on to trace contacts of the man. At Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH), a 25-year-old woman from Melur Taluk, who tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday, delivered a healthy child on Saturday. She became the third Covid-19 positive pregnant woman from Madurai to deliver a child through C-section at the hospital after a 24-year-old woman from Usilampatti and a 27-year-old woman from Anuppanadi Road, Teppakulam. Samples of the newborn will soon be taken and sent for testing. Hospital authorities confirmed that the test results of both the other two newborns are negative.


