4 more test Covid-19 positive in Uttarakhand, 2 discharged
2020-04-06
DEHRADUN: Uttarakhand reported four new Covid-19 positive cases on Sunday taking the state’s tally to 26.


Meanwhile, the state’s first case, the trainee Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer admitted to Doon Hospital on March 15, and a man from Kotdwar who had a recent travel history to Spain, were both discharged on Sunday after their second consecutive report were found negative.

According to health officials, all four positive cases reported on Sunday were members of Tablighi Jamaat. While one positive person is admitted to a Ramnagar hospital, three others are from Suddhowala quarantine centre in Dehradun.

An official statement from Dr Amita Upreti, director general (health), stated, “We got reports of 144 people on Sunday of which four were Covid-19-positive. As many as 101 new samples were sent for testing on April 5. A total of 983 tests have been conducted in Uttarakhand so far.”

The state has so far quarantined 15,217 people of which 184 are in hospital isolation. 

In an appeal to residents on Sunday, the health department said that people should follow the guidelines of the lockdown and those who have been placed in home quarantine must follow the same for the prescribed duration.

“If a person placed in home quarantine does not follow due instructions, he/she will be moved to the institutional quarantine,” Dr Upreti added.

Meanwhile, the members of Uttarakhand nurses service association on Sunday wrote to the chief minister saying that they shouldn’t be allotted duties in facilities which house only men. They also demanded N95 masks and Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) kits while working in the hospitals. 

Kanti Rana, president of the association, alleged, “In quarantine facilities, nurses are being made to sleep in rooms next to suspected cases which increase our risk of getting infected. There is also no arrangement of food, sanitisation and other basic facilities for nurses at these centres.”

