Four more test poitive for Covid-19, Pune’s case count up at 36
2020-03-29
PUNE: Four persons, including three family members of a critically-ill Sahakarnagar man diagnosed with the Covid-19 infection, tested positive for the contagion on Saturday. 

The critically-ill man has no history of foreign travel and is undergoing treatment for viral pneumonia at a private hospital in the Deccan area.


 

Another 50-year-old man, resident of Ravivar Peth, who tested positive for the infection on Saturday is a diabetic. He also has no recent history of international travel. This is the fifth case in Pune within a week where the source of infection is not linked to international travel or a traceable contact to infected person. This has pushed Pune district’s positive case tally to 36 so far. Of them, 10 individuals diagnosed with the infection have recovered and been discharged.

“Three family members who tested positive are the Sahakarnagar man’s wife and parents,” said a health official.

The man’s wife is 39-year-old. His father is 65-year-old and mother is 59-year-old. “Their condition is stable. They have been quarantined at Naidu hospital and their close contacts are being traced,” the official said.

The Revivar Peth resident complained of mild breathlessness two days ago, following which he was admitted to a private hospital in Rasta Peth. “His condition is stable. He has no history of international travel. His contacts are being traced and quarantined,” the official said.

All the five cases who have no history of international travel or proximity to the infected persons or their close contacts landed up at different hospitals in the city for treatment of viral pneumonia and breathlessness. Upon investigations, they were found infected with the virus.

On Friday, a 41-year-old woman, a resident of Sinhagad Road, had tested positive for Covid-19 when the treating doctors had sent her throat swab sample to rule out influenza A H1N1 aka swine flu. 

On Monday evening, a 51-year-old critically-ill man with viral tested positive for Covid-19. The man is currently on ventilator support at a private hospital in Erandwane. 

Another 48-year-old man, a resident of Wagholi who initially suffered an accident and later landed up at a private hospital on Ahmednagar Road for breathlessness, was also found infected with contagion on Tuesday. His condition is stable and he is recovering.

“Of the five Covid-19 infected patients with no apparent history of foreign travel, condition of three is critical and they are on ventilator support,” a state health official said.


