4 new Covid-19 cases in central districts
2020-04-19
TRICHY: Four new positive cases were recorded in Perambalur and Thanjavur districts on Saturday, taking the total number of cases in the central region to 191. 

Three people - a four-year-old boy, a 47-year-old police constable and a 24-year-old man tested positive in Perambalur district.

The boy is suspected to have contracted the infection from his father who had returned from Sharjah. The boy’s father was under home quarantine. The family resides in Palayam village near Perambalur town. Except for the boy, other family members including the father tested negative. 

The 24-year-old man from V Kalathur is suspected to have contracted the infection from his brother-in-law who had tested positive on April 3. 

Health department officials said the constable was posted at the V Kalathur containment zone. “As many as 36 contacts of the constable including policemen have been identified. They are advised to be placed in institutional quarantine,” a health department official said. The V Kalathur police station is being disinfected and the process is likely to go for two days.

The district police have instructed its personnel on Covid-19 duty to be more cautious. “Police personnel have been instructed to wash their hands frequently. If hand-washing facility is not available, they are told to use hand sanitizer,” Nisha Parthiban, superintendent of police told TOI. 

The district administration has instructed residents of V Kalathur and Palayam villages to stay home and avoid public movement. All three patients from Perambalur have been shifted to the Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital in Trichy. 

Meanwhile, a day after recording 17 cases, Thanjavur district recorded only one positive case on Saturday. A 39-year-old woman, relative of a positive patient who gave birth to a baby boy on April 7 at the Rajah Mirasudhar Government Hospital in Thanjavur, tested positive. 

There were no new cases in Trichy. In a statement, the district administration said that results of 208 out of the 331 close contacts of 36 patients, which came on Saturday, were negative. The remaining 123 results are pending, said Trichy collector S Sivarasu. 

There were no new cases in Karur, Pudukottai, Ariyalur, Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam. The Government Medical College in Karur discharged a 25-year-old man from Dindigul district on Saturday after he recovered from Covid-19. 

(With inputs from R Gokul and D Vincent Arockiaraj) 


