Four new districts join Covid-19 list as UP tally crosses 1,500
2020-04-24
LUCKNOW: Four districts, including Ayodhya, joined the ‘affected list’ as 66 new cases took UP’s Covid-19 tally to 1531 on Thursday. The state also recorded four deaths, taking the overall toll to 25. Besides, 33 patients were discharged on the day. With this, 206 patients have recovered so far.


Three of the four deaths were reported in Kanpur. Kanpur CMO Ashok Shukla said that all three cases were confirmed after patients' death. The list includes 72-year-old father of a Covid-19 patient in Quli Bazaar, a 45-year-old garment trader in Tikuniya Park area referred to LLR Hospital and a 50-year-old native of Roshannagar area who died on Monday. The district also recorded 15 new cases, taking the overall number of cases to 96.

The fourth death was reported in Meerut. Dr RC Gupta, principal, LLRM Medical College, said, “A 50-year-old man - who tested positive for coronavirus on Tuesday - died at LLRM Medical College on Thursday. This is the fourth death in Meerut. He is the father of Meerut BJP Mahanagar president’s assistant, who, too, had tested positive on Wednesday. He was diabetic and acute pneumonia.”

With eight, three and one cases each respectively, Bahraich, Shravasti and Balrampur were the new entrants to the list of affected districts. Bahraich CMO Suresh Singh said: “The list of patients included a Nepalese resident who had been quarantined at a shelter home in Rupaidiha.” 

Saharanpur recorded 13 cases. In Agra, nine new cases were reported taking the district tally to 336. Out of these, the list of fresh cases included one patient is provisional store shop-keeper while another is a ward boy of SN Medical College. The third patient is a vegetable vendor while the fourth is a female lab technician at a private dialysis centre. The driver of a government officer also tested Covid-19 positive. The remaining patients were contacts of previous cases. Four cases were reported in Lucknow, taking its overall total to 178. 

Three patients were reported from Moradabad. 

Aligarh and Mathura, too, reported one case each, taking the tally of the two districts to 7 and 8 respectively. Mathura CMO Sher Singh confirmed that one more person from Lal Darwaja tested positive. He said, “The patient’s age is 67. He works as an accountant and has been admitted to a private hospital.”

Ayodhya DM Anuj Jha said that one pregnant woman, aged 25 years, who was sampled on Wednesday by a private hospital through private lab tested positive for coronavirus.

