Four new suspected Coronavirus cases in Hyderabad, government says no need to panic
2020-02-01
HYDERABAD: As four more persons with symptoms of Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) were admitted to state-run Fever Hospital on Friday, the health authorities urged people to avoid crowded places. “People should not panic about Coronavirus, but be careful and avoid crowded places as a precaution,” read a statement issued by the health department.


In a huge relief for authorities, the much-awaited testing kits arrived from Delhi and the state government said they would begin testing samples within 48 hours in Hyderabad. The samples of the four persons, including a woman, were sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune, along with two more samples for tests.

 
 
These four persons are between 25 years and 40 years of age and travelled to China in the last fortnight. “With new suspected cases reported on Friday, we have a total of 15 suspected cases, of which nine have been tested negative. The report of six other samples are awaited from NIV Pune,” said Vijay Kumar, state nodal officer.

Officials at Gandhi Medical College, where testing for Novel Coronavirus will begin, said that sufficient number of kits have arrived in the first batch. “Once the tests are done here, they will be sent to NIV Pune to check that the tests have been done correctly. After getting a go-ahead from NIV, all tests will be done locally,” said an official.

Experts suggest maintaining high level of personal hygiene, exercise and self-isolation for 14 days in case people, who had travelled to China, witness symptoms. “Please do not send children to school if they feel sick. If a child has fever of 100F or above, he/she should rest at home until the fever is gone. If you have any health concerns, please consult with your physician or health care provider,” said Dr KK Agarwal, president of Confederation of Medical Association of Asia and Oceania (CMAAO), Heart Care Foundation of India (HCFI) and past national president of Indian Medical Association (IMA).


