Four new coronavirus cases in Delhi, total 39
2020-03-27
NEW DELHI: The number of cases of Covid-19 in Delhi touched 39 on Thursday with four new cases being confirmed. In Noida, three more persons tested positive for the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, taking the total number of Covid-19 patients in the NCR city to 14. On the brighter side, three of the Noida patients have fully recovered and have been discharged.


Among the Delhi patients was a 32-year-old man from Jamia Nagar who had returned from Dubai recently and three other persons from other states but quarantined in Delhi after returning from abroad. “Of the 39 cases confirmed till date, 29 have travel history,” said a senior health department official.

She added that five Covid-19 patients in Delhi have recovered fully and have been discharged. A doctor of a mohalla clinic in Northeast Delhi and his wife have also tested positive. “People who visited the clinic or came in contact with the doctor between March 12 and March 18 have been quarantined,” the official said. The clinic in the Mohanpuri area of Maujpur has since been closed and sanitised.

The state’s district surveillance officers are tracing all persons who came in contact with the Covid-19 positive cases to limit the risk of disease spread. “Till date, we have tracked 4,559 contacts out of which 1,639 contacts of first six patients have completed their 14 days in quarantine and the remaining 2,920 are under surveillance,” said the official. She added that more than 20,000 passengers from Covid-19 affected countries are also under surveillance.

On Thursday, a meeting was held in the chairmanship of Lieutenant Governor to review the state’s preparedness for Covid-19 after which guidelines were issued on surveillance and cluster containment plan. Orders were also issued for testing of healthcare workers who are directly involved in the treatment of Covid-19 positive patients and in drawing samples from patients at designated centres for testing. “All patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) admitted in government hospitals shall also be tested,” said a government order. Sources said testing of this persons with ARDS was important to find out if Covid-19 has spread at community level. So far, there isn’t enough evidence to show that. 

In Noida, among those who tested positive on Thursday was the 21-year-old daughter of the Sector 137 couple found positive two days ago. Another couple tested positive in Sector 150, the 39 years old and the woman 33. He and the Sector 137 male resident are colleagues and both families seem to have been infected by the same carrier. Sanitisation of the societies in Sectors 137 and 150 has been completed, though the society in Sector 150 will be sealed for the next two days.


