4 new Covid-19 cases found in U’khand, state tally now 67
2020-05-10
Dehradun: Uttarakhand reported four new Covid-19 positive cases on Saturday, taking the total number of coronavirus patients in the state to 67.

All the new cases are migrant workers based in Udham Singh Nagar, who were returning to the state from other places.

Dr Shailja Bhatt, chief medical officer of Udham Singh Nagar, told TOI that all the four persons were caught by city police deployed at district borders while they were attempting to enter Udham Singh Nagar to reach to their homes in Kichha, Rudrapur, and Khatima areas.

“Of the four new cases, two were coming from Haryana while one each was coming from Gujarat and Mumbai. The one coming from Gujarat boarded several road transport vehicles to reach Udham Singh Nagar while the other three arrived in their own vehicles. All of them came from hotspot cities but we are still tracing their movement history to ascertain the exact time and cause of infection,” she added. The patients were shifted to Dr Susheela Tiwari Medical College in Haldwani. Notably, Udham Singh Nagar district has reported five new positive cases in last five days after the government allowed industrial activities and movement in various green and orange zones across India. At present, Udham Singh Nagar has the maximum nine active Covid-19 cases in Uttarakhand, followed by Dehradun with seven cases, Haridwar with three cases, and Nainital with one positive case.

Meanwhile, one more patient — a staff nurse at AIIMS Rishikesh — recovered fully from the virus on Saturday. Staff members along with the director of AIIMS Rishikesh Dr Ravi Kant greeted the nurse who had recovered, with flowers.With this, the total number of recovered cases has shot up to 46 in Uttarakhand and the recovery rate in the state has become 68.66%.

The state has so far tested 9,683 samples, among which only 0.76% has tested positive, as per data provided by the health department. The rate of doubling of Covid-19 cases in Uttarakhand is 38 days, according to the health bulletin released by the department on Saturday.


