Four Uttarakhand medical colleges to be reserved for treatment of Covid-19 patients
2020-03-25
DEHRADUN: The Uttarakhand cabinet, which met on Tuesday, focused mainly on coronavirus preparations and steps required to combat the threat. The cabinet unanimously decided that the four state medical colleges of Dehradun, Srinagar, Haldwani and Almora be reserved for coronavirus patients and suspects.

It also directed competent authorities to fill up vacancies in the health department and allocated a separate fund to all the 13 district magistrates (DM) to help labourers – who were not registered – elderly and the needy. Besides, in a major decision, the cabinet has decided to give three-month advance ration to all card holders in the first week of April.

Urban development minister and state government spokesperson Madan Kaushik said, “For effective management and treatment of novel coronavirus patients, the cabinet has given nod to a proposal which recommended to convert the four medical colleges – Dehradun, Srinagar, Haldwani and Almora — into coronavirus treatment centres. Health secretary has been authorised to shift the remaining doctors and staff to other hospitals.” 

The state cabinet has requested the Centre to give approval for two Covid-19 sample test at Indian Institute of Petroleum and AIIMS Rishikesh. 

The HoDs of three medical colleges – Dehradun, Haldwani and Srinagar – have been authorised to recruit the required staff on contract for three months. “Similarly, DMs can recruit contractual staff in district hospitals for three months,” he added. 

Against the vacancy of 555 temporary posts in the health department, the recruitment process is on for 314 posts. Against the total vacancy, the health department has received 640 applications. “No fresh advertisement would be given for the remaining posts, which can be filed by finding suitable candidates among the 640 applicants,” said the minister. 

Against the requirement of 958 posts of surgeons, the cabinet has given a nod to immediately recruit 479 surgeons on a 11-month contract. 

There are around 3 lakh registered labours in Uttarakhand and the process has been started to deposit Rs 1,000 in their bank accounts. “Over 20,000 registered labourers have got the money transferred in their bank account and the remaining would be covered in the next few days,” he added. 

To help labourers who are not registered, the cabinet has approved a Rs 3 crore each for DMs of Dehradun, Haridwar, Udham Singh Nagar and Nainital districts. The remaining nine DMs would get a relief fund of Rs 2 crore each. “There are many labourers who are not registered with us or there are many people who are finding themselves in an extremely piquant situation. In such instances, the DMs have been given the power to provide financial relief in these matters,” said the minister. 

Kaushik added that the Centre has announced a MSP of Rs 1,925 per quintal on wheat. “We have to purchase 2 lakh metric tonne, and the Cabinet has decided to give a Rs 20 per quintal bonus to farmer,” said the minister.


