40 Covid patients recover, discharged
2020-04-17
Trichy: As many as 40 Covid-19 patients were discharged from hospitals in three districts in the central region, while a 62 year-old Tablighi Jamaat delegate from Athirampattinam in Thanjavur tested positive on Thursday.The patient was admitted to the isolation ward at Thanjavur Government Medical College Hospital. With this, the total number of cases in Thanjavur touched 17. In the central region, the total cases climbed to 161.Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) in Trichy discharged 32 Covid-19 recovered patients on Thursday. They included 29 patients from Trichy and one patient each from Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur districts. “The testing confirmed that they are negative,” Trichy collector S Sivarasu told reporters at MGMGH.The discharged people were among the 43 Covid-19 patients who tested positive since March 31. The treatment for the remaining 14 patients including a one-year-old baby is continuing. “All of them are stable. The discharged patients are advised to be in quarantine for 14 days and not to be in close contact with the family members,” said the collector. The collector also appreciated all the doctors and the health workers for their contribution towards the treatment of the Covid-19 patients.In Karur, seven patients were discharged from the Government Medical College Hospital following their recovery from Covid-19. Five of them are native of Dindigul while two are from Namakkal district.Till Wednesday, 52 patients from Karur, Dindigul and Namakkal districts were discharged from the Karur Government Medical Hospital.Thanjavur district also recorded the first recovery of a Covid-19 positive patient on Thursday with the discharge of a 42-year-old man from Kumbakonam. Being an employee in a company in West Indies, he was back in India on March 18. As he developed symptoms for Covid-19, he was admitted to the hospital on March 25 and he tested positive on March 28.As he tested negative after treatment, Covid-19 monitoring officer M S Shanmugam, district collector M Govinda Rao, medical college dean Kumutha Lingaraj gave him a farewell on Thursday.