Kolkata: 40% flyers cancel trips to China amid coronavirus scare, more may follow
2020-01-25
KOLKATA: Around 40% flyers scheduled travel to China from Kolkata over the next one week have cancelled their journey, ostensibly after the outbreak of coronavirus in that country. 


The Indian government has already issued advisory, asking people visiting China to take precaution against the disease. More cancellations could follow over the next few weeks amid fears that the contagious virus would spread to other Asian countries, say city travel agents. Kunming, Ghuangzao, Shanghai and Beijing are the most frequently visited by travellers from Kolkata; coronavirus cases have been reported from Shanghai and Beijing so far.


 
 “This will hit tourism hard since China is both a leisure and a business destination. It is close to India and is well connected by flights operated by several airlines. But already, more than 40% flyers have cancelled their journey,” said Joydeep Mukherjee of Meghdootam Travels. An estimated 4,500 people travel to China from Kolkata every week but the number could drop to 2,000 by next week, said Travel Agents Federation of India chairman (east) Anil Punjabi. “As of now, we are asking those who have booked with us to wait and watch. But it will not be fair to ask them to take a risk. So, we might advise them to stay away from China within the next few days,” said Punjabi, who also owns Ares Travels, which sends around 100 travellers to China every week. He added it would lead to a huge loss for the tourism sector since Southeast Asian countries, too, are likely to be affected next. “Cases have been reported from Thailand and Japan, apart from Saudi Arabia. Since it is difficult to check the spread, travel will be affected across the region,” said Mukherjee. There is no travel advisory for Southeast Asian countries so far.

Four airlines fly to three destinations in China directly from Kolkata; while IndiGo and China Eastern Airlines run daily flights from Guanzhou and Kunming, Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon operate flights to and from Hong Kong.

Airline officials pointed out that beside the coronavirus scare, there was another reason for the passenger slump: the lunar new year and spring festival in China are celebrated now, when most shops and stores shut for around two weeks. 

China Eastern Airlines and IndiGo officials confirmed a significant drop in passenger count . “The inbound flights are running full. But the outbound traffic has significantly been down,” said an airport official. 

But doctors welcomed the advisory. “The virus has spread to all corners of China and it can’t be prevented merely by screening flyers at airports. There could be scores of infected patients travelling to and from China with no symptoms and it could be dangerous,” said an infectious diseases expert.

