40 held, over 1,000 vehicles seized on Day 1 of lockdown 3.0
2020-05-05
PATNA: On the first day of the stage three of nationwide lockdown, 40 people were arrested and 1,045 vehicles impounded for violating the norms on Monday.

People came out in large numbers on the streets early in the morning in Vaishali, while some gathered in front of barber shops, others were seen waiting for internet kiosks to open. They were under the impression that their areas were under the ‘green zones’ as per an earlier notification by the Centre. Their illusion broke soon as lathi wielding cops arrived to chase them.

DGP Gupteshwar Pandey said, “There is no relaxation as the entire state has been divided into two zones—red zone and orange zone. There is no green zone at all. Instructions have been issued to all SPs to follow the lockdown norms strictly.”

The scene at Muzaffarpur was no different. People spotted moving on roads were chased and motorists forced to pay penalty for violating lockdown norms. Senior cops were seen monitoring the situation.

Arnab Choudhary, a resident of Mithanpura in Muzaffarpur district, said, “Cops are cruel. They behave as if we are hardcore criminals. They don’t discriminate between bonafides and fake ones. Senior police officers must look into it.”

Sharing details of the police action against lockdown violators, additional director general of police (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said, “Altogether 40 people were arrested and 1,045 vehicles impounded in the state for violating lockdown norms on Monday.”

In addition, 20 FIRs were lodged and Rs.25.66 lakh realised as penalty from vehicle owners, he said. Kumar, who is also official spokesperson of the state police, reiterated that lockdown curbs will be followed more effectively.

Another senior IAS officer said that the state government has converted the green zone into orange zone to contain the spread of Covid19 pandemic. “The police have been ordered to maintain law and order and ensure that social distancing is duly followed.”

He further said, “As per the latest order issued by the state government, people won’t be able to travel to different cities without necessary passes. Security and testing will be tighter at the check points on the borders.”

The officer on condition of anonymity said stern action would be taken if people entered the state without passes. However, some leniency will be given in orange zones. “Shops will remain open till 7 pm. Saloons have been given permission to reassume operation. Buses won’t run as yet. Other restrictions are in line with those being followed across the country,” he revealed.


