40 new cases in Rajasthan, Jhalawar gets its first Covid-19 patient
2020-04-09
JAIPUR: Forty more persons tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Wednesday, out of which 23 are from Jaipur. The total count of positive cases has increased to 383 till date in the state. 


According to the health department report, 23 persons were diagnosed with Covid-19 in Jaipur, six in Bikaner, five in Kota, two from Jhalawar, one each from Jodhpur, Karauli, Jhunjhunu and Banswara. 

The report says, 13 persons linked to Tablighi Jamaat have been found infected with the virus in Jaipur. They belong to Bhagalkot of Karnataka. However, four persons, who are staff of a private hospital in Suraj Pole area of Jaipur, have been tested positive for Covid-19. The health authorities have sealed the hospital after disinfecting it. Two persons from Ramganj and two from Ghat Gate and one each from Kho Nagoriyan and Bhatta Basti area have been diagnosed with Covid-19. They have been sent to SMS Hospital for treatment. 

In Bikaner, five relatives of a 60-year-old woman, who had died recently after being tested positive for Covid-19, have also been found infected with the virus. While one woman has also been diagnosed with the disease, who was in close contact with a Covid-19 patient. A 50-year-old woman in Banswara has also been found infected with the virus. She was in close contact with a Covid-19 patient. In Jodhpur too, a woman, a close contact of a Covid-19 patient, has contracted the virus. 

In Kota, five persons have tested positive for Covid-19. They all are relatives of a 62-year-old woman, who had died in Kota recently after being diagnosed with the disease. 

Jhalawar reported its first cases on Wednesday when two persons were found infected with the virus. Health department officials said that they had a travel history. “Both of them had travelled to Indore and returned to Jhalawar recently,” said a health department official. 

In Karauli, a 75-year-old person, linked to Tablighi Jamaat, has been tested positive for Covid-19. In Jhunjhunu, one person was diagnosed with the disease, who was in direct contact with a person linked to Tablighi Jamaat, already found infected with the virus. 


