Delhi: 41 Covid +ve cases in Kapashera building set off alarm bells
2020-05-03
NEW DELHI: Forty-one Covid-19 positive cases from a single building in Kapashera village in Delhi’s Southwest district have made it the second largest site of infection after the Alami Markaz Banglewali Masjid in Nizamuddin. The district administration reported that 175 samples were collected from this building on April 20 and 21, of which 67 reports were released on Saturday showing 41 infected individuals.

Rahul Singh, district magistrate, revealed that the administration had sought to pre-empt the spread of infection in the building by sealing the area on April 19. “We had detected one positive woman living in the building on April 18. Given the cramped conditions in the building, we had to carry out containment before the mandatory level of three or more confirmed cases was reached,” he explained. 

An official of South Delhi Municipal Corporation, elaborating on the poor living conditions there, said, “It is a two-storey building with a narrow corridor connecting rented rooms. In some rooms live families with 5-6 members, while other rooms have 10-15 bachelors. Space is so limited that if someone comes out of the room for fresh air, the balcony cannot hold anyone else.” 

The results came after 13 days, and re-testing will now be carried out to assess the present status of the residents. Singh attributed the long delay between testing and results to “blockade at Delhi-Noida border and backlog at National Institute of Biologicals, Noida”. 

The official of SDMC, under whose jurisdiction Kapashera falls, said an intense disinfection drive on the lines of the measures in the Nizamuddin masjid will be carried out on this building. Six knapsack pump operators and a disinfectant tanker have been exclusively deployed for the building.

A corporation public health officer worried about an increasing number of cases emerging in high-density areas like Kapashera. “The Thekewale Gali containment zone shows that the new challenge before us are these chawl-type settlements where social distancing is near impossible,” the officer said. “We are appealing to people to use sanitising agents and keep disinfecting commonly used surfaces such as hand railings and doors in their buildings.” 

The health officer added that in slums, where large numbers share a single room, the local population is being advised to wear face masks even in the rooms. “Since the residents all use the common toilets, we are now recommending the deployment of mobile toilets and hand-wash stations,” the officer said.

Meanwhile, one of the largest containment zones in the city — J & K, L and H pockets of Dilshad Garden and G, H and J blocks of Old Seemapuri — were de-contained on Saturday. 

