Gujarat: ‘43 China arrivals screened, coronavirus not detected’
2020-01-31
GANDHINAGAR/ AHMEDABAD: After the first confirmed coronavirus case in India was reported from Kerala on Thursday, the state health department said that its screening of arrivals from China had been strengthened. Jai Prakash Shivahare, state health commissioner, said that 43 such recent arrivals had all have been screened.

“They are all healthy. They are under medical observation at their homes as a precaution,” said Shivahare. “Citizens need not panic as the coronavirus has been reported in 17 countries but so far there has been no case in Gujarat. The state administration is fully prepared for any scenario.”

He said arrivals from China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Thailand, Japan and South Korea are being screened according to government of India guidelines. Of the 43 screened, 16 were from Mehsana, six from Panchmahal, three from Anand, five from Surat, four from Ahmedabad, two each from Junagadh and Vadodara, and one each from Ahmedabad district, Mahisagar, Patan, Jamnagar and Rajkot.

Shivahare added that at the Ahmedabad international airport Terminal II, round-the-clock screening has been initiated and there are doctors and paramedical staff stationed at the spot. “The medical team has thermal scanners, PPE kit, N-95 masks, three-layer masks, oxygen, emergency medicine and self-declaration forms,” he said.

Health department officials said all those returning from China are requested to approach the screening desk not only for their own well-being but also for the health of their families. Apart from the Ahmedabad airport, airports at Vadodara, Surat and Rajkot have health alerts displaying coronavirus symptoms and requesting passengers to get screened if they experience any of the symptoms and have visited China recently.

Officials at the Ahmedabad Civil Hospital said the hospital is the nodal centre and will serve as a base hospital. “Staffers from more than 100 government hospitals and medical colleges in the state have been trained on coronavirus and more will be trained this week. Isolation wards have been readied at major hospitals,” said a senior hospital official.


