Madhya Pradesh: Covid-19 count goes -ve in 7 districts, including Indore
2020-04-19
BHOPAL: The count of corona-positive cases in Madhya Pradesh went into the negative in hotspot Indore and six other districts on Saturday.




The bulletin released by directorate of health showed an increase of 93 cases (49 reported on Friday midnight and 44 on Saturday) – a significant drop for the second day from the alarming high of 391 recorded on Thursday. MP’s Covid-19 count on Saturday, according to the bulletin, stood at 1402.

However, the bulletin also showed a drop of 17 cases in six districts – Ujjain, Gwalior, Chhindwara, Morena, Khandwa and Raisen.

Indore’s bulletin recorded nine new cases, a surprising slump after Thursday’s high of 244. Even more surprising, the total went down. The health bulletin issued by Indore chief medical and health officer (CMHO) on Friday showed 892 Covid-19 patients in Indore. But on Saturday -- after addition of nine others -- the tally displayed in the bulletin was 890.

“We had erroneously included 11patients detected in other districts. We have corrected the numbers today,” CMHO Dr Pravin Jadia said. The bulletin recorded another death, taking the city’s toll to 47. As per the latest state health bulletin, Gwalior has only two cases but the bulletin of April 17 noted six. Asked about this, Gwalior collector Kauslendra Vikram Singh said, “Six Covid-19 patients have been reported in the district so far. All of them recovered and have been discharged from hospital.”


432 containment localities in 26 districts across state
Ujjain had the biggest drop – eight less cases between April 17 and 18. The bulletin recorded 31 cases on Friday and 23 on Saturday. Collector Shashank Mishra said, “There are 27 cases in our district, plus a patient of Indore has come here. There are three other patients who are residents of Nagda town in Ujjain and tested positive in Ratlam. They are admitted there and are being counted in Ratlam’s tally.”

Chhindwara’s count has been halved from four on Friday to two on Saturday. District collector Shrinivas Sharma told TOI that four Covid-19 patients have been reported in Chhindwara so far. “One of them died, and the sample of another patient has been sent for tests again as he has completed 14 days’ treatment and has improved. The two other patients are undergoing treatment and are stable,” he added.

The April 18 health bulletin showed one less patient each in Morena, Raisen and Khandwa districts.

Asked about this, director of health services, Sudam Khade, said, “In Gwalior there are two patients. Some patients are tested positive in screening also.” But Khade could not explain why there was a drop on April 18. A very senior health official said that it could be due to “reconciliation of repeat testing” — meaning that the second round of tests of Covid-patients who have been in treatment for 14 days is sometimes included erroneously in the new positive cases. Saturday’s bulleting added five cases in Jabalpur, taking its tally to 21. This includes one person from Indore, who was shifted to Jabalpur jail and tested positive. MP now has 432 containment zones in 26 districts with 24 lakh people living behind barricades.TNN


