44% dip in freight revenue for rlys during lockdown
2020-05-12
Trichy: Indian Railways witnessed a massive surge in transportation of food grains during the lockdown period, recording a 136% increase in terms of quantity in April, compared to the corresponding period the previous year. However, there was a 35% decline in the volume of goods handled compare to same period last year with a 44% drop in revenue, officials said. In the case of Southern Railway alone, it recorded a 53% dip in goods transportation.Freight traffic is the major source of revenue for railways. Though one-third of the total trains are operated for transporting goods, it accounts for more than 60% of the railway's total revenue, authorities said. There has been a steady growth in freight loading by the railways. The railways has been able to operate plenty of goods trains despite several constraints. As it is in the delta region, 1.03 lakh tonnes of food grains were transported by Trichy railways division between March 24 and April 22. A total of 5.96 lakh tonnes of goods was handled by division alone, officials said. According to data available with the ministry of railways, the total volume of freight handled during April 2019 was 101.09 million tonnes across the country, while it was 65.4 million tonnes in April 2020, a decrease of 35.31%. In the case of revenue, the total money earned in April 2020 was Rs5,998.81 crore against Rs10,652.28 crore during the corresponding period the previous year, a loss of 43.69%. Apart from regular freight traffic, the railways had also transported several tonnes of essentials, medicines and medical equipment from one place to another across the country during the lockdown period, officials said. “Despite the lockdown, the railways managed to earn 55% of revenue (compared to last year). Once the lockdown would be lifted, the railways could recuperate in the coming days,” a senior official from Trichy railway division said. “Since passenger segment is proved to be a loss to railways, the revenue earned from freight is the only source of income. The railways has witnessed a loss of around Rs4,500 crore in April 2020. Definitely it would continue for the next few months amounting to a loss of around Rs15,000 crore,” said Dakshin Railway Employees Union deputy general secretary D Manoharan. “Ever since the railway budget was merged with the general budget, budgetary allocation to the railway has been drastically minimized. To safeguard railway department, the government of India should allocate budgetary support fund. Otherwise, railways will be forced to incur huge losses,” he further stated.