44 quarantined people test negative for corona
2020-04-13
Kanpur: As many as 44 persons after being quarantined tested negative for Covid-19 and are being sent to their homes with certain directives.

According to health bulletin, so far 905 suspected persons have been sent to their homes after due quarantine period as they tested negative. On the other hand, 5896 suspected cases have been quarantined and a few of them are being treated in a hospital.

One person, who had either come from outside the district or from some foreign country, was quarantined by the health authorities on Sunday.

The authorities have so far identified 6801 persons who came from outside the district and 1691 persons who had travelled abroad.

Meanwhile, the district administration has received an advisory from the state government in which the authorities have been asked to ensure downloading of Aarogya App by every government official and employee at his/her mobile phone.

District magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari said that door to door delivery of essential commodities was being done through 2521 provision stores. So far 73 voluntary organizations and government agencies had provided meals to 108810 persons, he said.

The DM has again stressed on social distancing and asked the people to use masks whenever they go outside their house for receiving delivery or any other purpose.

The police and district administration officials kept strict vigil in hotspot areas of the city. They did not allow anyone to come on road and also used drone and IIT glider for aerial surveillance of hotspot areas.

Kanpur Municipal Corporation (KMC) sanitized several areas and lifted garbage from several places in the city. Under its telemedicine system around 43 persons sought medical advice for their ailments from doctors.

Meanwhile, some more people donated money for feeding the poor and needy. Pranveer Singh, chairman, PSIT presented a cheque of Rs 20 lakh to the chief minister’s relief fund.

BJP MLA Surendra Maithani washed the feet of sanitary workers at Pando Nagar and felicitated them. He said they (sanitary workers) are frontline warriors against coronavirus.

The authorities have given green signal to 50 industrial units of Rania industrial estate in Kanpur Dehat to start operation. These units manufacture essential commodities such as flour, soap, pulses and oil.


