45 contacts of Covid patient from Shivkuti test negative for infection
2020-04-27
Prayagraj: Health department officials heaved a sigh of relief as 45 persons who had come in contact with a 37-year-old novel coronavirus (Covid-19) patient from Shivkuti tested negative for the infection on Sunday.

The youth tested positive for novel coronavirus and had travelled in a train coach along with another Covid-19 patient in March first week.

The youth’s seven family members including his wife and two children had tested negative for the virus on Saturday night. The seven family members have been quarantined in a guest house in Kalindipuram area as a precaution.

Additional chief medical officer and nodal officer Dr Rishi Sahai said, “The Shivkuti-based man had come in contact with 45 persons over the the last one-and-a-half month before he was diagnosed with the infection and was later admitted to Covid-19 Level One Hospital in Kotwa for treatment.”

Apart from the Shivkuti-based youth, two other men had tested positive for novel coronavirus in the city on Friday. The two are cousins who work as daily wage labourers in Mumbai and had come to Prayagraj to attend a family member’s funeral. They had set out for the city on April 19 and reached three days later. They were native to Kapari village in Shankargarh. They had been issued e-passes for travelling. 

Talking about the two other Covid-19 patients from Shankargarh, Sahai said that the duo came in contact with 191 persons after coming back from Mumbai. The group of 191 persons has been quarantined at four guest houses in Kareli. Their swab samples will be collected either on Monday or Tuesday for testing. 

The two youths had visited several places in Kapari village after returning from Mumbai along with a friend. On Saturday, around 50 cops and administrative staff posted at Kaundhiyara police station were quarantined as the youths’ friend had also visited the thana. 

All patients are undergoing treatment at Covid-19 Level One Hospital in Kotwa. 


