45 days & counting, 12 Jamaat followers still languishing in quarantine centre in Lakhimpur Kheri
2020-05-13
Bareilly: The quarantine period of 12 followers of Tablighi Jamaat seems to be “never ending” even after 45 days, as after spending 14 days in a temporary jail of Lakhimpur Kheri they were again sent to an isolation centre. With no word from the top, the district administration is yet to take a call on their fate.

The 12 men from Bihar had attended the Delhi’s Nizamuddin congregation and three of them had tested positive for Covid-19 in Dhaurahra area of the district.

They were booked under the Epidemic Diseases Act on March 31, and were quarantined. After a month there, they were produced in a court which sent them into 14 days judicial custody.

Now, after spending 14 days in temporary jail, all of them were “forcefully” quarantined at a school in Dhaurahra as the district administration has not received any instructions from government regarding further action.

District magistrate Shailendra Singh told TOI, “All of them belong to Bihar and don’t have any relative here. We have kept them at a shelter house like other migrants from other states. They may be sent back home when Bihar government will start calling their people back.”

Aged between 19 to 60 years, most of them are skilled workers like tailor and masons.

A senior official, on condition of anonymity, said, “We cannot release them as their security in the state is our responsibility. We will ensure that they are sent back to their home in Bihar from here. Also we have not received any official word from government about the steps to be taken after the completion of their remand period.”

While SDM of Dhaurahra, Sunandu Sudhakaran told TOI, “As per instructions from district administration, we have shifted all the 12 men at a centre in Government Inter College, Dhaurahra. Thermal screening of all of them was done and they all were found fit. They will remain here until we receive further instructions from government.”


