Pune: 45 of 511 SARI cases surveyed have Covid-19
2020-05-27
PUNE: A sizeable number of people with the Covid-19 infection has been found during tests conducted on those hospitalised with severe acute respiratory illness (SARI). The results, experts said, indicate some levels of community transmission of SARS-Cov-2 in the Pune Metropolitan Regio (PMR).

 


From a total of 511 SARI cases, 45 people were found to be positive with Covid-19. 

But Pune divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said he has left it to the Union government to decide if the results are indicative of community transmission.


45 of 511 SARI patients surveyed have Covid-19
Health experts have said that a disease is in community transmission phase when there is no clear source of infection in a person. Early in the outbreak, Covid-19 was mostly seen in those with travel or contact history. But experts have been saying the infection has started to appear in people with no records of travel or contact. 

“We will submit ICMR-NIV's SARI surveillance report to the Centre. It will decide if there has been community transmission in Pune,” Mhaisekar said.

The 511 SARI patients were admitted across 18 private and government hospitals in the PMR between March 22 and May 14. A total of 45 tested positive. State health officials have dismissed chances of community transmission. 

“The 45 SARI patients were mainly residents of containment zones. Source of infection is identifiable. There are chances they may have come in contact with unknown transmitters,” a state official said.

But public health experts said the SARI tests show community spread. “Patients with SARI are independent cases with a similar set of symptoms: fever, cough, breathlessness. Finding Covid-19 in SARI cases, where the source of infection is unknown, strongly suggests community transmission,” said Sanjay Dabhade, a public health activist and medical practitioner .

He added: "It is probable those who tested positive for Covid got the infection from within the community. To confirm this, officials can revisit these 45 patients for travel or contact history."

Epidemiologist Amitav Banerjee, who has been part of the Army's central epidemiological surveillance centre at the Armed Forced Medical College in Pune, said: "The rather low 8.8% positivity among SARI patients indicates two things: First, there has been some amount of community transmission. Second, most cases of Covid-19 infection in Pune are sub-clinical or asymptomatic and only a few are landing up as SARI cases. Given our predominantly young population, in which the majority of cases are likely to be mild or asymptomatic, this is a strong possibility." The ICMR's chief epidemiologist Raman Gangakhedkar and Priya Abraham, the director of NIV, could not be reached for their comments on the SARI findings.


