Bengaluru: 4,500 visit fever clinics, but none found Covid-19 positive
2020-04-20
BENGALURU: Health officials on Saturday ruled out any possibility of community spread of Covid-19 in the city. Their argument: over 4,500 persons have been examined at the designated fever clinics for the related symptoms and not one has tested positive so far.


Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) set up fever clinic at 31 locations across the city, which were meant to be the screening points for Covid-19. Anyone with travel history or symptoms like fever, cough, sore throat and breathlessness can report to these clinics and get diagnosed. While those who don’t show any Covid-19 symptoms are sent back home with a prescription for their illness, those suspected to have contracted the infection are sent to a swab collection centre where samples are taken for testing. 

Since March 29, a total of 4,557 persons have been screened at the clinics. Of these, only 56 showed Covid-19 symptoms and were referred to Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases, Victoria Hospital, Bowring Hospital and other isolation hospitals for further examination. Throat and blood samples of 15 were sent for testing. But none has tested positive. 

According to earlier guidelines, people visiting fever clinics were referred for further screening only if they had a travel history to any affected countries, were contacts of the infected or had symptoms of Covid-19. However, the guidelines have changed since diabetics, blood pressure patients and those with respiratory issues and senior citizens are also being referred for further tests. A fresh directive mandates health workers also be referred. 

Dr Nirmala Buggi, chief health officer (clinical), BBMP, said since people are panicking because of lockdown, they visit fever clinics to get themselves checked even for symptoms like cold, cough and fever. This apart, those living in areas marked as hotspots or those who have come in contact with foreign returnees have also been queuing up at such clinics. 

On reports that many people don’t visit fever clinics fearing they will be quarantined, Dr Buggi stated: “Doctors, nurses and other health officials are working at these fever clinics to help people. Only if a person shows symptoms will s/he be sent to hospitals treating Covid-19 patients.” 

