47 more test +ve for Covid-19 in Aurangabad
2020-05-01
47 more test +ve for Covid-19 in Aurangabad

Aurangabad: A total of 47 people tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday taking the tally of cases in city to 151. These cases include the ones from high-risk areas and three from new areas of the city. 

Over the last three days, the number of Covid-19 confirmed cases has spiked from 53 to 177. A male nurse working at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) too tested positive for the virus on Thursday. He was posted at the non-Covid ward at the GMCH.

“The male nurse is showing mild symptoms and lives in Beghumpura with his wife. He is a native of Jalna. We are yet to get information about his travel history. His wife was posted at the Covid-19 ward for a night. Her throat swab samples were sent for testing. However, she tested negative for the infection,” Yelikar said.

According to GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar, five cases were detected from Qile Ark, eight from Jai Bhim Nagar, two from Asefiya Colony, Noor Colony and Naregaon each, one from Kailash Nagar, Chikalthana, Shaha Nagar, Hilal Colony, Beghumpura, Khadkeshwar, Roshan Gate and Sky City Beed Bypass each and 18 from Mukundwadi on Thursday.

Municipal officer of health Nita Padalkar said that the process of moving 46 of these patients to district civil hospital is currently underway. Teams of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) were on ground until late evening on Thursday for contact mapping of the high-risk areas and for moving Covid-19 positive patients to the district civil hospital.

Of the total 177 Covid-19 cases, 24 have been discharged after recovering while seven have succumbed to the infection. The remaining 135 are undergoing treatment at the district civil hospital and 11 at GMCH, district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said. 

Notably, this is the second nurse from GMCH who tested positive for novel coronavirus. Earlier, a 38-year-old male nurses posted at the casualty ward had contracted the virus. He was treated at the district civil hospital and discharged. The recent male nurse case has raised concerns on the health of frontline workers posted at the government hospital.


