472 more from Satranjipura in quarantine
2020-04-28
Nagpur: One more person from Satranjipura, the city’s Covid-19 hotspot, tested corona positive on Monday, increasing the district’s total to 129. Even before this result, at least 472 neighbours of the 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura, the city’s first and only death, were taken to quarantine between 7.30pm and 11pm on Monday, taking the total number of people quarantined from this locality to 975.Also, in a goof-up, a 40-year-old man from Mominpura remained at Vanamati Institutional Quarantine despite testing positive two days ago.On Monday afternoon, the office at Vanamati received the positive reports of a 40-year-old man quarantined there. The reports of the person had come positive from AIIMS Laboratory at 5.30pm on April 25. TOI had reported the case on April 26.However, the control room at collector office did not send the report to NMC. TOI had pursued the case for two days with officials of NMC. After finally receiving the reports, usually a team from NMC contacts either IGGMCH or GMCH and goes to the institutional quarantine to shift the patient to Covid-19 Isolation Ward.Due to the goof-up, the positive person remained at Vanamati for two days. He was reportedly sharing the room with another family member, whose corona status could not be immediately ascertained. More family members of the person are quarantined in Vanamati so chances of him having met them in these two days cannot be ruled out.The person was finally admitted to GMCH on Monday afternoon.Collector Ravindra Thakre did not respond to TOI’s calls and messages.The positive person is brother of 42-year-old resident of Choodi Gully, Mominpura, who had tested positive on April 18. Number of positive persons from this family has increased to 14.A 42-year-old person had tested positive after being quarantined following the positive results of seven Jabalpur-based Tablighi Jamaats (TJs) on April 12 and 13. The person was taking care of food and other requirements of TJs, who were camping at Darul Falah situated at Takia Deewanshah, Mominpura. The number of cases from Mominpura has increased to 26.From the corona reports released on Monday, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) officials told TOI, “A 28-year-old woman from Satranjipura tested positive. She was in institutional quarantine at Wathoda and admitted to IGGMCH after testing positive.” The number of cases from this area remained at 80, though. A 40-year-old person from Mominpura had been considered a case from Satranjipura on April 15.Considering the number of neighbours of Satranjipura deceased testing positive, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe also directed quarantining more people from this area.A team led by assistant commissioner Vijay Humne and zonal medical officer Dr Minakshi Mane quarantined 472 persons on Monday evening. The 68-year-old person had died on April 5 and his samples tested positive on April 6. NMC had already quarantined 230 family members, close contacts and some neighbours of the deceased between April 6 and 22. Some 150 more neighbours were quarantined on April 23.East Nagpur MLA Krishna Khopde said in a press release, “People from the hotspot area in Satranjipura are still not maintaining social distancing, continue to meet each other, and even going to other areas. This violation should be stopped soon to contain spread of Covid-19.”It was reported that 10 people from this hotspot had managed to move out and hide in a godown at Kalamna a couple of days ago.NMC sources told TOI, “Mundhe is expected to direct similar quarantining of large number of people from Mominpura on Tuesday or Wednesday.”Mundhe said in a press release, “We are taking efforts to contain Covid-19 and ensure treatment to all at initial stage but persons from Satranjipura and Mominpura are not giving correct information. Therefore, all people from the hotspot are being quarantined and examined.” 