484 Iran evacuees quarantined in Jaisalmer test negative
2020-03-24
Jaisalmer: The report of 484 Indian citizens, who had been evacuated from Iran in three batches last week, has come out negative.They are currently residing in the three Army Wellness facilities at Jaisalmer Military Station. The evacuees are subject to daily medical check-ups and all of them are presently asymptomatic.District collector Namit Mehta said that he was in touch with Army officers regarding the evacuees brought from Iran. All of them are healthy and there is no positive coronavirus case.Defence spokesman Col Sambit Ghosh said, “In addition to sanitization of the entire premises, daily motivational lectures are conducted by the Army medical authorities which have made the people understand that the mandatory quarantine at the Wellness Centre is a social responsibility on their part, to combat the spread of Covid-19.”“A total of 484 Indians evacuated from Iran are undergoing the mandatory quarantine period at this facility. The Wellness Centre is equipped with all facilities to make the stay of quarantined people comfortable. Women and men have been kept in different barracks as per their age groups. A dedicated team of medical staff has been earmarked and placed at the Centre to monitor the residents. All rooms are equipped with TVs and there is provision for indoor and outdoor sports for recreation. The Centre has been totally isolated and jawans have been deployed round-the-clock for security. Overall, the Wellness Centre has been established with an aim to ensure that the quarantined people leave the place healthy,” Ghosh added. He said, “The people have taken the quarantine in the right spirit and have gone ahead to enjoy their time playing games, watching television, praying and utilising the available resources in the Wellness facility. The cohesiveness shown by the people, medical and administrative staff is a testimony of their resolve to defeat Covid-19 together.”The staff at the Army Wellness Centre is working overtime to ensure the area remains clean and is de-contaminated after every meal, Ghosh said. 