49 Covid-19 patients discharged after recovery in southern dists
2020-04-16
Madurai: It was literally a positive day for the southern region, as 49 Covid-19 patients were discharged from various hospitals in the districts on Wednesday, meanwhile reporting just three cases one each in Theni, Tirunelveli and Tenkasi. With this, the number of Covid-19 cases in the southern districts has climbed to 290.In Madurai, seven people who tested positive and has been undergoing treatment at the isolation ward at Government Rajaji Hospital were discharged on Wednesday. All the seven had attended the Tablighi meet in New Delhi, and were from Melur and Ezhumalai in Madurai district. They tested negative in two consecutive tests as per protocol, according to hospital sources. They were admitted to the hospital on March 29 and tested positive the next day.Six patients who were under treatment at the Sivaganga Government Medical College, including two people from Ramanathapuram, were discharged after testing negative in two consecutive tests on Wednesday. Sivaganga district collector J Jayakanthan gave them a send-off as they were adorned with shawls and the hospital staff clapped when they walked out.Among the six patients, three were from Tirupathur and one from Devakottai in Sivaganga district. The other two patients were from Ramanathapuram. Sivaganga district has reported 11 Covid-19 positive cases and Ramanathapuram seven. Two people from Kayalpattinam in Tuticorin district who were undergoing treatment at Tuticorin Medical College Hospital were discharged. They include the government doctor from Kayalpattinam and another man from the same area. Tuticorin district collector Sandeep Nanduri gave them fruit baskets as a goodwill gesture on their discharge. The collector said that those who were discharged had participated in the Tablighi Jamaat conference in New Delhi and was admitted to the hospital on March 30 with symptoms and tested positive on March 31. The tests for Covid-19 were conducted twice as per protocol and the tests results were negative. All those discharged have been asked to be in home quarantine for two weeks. Meanwhile, 13 people, who had tested positive for Covid-19 after attending the TJ congregation, were also discharged early in the morning on Wednesday in Tirunelveli. They were brought to their homes in an ambulance, and they have been asked to remain quarantined for two weeks. In Dindigul, where 65 people have tested positive for the disease, saw 21 people being discharged from the isolation ward at the Karur Medical College Hospital. Dindigul district collector M Vijayalakshmi said that they had been asked to remain in home quarantine for two more weeks.