Hyderabad: 4,000 FDA-approved drugs to be tested for Covid-19 cure
2020-05-17
HYDERABAD: Around 4,000 drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) will be tested by a Hyderabad-based biotech startup to see if they can be used as a cure for Covid-19. 


For the procedure, Reagene Innovations, incubated at ASPIRE-BioNEST of the University of Hyderabad (UoH) along with Indras Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad has collaborated with Tech Mahindra, an IT giant, to identify a drug that can stop the entry of coronavirus into lung airway epithelial cells. 

Articial Intelligence (AI) and rational computational approaches will be used by the startup for the process, along with biological and pharmacological methods.

“No one knows which drug is going to work on coronavirus. So, we have decided to go into the research in an unbiased manner and test all the drugs available,” Uday Saxena, co-founder of Reagene Innovations, told TOI.

Saxena’s firm will print a human vascular lung model using 3D bioprinting technique to study Covid-19. “We can complete the printing process within a few weeks after the lockdown is lifted. Testing all FDA approved drugs using AI technology might take a few more months. We can find an effective drug against the virus in five months, approximately. With the drugs already approved by the FDA, the solution will be readily available with us,” Saxena said, adding that testing for the drugs will be done in their laboratory.

The high transmission rate of Covid-19 has been attributed in part to the attachement of the virus that facilitates its entry into the lung cells. Hence, researchers have said the strategy being adopted by Saxena’s firm is pertinent as it will work toward stopping the virus from entering the cells, thereby rendering it harmless. 

“This collaboration will bring valuable findings in therapuetic interventions as well as add invaluable intellectual property,” said Ratnagar Palakodeti, vice president of life sciences vertial of Tech Mahindra. 

