Coronavirus scare in Delhi: Fourth patient came in contact with Paytm employee
2020-03-10
NEW DELHI: As the fourth case of novel coronavirus was confirmed in the capital, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Monday said the Centre and the state government were working in close coordination to check the spread of the disease and all those who came in contact with infected people had been quarantined.


Kejriwal met with Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday to discuss preparedness for Covid-19 in the state. The meeting was also attended by lieutenant governor Anil Baijal, Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain, municipal mayors and officials of Delhi government.

The chief minister said a campaign will be run to make people aware about preventive measures to contain the spread of the disease. “We have successfully been able to contain the spread of coronavirus because both governments are working in a coordinated manner. People are also alert and are cooperating with us to a large extent,” Kejriwal said.

The number of coronavirus cases in India, meanwhile, rose to 44 on Monday with five people, one each from Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu, Kerala and Punjab, testing positive, health ministry officials said.

Sources said the fourth person infected in Delhi, detected on Monday, had been in contact with the earlier identified Paytm employee, a resident of west Delhi’s Janakpuri, who had recently travelled to Italy.

The chief minister said most of coronavirus cases have so far been from those who have travelled back from other countries. “All people who came in contact with infected people have been identified and quarantined, which has contained the outbreak of the virus,” he said.

According to the state health department, 37 persons in the capital are under quarantine at Safdarjung and Ram Manohar Lohia hospitals at the moment.

“We are aggressively tracing everyone who may have come in contact with persons who have tested positive for Covid-19 in the state. Over 600 people have been put under surveillance across the state,” said an official.

Delhi government has also warned against hoarding of masks and hand sanitizers amid rising demand due to coronavirus scare. Kejriwal reiterated that people who are not suffering from any respiratory issues are not required to wear masks.

“Only those with respiratory diseases, infected patients, or those who came in contact with infected people are required to wear masks. Hand sanitizers are also not needed. Washing hands with regular soap and water for 20 seconds is enough,” the chief minister added.

Kejriwal also urged people to avoid mass gatherings in the wake of Covid-19 scare. 


