Coronavirus in Delhi: Five children among 112 isolated at ITBP facility
2020-03-03
NEW DELHI: All 112 evacuees airlifted from China’s Wuhan, who are being quarantined at an ITBP facility in Chhawla in southwest Delhi, have tested negative in the first test. 


Officials told TOI that the second set of tests will be carried out in a fortnight after which — if the results are still negative — the evacuees will be allowed to go home. 

“The evacuees include five toddlers, 80 men and 32 women. Among the evacuees are 36 foreign nationals,” said an official. He added that none of them have developed any symptoms so far. A team of doctors posted at the facility is constantly monitoring them.

Another 119 individuals — 114 Indian and five foreign nationals — airlifted from Tokyo have been quarantined at Indian Army’s facility in Manesar for a period of 14 days. These passengers were on-board the Diamond Princess Cruise ship, which docked off at Yokohama in Japan. 

Dr Balram Bhargava, director general of Indian Council of Medical Research, said the evacuees quarantined at both facilities are being regularly monitored. “The government has so far rescued around 900 individuals from Wuhan and Tokyo that have been the worst affected by COVID-19 outbreak. We took a big risk in this exercise and carried it out successfully,” he added.

Many Indians are also stuck in Iran and Italy where a number of fresh cases of COVID-19 has been detected. Union health minister Harsh Vardhan said the Centre was in discussions with authorities in the two countries to evacuate the Indians there. 

“If we didn’t deter from evacuating are citizens from Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, there is no reason why we wouldn’t try to save those stuck in other countries affected by COVID-19. But we have to follow the protocol and international guidelines for the rescue process,” Vardhan said.

The Union health minister advised people to avoid non-essential travel to Iran, Italy, South Korea and Singapore.

Vardhan, who held a meeting of the group of ministers constituted to monitor the current status and actions for prevention and management of the virus, said India has already suspended e-visas/visas issued to Iranian and Chinese nationals over the rising number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in these countries. “Depending on the situation, visa restrictions may be extended to other countries,” he added.

Asked if there could be a drug shortage in the country as around 70% of active pharmaceutical ingredients come from China, Vardhan said he has spoken to the minister in-charge who has informed that “we are adequately prepared to deal with the situation as of now”. He added that around 1,086 people who returned from Iran in recent times have been recommended for community surveillance.

