Five districts that border Kerala on high alert to prevent coronavirus
2020-02-08
TRICHY: At least five districts in Tamil Nadu that border Kerala are on high alert to prevent the spread of novel coronavirus. Health officials from the state have been touring the districts to oversee preparations, health secretary Beela Rajesh said on Friday.


The department of public health and preventive medicine has taken awareness on novel coronavirus to campuses by organising sensitisation programmes to educate students to focus on washing hands to prevent infection. The state has been encouraging people who have travelled out of the country to call a health worker if they have symptoms of fever, cold or breathlessness.

State nodal officer Dr P Sampath said village health nurses and health inspectors have been told to instruct passengers on quarantine that they should not leave their homes if they have symptoms. “We will take them to GH by ambulance,” he said.

Awareness programme was held for principals from more than 100 colleges from Trichy, at the government engineering college in Sethurapatti and at the office of the deputy director of health services (DDHS), Trichy, on Friday. 

The core objective of the programme was to drive home personal hygiene among students and faculty in crowded places like educational institutions. 

“Avoid being in crowded places, ensure hand hygiene. Since the novel coronairus is a droplet infection, people are prone to get infected anywhere,” A Subramani, DDHS, Trichy told TOI.

Even though the state health department claimed to have no case of nCoV in the state, the public health and preventive medicine was in full swing to keep the general public informed about prevention measures. “We have no positive novel coronavirus case but we should be prepared to protect ourselves,” said DDHS. 

His team suggested the participants were told to tell their students to use cresol with soap solutions as disinfectant and hand wash. “It is available for cheap in the market. Cresol can be mixed in the advised ratio with water and used as disinfectant,” said DDHS. 

The public health department has planned to cover all the colleges in the district shortly. They also utilized the teams of Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram to conduct information education and communication programmes in schools also.


