Five imported cases of Covid-19 recorded in dist
2020-06-02
Coimbatore: After a gap of 28 days, the district recorded five imported cases of Covid-19 on Monday, taking the total number of cases to 151.

Officials said that a family of five people who drove down from New Delhi to outskirts of Pollachi for a wedding on May 30 tested positive for Covid-19. They were reportedly traced on Saturday, after a few others of their wedding party, tested positive in a check-post in Dindigul.

The group, which included the bridegroom and two people in the risk age group, a 49-year-old woman and a 60-year-old man, were allowed home quarantine in a farm until Monday. “The wedding has not happened yet. We traced them the day they reached to their farmhouse, took nasal swabs and instructed them to remain in quarantine,” said collector K Rajamani. 

“We cross notified it to New Delhi and assumed it would not be recorded as Coimbatore cases,” said a health officer. “The source of infection is definitely not from Pollachi, because they were stopped and tested at the border,” he said. 

Meanwhile, a 32-year-old woman cop, who is a probation officer with the district collector, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday. The cop who had gone to Chennai before the lockdown to attend a training session, had returned to the city by road last week and resumed duty. She decided to get tested, after her colleague in Chennai tested positive for the virus. This case is not being added to Coimbatore’s tally of cases, because she contracted the virus in Chennai, and thus will be added to the capital’s count. Besides this, two passengers who flew into the city from Chennai on Sunday also tested positive.

Officials confirmed that the woman, instead of quarantining herself for 14 days, joined duty as probation officer hardly two days later because she had no symptoms. Sources say the woman, who is a resident of Prisoner’s quarters just off Gandhipuram, has travelled across the city in the last one week including Pollachi. On Monday, after she tested positive, corporation health officials visited her quarters and collected nasal swabs from 50 of them, including her family members. “The quarters has around 17 families. We may collect more samples on Tuesday,” said a corporation official. “We are also making a list of people in the collectorate who came in close contact with her,” he said.

Though health officers insist that the woman is asymptomatic, and thus unlikely to have transmitted the virus to anyone else through a cough or sneeze, it is unclear how she crossed the district’s border via road without being tested, especially after serving in Chennai, a hotspot for the virus.

The woman is also now admitted in ESI Hospital, along with two other air passengers from Chennai who also tested positive for the virus. 


