Five including eight-year-old test positive for coronavirus
2020-04-11
MYSURU: Five individuals including an 8-year-old boy tested positive for the novel coronavirus in Mysuru. All five are primary contacts of employees of Jubilant Life Sciences, the pharmaceutical firm in Nanjangud. With this the tally of covid positive cases jumps to 40. So far two individuals have been discharged and about 1,831 are under quarantine in Mysuru district. 


The boy is the son of an employee of the firm. All five in the family of P103 – wife, son, and in-laws have tested positive and have been hospitalized. 

With this the worst fears of Mysuru district administration is coming true as five primary contacts of positive cases from the company have now tested positive for the virus. MMCRI dean and director CP Nanjaraj said many patients at the Covid hospital have tested negative in the first test after hospitalization; they will be discharged if they test negative even in the second test.

First employee discharged

The first employee from Nanjangud’s pharmaceutical firm employee to test positive for the novel coronavirus was discharged on Friday. 

P52 was the first employee of Jubilant Life Sciences, Nanjangud, some 26 km from Mysuru city, to test positive for the virus. 

Of the total positive cases, 30 are either employees or their primary and secondary contacts. All are in the dedicated Covid hospital. Eight visited Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz and from New Delhi. One is a Dubai-returnee and another is his contact. 

Deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar said that the 35-year-old employee was first identified with the virus in the fourth week of March. He was treated for fever at a local hospital before he was shifted to the Covid hospital. P52's case continues to baffle authorities as he has no travel history nor has he had any contact wirh anyone who has travelled abroad. 

After him, 30 others including employees of the pharmaceutical form and their primary and secondary contacts have since contracted the virus. All of them have been isolated at the Covid hospital and their contacts in home quarantine.

This is the first cluster outbreak of novel coronavirus in Karnataka. Officials are yet to map out the source of virus infection among its employees. The firm manufactures active pharmaceutical ingredients and has business with many foreign nations including China. 

------ 


