Madhya Pradesh: 5 lakh migrant workers return, more than 200 test Covid-19 positive
2020-05-24
BHOPAL: More than 5 lakh migrant workers of Madhya Pradesh have been brought back to the state by the government so far and more than 200 of them have tested positive till now.


 Unlike other states, where all the migrant workers who are returning home, are being sent to institutional quarantine, in Madhya Pradesh only those who are screened with symptoms or have come from high-risk zones are sent for institutional quarantine. Others are sent to home quarantine. 

As per official sources, till May 22, a little more than 5 lakh workers have been brought to MP from different states of the country. While more than 2 lakh have been brought back from Gujarat, more than 1 lakh have been brought back from Rajasthan, more than 1 lakh have been brought back from Maharashtra. Apart from these, labourers have been brought back from Goa, Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Telangana. Around 1.5 lakh have been brought back using buses, while around 3.5 lakh have been brought back through Sharmik Express trains, said sources. 

Sources from the health department said that between 200 and 300 of the total patients who have been tested positive so far are migrant labourers. In districts like Seoni, Mandla,Satna,Shahdol, Umaria, Singrauli, Sidhi, Rewa, Tikamgarh, Panna and Sagar, where there are less number of positive cases, but a majority of the positive cases are of migrant workers. 

In Gwalior too, a majority of migrant workers have tested positive. When contacted over the issue, additional chief secretary, health, Mohammed Suleman, said, “People who are brought from other states are first screened at their district borders and if there are any symptoms or if they have come from high-risk zones, they are sent to institutional quarantine, the remaining are sent to home quarantine. Monitoring is being done by health department staffers and those in home quarantine are being monitored by village panchayats and local health workers”.

Sources said that there are more than 5 lakh people and keeping such a big population in institutional quarantine is a herculean task for the administration. However, efforts are being taken to effectively monitor these patients. A majority of those who have tested positive were found during the screening done at the district borders, said sources.


