Five-member panel to boost Covid-19 health infrastructure in Delhi
2020-06-04
NEW DELHI: Delhi government on Wednesday formed a five-member committee to assess overall preparedness of health facilities to fight Covid-19 cases and suggest measures to augment the health infrastructure in the capital.

The AAP government also said that two senior officers have been tasked to coordinate with state and private-run health facilities to ensure that the new mobile app on the availability of beds and ventilators gives out updated information.

The five-member committee appointed by the department of health and family welfare will be headed by IP University’s vice chancellor Dr Mahesh Verma and submit its report by June 6. Other members of the team include Dr Sunil Kumar, medical director of GTB Hospital, Dr Arun Gupta, president of Delhi Medical Council, Dr RK Gupta, former president of Delhi Medical Association and Dr Sandeep Budhiraja, group medical director of Max Hospital.

According to officials, the committee will guide the government on overall preparedness of hospitals in Delhi, health infrastructure augmentation and other areas where strengthening of infrastructure of health facilities is required for better management of Covid-19 in the capital.

Delhi government had appointed its first committee to analyse the preparedness and augmentation of health facilities in March this year, when Covid-19 cases had just started emerging. However, with 23,645 cases registered in the city so far, including 606 deaths, and over 1,500 new cases emerging on Wednesday, officials said it is important that health facilities are augmented to tackle the surge.

Meanwhile, with several reports of discrepancies in the data available on ‘Delhi Corona’ mobile application, the government has deputed two senior officials as nodal officers who will coordinate with the health facilities and ensure that correct data on the availability of beds and other infrastructure is relayed to public. People also complained that hospitals are denying availability of beds while the app shows they have vacant beds.

The government also said that the app is updated on the basis of the data provided by individual hospitals and the discrepancies emerge due to inaccurate information being given. Since the app is new, the officials said that teething problems are bound to happen and efforts are being made to streamline the system.

“The information about the bed status comes from the hospitals. If any of the hospitals claim otherwise to any patient, we will take action immediately,” a Delhi government functionary said. “Over the next few days, we are aiming to provide real time information to everyone.”


