Five-min video capsules on lockdown make waves in Konkani world
2020-06-05
MARGAO: The Konkani language has just got richer. With the introduction of a series of five-minute video capsules on varying themes, primarily centred on the Covid-19 lockdown, Mukesh Thali, a versatile Konkani writer, lexicographer, and playwright, has added a fascinating genre to the Konkani audio-visual arena.

The 15 video snippets, with themes ranging from nature and environment to culture and tradition, are structured in a way that the viewer is able to effortlessly take in the philosophy of life and its lessons. 

“The purpose of producing the videos was to enlighten and entertain viewers so that they remain positive during the lockdown. Misinformation, rumours and worries that people were bombarded with caused much turmoil, confusion and anxiety. The video capsules were aimed at connecting the viewer to his roots so that he experiences peace and solace,” Thali told TOI. 

Presented in a form of a dialogue, the videos are enriched with verses penned by great Konkani poets, including Bakibab Borkar and Vaman Sardesai, and packed with powerful imagery and symbolism. In the video, ‘Kulagar’, Thali has tried to play on the words, ‘kular’ (maternal home of a married daughter) and ‘kulagar’ (orchard) to drive home the message that a man’s happiness lies in sharing. “Kindness should spring forth from the orchard of one’s life,” so goes the narration. 

In another video, he has used the blue sky to symbolise inspiration, motivation and speed. The video invites the viewer to reflect on the insignificance of human life in the vastness of the cosmos, even as it exhorts him to draw on patience and courage to face challenges.

“Don’t curse the darkness, light a lamp instead,” is another life lesson in the video capsule series. 

Subhash Jan, a noted artiste, has handled the photography, videography, editing, dubbing and other technical aspects of the videos. 

The videos have already caught the imagination of Goans as well as the Konkani diaspora. 

“I never expected the reach of these videos would be so wide,” Thali says. “The allegories, metaphors, symbolism and undercurrents presented in simple lucid style are the salient features.”

A self-confessed perfectionist, Thali, who has specialised in mathematics, says his endeavour was to give the viewer value for the time he spent watching his creation. “Study of mathematics has lent precision to my choice of words and dialogues in plays and videos,” he said. “Besides, as the legacy of three generations of music runs in my family, the know-how of Indian classical music is another facet that has helped me to give accurate and apt music and sound effects in plays or videos.” 

Stressing that brevity has been the hallmark of the production, Thali adds, “Video is a powerful medium. Lens poetry and word poetry has to be a fine blend. The magic that follows is incredibly awesome.” 


