Five more test positive for Covid-19 in Rajasthan, five recovered
2020-03-30
JAIPUR: Five more persons — three in Ajmer, one each in Bhilwara and Jhunjhunu — tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Sunday, taking the total count to 59. Five others who were undergoing treatment in Bhilwara tested negative. 


One of the five who tested positive is a 21-year-old Jhunjhunu youth who had arrived from Philippines on March 18. A 53-year-old woman, who had undergone angioplasty at a private hospital in Bhilwara, the epicentre of the virus outbreak in Rajasthan, also tested positive. Besides, the father, mother and brother of a 23-year-old person from Ajmer who tested positive were also found infected. 

The Ajmer youth, who sells products from Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in tourist places, was brought to JLN Hospital with fever, cough and running nose on Friday. Now, his 47-year-old father, 40-year-old mother and 20-year-old brother have been diagnosed with Covid-19. His 17-year-old sister, however, tested negative. The youth had visited 13 districts of Punjab and Haryana to sell handmade clothes in Ambala, Bhatinda, Chandigarh, Ludhiana, Jalandhar, Amritsar, Rohtak, Panipat and other towns before returning to Ajmer on March 22. 

“Five new cases were detected on Sunday, three in Ajmer, one in Bhilwara and Jhunjhunu each,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health.

So far, 25 cases have been reported from Bhilwara connected with the private hospital. The 53-year-old woman is the third patient from the hospital to have tested positive. She had undergone angioplasty there. The other two — one a chronic kidney patient who had also suffered a stroke and another who had suffered cardiac arrest — had been diagnosed with Covid-19 recently and died on March 26. At the hospital, 18 doctors, nurses and other staff have already tested positive so far, while three patients and their four relatives too have been found to be infected. 

“The woman was admitted before the first Covid-19 case was reported from the hospital. After the first case, the health department launched a search for all those patients who had been admitted to find out if they have been infected with the virus. During screening, we found three such patients. Two of them died on Thursday and the 53-year-old was found infected with the virus on Sunday,” said a health department official.

Jhunjhunu reported its seventh case when the 21-year-old person, who reached the district on March 18, was diagnosed positive on Sunday. He had gone to Philippines and reached Delhi airport on March 18. He came to Jhunjhunu by a taxi on the same day. Health department officials said that he remained at home quarantine till March 22. Health authorities shifted him from home to a private university for quarantine. On March 26, he complained of fever and cough. His samples were sent to Sawai Man Singh Hospital in Jaipur on March 27 and the positive report was issued on Sunday. 

Meanwhile, five patients who are undergoing treatment in Bhilwara tested negative. “Five patients have tested negative,” said Dr Arun Gaur, medical superintendent, MG Government Hospital. 

Bhilwara Medical College principal and controller Dr Rajan Nanda said, “The government has provided all facilities which we needed for treating Covid-19 patients. We have a sufficient number of personnel protection equipment and other items such as masks.”

A team from Sawai Man Singh Medical College was sent to Bhilwara when the first cases of Covid-19 was reported. Dr Narendra Khippal, senior professor, (respiratory disease) SMS Hospital said, “We have helped the doctors in Bhilwara for preparing protocol for screening, testing and treating suspected Covid-19 persons and patients.”

The doctors in Bhilwara were in touch with SMS Hospital and other hospitals in various parts of the country which had succeeded in treating patients. They also followed treatment protocol prepared by AIIMS, Delhi. 

So far, seven patients from Bhilwara, including two in SMS Hospital, have tested negative for the disease. In the state, nine patients in SMS Hospital, five in Bhilwara and two in Jodhpur have been tested negative after being treated. A total of 16 Covid-19 patients have tested negative for the virus, after being treated in the state.


