5 more test +ve, Covid-19 tally in city now 28
2020-04-18
Kanpur: Five more people, including a woman, have tested positive for Covid-19 in the city in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 28.

According to chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla, five more positive cases were reported in the city since late Thursday evening. "While four men, aged 19, 23, 39 and 40, all residents of Quli Bazar area, tested positive on Thursday evening, a 50-year-old woman from Colonelganj locality tested positive on Friday morning. All the five samples were tested at GSVM medical college.

The administration is trying to trace people who had come in contact with Covid-19 people, All 28 positive patients in the city have been quarantined and are undergoing treatment at the Covid-19 hospital.

The CMO said the woman, who has tested positive, is a relative of the readymade garment trader, who had died on Monday evening. The second report of two women, relative of the deceased trader, again tested positive, he added.

A youth from Auraiyya was also declared infected after being declared a corona positive case.

Among 28 infected persons, one person returned to his home after successful treatment while one died. The remaining 26 persons are being treated at the Covid-19 hospital, he said.

Meanwhile, according to the health bulletin released by the district authorities, as many as 632 suspected persons who had come from other districts have been quarantined. Around 5731 quarantined persons have recḤovered in the last 24 hours. So far, 6769 people have recovered while 698 people are in isolation and being treated.

Several voluntary organizations have donated money in the prime minister and chief minister fund.

District magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari has ordered that no shop would be opened in hotspot and red zone areas. He said strict action would be taken if any shop was found open in these areas.

Kanpur Municipal Corporation continued its sensitization work in red zone and hotspot areas and other parts of the city.


