5 more test +ve for Covid-19 in Agra, active cases now 45
2020-04-07
Agra: Five more Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Agra on Monday. Of these, two of them were related to the Tablighi Jamaat gathering in Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz. With the five new cases, the total number of Covid-19 infected individuals in Agra has gone up to 45.

Monday’s cases included two staffers of a private hospital in the city. They tested positive for Covid-19, just days after the hospital owner and his son, both doctors, were found infected at a hospital in Gurugram. Meanwhile, one of the cases is related to an individual who took part in the Jamaat event, and the other is a contact. Besides, a businessman who had recently returned from Dubai was also found positive.

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the five people have been shifted to quarantine facility. A team of doctors is taking care of them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and places they had visited. Their contacts are also being identified. We will be conducting a health check of all these individuals.”

Out of the 45 active Covid-19 cases in Agra, 33 are related to people who had attended the Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts. Health department teams have shifted 137 people from eight city mosques to three quarantine centres. The police have sealed the area around these mosques. Drone-mounted cameras are being used to ensure strict enforcement of the lockdown in densely populated areas.

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 53 Covid-19 cases have surfaced in Agra, out of these eight people have been cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. The places where the infected individuals were staying are being sanitised. Everyone should fill up and submit a self-assessment form available on Agra Smart city website. Stepping out of the house should be strictly avoided, and legal action will be taken against those violating the lockdown.”

The DM also released a list of 25 Covid-19 hotspots in the city on Monday. All these places will be “sealed” by police to prevent any further spread of the disease.

Meanwhile, the district administration has been unable to find the reason behind a 40-year-old man, who was suffering from tuberculosis, and was infected with the virus. The man, a resident of Jaghishpura locality, has no recent travel history.


