Five more die of Covid-19 in Pune, case count up to 209
2020-04-10
PUNE: Five critically-ill patients succumbed to Covid-19 associated complications at different hospitals in Pune on Thursday, taking the number of contagion deaths in Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR) to 25 so far.


Four of the deceased had pre-existing medical conditions like diabetes, hypertension, asthma and ulcerative colitis. Of the total casualties in PMR, 24 were residents of PMC limits, while one was a resident of Baramati in Pune district. 




Besides, 12 more people tested positive for Covid-19 in PMR on Thursday, taking the total case count in the region the total case count to 209. Of the 12 fresh cases, two were reported from PMC limits, while three from Naidu hospital and seven from the Sassoon hospital.

“None of the five patients who died on Thursday had any history of recent foreign travel. Four of them are women who had underlying medical conditions. They are resident of Ganesh Peth, Yerawada, Kondhwa, Parvatigaon and Swargate,” a district health official said.

Four of them died at the state-run Sassoon hospital and another at a private hospital in the city limits. “Of the five casualties, a 58-year-old woman from Ganesh Peth was a known patient of diabetes. She was admitted to our hospital on April 8 after she complained of breathlessness,” the official said, adding that she developed bilateral pneumonia and slipped into respiratory distress and died on Thursday.

The other deceased included three 65-year-old women from Yerawada, Kondhwa and Parvatigaon. The Yerawada woman had diabetes and hypertension. She was admitted to the hospital on April 5 and succumbed to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a fatal complication of Covid-19 and other respiratory viruses, on Thursday. The Kondhwa woman was a patient of asthma, while the Parvatigaon woman was a patient of ulcerative colitis for many years. 

She was admitted to a private hospital in Pune on March 31. “She complained of giddiness, fever and vomiting. She was undergoing treatment at the hospital's isolation ICU,” hospitals medical director said.

‘Besides, a 44-year-old man from Swargate, who had no pre-existing medical conditions, also breathed his last on Thursday after developing ARDS. 


