Five new coronavirus cases in Uttar Pradesh, tally now 43
2020-03-27
LUCKNOW: Five new coronavirus positive cases were reported in Uttar Pradesh on Thursday, taking the state’s tally to 43. 


Among the new cases are the daughter and two acquaitances of the Noida couple who have already tested positive. Of the remaining two cases, one person is from Agra and the other from Baghpat and had retuned from Dubai recently.

State surveillance officer, Dr Vikasendu Agarwal, said, “All the three cases in Noida are linked to the couple based in Sector 137 who tested positive earlier this week. Their daughter has been totally asymptomatic so far.” 

“The 32-year-old man from Baghpat is stable. We have quarantined his family and sent their samples for testing,” said CMO Dr RK Tandon.

The CMO admitted that tracing all contacts of Baghpat case was a challenge. “He had taken public transport to reach his home from Delhi airport after returning from Dubai. Though it’s very tough to track who travelled with him in the public transport, we are trying to trace if any people came in contact with him,” the CMO added. 

About Agra patient, sources in the health department said he is the son of a city-based nursing homeowner who returned from the US via Dubai in March. He is not a contact of the Covid-19 positive cases reported from the city earlier.”

However, Agra CMO Dr Mukesh Vats said the youth’s sample has been sent for test and the report is awaited. He refused further comment.

Dr Vikasendu Agarwal said so far 14 patients have recovered from the infection. Three patients from Noida, who were undergoing treatment at different hospitals, have been discharged,” he added.

Health officials said maximum corona cases (14) have been reported from Noida, followed by Agra (9 cases). They said seven of the nine patients in Agra have recovered. Eight cases have been reported from Lucknow, three in Ghaziabad, two in Pilibhit, and one each in Lakhimpur Kheri, Moradabad, Varanasi, Kanpur, Jaunpur, Shamli and Baghpat. 

Dr Agarwal said eight labs in UP are conducting coronavirus detection tests. Of these, six labs — KGMU, SGPGI, Command Hospital Lucknow, IMS-BHU, Medical College AMU Aligarh and LLRM Meerut can give confirmatory tests while two others -- RIMS Saifai and NIV Pune Regional research lab at BRD Medical College Gorakhpur, NIV will be able to provide confirmed reports in a day or two. 


