Coronavirus in Delhi: Five new cases, three more linked to case No. 10
2020-03-26
NEW DELHI: The web of positive cases connected to Delhi’s case number 10, a 38-year-old woman from Dilshad Garden with travel history to Saudi Arabia, reached nine with three more persons connected to her testing positive for the novel coronavirus infection on Wednesday. The total number of Covid-19 cases in Delhi now stands at 35. 

The five new cases on Wednesday include two residents of Sainik Farms — not connected to the woman — with travel history to Brazil and London, respectively.

According to a Delhi government official, eight cases in the city are so far linked to the Saudi Arabia-returned woman, excluding her. The latest additions are the wife and the daughter of the mohalla clinic doctor who examined her on March 12 and a relative of the woman’s brother who picked her up from the IGI airport on her return to India.

The woman, Delhi’s case number 10, was diagnosed positive on March 17. Three days later, her brother and mother tested positive, and on March 21, her two daughters. The mohalla clinic doctor tested positive the next day. 

All of them are in stable condition in hospitals, a source said. On Tuesday, the doctor was shifted to the Safdarjung Hospital ICU from Guru Tegh Bahadur (GTB) Hospital after developing respiratory distress but has since been kept in an isolation ward. 

Since March 12, the doctor had seen several patients at the mohalla clinic. On Wednesday, the subdivisional magistrate of Shahdara directed that all those who had visited the clinic in Maujpur’s Mohanpuri between March 12 and 18 should home-quarantine themselves for 15 days.

A district health official also said 74 people living in the neighbourhood of the Saudi Arabia-returned woman are under surveillance. “After the woman tested positive, we immediately asked her family for the names and addresses of the people who had visited them since March 10, the date of her return,” a health official said. “They weren’t cooperative, so we had to seek local police’s help to get information. We also used footage from the CCTV cameras installed near their home to identify some people who needed to be put under surveillance,” he added.

The woman’s brother and mother live in Jahangirpuri. The people who came in contact with them are also being screened, a source said.


