Kerala: 5 quarantined UK nationals test positive for Covid-19
2020-03-21
KOCHI: Minister V S Sunilkumar confirmed five Covid-19 cases in Ernakulam on Friday. Briefing the media, he said the five persons were part of a team of 19 tourists from the UK that had visited Munnar.

Samples of all persons of the team were sent for testing. The five who tested positive have been shifted to the isolation ward at Government Medical College, Ernakulam. They are between 60 and 85 years of age. The minister said all 19 are foreign nationals.

“The condition of the affected persons is satisfactory. Results of 12 are negative. Steps can be taken to clear their travel documents and help them return to their home country,” he said.

The patients who tested positive were already in quarantine. The minister said that their route maps have already been prepared. He said that these persons were under observation. Their primary contacts have also been identified.

Meanwhile, private hospitals in the district have assured complete cooperation in the fight against Covid-19. This was decided at a meeting convened by the government and attended by representatives of 24 hospitals. Hospitals have agreed to set up six isolation wards, 94 ICU beds, 35 ventilators and 120 ward beds.

Sunilkumar said that if the situation worsened in the coming days, private hospitals will be equally prepared to tackle the situation. “All hospitals will have to set up communicable disease prevention centres. Screening of patients and bystanders should be done before allowing them within the premises. Visitors should be restricted. Hospitals are bound to ensure personal hygiene of staff. All labs, including x-ray rooms, should follow guidelines issued related to their functioning,” he added.

He said meetings were held with Kochi mayor Soumini Jain. Campaigns are taking place and squads are functioning at the grassroots level. Steps have been taken to provide food to persons in quarantine. The online team is also functioning effectively. The palliative care team is also supporting elderly citizens, the minister said. 

