Gujarat: 5 societies put under cluster quarantine
2020-04-04
AHMEDABAD: For the first time, fearing that dense human habitation could act as a pacemaker for Covid-19 spread the civic body on Friday decided to impose cluster containment of some residential societies, after Covid-19 patients were detected from these residential clusters on different dates. Around 493 households in five residential societies in Jamalpur, Shahpur Rangila Chowky, Bhanderi pol in Dariapur, Gujarat housing board in Rakhial and in Danilimda have been cluster quarantined.

These societies will have a board outside their societies warning outsiders to not enter the perimeter. All important provisions will be supplied by the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) to these societies, including groceries and food kits. The civic body will conduct regular health check-ups of the residents. No persons will be allowed to move out or strangers allowed inside the society under quarantine. Police presence will be there in the large containment zone according to the prevailing requirement

The locations are Alif apartment near Ismail Pir ni Dargah, where there are some 50 houses, Crystal Apartments behind Shahpur Rangeela police chowky, where there are 27 families, Bhanderi pol in Dariapur where some 250 households including some 1,000-odd people stay, while at Gujarat Housing board in Rakhial some 16 families have been quarantined. At Maaz residency in Danilimda some 150 households have been put under cluster quarantine.

“Extraordinary times call for extraordinary steps. Our teams will ensure supply of essential commodities to all the families in these areas,” said municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra.

According to a senior MC health official, the cluster quarantine is apart of the micro-plan for containment issued by the Union ministry of health which states that the containment zone will be decided based on the extent of cases or contacts listed and mapped by the surveillance teams. There is also provision of an arbitrary basis to demarcate an area of 3km radius around the epicentre — which is the residence of the positive case.


