5 under scanner for novel coronavirus infection, 2 from Mumbai quarantined
2020-01-24
Mumbai/Pune: Five persons — two from Pune and three from Mumbai — have been put under surveillance in the past 48 hours after they landed at Mumbai airport from China to ensure that they have not been infected with the novel coronavirus.

Two of the three Mumbai residents, exhibiting mild cough and cold symptoms, were admitted to Kasturba Hospital in Chinchpokli late on Thursday as a precautionary measure, said an official.

The three Mumbai residents are of Jogeshwari, Kalyan and Nalasopara. “Since the passengers from Kalyan and Nalasopara have shown signs of mild cold and cough, we have asked them to come and get admitted to Kasturba Hospital so that we can run some checks and rule out any infection,” said BMC executive health officer Dr Padmaja Keskar.

State epidemiologist Dr Pradeep Awate said they had exhibited no specific coronavirus symptoms. Two of the five passengers had been to Wuhan, the epicentre of the novel coronavirus outbreak. “Those two passengers are also currently asymptomatic like the other three, who had been to other parts of China,” said Awate.

Sources said the Nalasopara traveller had stayed in Foshan city — almost 1,000km south from Wuhan — for six days. The person left China on January 21 and arrived at Mumbai airport at 4am on Wednesday. The local health officer said the woman complained of body ache and cold when the health department officials contacted her. “We referred her to Kasturba for the physician’s opinion,” said the official.

The Kalyan resident was in Guangzhou, also almost 1,000km south of Wuhan, for six days from January 16. “He had cold and cough. A complete blood count test showed normal results,” said an official.

The state health department officials have decided to follow up with the five passengers for 28 days.

A total of 1,323 passengers returning from China and other affected countries have so far been screened at the Mumbai airport since January 18. 


