Five-year-old is latest negative case in Kerala, testing positive in Tamil Nadu
2020-05-13
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: A five-year-old girl from Karakonam has become the fourth certified novel coronavirus-infected person in the last two weeks to be discharged within four days of admission by health authorities here after meeting the double-negative protocol.


The girl was travelling with her mother from Chennai when they were tested by Tamil Nadu authorities. After her sample returned positive, the case was cross-referred to Thiruvananthapuram. Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan had said the girl had tested negative although Tamil Nadu maintained it as an active case.

As per the records in Tamil Nadu, she is one among the eight cases reported recently in Kanyakumari district. The latest case status of the state also shows her as an active case. Two days ago, authorities there retested the same sample and confirmed the positive result.

Documents show the girl was shifted to the Covid isolation ward of SAT from Covid care centre at Nalanchira following a positive report from Tamil Nadu. The report shows the child was asymptomatic except for mild rhinitis. Her nasopharyngeal swabs were sent to the Medical College Hospital lab and the result was negative. This was followed by another negative result. A rapid GeneXpert test was also carried out. The sample was sent to NIV Alappuzha which also returned negative.

The girl was discharged on Monday and she along with her mother have been directed to remain under room quarantine till May 20. The child's parents said the kid had not shown any symptoms. Health authorities here had not initiated contact tracing after repeated tests yielded negative results. The swabs were first taken on May 6 and the girl was shifted to SAT on May 7. All samples taken from the date of admission showed negative results. Earlier, persons from Varkala, Neyyatinkara and Tamil Nadu who tested positive for Covid-19 were discharged following repeated negative results within four days of admission after the medical team did not detect any symptoms.

Recently, a 68-year-old man from Tamil Nadu who was declared positive in Kerala and admitted to MCH here was termed negative in his home state. “We have not received the official report from Thiruvananthapuram administration in the latest case. Such instances are possible considering accuracy rates of RT-PCR. We were taking swab samples from everyone entering Kanyakumari. In this case they already had a pass to travel to Thiruvananthapuram. We took their samples as per protocol and all her family tested negative. When her results came positive we immediately cross-referred it to Thiruvananthapuram. We communicated our test results to Chennai and we are awaiting further communication for change in status,'' said Prashant Wadnere, district collector of Kanyakumari.


