50-bed quarantine facility set up at Coimbatore college hostel
2020-03-18
COIMBATORE: From Wednesday midnight, all asymptomatic passengers landing in the city from 10 countries affected by Covid-19, will be quarantined for 14 days at one of the hostel buildings of Tejaa Shakthi Institute of Technology for Women at Karumathampatti.


Though the building is being equipped with 50 beds, it has provision to accommodate 200 beds, a health department official told TOI.

There was brief commotion in front of the facility on Tuesday evening when Coimbatore collector K Rajamani arrived to inspect it. Staging a protest against setting up the quarantine centre there, as many as 100 residents of the area blocked the collector’s vehicle. The collector got off the vehicle and explained that only asymptomatic patients will be quarantined there.

The district administration began identifying a space to quarantine Covid-19 patients two days after the Indian government made quarantine compulsory for passengers landing from the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, China, Oman, South Korea, Iran, Italy, Spain, Germany and France. “While patients with symptoms will be taken to the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital for treatment, testing for the virus and then isolation, the patients without symptoms will be housed in this building for 14 days,” deputy director of the public health department Dr Ramesh said.

Since it is a quarantine space for asymptomatic patients who require no treatment and only monitoring, officials said the hostel has all the basic facilities to make quarantine simple. “It already has beds, laundry facilities, adequate number of toilets and canteen facilities. The revenue department is yet to take a decision on extra facilities like books, television and Wi-Fi,” said Ramesh, who supervised cleaning of the building on Tuesday.

The move to set up set up pure quarantine facilities outside government hospitals seems to have been fuelled by reports of people not reporting symptoms and travel history, and even fleeing airports fearing quarantine in government hospitals, sources said.


