50 Covid-19 +ve cases in city takes district tally to 558
2020-05-11
Aurangabad: As many as 50 confirmed Covid-19 cases emerged from the city on Sunday, taking the tally of positive cases to 558 in the district. Most of the cases were reported from Ram Nagar and Silk Mill Colony. Meanwhile, a 50-year-old man, a resident of Roshan Gate in Baijapura who had contracted the infection, died while undergoing treatment at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Sunday. This is the 13th case of a patient succumbing to the infection in the city. GMCH’s nodal officer for media interaction Arvind Gaikwad said that the man was admitted to the district civil hospital on May 2 after he tested positive for Covid-19. However, as his oxygen levels in the blood were low, he was admitted to the GMCH on May 3. “He was suffering from diabetes and a kidney disease. He had acquired pneumonia due to Covid-19. He underwent dialysis four times. As he was having difficulty breathing, he was placed on ventilator on May 6. His health was deteriorating in the last two days due to the comorbid conditions. The man died at 7.50am on Sunday,” said Gaikwad. The cause of the man’s death has been identified as uremic encephalopathy Covid-19 associated with coagulopathy in case of diabetes mellitus nephropathy with chronic kidney disease. 27 patients discharged Municipal officer for health Nita Padalkar said that as many as 27 Covid-19 patients were discharged from different health facilities in the city on Sunday after they tested negative for the two consecutive tests conducted after 14 days of quarantine. This takes the tally of cured patients in Auranagabad to 92. While the district civil hospital sent home eight patients, 19 more were discharged from Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC)‘s Covid care centres in Qile Ark and Padampura Emergency Operations Centre. Padalkar said that following the instructions from the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the state government on discharge guidelines, it has been decided to discharge Covid-19 patients after 10 days if they were asymptomatic. “They will be discharged without needing to undergo throat swab test again. However, they will be placed in home quarantine for seven days. Residents and patients need not worry as the virus load starts reducing after 10 days,” said Padalkar. 