50 Goans onboard quarantined cruiseliner to return to India today
2020-02-26
MARGAO: Chinchinim resident Dhanasth Raikar is looking forward to finally coming home. He is among the 50 Goans onboard the luxury cruiseliner Diamond Princess that has been quarantined off the coast of Japan since February 3.


Raikar told TOI on Tuesday that though they have been informed about the arrangements being made by the Indian government to bring them back to India, no details have been shared with the 138-member Indian crew yet.

“We have only been told to get ready to board the flight back to India on Wednesday. After over 500 Filipinos among the crew went back to their country in two chartered flights on Tuesday, only the Indian crew is left on the ship,” he said.

Although two more Indians have tested positive for Coronavirus, Raikar said that all Goans aboard the vessel are safe and healthy. He added that the few Indians who have been affected by the virus have already been hospitalised and quarantined.


Crew will be quarantined in New Delhi

The Indian embassy in Japan on Tuesday announced that the government of India has arranged a chartered flight to bring back all Indian crew members. “A chartered flight is being arranged to repatriate Indian nationals onboard #DiamondPrincess, provided they have (a)consented; (b)not tested positive for #COVID19;

(c) cleared by the medical team. An email advisory to this effect, with details, has been sent to them,” read a tweet by the embassy of India in Japan.

Spokesperson of the Goan Seamen Association of India (GSAI) Dixon Vaz told TOI that the hiring agent from Mumbai, Milind Kurturkar, conveyed to him that the flight carrying Indian crew members was likely to arrive in New Delhi by Wednesday.

“Here all the crew members will be quarantined for 14 days and given treatment. Once they are cleared by the medical team, they will be able to return to their respective states,” Vaz said.

In an earlier tweet by the Indian mission in Japan on Tuesday, it was informed that two more Indians have tested positive for the virus. “PCR test results for ALL Indian nationals declared-02 more Indians tested positive to #COVID19, taking the total to 16. Those fulfilling conditions and consenting to repatriation to India on 26 Feb being facilitated by the Indian Government,” the tweet read.

All the affected Indians are responding well to the treatment, it said. “The shipping company has promised to pay two months extra salary to all crew members,” Vaz said.

