Mumbai: 50% jump in Covid-19 cases was in last week of April
2020-05-05
MUMBAI: The city's Covid death graph seems to be climbing more steeply every passing day.

If Mumbai registered nine deaths due to Covid-19 in March, the toll rose in April rose to 281--making up for around 40% of the country's total Covid-related deaths.

 


Now, in the first four days of May, the city has registered 71 deaths, taking the toll to 361 since the first case was diagnosed in Mumbai on March 11.

In terms of cases as well, the tally stood at 92 till the end of March. The big jump in cases and deaths began around April 7, when the city recorded over 100 positive cases in a single day. By the end of April, the city registered 6,910 cases and 281 deaths. In fact, a 50% jump in cases was registered in the last week of April.

Experts fear the worst is yet to come. A ward official said from seeing 10-12 positive cases every day until a couple of weeks back, even less affected wards are recording around 20-24 new cases every day. “Most cases are either coming from containment areas or have a history of visiting one. Many have history of visiting hospitals. But, in at least 15-20% cases, we are struggling to find the source of the infection,” he said.

Dr Avinash Supe, head of a seven-member committee and former KEM Hospital dean, said urban areas such as Mumbai may continue to see cases in big number through May and a peak in June. “We are expecting to see lot of cases in May with a peak in the first week of June,” he said.

On the bright side, he said the cumulative death rate in the city has been registering a decrease due to a clutch of preventive measures such as lockdown and improved healthcare facilities. “The mortality rate was around 7%-8% in the beginning of April, but is now down to 4%,'' he said. Preventive measures such as screening oxygen levels of those in the 60-plus age groupcould be helping in controlling death.

``Better surveillance may have brought down mortality, but we have to remain vigilant,” said Dr Supe, adding that Mumbai’s positivity rate (around 6%-7%) is much less than in some other nations.

Dr Abhay Shukla of NGO Jan Swasthya Abhiyan, which has set up a Maharashtra Public Health Analysis Group to study the Covid crisis, said there was a window period between March 10 and March 31 to contain the infection with intensive public health measures such as identifying new patients, isolating them, tracing their contacts and carrying out a massive number of tests. ``But the opportunity was not widely utlitised. We would have seen much less transmission intensive measures were taken,’’ he said. However, he said the ``cluster of cases'' in Mumbai can still be contained. 

Public health analyst Dr Ravi Duggal said that while Maharashtra and Kerala were on a par in March. the southern state managed to control Covid in April while Mumbai has seen a worsening of the outbreak. 

The outbreak is also worsening for vulnerable groups such as healthcare workers. Dr Supe said, “An emerging challenge is that frontline workers are getting affected,” he said. At least two civic employees have died of the novel coronavirus, while nearly 100 have tested positive across municipal hospitals. Sion Hospital that has over 57 infected healthcare workers is the worst affected so far.

Dr Shukla said that Mumbai, Pune and Thane districts account for 88% of the state’s cases, while the remaining 24 districts that form two-thirds of the state have just 3% of all cases.


