50 more Jamaat members test +ve for Covid-19
2020-04-12
New Delhi: As many as 50 of the 102 Tablighi Jamaat members, who were evacuated by Delhi Police from different mosques in the central Delhi area on Monday, have tested positive for the novel coronavirus. Most of them were foreigners and had come to attend the event held at Alami Markaz Banglewali Masjid in mid-March.

Many other Jamaat members were staying in lodges and guesthouses waiting for the lockdown to end to return to their countries, said police sources.

A senior police officer said that the cops were trying to trace people who had attended the programme at the Alami Markaz.

“Police inspected about 70 mosques in Chandni Mahal area and 102 people were evacuated from 13 mosques. Around 60 of the evacuees were foreigners. After we informed the administration, the suspected cases were moved to a quarantine centre in Gulabi Bagh. We were later informed that 50 of them had tested positive,” the officer added. 

“We are now trying to find out who all they had met.”

Special precautions are being taken after three people from the central Delhi area suspected to have succumbed to the coronavirus. However, the cops were still waiting for a confirmation in this regard.

Several measures have been taken to ensure that the people who had come in contact with the Jamaat members and the three deceased remain inside their homes. Their mobile phone locations are being tracked to ensure that they do not move around the locality.

Delhi government has, meanwhile, declared Chandni Mahal a containment zone. “No resident of the locality is allowed to go out of his/her home and essential items are being delivered at their doorsteps,” said another police officer.

“The mosques in which the Jamaatis were staying are also likely to be turned into no-access zones. Police have requested the civic bodies to ensure that the area is sanitised,” the officer added.

Meanwhile, police have said that no action will be taken against the local guesthouses and lodges where the Jamaatis were staying.

“An enquiry has revealed that they were not staying together in the guesthouses. A few guesthouse owners had even asked the members of the Jamaat to leave. With their help, the area sub-divisional magistrate had shifted some of the Jamaat members to the quarantine centre in Gulabi Bagh.”


