50% of Covid-19 patients discharged in Nashik divn
2020-05-16
Nashik: Around 50% of the Covid-19 patients in the five districts falling under the jurisdiction of Nashik division have been cured of the viral infection and discharged from the hospitals.

As per the new directives issued by the Central and the state governments, if a patient testing positive for Covid-19 does not show any symptoms or shows mild symptoms of the virus, the patient can be discharged after 10 days without having to undergo the two consecutive medical tests. This directive has come as a breather for many Covid care centres, health centres and hospitals. 

“Of the 1128 patients in Nashik division, 561 patients have recovered and been discharged. The new policy has benefitted 350 more patients. Malegaon has benefitted maximum from the new discharge policy. Of the 600 positive patients in town, only 105 are admitted in the Covid facilities,” said deputy director of health, Nashik, Mallikarjun Pattanshetty. 

While Ahmednagar district topped the chart of the patients discharged after treatment with 66.66%, Malegaon—which has turned into a hotspot for Covid-19 cases— has discharged 64.5% of the total number of patients. 

“More than 80% of the patients are asymptomatic. The government policy of discharging patients with asymptomatic or moderate symptoms on the 10th day, if they show no signs of illness, has relieved both the health systems and the patients,” said Pattanshetty. 

“The new policy has done away with the need for conducting two throat swab tests of the patients. The new guidelines have come as a boon for us. This has led to decongestion of the facilities to a very large extent, thus allowing the medical staff to pay more attention to the critical patients,” said the deputy heath director. 

Pattanshetty clarified that the occupancy less than 25% did not mean that the number of quarantine and isolation facilities created across the division would not be wound up anytime soon. 

“The infection is still out there. It will need us and the facility to treat the people. We just cannot be at ease. The system will continue to function as it is,” he said. 


