50% of Karnataka patients beat coronavirus, national average is 27%
2020-05-06
BENGALURU: For the first since the outbreak of Covid-19, the total number of discharged patients in Karnataka is more than those under treatment and one in two positive persons has recovered so far, better than the national average.


As reported by TOI earlier, the number of discharges had outnumbered the number of active cases in 10 affected districts as on May 1. On Tuesday, nearly 50% (331) of the total 673 positive cases reported from 21 districts in Karnataka have been discharged. Nationally, the recovery rate is 27%.

 

Belagavi, Kalaburagi, Mandya and Vijayapura (which have cases in double digits) are among the 11 districts which still have more active cases than recoveries. In all, 312, or 46%, are active cases. Twenty-nine people have died due to Covid-19 at a rate of 4% in Karnataka. The fact that nearly 500 people, or 75%, of all the infected people in Karnataka were aged below 50 may have contributed to this trend.


State needs to be more careful now

Globally, infectivity and mortality trends place those above 50 years more vulnerable than others. More than 400 people who tested positive are 40 years or younger and 92 under 20.

The state, two of whose quarantine facilities and one incentive-care facility have been declared “models” by the Centre, has managed to perform well in lockdown conditions, recording fewer cases than its own projections at least twice since the outbreak.

With more than 74% of all cases as on Tuesday being asymptomatic and lockdown norms being relaxed, the state will have to be more careful in managing the pandemic.

Aloke Kumar from IISc, who, along with Prof Santosh Ansumali from JNCASR, was among the first in the country to develop projection models, said: “...Citizens will need to employ restraint and maintain social distancing even in places where there’s more relaxation of rules than others. For instance, in just one day, we’ve seen districts in an orange zone turn red.”

