50% patients in 21-40 age-group keep UP Covid recovery rate high
2020-05-15
Lucknow: The covid recovery rate in UP has been steadying above the 50% mark for couple of days, giving the state government and health officials much to cheer in time of pandemic. While the hard work by corona warriors contributed towards controlling the spread, experts cite other reasons too.,

Demographic experts say the current recovery rate in the state is linked to comorbidity or risk factors and age-group of patients. According to state health department data, 49.5% Covid-19 patients are in the 21-40 age-group while 25.6% fall in the 41-60 age-group. Experts believe almost 59% patients in the first category have limited comorbidity, which refers to multiple medical disorders in a person.

This can be corroborated medically too. “Age does play an important role in recovery. In younger patients, comorbidity conditions or risk factors like blood pressure or diabetes are less common and their bodies have just one task in hand and that’s to battle coronavirus,” said city-based physician Dr Sunil Verma.

Head of pulmonary medicine department, King George’s Medical University, Prof Surya Kant said, “The virus is known to trigger complications in existing medical conditions and thus cannot cause much harm in a fairly healthy younger population.” He said, the infection rate among the high-risk 60 plus age-group was as low as 7.7%.

Health experts also attribute the steady recovery rate to an early lockdown. “Since affected persons were quarantined, many patients were either primary or secondary contacts. The lockdown didn’t allow the virus to spread or strengthen the infection chain,” said Dr Vikasendu Agarwal, state surveillance officer. He said, the number of cases in UP was lower due to strict surveillance measures during the lockdown.

While lauding the state’s efforts to battle the pandemic, social scientists Aarti and Vishwajeet Kumar had a word of caution. “Numbers can be deceptive. On a macro scale, data suggest things have been good so far, but number of positive cases over past two weeks was more than those discharged,” said Vishwajeet.

“Different cities are on a different point in the pandemic trajectory. Data suggests UP has done a fair job, but it doesn’t mean other states are not doing well. The covid gulf between Maharashtra and UP is primarily because cases in Maharashtra were much higher than UP in the initial phase,” said Aarti.


