50 working at police station visited by Covid-19 suspect quarantined
2020-04-26
PRAYAGRAJ: Over 50 cops and administrative staff posted at Kaundhiyara police station were quarantined on Saturday following reports that a man who had come in contact with two Covid-19 patients had visited the thana premises.

On Friday, three youths tested positive for novel coronavirus in Prayagraj and were admitted to Covid-19 Level One Hospital in Kotwa for treatment. The new cases included two cousins who worked in Mumbai as daily wagers and had set off for Prayagraj on April 19 to attend a family member’s funeral. They had been issued e-passes for the purpose too. 

According to the police, the two youths had visited several places in their village along with a friend after returning from Mumbai. The labourers’ friend had gone to the Kaundhiyara thana for some work and had even spent some time there. “On getting the information, I ordered station house officer Praveen Singh and other staffers posted at Kaundhiyara thana to be quarantined at Motilal Degree College. However, as the thana has to function Mahesh Kumar will be temporarily taking charge and additional PAC has been deployed at the police station,” said SSP (Prayagraj) Satyrath Aniruddha Pankaj. 

The third case was a youth who had tested positive for the virus after travelling in a train coach with another Covid-19 patient in March.

As the three cases were reported from Kapari in Shankargarh and Shankarghat in Shivkuti, the district administration declared the areas as hotspots and sealed them on Friday.

Meanwhile, divisional commissioner R Ramesh Kumar, DIG KP Singh and Prayagraj Development Authority vice-chairman TK Sibu visited Shankarghat on Saturday to ensure that adequate measures are being taken to check the spread of the novel coronavirus.

The entire locality was sanitised and sealed. Health department officials are also collecting swab samples of all those who came in contact with the patients and send them for testing. Some of the youths’ acquaintances have been quarantined.

At the other hostpot — Kapari in Shankargrah — the administration has sealed the entire village. The health department has constituted 53 teams to keep an eye on 8,295 homes which house 41,475 residents. The teams comprise 19 supervisors and health supervisors and are supervising sanitisation drives in the area, for which 35 sanitation workers have been roped in. 


