Coronavirus scare in Kolkata: 500% jump in airfares keeps students away from home
2020-03-15
KOLKATA: Students returning to Kolkata from the coronavirus-hit Bengaluru, Mumbai and Delhi have been grounded by air fares that have escalated 300%-500% in 24 hours. While a one-way ticket from Bengaluru to Kolkata on Sunday touched Rs 25,000, the fare from Mumbai and Delhi to the city rose to Rs 34,000 and Rs 17,000 respectively. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


“Our exams have been postponed and even the university sports centre, Marena, has been closed. So there’s nothing much to do here. We are planning to go home, but air fares have suddenly gone through the roof. Travelling now will burn a hole in our parents’ pockets,” said Ayush Dasgupta, a second-year student of computer and communications engineering at Manipal Institute of Technology.

Wrichik Sengupta, a second-year journalism honours student at Garden City University, Bengaluru, is holed up in the hostel that has nearly emptied out after the college suspended classes for two weeks. 

Airlines officials said the surge in demand over the past couple of days had triggered the sharp escalation in fares from what was otherwise an extremely difficult situation when fares had touched rock bottom after the Covid-19 scare reduced travel to a trickle.

“Fares to Bengaluru and Mumbai were Rs 4,000-Rs 5,000; and that to Delhi was Rs 2,500-Rs 3,000 till the shutdown announcements led to the spike. This will last a few days. Once the things settle, fares will be back to normal,” said the commercial manager of a private carrier. 

Kolkata airport’s domestic wing has also witnessed a decline in passenger count. But the international wing was worse and wore a deserted look with barely 500 passengers using the terminal between Saturday midnight and noon. On a normal day, around 3,000 passengers would have flown out in these 12 hours. But the flyer count crashed after India announced the lockdown. Several international carriers have suspended flights while others have reduced frequency. Only the three Gulf carriers — Emirates, Qatar and Etihad — continued to operate as scheduled.

The airport stepped up its protocol to keep the facility free from infection. On Saturday, all touchpoints in the terminal were cleaned at regular intervals. “Seat handles, handrails in escalators and walkalators, elevator buttons, immigration desks, tables and taps are being cleaned more often and more thoroughly,” said airport director Kaushik Bhattacharjee.

