Delhi: 500 test positive for Covid-19 in a single day
2020-05-20
NEW DELHI: Delhi’s Covid-19 count rose to 10,554 on Tuesday with 500 more people testing positive for the disease. This is the highest single-day increase in new cases, officials said.


Earlier, on May 14, the national capital had reported maximum 472 new cases in a single day. Delhi also reported six more deaths due to novel coronavirus, taking its toll to 166.

Meanwhile, state health department officials said that total 4,750 Covid-19 patients have recovered from the disease. “We now have 5,638 active cases in the state. Of this, 2,261 (40%) are under home quarantine while 781 (14%) are under isolation at various Covid-19 health centres and Covid-19 care centres. Only 32% patients are admitted in hospitals because they have mild to moderate symptoms, which necessitates regular monitoring,” said an official.


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Lockdown 4.0: What's allowed and what's not in the three zones
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news

He added that 158 Covid-19 positive patients are requiring ICU support and 16 patients are on ventilator support.

Recently, the central government revised its advisory on discharge policy for Covid-19 positive cases. It said that patients can be discharged without testing ten days after onset of symptoms and if they are not running a fever for at least three days. This is because, officials said, a person who may test positive for the disease on follow-up after few days cannot transmit the disease to others if he or she is not symptomatic.

As per the revised guidelines, after discharge, patients need to follow home isolation for seven days. The government has also tweaked the policy for quarantining healthcare workers. New guidelines said that -risk exposure is considered only when healthcare workers providing care to a Covid-19 case or lab worker handling respiratory specimen without recommended PPE or with possible breach of PPE.

It also includes healthcare worker who may have performed aerosol generating procedure without PPE and those working without mask, face shield or goggles and having face to face contact with a positive case within one metre for more than 15 minutes and those having accidental exposure to body fluids. The rest are considered low risk exposure cases, as per the new guidelines. 

The Resident Doctor’s Association of Maulana Azad Medical College and associated hospitals has written to the Union health minister seeking withdrawal of the new guidelines for quarantining of healthcare workers, which has been notified in Delhi too.

