51 more test Covid-19 +ve in district, total count hits 572
2020-05-09
Nashik: The district recorded a big spike in Covid-19 cases with as many as 51 people tested positive for the infection. Of these, 18 were from the city, 28 from Malegaon and five from rural parts of the district.

With this, the total number of cases in the district has reached 572 with 44 cases from Malegaon, 44 in the city, 61 from rural Nashik and 19 patients are from outside the district.

NMC officials said 13 people were tested positive in the morning were all high-risk contacts of the earlier positive patients. Eight of them were from the existing containment zones in the city, while five tested positive from non-containment areas of the city.

Currently, the NMC has sealed five containment areas in the city – Hirawadi in Panchavati, Shrikirshna Nagar, Jadhav Complex in Satpur, Patil Nagar and Hanuman Chowk in Cidco. The total number of containment zones in the city have reached 20. 

According to officials, a woman who had tested positive from Satpur area on Tuesday had travelled with seven others for a funeral at Chinchangaon near Malegaon on April 7 and returned Nashik on April 28. After she was tested positive, these seven were isolated and their swabs were sent for testing. The NMC received the reports of all seven today and they all have been tested positive.

As many as 13 were tested positive in the city on Friday morning while five more were added to the list in the evening. Out of the 13, five were from Dhatrak Phata, Indira Nagar, Tarwala Nagar, Konark Nagar and another location that is yet to be confirmed. 

“We have also started tracing close contact with today’s all-new positive patients. We are also tracing out the travel history of these new five positive patients and they are in the process of sealing containment areas of these five patients” said NMC officials. 

The civic body is also planning to conduct a door-to-door survey in new containment zones to trace out high-risk contacts and suspects, said NMC officials. 

There were only 10 positive patients in the city by April 27, but the number of new positive cases increased to 44 in the city. 


