5,200 rail coaches ready as Covid care centres
2020-05-08
NEW DELHI: The Indian Railways has kept 5,231 coaches ready to be used as Covid care centres across the country to meet demand as cases of infection increased significantly in the past few days. These coaches can be deployed across 23 states in the country and in major cities, including Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Nagpur, Pune and Lucknow.

The national transporter will provide healthcare facilities in 85 stations. In another 130 stations, states can request Covid care coaches only if they agree to provide staff and essential medicines. The railways has deployed over 2,500 doctors and 35,000 paramedic staff to meet the Covid-19 challenge.

“The coaches can be used for very mild cases that can be clinically assigned to the Covid care centres as per guidelines issued by the health ministry. These coaches can be used in areas where state has exhausted the facilities and needs to augment capacities for isolation of both suspect and confirmed Covid cases,” a railway ministry spokesperson said.

The health ministry on Wednesday said that train coaches will be turned into Covid care centres and parked at 215 stations as part of the preparation for a sudden spurt in cases.

 

 
According to the ministry, 158 stations are ready with watering and charging facility and the remaining 57 stations are ready with watering facility for these centres. The 23 states where these coaches can be parked and used for Covid care include Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal.

While a maximum of 26 stations have been identified in UP where these coaches can be deployed, Maharashtra has 21 such stations followed by 19 in Rajasthan and 18 in West Bengal. Bihar has 16 such stations followed by 15 in MP and 14 in MP.

The ministry officials said as per health ministry guidelines state governments would send the requisition to railways.

“Railways will make allocation of these coaches to the state or UTs. After allocation by railways, the train shall be placed, at required station with necessary infrastructure, and will be handed over to district collector or magistrate or their authorised person,” the official said.

The railways will provide items in each coach, including oxygen cylinders, and take care of their maintenance. The catering arrangements will be done by IRCTC and the Railway Police Force (RPF) will take care of the security aspect.

