Uttar Pradesh: 54 officers off to 18 Covid-hit districts
2020-04-25
LUCKNOW: Intensifying the government’s intervention in coronavirus sensitive areas, chief minister Yogi Adityanath has deputed 54 senior officers to spend at least a week in 18 districts where there are 20 or more Covid-19 cases and assess how the lockdown is being implemented.

The three-member teams, each comprising a senior administrative officer, one health department official and a senior police officer, were dispatched to their respective areas on Friday. Additional chief secretary, home, Awanish Awasthi said that the team would review the lockdown situation, condition of quarantine shelters and community kitchens and arrangements in hospitals. “They will also check the sanitation condition, review cases related with the Tablighi Jamaat, distribution of foodgrains and emergency services in hospitals. The CM will review their work twice a day and the officers are required to send reports to him, the health department, home department and any other department which will be specified,” he said.

On Thursday, the government had identified 15 districts, but after a review on Friday the CM added three more sensitive areas, taking the tally to 18. The 18 districts are: Agra, Firozabad, Lucknow, Rae Bareli, Ghaziabad, Meerut, Gautam Budh Nagar, Bulandshahr, Basti, Auraiya, Sambhal, Sitapur, Shamli, Saharanpur, Kanpur, Moradabad, Bijnor and Amroha.

The CM has also stressed on maintaining a strict lockdown in hotspots where nobody other than medical personnel, sanitization staff and home delivery personnel are allowed.

Awasthi said that in each district, Covid and non-Covid hospitals are to be identified and new coronavirus patients should only go to designated Covid hospitals for treatment. “The CM has said that personal protective equipment should be made available in all hospitals. Emergency services should be started as soon as possible so that patients with other serious illnesses can get treatment. Pool testing should be increased and beds in Covid hospitals should also be increased,” he said.

The CM has laid stress on making telemedicine available at the earliest. For this, all district magistrates and chief medical officers should hold meetings with government and private doctors and request them to join this facility.

Awasthi added that labourers registered with the labour department have been given Rs 27.24 lakh as financial assistance.


