54, who came in contact with Malaysian woman, sent to Khelgaon quarantine
2020-04-02
Ranchi: A day after the 22-year-old Malaysian woman, who was staying in Hindpiri area, tested positive for Covid-19, the district administration on Wednesday started a door-to-door screening and sanitization process and 54 persons from the area who were suspected to have come in contact with the woman were shifted to the Khelgaon quarantine centre. Their blood samples were collected at the Covid-19 block of Rims.

Speaking to TOI, Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said, “We had deployed 10 contact-tracing teams along with health workers who identified 54 persons from five houses in Hindipiri area which were used by the woman and her group. All the 54 suspected patients have been transferred to the quarantine centre in Khelgaon after medical examinations were conducted and their blood samples were collected. Our teams are continuously working to trace more people who might have come in their contact.”

With these 54 people being tested for Covid-19, the total collection of blood samples across the state stands at 445, including 257 at Rims and 30 st MGM in Jamshedpur. 

Meanwhile, doctors at Rims’ trauma centre started medication on the state’s first Covid-19 patient and said she is stable, but continues to be asymptomatic.

 “The patient is being administered medication and she is stable and hasn’t shown any symptoms,” said Dr Devesh, professor at the PSM department of Rims.

Devesh added, “The woman is young and has better immunity and thus continues to be asymptomatic despite testing positive for Covid-19. We need to test all the people who came in her contact as they too might be asymptomatic, but could be infected.”

Earlier in the day, a team of health workers along with the district administration and police officials led by Town CO Prakash Kumar reached Hindpiri area and started evacuating the suspects. 

The district administration team had to face resistance from the locals as they weren’t ready to allow the women to be shifted to quarantine centres. The suspects were taken to Rims only after a few locals interfered and convinced the family members to undergo the tests.

Soon after the suspects were transferred to Rims, a cleanliness team of Ranchi Municipal Corporation sanitized all the five houses and conducted similar drives across the area amid a curfew which was imposed on Tuesday evening.

According to sources, the Tablighi Jamaat group, which was camping in Ranchi since March 17, has stayed at three different mosques in the area as a part of their religious outreach programme before they were detected and sent to quarantine centres. The group was also examined by a health department team from the Sadar Hospital on March 25 who declared them fit.

“The Jamaat was scheduled to stay at Masjid-e Ambia, their second stop, between March 21 and 24. However, after the ‘janata curfew’ was imposed on March 22, I wrote to Hindpiri police station on March 24 about their arrival and asked them do the needful, but the authorities turned up only on March 28 after which they were shifted to the quarantine centre on March 29,” said Sajjad Idrisi, sadar of Masjid-e Ambia mosque on Nala Road in Hindpiri.


