54 who took part in Delhi’s Tablighi Jamaat meet quarantined in Mathura, Agra
2020-04-01
Agra: The Mathura administration on Tuesday quarantined 51 persons, including 30 who took part in the Tablighi Jamaat congregation at Delhi’s Nizamuddin, where 24 participants tested positive for novel coronavirus. 

Health officials said that the 30 quarantined people hail from Shamli and Yamunanagar and were part of the same meet and had moved to the mosques in Mathura and Farah on March 19. They added that none of them has showed any symptoms so far.

Mathura district magistrate Sarvagya Ram Misra, said their samples have been taken and sent to Aligarh’s Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College for tests. All of them have been put up in quarantine centre for 14 days, he said. 

He told TOI that 21 others, including 14 from Agra and 7 from Shamli, were also home quarantined for 14 days. Though they had not attended Delhi’s congregation, they were in a ‘jamaat’ and hail from other states.

Meanwhile, the Agra administration also quarantined 89 people, including 24 who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin. Others were from outside the state and were staying in mosques. Similarly, in Aligarh, 18 persons who had come from Aligarh in February and were staying in a mosque were put in quarantine as a precaution. They were also booked under IPC’s section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) for staying in a mosque, which is a public place.

In Agra, all these people were shifted to an institutional quarantine facility developed at a resort in Sikandra by the evening. 

Agra chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Vats said, “On the orders of the district administration, the health department teams along with police has identified 89 people staying in different mosques of the city. These people had recently come from outside UP. Some of them attended the religious congregation in Delhi. All these people have been shifted to a quarantine facility. The number of such people can further increase. Doctors have started screening them. We will keep them in a 14-day quarantine. Samples of all those having symptoms of Covid-19 will be sent for tests.”


