Mumbai: 54-year-old businessman, denied a bed for not having Covid report, dies
2020-05-21
MUMBAI: It was yet another Catch-22 situation that ended in tragedy. A 54-year-old businessman suffering from a respiratory tract infection died within hours of queuing up at Nair Hospital for a Covid-19 test but being unable to get a bed as he was not a confirmed coronavirus patient. His grief-stricken family made several attempts to obtain his test report from the hospital even as they faced mounting social stigma from neighbours. After days of waiting the family was “shocked” to learn that the report could not be prepared as the hospital had discarded the samples.

 


Rajendra Pidugu lived with his wife and teenage son in Mumbai Central. He developed a fever on May 5 and visited a local physician. The antibiotics did not work. On the night of May 8, he developed breathlessness. The next morning he went to a diagnostic lab for a chest X-ray and blood tests.

Looking at his X-ray plates, a local doctor suggested he get hospitalized immediately.

Pidugu then went to Nair Hospital with his wife. “He waited for two hours to get his Covid test done as there was a long queue. All the while his condition kept deteriorating. When the test was finally done, the staff asked him to go home and return a few days later. My relatives argued he was in no condition to do that, but in vain,” Pidugu’s married daughter Priti told TOI. 

“The hospital said they could only admit Covid patients. My parents waited on the street outside the hospital for four hours. All this while, I dialled dozens of hospitals to ask if I could admit him. Some hospitals were shut, others demanded Covid test reports,” said Priti.

At 5pm, after Pidugu’s relatives kept pleading with hospital staff, he was finally taken to a ward on the fifth floor. But doctors said his chances of survival were low. Around 8.10pm, he was declared dead. On his hospital papers, doctors mentioned the cause of death as “cardiorespiratory arrest in a case of lower respiratory tract infection with acute febrile illness”. They also mentioned he was a Covid suspect and his reports were awaited. The body was not released immediately.

“My mother and brother faced much social stigma; neighbouring residents presumed my father had succumbed to Covid. Our relatives repeatedly visited the Nair Hospital for the test report but were sent away. A day after my father's death, BMC staff visited his residence and home quarantined my mother and brother, even though there was no Covid positive test report to show,” said Priti.

After checking with the lab where Nair Hospital was supposed to send samples for testing, the family found out that Pidugu's sample had never been sent. Staff at Nair Hospital eventually told them the sample had got damaged at their end and had to be discarded. When contacted, Nair Hospital dean Dr Mohan Joshi blamed the damaged samples on “human error” and did not comment further.

