Kolkata: 55 NRS junior doctors, nurses sent to quarantine
2020-04-06
KOLKATA: Around 55 healthcare workers that included 39 junior doctors attached with NRS Medical College and Hospital were sent on quarantine on Sunday after a patient who died in the hospital tested positive to Covid-19. The report arrived after his death. Some of those who have been sent to quarantine include junior doctors who had faced mob attack on the hospital premises last June. 

 

This perhaps is the first time healthcare workers from a state run hospital have been sent to quarantine after coming in contact with a Covid-19 patient.

The patient, a 35-year-old from Maheshtala, had died in the hospital on Saturday. The male patient suffering from haemophilia had come to the hospital’s emergency on March 30. The patient was initially admitted to the male general medicine ward.

“As his condition deteriorated, he was shifted to the CCU (critical care unit) the next day and put on ventilation,” said a source in the hospital.

During treatment, doctors noticed Covid-19 symptoms and his swab samples were sent. The patient died on Saturday morning and the test reports confirming the infection came only on Saturday night.

When reports reached the hospital authority late on Saturday night, hours after the patient’s death, officials frantically started searching for any healthcare worker who had come in contact with the patient — right at the emergency, the general medicine ward and the CCU unit.

By Sunday afternoon, the hospital had traced 39 junior doctors and 16 other staff that included nurses, paramedics and Group D staff who had come in close contact with the patient. All of them have been sent to the state’s quarantine centre at New Town.

“Another 16 persons are under home quarantine. They might also be brought to the New Town quarantine centre if required,” said a senior state health department official.

The list of doctors who have been sent to quarantine include 15 post-graduate trainees, six house staffers and 18 interns. 

The patient, according to hospital sources, did not have any flu symptoms, because of which he did not get any kind of screening at the fever clinic set up in the hospital. He was sent to the male general medicine ward straight from the emergency.

“This is the reason we have been asking for PPE. What happens if any of these doctors test positive? They must have come in contact with other patients too. The situation is quite grim. But we will continue to work despite all these conditions,” said a doctor at the hospital.

The hospital has disinfected the male general medicine ward. The CCU unit will be disinfected on Monday after shifting three admitted patients.

The patient reportedly had also gone to the emergency unit of two other government hospitals where he was denied treatment.


