Covid-19: 55 undertrials released from Mysuru prison to decongest facility
2020-04-04
MYSURU: At a time when ‘social distancing’ has become an essential catchphrase, the spotlight has turned on the overly congested prisons across India, which healthcare experts fear can turn into hotbeds for the spread of the Covid-19 infection. However, officials guarding prisons are working tirelessly to decongest Indian jails, and to this end, authorities at the Mysuru Central Prison released 55 undertrial inmates on bail.


The release of the undertrials from the Mysuru prison has been carried out within the framework of rules set down by the high court, and after a scrupulous scrutiny conducted by the district court. Furthermore, the ‘cluster case’ at Nanjangud has resulted in the prison authorities stepping up screening measures. Right from the chief superintendent down, all the personnel have to subject themselves to thermal screening before they can enter the prison. The authorities have also appealed to visitors against coming to the prison for the reminder of the duration of the lockdown. However, inmates are being permitted four telephone calls a week against the regulation two. 

The authorities have also barred entry of advocates, journalists seeking to interview inmates and NGO personnel to the prison. 

Chief superintendent of Mysuru Central Prison KC Divyashree told TOI that they were leaving nothing to chance as far as adopting precautionary measures against Covid-19 was concerned. “All the inmates and staff have been directed to wear masks and use hand sanitisers frequently,” said Divyashree, confirming the release of 55 undertrials from the jail. “They were released on Tuesday and Wednesday,” she said. 

Divyashree said that the condition of all inmates was being closely monitored, and those displaying any symptoms of the infection were being segregated and placed in isolation. “We have set aside one cell for use as an isolation ward. Directions have been issued to all those working here not to leave the place unnecessarily,” she added. 

