55 who visited China are coronavirus-free, says Himanta Biswa Sarma
2020-03-05
GUWAHATI: Assam health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma told the legislative assembly on Wednesday that all 55 persons who returned to the state from China were quarantined for observation and none of them tested positive for the Covid-19 virus. "There is no case of coronavirus in Assam. We have screened everyone but none has tested positive so far," Sarma said 

In a written reply to a question, Sarma said, "A total of 55 suspected persons who came from China were observed from January 15 last. Out of the 55 persons, 46 have completed their observation period. The remaining are under observation in home quarantine for the incubation period. Till now, two persons have been admitted at an isolation ward of Guwahati Medical College and Hospital with mild symptoms. The samples have been collected and tested and the result is negative."

He added, "The Assam government is undertaking all necessary precautions and preparations to prevent the outbreak of COVID-19 in Assam and to restrict the epidemic in case of positive cases in line with advisories issued by the government of India and in consultation with the local offices of World Health organisation, UNICEF and other international organisations."

The minister said deputy commissioners of all districts, principals of all government medical colleges and the joint director of health services of all the districts are being sensitised on actions they must take in case there is an outbreak. "Panchayat and rural development department and the education department have been advised to undertake information, education and communication activities for which 73 gram sabha meetings have been held in the bordering districts so far," Himanta added. 

He informed the legislators that medical team have been deployed at all airports in Assam and ambulances are kept on stand by. "The health department has also completed assessment of triple layer masks, personal protection equipment and N95 masks. Awareness announcements are being made at the airport at regular intervals and regular screening is being carried out at the Lokapriya Gopinath Bordoloi International (LGBI) airport here," he added. 

Airport officials said that special focus is on passengers coming from Singapore.

