Coronavirus outbreak: 56 engineers from Andhra Pradesh in quarantine at Manesar
2020-02-03
HYDERABAD: Though 56 engineers from Andhra Pradesh, employed and trained by a Chinese company at a facility in the coronavirus-hit Wuhan in China, heaved a sigh of relief on touching down at the Delhi airport, some of them complained that they were subjected to a series of medical checkup, more than the usual while returning from China. 

Female students and employees were quarantined at a navy camp in Manesar in Haryana, while males were housed at an army camp. They might be kept under observation for a couple of weeks there.

"While an employee (Jyothi) released a video claiming that she along with another colleague were not affected by the coronavirus, they were not allowed to take a flight to India as their body temperatures were found to be slightly above normal. Authorities were checking if anyone's temperature is even slightly higher than the normal. Those two did not have fever, but they were strained and tensed because of the many checks and atmosphere at the immigration desk in particular and the airport in general," an engineer, who is in quarantine at the army camp told TOI over the phone. 

The Chinese company representatives requested the Indian embassy officials to allow the two to fly to India, but they rejected their plea. 

Indians returning from China were being quarantined at army and navy facilities at Manesar. About 20 people were being accommodated in each tent with doctors checking their temperatures twice a day. Though the quarantined have been provided food, they were not allowed to meet anyone, including relatives. 

"On Saturday, we could not even talk to parents over the phone, now we are able to communicate with them," another engineer said. 

The Chinese company did not inform the engineers, who completed their training, when to begin work at its facility in Tirupati. They were supposed to resume work after a 10-day holiday, but as they were in quarantine, there was no clarity on their work schedule.


