Pune: 57% of Covid deaths in PMR occurred within seven days of symptom onset
2020-05-10
PUNE: Many Covid-19 patients in the Pune Metropolitan Region died within a week of onset of illness, an analysis of the toll so far has revealed. 





A study of 134 deaths in the region, recorded until May 7, shows 77 of the 134 patients — or 57% — died within seven days of showing serious symptoms. The rest succumbed to infection after little more than a week. 

Among the 77 patients, 12 died within 24 hours of being admitted to a hospital — showing how the disease has had a severe progression in some. 

The problem of rapidly worsening conditions that eventually led to death can be attributed to pre-existing illnesses. The study — by the district administration — said 90% of the 134 individuals who died had comorbidities in their system. About 10% of the 134 were healthy individuals who had no history of serious illness other than Covid-19 infection. 

“Advanced age, signs of respiratory distress during admission, underlying conditions such as high blood pressure, diabetes and self-delay in seeking medical care, despite having other illnesses, were important factors in the deaths of these patients,” a senior health official said.

The study also tracked how urban living conditions and awareness have influenced the spread of Covid-19 in the PMR. 

Most who died were residents of densely populated pockets of the Peth areas. Disease investigators said the crowded living conditions in these zones and lack of awareness combined to create a worrisome situation. Officials also said many people from these areas delayed seeking care.

“Quite a few who died turned up at hospitals in a critical condition. They had the symptoms for more than five or six days. They procrastinated, despite having pre-existing conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease,” said dean of Sassooon hospital, Muralidhar Tambe.

The most common pre-existing conditions in the 134 patients were hypertension and diabetes, followed by coronary heart disease.

“In the first five to six days, Covid-19 is limited to the upper respiratory tract,” said senior physician Dilip Kadam. "If the infection is not treated at that stage, it reaches down to impact the lower respiratory tract, which involves the lungs. In people with co-morbidities, this progression can be sudden and fulminant,” Kadam said. 

Critical care expert Kapil Borawake added, "Non-survivors had higher instances of respiratory sepsis and secondary infections."


