58 cases in G-South as Prabhadevi, Worli keep ward under Covid-19 glare
2020-04-06
MUMBAI: Worli Koliwada, its adjacent areas and Prabhadevi continued to keep G-South ward on the coronavirus highlight map. In the turn of a day on the weekend, the number of positive cases in the ward increased from 44 to 58.


The ward includes Worli Koliwada, Janata Colony and Adarsh Nagar, all closely located Covid-19 hot spots and of which the last one alone reported 15 positive cases and a death over the last week. Prabhadevi, too, reported 15 positive cases and a death.



As of Saturday, the number of Covid-19 cases in G-south stood at 58, 14 more than the previous days, showed data made available on Sunday.

The other wards with a high number of Covid-19 cases were D Ward with 31, KWest with 25, K-East with 24, and E Ward with 19 cases.

In Jijamata Nagar in Worli, a 52-year-old municipal sweeper whose duty took him to the Dharavi area tested positive and several from his family were suspected to have contracted the virus. The BMC started the process of quarantining them in places other than their homes as most of them lived in tiny units that offered little possibility of separation.

Mayor Kishori Pednekar, who is a corporator from G South, said if the figures keep rising at the same rate the lockdown would not be lifted and quarantining of suspected cases would have to be increased. “If people stay at home, the figures will decrease and we will be able to win this fight,” Pednekar said.

Municipal sources said they were yet to trace the index case, or the person who first came with the virus to the area and from whom the spread started. Officials from the ward were reluctant to share any more information.

It is learned that a doctor from the locality whom many patients from Worli would visit had himself tested and turned out to be positive for the virus. Staff from the doctor’s hospital, which include nurses living in Worli, were also found positive for the coronavirus.

Some locals in Worli Koliwada said that after much hue and cry from their end on social media, they had finally managed to procure some groceries.

One of the residents, who did not wish to be named, said: “On Sunday we received a packet of groceries, which included some rice, onions, dal and potatoes. Vegetables had become unavailable for over a week with shops shut completely. Even if they opened, there would be a long queue. No proper information is given out on the number of positive cases by the authorities so that one can know where precautions need to be taken.”

Nitesh Patil of the Worli Koliwada Nakhwa Matsya Vyavsay Sahakari Society said groceries that they were promised would be home-delivered were yet to reach their end of the locality.

“While we heard distribution of groceries has began we have not received anything,” Patil said.

