58 released from 2 quarantine centres in Munger for creating ruckus
2020-04-06
PATNA: The Munger administration released 58 persons quarantined at two centres on Saturday night after they allegedly created ruckus and broke furniture in two separate incidents since Friday.

A video shows women and men quarantined at Goenka dharmashala breaking plastic furniture, alleging poor and untimely food facilities for them. All of them were marked under low-risk category and suspected of coming in contact with Covid-19 patients. GNM College is the other quarantine centre from where ruckus was reported on Thursday.

Altogether seven persons from Munger have been tested positive for Covid-19 so far, including the one who died at AIIMS-Patna on March 21.

When asked, Munger civil surgeon Kumar Purushottam said 39 persons were released from GNM College quarantine centre and 19 from the dharmashala. “More than 20 are to be released from both centres on Sunday too,” he said.

Kumar, however, said he had visited the two centres on Saturday evening but everything was peaceful that time. “I had not come to know about any ruckus. I have also not seen the video showing people creating ruckus. So I can’t comment on it,” he said.

Purushottam said 18 persons, including the family members of the Munger man, 15 from the contact list of the ambulance driver who had taken the Covid-19 positive patient from a Munger hospital to Patna, staff of that hospital, 27 from contact list of those who had reached or attended the funeral of that person were among those who had been quarantined at the college.

“Those released had completed their quarantined period. All of them had tested negative,” he said.

The civil surgeon said the family members of a deceased minor girl, who was the neighbour of ambulance driver at Hasratganj, and other suspected from the area, were quarantined at dharmashala centre.

Incidentally, a team of doctors had come under attack alleging poor facilities at quarantine centres when they had gone to Hasratganj to quarantine six family members of the minor girl on April 1.


