59 new Covid-19 positive cases in south TN, three in central districts
2020-05-26
MADURAI/TRICHY: With 44 influx cases from other states and 15 local cases in the southern districts on Monday, the total number of Covid-19 cases in the region has now gone up to 1,289. The central districts recorded three more cases, including a pregnant woman in Trichy, taking the total in the region to 844. 

Tirunelveli and Tuticorin districts continued to see a spike in influx cases with more migrants coming in by road or by train. The two districts together accounted for 30 influx cases from Maharashtra. The remaining two cases were from Gujarat. Further, 15 people under railway quarantine who had travelled in the special train from Ahmedabad to Tirunelveli tested positive. 

Virudhunagar district also saw as many as 13 influx cases on Monday, with 12 from Maharashtra and a lone case from Kerala. The district also had four local cases.

A 27-year-old eight months’ pregnant woman from Somarasampettai area in Trichy rural tested positive As she had fever, the woman got admitted to the Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital a few days back. 

Since pregnant women came under the high-risk category, doctors tested her for Covid-19. Results confirmed that she was positive. Doctors at the MGMGH said the woman had fever but was stable and her health condition is being closely monitored. 

Public health department officials said they had no concrete clue about the source of infection but they could not rule out the possibility of her getting infected from positive patients in Somarasampettai area. 

Till Monday, MGMGH had 10 patients from Trichy, three from Perambalur, one from railway quarantine and one from Theni under treatment. 

A 30-year old tanker truck driver from Chennai tested positive in Chennai. He returned to his native Vilangudi village near Thiruvaiyaru a few days ago. He has been put under quarantine at the Government Medical College Hospital in Thanjavur. With that, the total number of positive cases has risen to 84.

A 51-year-old man tested positive in Tiruvarur and was sent to the Government Medical College Hospital in Tiruvarur for treatment. 

Ramanathapuram recorded five cases, including a 11-year-old boy, all with contact history. 

In Theni, two cases were recorded of which one was that of a contact of Covid-19 patient. The other case was a person from Seelayampatti in Theni who had returned from Koyambedu in Chennai and is currently undergoing treatment at the Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) in Madurai. 

Kanyakumari district, meanwhile, reported two local cases with contact history and one influx case. 

No fresh cases were reported in Sivagangai, Madurai, Dindigul, Tenkasi and Nagapattinam districts.


