59-year-old dies in Amravati Covid-19 hospital, report awaited
2020-04-08
Amravati: A 59-year-old man’s death at the district general hospital’s special Covid-19 unit has sparked fears of the novel coronavirus outbreak in the city though swab test report is yet to confirm whether the deceased had contracted the coronavirus or not.

The patient, a mechanic and resident of Sufiya Nagar locality here, was rushed to district general hospital from Medlife Hospital on Walgaon Road on Monday midnight with respiratory disturbances. He was admitted to non-Covid ward of the Covid-19 Hospital, opened last Saturday on the premises of Super Speciality Hospital. However, the patient died around 1am of Tuesday during treatment.

The deceased had no travel history for the last two years.

Civil surgeon Dr Shyamsunder Nikam told TOI that the patient was suffering from heart disease and had undergone bypass surgery in 2014. “When the patient was admitted to the hospital, his throat swab sample was taken and sent to Nagpur for Covid-19 test. The report is awaited,” he added.

The man is survived by wife, two daughters and a son. The administration has quarantined members in his family and put them in the isolation ward of the district general hospital. Roads to Sufiya Nagar have also been sealed as precautionary measure.

The private hospital where the patient was taken first has been sanitized and sealed. The doctor and nurses there have been quarantined.

“Body of the deceased was buried at Lalkhadi Road kabrastan on Tuesday afternoon as per protocol,” said collector Shailesh Naval. He told TOI that whether the deceased was corona positive or not could be established only after his swab test report is out.

The district as well as health administration is worried over the delay in receiving swab test reports from Nagpur lab. Even after opening a separate lab for western Vidarbha districts at AIIMS Nagpur, things do not seem to have fallen in place. The administration here is yet to receive 126 swab test reports even as nine more samples have been sent for testing on Tuesday. “We have received only six reports on Tuesday and all of them are negative,” said Naval.


