6 Covid-19 deaths in a week in south TN not officially recorded
2020-06-14
Madurai: As many as six Covid-19 deaths were reported in the southern districts in the past week, including five at Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) in Madurai, but none of them have so far been officially declared in the daily state medical bulletin. This despite local health officials maintaining that all necessary reports have been duly sent to the state authorities. According to Saturday’s medical bulletin, the southern region has recorded only 12 deaths. However, local authorities have reported at least six more deaths within the last week. Five of these deaths were at GRH, one of the state’s largest tertiary care centres. They include three from Madurai and one case each from Sivaganga and Dindigul districts. The three cases from Madurai were a 72-year-old woman from Mela Anuppanadi who died on June 6, a 73-year-old man from Sellur who died on June 11 and a 53-year-old woman from T Vadipatti who died on June 12. All three patients had co-morbid conditions.“Reports of all deaths at Madurai GRH are being regularly sent to state authorities. We send almost all reports within three hours. If cases are from other districts, we notify the respective officials as well. We have no reason to hide any deaths because it is a pandemic situation,” said GRH dean Dr J Sangumani.Senior health officials from Sivaganga and Dindgul districts confirmed two deaths at GRH from their respective districts. A 51-year-old cancer patient from Chennai admitted to a private hospital at Karaikudi had developed complications and was referred to GRH where he tested positive and later died on June 10. Though district health officials said the case may be cross-notified to Chennai, they maintained that state authorities were given all required reports so far.According to Dindigul health officials, an elderly man admitted to Kodaikanal government hospital was referred to GRH after suffering weakness in his heart, lungs and kidney. The 70-year-old man tested Covid-19 positive and died shortly after on the same day, June 10, as the Sivaganga man. “We have to periodically update state authorities via an app all information about samples taken from Covid-19 patients. There cannot be delays of more than a few hours,” said a senior health official from Dindigul. In Tuticorin too, Thoothukudi medical college hospital authorities said a 34-year-old man had died of Covid-19 on Saturday. However, the death was yet to be recorded in Saturday’s bulletin.