6 from Agra shoe exporter’s family show Covid-19 symptoms, shifted to Delhi
2020-03-04
Agra: Two local shoe exporters, who had visited Italy last month, were shifted to Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital on Tuesday along with their four family members on suspicion of having contacted the deadly coronavirus.

According to health officials, the two exporters, who are brothers, had been kept in the isolation ward in district hospital since Monday after they had developed symptoms of the disease, including high fever and respiratory problems. Their other family members had been advised to “quarantine” themselves at their home and their throat swabs were taken for testing.

They along with a host of other local leather exporters had participated in Lineapelle, an international exhibition of leather products, held in February in Milan, Italy. 

The decision to shift them to Delhi was taken after the close relative of the exporters, who, too, had visited Italy with them, had tested positive for Covid-19 in Delhi. 

Agra district magistrate Prabhu N Singh told TOI that the health department on Tuesday collected samples of 26 people, including the doctors who had directly or indirectly came in contact with the suspected coronavirus patients. He said this was done as a precautionary measure. All samples will be sent to Pune for testing, the DM said.

Following the detection of these suspected cases, Rapid Response Teams of the state and central governments reached Agra on Tuesday morning and conducted a series of meetings with the district authorities and health officials for taking appropriate steps. The UP government has also called an emergency meeting of the technical committee and directed the officials to prepare and implement a containment plan for patients suspected to be suffering from the symptoms of Covid-19. 

According to the DM, the two exporters had gone to Europe on February 18 and had travelled to Italy and Germany. One of them had returned on February 28 and the other had come back on March 1. Their throat swab samples have been sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, for confirmation.

Puran Davar, president of Agra Footwear Manufacturers and Exporters Chamber (AFMEC), told TOI that many shoe manufacturers from the city had visited Italy recently to participate in the global leather fair. He said that he has advised all of them to get themselves tested at the district hospital. The samples of all the suspected Covid-19 patients are being sent to either NIV, Pune, or King George Medical University, Lucknow. 

On Monday evening, Agra tourism department officials had issued an alert to the travel and hospital industry operators, Archeological Survey of India (ASI), Agra circle, and Agra Development Authority (ADA) informing about a group of 19 Italians, whose one member had tested positive in Jaipur, had travelled to Agra. The CMO told TOI that another group of 19 Italians had arrived Agra on Monday evening. They were screened and showed no symptoms of coronavirus.


