Bihar: 6 kin of Gaya coronavirus case among 22 quarantined
2020-04-02
GAYA: Promptly reacting to a positive case of Covid-19 virus in Gaya detected on Wednesday, the district administration has identified 22 people, who came into direct contact with the youth, including six of his immediate family members.


The family members have been put in the isolation ward of the Anugrah Narayan Magadh Medical College and Hospital (ANMMCH), while the other 16 are under home quarantine with notices pasted on their doors. Domestic waste of these houses will be separately collected and disposed of, the district administration said.

Gaya DM Abhishek Singh said, “A 3 km circumference area of the Covid-19 patient’s home was being thoroughly sanitised and all shops have been closed. Movement of people in the locality has been completely banned with very few emergency exceptions.”

Asked whether all residents of the sealed area will be tested, the DM responded that those who came into contact with the Covid-19 positive man, would be tested. “Several groups of para- medics have been formed to visit each and every household in the area to monitor the health condition of the people. Anyone showing symptoms of Covid-19 would be immediately segregated and put to test. There is no cause of panic,” Singh added.

As the area where the Covid-19 positive case has been detected was in proximity to the Officers Training Academy (OTA), several people have expressed concern over the matter. “There is no cause for concern on the issue as the entire OTA area is fully sanitised. Entry to the OTA, in any case was very restricted,” the DM said.

Asked about hiccups in home delivery of essential items, Singh admitted that there were teething troubles and the issues would be resolved within a couple of days. Earlier, several retail outlets and other business establishments volunteered home delivery of essential items.

“The sale outlets volunteering home delivery were facing manpower shortage. Passes will be issued in sufficient numbers to the delivery personnel,” the DM said.

