6 linked to Tablighi Jamaat test positive in U’khand
2020-04-04
Dehradun: Six person tested positive for novel coronavirus in Uttarakhand on Friday taking the hill state’s tally to 16. While all the new cases are people associated with Tablighi Jamaat, the health department has sought early reports of people associated with the Islamic organization after nine of its members were found Covid-19-positive in the past 48 hours.

Director general (health) Dr Amita Upreti said that among the six new cases, five are from Dehradun district while one is from Baajpur area of Udham Singh Nagar.

“We are continuing the screening of members of Tablighi Jamaat. As many as 144 new samples were sent for tests at AIIMS-Rishikesh and Susheela Tiwari Medical College on April 3. We have tested a total of 835 people till now. Of whom, 671 tested negative while 16 cases were found to be positive. We are awaiting results of around 138 samples,” she added.

According to the health department officials, the cases of those having attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi’s Nizamuddin are being considered on priority and every person, who is showing even mild symptoms related to novel coronavirus, is being tested.

“The state had barely five active cases till March 13 and our tally reached three-fold of that in the past two days – after all the new cases were found to be associated with Tablighi Jamaat. We have asked the labs to take samples of people associated with the Jamaat on priority and hasten tests, so that immediate treatment can be started,” they said. 

Meanwhile, the three Covid-19 patients reported in Kashipur on Thursday were moved to Haldwani’s Susheela Tiwari Medical College on Friday. The state has put 296 people from Jamaat in institutional quarantine while 152 people are placed under hospital isolation till Friday.

Also, to strengthen their hands in fight against Covid-19, the Uttarakhand health department has issued orders stating that all medical students, who have passed final-year exam in March 2020, will commence their internship immediately. 


