Six more die of Covid-19 in Telangana, 107 fresh positive cases in state
2020-05-28
HYDERABAD: Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao asked people not to get scared of the surge in novel coronavirus cases in recent days and follow lockdown rules, even as Telangana reported six deaths and 107 new positive cases on Wednesday, the largest single-day jump so far.


“There is a need to take extra care of patients who are critical. They should be kept in hospitals and provided treatment. People who have tested positive, but have no symptoms should also be monitored,” the chief minister said at a review meeting on Covid-19 spread with officials.

While the death toll rose to 63 with the six deaths, 37 patients also recovered on Wednesday, taking the total number of discharged patients to 1,321.

Authorities said among the new cases, 39 are local residents, including 14 policemen. The rest comprise 68 migrants and deportees from Saudi Arabia.

As the novel coronavirus caseload in the state shot up to 2,098, KCR said the spread was not yet on an alarming scale despite the relaxations given in the lockdown guidelines.

“People should not get scared but simply follow Covid-19 guidelines and lockdown restrictions. They should take adequate precautions personally,” the CM said.

Authorities said a new cause for concern was the count of non-local Covid-19 positive patients going up to 297 in the state.

“These non-locals, including 173 migrant workers, 94 deportees from Saudi Arabia, and 30 foreign evacuees. They will be treated and then sent back to their respective states,” a health department official said.

While acknowledging the rapid increase in numbers, the CM said that the health department was ready to handle any number of cases and instructed officials to provide emergency services to patients experiencing deterioration in condition.

“People started travelling from one place to another. But the virus did not spread rapidly,” said an official, saying the death rate in Telangana was 2.82% as against 2.86% in the country.


