6 more positive cases in Haryana, including 5 Tablighis
2020-04-06
KARNAL/CHANDIGARH: Two days after testing positive for coronavirus, a 58-year-old man from a village in Karnal, who was undergoing treatment at the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGI) in Chandigarh, died on Sunday evening.

Confirming the death, Karnal deputy commissioner Nishant Kumar Yadav said the deceased, Gyan Singh, a resident of Rasin village under Gharaunda block in the district, was admitted to Kalpana Chawla Medical College and Hospital on March 25 with severe respiratory illness. On April 1, he was referred to the PGI. His sample was taken on Thursday, and on Friday, he was declared a confirmed case.

“On Sunday evening, we received the information from PGI that Gyan Singh had died due to coronavirus. The patient had no foreign travel history. The source of infection is yet to be traced,” said the officer.

Meanwhile, with six new cases being tested positive, who included Sri Lanka Nationals Tablighis and their driver from Nuh, the total number of Covid-19 cases in Haryana has gone up to 76.

The lone non-Tablighi Jamaat related case is from Gurugram. 

The Tablighis and their driver has been admitted into the dedicated hospital in Nalhar Medical College of Nuh. While Gurugram patient has been admitted in local hospital there. 

Meanwhile, in what appears to be a major respite for the state health authorities, no fresh cases have been reported from Panipat, Sonipat, Fatehabad and Hisar. Even the due samples of Tablighis Jamaatis have tested negative. 

Meanwhile, the Haryana health department in its bulletin released on Sunday evening said of the total Tablighis who have been tested positive in the state, five are foreign nationals and rest 20 are from other states. 

Till date, 17,010 persons, including those with travel history to foreign countries and those who were in touch with Covid-19 positive cases are under hospital quarantine or self quarantine in the state.

Meanwhile, Haryana Police have managed to track 98 more people, who had attended Jamaat’s Nizamuddin sessions in Delhi

Sources said majority of Jamaatis were found on the basis of inputs given by locals and panchayat representatives. Some of them approached the police or health authorities of the area on their own.

At present, there are nearly 1,400 Tablighis in Haryana. “All of them have been put under medical surveillance and have been quarantined at hospitals or other places. Their samples will be drawn and sent for testing. The teams concerned are investigating their movements as well,’‘ said sources.

Additional director general of police (ADGP), law and order, Navdeep Singh Virk confirmed that mote Talbighis were tracked.


2,104 arrested under Epidemic Act 
In a related development, till Sunday evening, the police have so far arrested 2,104 persons and registered 1,413 FIRS for violation of the Epidemic Act. The police also claimed to have recovered Rs 7.86 crore and impounded 6,100 vehicles from across the state.


Current status

The health authorities said of the 1,530 samples sent so far, 972 samples have been tested negative. Result of 482 samples is awaited. In total, 492 persons, including the Covid-19 active cases, have been hospitalised so far.

Till Sunday, 15 patients have been discharged after treatment, while 61 persons are undergoing treatment,


