Trichy: 6 more Tablighi Jamaat delegates turn positive
2020-04-09
TRICHY: Six more Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) attendees of the Delhi conference tested Covid -19 positive on Wednesday taking their count to 36 in the district and 97 overall in the central region.

A health and family welfare department bulletin said six patients under treatment at Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) tested positive while four others were negative. The hospital which already has 30 positive cases of TJ delegates for the past five days, now has no more samples from the TJ cluster to test.

Meanwhile, samples of six new patients belonging to various places in Trichy have also been lifted from MGMGH. A senior official said the patients had no contacts with the infected patients. Since they had symptoms of cough and fever, they have been admitted and put through testing.

Overall, MGMGH has 41 Covid-19 cases including 36 TJ delegates and five cases from Erode, Karur, Ariyalur and Perambalur districts. “The health condition of all the positive patients is stable,” said Trichy collector S Sivarasu in a statement.

As of Wednesday, 69 TJ delegates who tested negative were being kept in institutional quarantine at Jamal Mohammed College (JMC) in Trichy after they were shifted from MGMGH on their demand for a better environment. Trichy district administration said they will be discharged after 28 days of institutional quarantine on testing negative.

The collector also said that a total of 20 areas including nine places in corporation limits, one area in municipality, three areas in town panchayat and seven places in rural areas have been fully cut off as a preventive measure. Hhealth department teams have been making door-to-door visits to the houses to check symptomatic patients.

Except Trichy, none of the districts – Ariyalur, Perambalur, Karur, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and Nagappattinam in the central region -- had new cases on Wednesday. However, the region had 97 cases in total including the six new cases in Trichy. Pudukottai district has no positive case so far.


