6 newborns with Covid-19 exposure discharged from LLRM, docs relieved
2020-05-21
MEERUT: Facing toughest challenge of their careers thrown by pandemic, paediatricians in Meerut’s LLRM Medical College have successfully taken care of seven new-borns who were either Covid-19 positive or their mothers were infected with the highly-contagious disease. Six of them have been discharged while the remaining one will be relieved soon.

Of them, three infants were tested positive for novel coronavirus after birth, while four were born to Covid-19 positive mothers but tested negative. Six infants have been handed over to the families, who are now dropping in thank you notes for the staff.

One of the attendants, whose sister-in-law had tested positive, said in a series of tweets to UP CM Yogi Adityanath, “I would like to inform you that my sister-in-law was Covid-19 positive and she was admitted to LLRM medical college, Meerut on May 4 as she was pregnant. On May 12, she delivered a baby girl. The baby was immediately handed over to the paediatric department under Dr Vijay Jaiswal (HOD) and Dr Navrtan Gupta supervision.

“The way they took care of our baby is highly appreciable. Special thanks to Dr Shashank who monitored the infant with all possible care and performed timely Covid-19 testing and immunization. Heartily appreciate and big thanks to the whole paediatric staff for taking care of our baby in this pandemic situation. Our baby is tested negative and she is at home now. Thank you.”

This comes as a relief for the doctors who say their efforts are not being recognised. Several deaths were attributed to negligence of doctors at LLRM hospital, a charge denied be the administration.

A resident of Rajban, whose Covid-19 positive sister-in-law gave birth to a baby in April end, said, “The baby had tested negative and he was handed over to the family members. The hospital staffers were in contact with us and called at least twice every day to tell us about the baby’s health.”

Dr Vijay Jaiswal, head of the paediatrics department at LLRM, said, “Currently, one infant is under our care, whose parents tested negative but he is positive. The family has a travel history to Maharashtra and the mother is staying inside the Covid-19 ward along with the child. We are providing all the necessary care to the kids.”


