6 games to play with friends during lockdown on WhatsApp
2020-04-06
If you wish to do more than just chat over texts and video calls with your friends, then gaming may be a good way to stay in touch with them during the lockdown. However, not everyone is into playing games like PUBG Mobile or Call of Duty Mobile. Games can be simple, fun and can be played together on WhatsApp groups too. 

These games on WhatsApp and Facebook groups will help you engage everyone and may offer a break from the tense conversations around coronavirus. This will also help you keep in touch with friends and family and all of them can have fun together playing these games. Here are 6 games to play on WhatsApp or Facebook groups...


Kiss, Marry, Kill

This is a very interesting game to play with friends. In this game, players can ask other players who’d they Kiss, Marry and Kill from the three given options. These options can be anything such as cricket players, celebrities or even the members of the group. 


Text Antakshari
Antakshari is already a popular game played among friends and family. However, Antakshari over WhatsApp is slightly different. Here you will need to write the lyrics instead of singing it. Well, there’s an option to record and send voice notes, but that might not be as interesting as texts.


Once upon a time… or Storyline

One person from the group writes Once upon a time in the group and other players or members are supposed to add more lines after it to make it into an interesting story in 15 seconds. The game can be more fun if it is being played between college or school friends who know all your secrets. 


What's the first thing that came to your mind

The game is simple, but it is more suitable when played on a personal chat. All you need to do is write a word on chat and the other player needs to reply to the first thing that came to his/her mind. 


Guess the word

The game takes its cue from the popular game we used to play as kids. All you need to do is scramble a word and send it on the group with a hint. Other members are supposed to guess the correct word. 


20 Questions

If you are a 90s kid, then you must have heard about this game. If not, the rule is very simple. It is a turn-based game and players need to think or choose an object e.g. Cup. Now, other members of the group have to guess the object by asking questions in Yes/No format. For example: Are you a game? Then the player will answer as ‘No’ because Cup is not a game. Then they will move to another question, Is it cutlery? Then you’ll say ‘Yes’. This will continue with 20 questions limit or until other players figure out the name of the object.



