6-yr-old boy dies, family alleges hosp refused treatment since it was turned into Covid-19 facility
2020-04-07
Naintial: A Haldwani-based family has alleged that their six-year-old son died due to lack of proper medical assistance by both private and government hospitals in the ongoing lockdown.

The family alleged that they were turned down by at least half a dozen hospitals including the government-run Dr Susheela Tiwari Hospital in Haldwani, also known as STH, which refused to admit the boy since it had turned into a facility for Covid-19 patients exclusively.

Speaking to TOI, the family said that the boy, identified by his first name, Vivek, was complaining about shortness of breath since March 31 and on recommendation of a local doctor, they had conducted his blood test. The results showed that he had pneumonia. After his condition deteriorated on April 2, the family took him to a private hospital. “The next day, the private hospital officials said they cannot treat Vivek anymore and that we should get him admitted at some other hospital. We carried him to at least half a dozen hospitals but none of them agreed to treat him. Finally, we reached STH where they informed that the hospital was treating only Covid-19 patients and therefore he cannot be admitted,” said Raju Paasi, the boy’s paternal uncle.

The family then pleaded with a private hospital which agreed to admit him. However, as per the family, after some time, the hospital officials asked him to be taken to STH or any other hospital. “We asked them for an ambulance but the hospital didn’t even arrange that. We had already been turned away by STH so we took Vivek home but he died early morning on April 4,” Paasi said. 

The boy’s death came just 36 hours after his elder sister, Nidhi, 13, passed away in the ICU of STH on April 2 (when the hospital had not turned into an exclusive Covid-19 facility). “We had taken her to the hospital which, after conducting some tests, informed us that she was suffering from Tuberculosis (TB). She was admitted in the ICU and she she died the same day. But the death is a mystery to us since she had just complained of headache that morning and died the same day,” Passi told TOI.

When contacted about the matter, the STH administration said that since the hospital had been turned into a facility for treatment of Covid-19 patients only, therefore, they were not taking any other cases except giving neo-natal care and chemotherapy. The officials confirmed that they had treated Nidhi for TB and that she died of the disease, but added that they had no knowledge about her brother Vivek. “The girl was treated at the hospital and she succumbed to TB despite being admitted in ICU. However, we have no knowledge of the boy. The hospital did not treat him and we have no knowledge of even him being turned away by our staff,” said Dr CP Bhairola, principal, Government Medical College, Haldwani, which is an associate institution of STH.


