6 zoo staff in quarantine after indirect contact
2020-04-10
Ranchi: The authorities of Ranchi’s Birsa Biological Park have asked six of its casual workers to remain in home quarantine for a fortnight. The directive was issued on Wednesday after it surfaced that one of them was the husband of the ANM who handled Ranchi’s second positive Covid-19 patient recently.

D Venkateswarlu, director of the park, said, “One of our workers came to us on Wednesday and revealed that his wife, an ANM, was asked by Ranchi district administration to be on home quarantine with her family because she had handled the Ranchi woman (who tested positive) at a private health facility. He was then asked to be on self quarantine.”

The park authorities asked five more men, who came in contact with the man, to be on home quarantine. One of the five is also a relative of the ANM.

Venkateswarlu said all contractual and permanent staff of the park are being monitored. “They have been asked to report any health complications immediately,” he said. 

The ANM hails from Chakla village in Ormamjhi block in Ranchi district, some 20 kilometres from the state capital. The ANM, park authorities said, assisted doctors in the dialysis of the 54 year old Ranchi woman from Hindpiri at a private health facility in Bariatu before her test reports came in. In addition to this, another man from Chakla village, who had ties with Tablighi Jamaat, was recently asked to be in quarantine. 

The ANM’s husband was deployed at the boating section of the park. “Since the park closed on March 17 for the visitors, he was engaged in other tasks such as cleaning of enclosures and preparing fodder for herbivores,” a source in the park said. 

With a tiger testing positive for Covid-19 at a US zoo recently, the Ranchi zoo has been put on high alert by the Central Zoo Authority. The park’s vet, Dr Ajay Kumar, said, “Sanitisation is being done every day by spraying chemical solutions. We are also keeping an eye on the zoo inmates. So far, none have shown any symptoms such as respiratory problems, behavioural changes, appetite loss or diarrhoea.”


