60% Covid cases in Tirunelveli, Tuticorin are Maha returnees
2020-05-22
Tirunelveli: The number of Covid-19 positive cases, which was 604 between March 22 and May 13 in the 10 southern districts, has jumped to 1,076 on Thursday. The 78% increase is primarily due to the influx of people from other states, predominantly Maharashtra. This has resulted in cases spiking in Tirunelveli and Tuticorin.

Tirunelveli has the most number of cases in the south. It includes 153 cases (60%) from Maharashtra. The first positive case in the district was on March 22, a man who returned from Dubai. There was an escalation in the cases in the district – especially in Melapalayam in the city – who were people who had returned from Delhi and their contacts.

The last local contact person who tested positive was a pregnant woman from Pathamadai and her mother. She delivered a baby, recovered and was discharged two weeks ago. “So far (till Wednesday) 3,200 people have returned from other states. Samples were collected from them at the Gangaikondan check post and sent to taluk level temporary quarantine facilities,” Tirunelveli district collector Shilpa Prabhakar Satish said.

She said that efforts have been taken to ensure that the results were given in eight hours or the latest by a day. “The facilities can accommodate 800 people. Around 200 passes from other states are awaiting approval in Tirunelveli. We are calling them to check for the need to return to ensure that those in dire need are getting it first. Some say they are finding it difficult to get food and we approve it immediately,” she added.

Tuticorin collector Sandeep Nanduri said that after the 27 initial positive cases in the district, there was no case in the district for 20 days till the influx from other states. The 135 positive cases in the district till Thursday included 91 (67%) from other states. Eighty-eight are from Maharashtra and the majority is from Mumbai. Three others are from Gujarat.

Eight people who tested positive are those who returned from Chennai and Chengalpattu. He said that 1,494 have returned from other states. “Around 1,000 have come from Maharashtra. On an average 120 to 150 people are coming on a daily basis in various vehicles. “Vigil has been stepped up at the 15 check posts of the district,” the collector said.


