60 Jamaat followers in 'quarantine' at Agra centre for 42 days, 24 of them ill, all have tested negative twice
2020-05-12
AGRA: At least 60 people, including 24 facing health issues ranging from diabetes to heart-related ailments, are lodged at a quarantine centre in Agra for the last 42 days in spite of clearing the Covid-19 tests twice, first on April 3 and then on April 20. They have said conditions are "prison-like" and that there is "ill-treatment by staff" at the centre in Agra’s Sikandra area.


Mostly residents of Delhi, Andhra Pradesh and parts of Uttar Pradesh, all of them had contacted the administration after it came to the fore that government wanted all those who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi’s Nizamuddin should come forward. Of the 60, 12 are women.

When contacted, additional district magistrate (ADM) Prabhakant Awasthi said, “These Tablighi Jamaat people are involved in criminal offence. They will be released only after the approval of police.”

But police said that there was no case filed against them.

Station house officer (SHO) of Sikandra police station, Arvind Kumar, said, “No FIR has been registered against them. After the lockdown, they were not allowed to move out of the district. State government and administration will decide on their release.”

Those suffering from health issues claimed that they were not getting medicines. 

Some went on to say that they are being “unnecessarily targeted” by the authorities.

A businessman from Ghazipur lodged at the centre told TOI, “Local leaders of Tablighi Jamaat had themselves informed the police about us. We were shifted here on March 31. Local authorities had told us that after testing of samples, all those who reported Covid-19 negative will be released. Our samples were collected on April 1 and all of us were confirmed Covid-19 negative on April 3.”

He added, “On the next day, we were informed about the compulsory quarantine period of 14 days. After 14 days in quarantine, we were told that resampling will be done. Samples were collected on April 18 and all of us were again confirmed Covid-19 negative on April 20. Since then, we have been pleading with officials to allow us to go home. But they often misbehave when we ask them about the date of our release”. 

Another inmate from Delhi said, “It feels like we are serving a jail term. Authorities must understand that we have not done any crime. Our family members are also in deep distress. We request chief minister Yogi Adityanath to take cognizance of our problem and order our release”. 

An elderly man at the centre said, “I am a heart patient. Besides, more than 20 people have high blood pressure, diabetes and other health issues. We are not getting the required medicines even after repeated requests. Quality of food being served here is poor too. Soon, some of us will die if not released.”

A video of the quarantine centre shows filthy toilets with no water supply. The centre has two toilets for 60 people. 

Chief medical officer of Agra Dr RC Pandey said, “We will be releasing all those tested negative.” 

