60-year-old Covid-19 positive patient dies in Chennai; Tamil Nadu toll rises to five
2020-04-05
CHENNAI: A 60-year-old, who tested positive for Covid-19 and took part in the Tablighi Jamaat conference in Delhi, died at the Stanley Medical College Hospital in the early hours of Sunday. His death takes the Covid-19 toll in the state to five.

Hospital authorities say he was admitted on Wednesday (April 1) with symptoms of fever, cough and chest congestion. He later tested positive for the viral infection. “He was initially stable. He had diabetes and hypertension both of which are risk factors for mortality,” said a doctor attending on him.

On Saturday, he developed respiratory distress and was connected to the ventilator at 7pm. “Despite resuscitative measures he could not be revived. He died of cardio – respiratory arrest at 1.45am on Sunday,” the doctor said.

His family members have been isolated and their samples have been taken for test. On Saturday, the hospital announced that a 71-year-old man, who died on Thursday, was Covid-19 positive. The test results arrived on Saturday evening.

By then his body was taken to Keezhakarai in Ramanathapuram district where it was buried in a Mosque on Friday. Public health officials in Ramanathapuram were asked to track the family members who travelled with the body and all others who took part in the last rites. They will be disinfecting his house and the mosque as well.

The district health authorities were instructed to disinfect his house, mosque, and quarantine family members and the ambulance driver for 28 days. Samples will also be drawn from all of them for tests. “We have now told all hospital authorities that families should be given two options if death happens before the results arrive,” Dr Kolandasamy said. “If they want to bury or cremate the body immediately, they should do as per our protocol that limits number of people and restricts opening body bag or washing the body. Otherwise, they can wait for the test results. If the results are negative there will be no restrictions,” he said.

