Coronavirus: 6,000 travellers from virus-affected nations on Lucknow health department radar
2020-03-17
LUCKNOW: A massive search and screening exercise was launched by the UP health department on Monday to track some 6,000 travellers from the state who have come back home in the past two days. This is over and above over 4,358 travellers who have come from coronavirus-affected countries and are being tracked by the district surveillance units across the state. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Meanwhile, no fresh case of Covid-19 was reported in the state on Monday, keeping the tally of positive patients to 13. However, at least 20 suspected cases were hospitalized all over Uttar Pradesh. 

“This is a new list (of 6,000 travellers) handed over by the Central government to the state and the work to track them is already under way,” said Dr Vikasendu Agarwal, nodal officer, coronavirus, UP. He said that UP had taken help of WHO polio surveillance programme staff and volunteers to track these persons. 

“These persons are to be tracked for the next 28 days and it is mammoth task,” said Dr Agarwal, adding that surveillance and isolation, or quarantine, were the two important pillars of strategy to combat coronavirus in India. 

“Though we are leaving no stone unturned, the scope for leakages is always there in the wake of the high population. WHO is our helping hand but the bigger contribution can come from people with travel history to affected countries. All they need to do is self-report,” he said, speaking at a dialogue on coronavirus awareness organized by Unicef field office in UP.

Citing the example of Agra, Dr Ashutosh of WHO said: “protocols say that we have to track entire population in three kilometre radius of the point where a covid-19 patient is found. Target population for epicentre in case of the Agra family was 11 lakh. We are lucky to have a trained and motivated workforce in place for polio surveillance. They are heroes.” 

Experts present in the coronavirus update stated that the next two weeks were extremely crucial for containment of covid-19 in India. “Even if a single person tests positive to covid-19 in the new list, the population to be tracked will increase in leaps and bounds. Also, we do not know how many more lists would come up in the days to come,” admitted Dr Agarwal. 

