62-year-old Covid-19 patient dies in Agra, 8-year-old boy infected in Bareilly
2020-06-07
AGRA/MEERUT/BAREILLY: A 62-year-old man, who tested positive for Covid-19, died while being treated at SN Medical College in Agra on Saturday. Also, at least 12 new Covid-19 positive cases surfaced in Agra, taking the district tally to 957. There were at least 13 cases reported in Meerut on Saturday, taking the tally to 503 which included one positive in Kanpur - surpassing the 500 mark.

In Agra, according to the health department, the resident of Hariparwat locality was suffering from Severe Acute Respiratory Infection and died due to comorbid conditions. Furthermore, two patients were discharged on Saturday. Out of the 957 cases, 84.95% have recovered and discharged. There are 95 active cases in the district. Chief medical officer RC Pandey said, "So far, 813 people have been cured of the infection and discharged. Health department teams are conducting door-to-door checks of the people in hotspot areas."

Moreover, in Meerut, a 45-year-old man from Dhabai Nagar died late on Friday, taking the death toll to 33. "As many as 13 cases were found positive in Meerut on Saturday, thereby crossing the 500 mark. These include residents of Sunderji Enclave, Harvansh Vihar, Milak Mandhaiya village, Shastri Nagar, Lalkurti Road, Phoolmandi and Adarsh Nagar," said Dr Vishwas Chaudhary, Meerut's district surveillance officer.

Three more people tested positive in Bijnor district, taking the tally to 147. Of them, 81 are active ones. According to Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav, the patients are from Nagina area. Family members and contacts of patients are being quarantined.

In Bareilly, an eight-year-old boy tested positive on Saturday. District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, "The boy’s parents had tested positive earlier this week when they had come from Mumbai to Bareilly’s Faridpur. The boy is asymptomatic." The Bareilly tally rose to 65, with 28 active cases, 35 discharged and two deaths.

In Pilibhit district, a 28-year-old youth of Barha - on the outskirts of Pilibhit city - was tested positive on Saturday. He had come from Delhi on June 3 and had been kept in home quarantine. The tally has now gone up to 51, with seven active cases and 44 discharged.


