Mumbai: 62-year-old man with several co-morbidities beats Covid-19
2020-04-30
MUMBAI: On Tuesday, when a 62-year-old patient and his wife were leaving Jaslok Hospital in an ambulance after a 49-day stay, many doctors and nurses turned up to say goodbye. After all, despite a litany of complaints—diabetes, hypertension, kidney failure and bladder cancer—he had beaten Covid-19.

When statistics the world over show that patients over the age of 60 with co-morbidities form over 70% of the Covid toll, the private contractor’s survival is a medical miracle, said his son from Sydney, Australia.

The man was, in public health terms, the ‘Case 0’ or the ‘index patient’ as far as Jaslok was concerned. That is, his Covid infection triggered off a chain of coronavirus cases among the hospital’s resident doctors, nurses and allied staff. 

Almost 40 staffers were detected Covid-positive in the past one month. “We had a ‘junoon’ (obsession) to ensure he gets well,’’ said Dr Shruti Tandon, who is in charge of intensive care where the patient was moved into on March 26. “Many of us felt if he got well, Jaslok, too, would get back on its feet,” said a nurse involved in his care. (The hospital has not been admitting new patients as many of its staffers are in quarantine).

The Pimpri contractor came to Jaslok Hospital for the first time in February with kidney failure. “As he had protein leak in his urine, we admitted him on March 11,” said Dr Sudhirranjan Dash. He was detected with bladder cancer as well. Doctors said he underwent a cancer removal surgery and a second minor procedure to prepare an access route for dialysis.

A day before the national lockdown was announced on March 24, he was diagnosed with Covid. In the Covid ICU, he developed complications and needed ventilator support for six days. On March 29, the ICU team felt he was sinking and changed all his tubes in order to check microbial infection. “And it worked well as he started recovering thereafter,’’ said Dr Tandon said.

As Jaslok Hospital was ‘shut’ for new admissions, most consultants took on specific tasks—right from arranging transport for nurses, food or entertainment—to help out.

Incidentally, the patient received a four-day course of HCQS (hydroxyl chlorquinine sulpate) and a range of antibiotics, but none of the other experimental drugs given to Covid patients. The team relaxed on Tuesday only after the patient’s son sent a message from Sydney on the Jaslok Covid ICU phone: “My father is back home and sitting on his favourite couch.”


