Covid-19: 62-year-old textile businessman in Surat city tests positive
2020-03-26
SURAT: The total number of COVID-19 cases in Surat touched seven with a 62-year-old male from Parvat Patia, working in Radha Krishna Textile (RKT) Market at Sahara Darwaja, testing positive for the virus on Wednesday.


Health department officials said the patient is into textile business and had visited the textile market on Ring Road several times and also Kolkata where he may have come in contact with infected persons.

 
 

The patient was first shifted to a private hospital in Parvat Patiya and then to the isolation ward of New Civil Hospital three days ago. About 12 of his close contacts, including his family members have been quarantined at the government facility at Samras Hostel of Veer Narmad South Gujarat University (VNSGU) on Wednesday.

Dr Ashish Naik, deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), told TOI, “He had visited the RKT Market several times in the last 15 days. It is difficult to ascertain the number of people whom he may have met. They could be traders, workers, security guards etc.”

According to Dr Naik, an advisory has been issued for those owning shops in the RKT Market and others, who may have visited the market in the last 15 days, to strictly undergo home quarantine.

Meanwhile three healthcare staffers of Mahavir Hospital, where 67-year-old COVID-19 positive patient died on Sunday, have been admitted in the isolation ward after they showed symptoms of the virus. The staffers include two males and one woman. 

Municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani said that as on Wednesday there are six COVID-19 positive cases undergoing treatment in hospitals in the city. Along with these cases, three other suspected patients include a 55-year-old male from Gopipura and 68-year-old man from Palanpore, both without any travel history and a 30-year-old male from Adajan who had travelled to Satara in Maharashtra. They have been admitted in the isolation ward of New Civil Hospital as suspected COVID-19 patients. "We have started sending smses to people living or working in close contacts of COVID-19 positive patient and telling them to self isolate them so that virus does not spread,'' Pani said.

