Coronavirus: 63-year-old man is India’s 3rd death, first in Maharashtra; another critical
2020-03-18
MUMBAI: Maharashtra on Tuesday recorded its first Covid-19 casualty — India’s third — with the death of a 63-year-old man who was undergoing treatment at Kasturba Hospital, Chinchpokli. Another patient undergoing treatment at Kasturba is said to be critical.

Two more persons in the state — one from Mumbai and the other from Pune — also tested positive on Tuesday, taking the state’s count to 41.

Of the 40 people now in public hospitals in the state, one is critical, seven have mild symptoms, and the rest are showing no symptoms. Twenty-six of the patients are men and 14 women.

Civic officials said the new case in Mumbai is of a 49-year-old man from Ghatkopar who came back from the US on March 7. The latest case in Pune is of a 26-year-old man who also returned from the US on March 14.

Civic officials said the senior citizen from Mumbai who died on Tuesday had high blood pressure, which, combined with inflammation of the heart muscles and an increased heart rate, contributed to his death. His wife and son, who too have tested positive, are currently under treatment at Kasturba and couldn’t attend his cremation. 

All ward-level officers and staffers at the Shivaji Park crematorium were provided masks, gloves and a gown. Complete with protective gear, the staffers completed all the formalities as the family members were asked to witness it from a distance. Sanitizers and disinfectants were also kept ready.

The senior citizen had returned to the city from a business trip in Dubai on March 5. Three days later, he got admitted to Mahim’s P D Hinduja Hospital after developing symptoms. The doctors admitted him before suspecting coronavirus. They subsequently sent his samples to Kasturba Hospital, which came positive on March 12. 

The state’s 41st patient, and Mumbai’s eighth, who tested positive on Tuesday, had returned to the city on March 7 and reported to Kasturba Hospital after feeling unwell. Four of his close contacts have been admitted to Kasturba, while seven low-risk contacts have been home-quarantined. The latest Pune patient has been admitted to Bhosari hospital in Pimpri-Chinchwad. 

There are currently 10 coronavirus patients in Pimpri-Chinchwad, eight in Pune, four in Yavatmal, three each in New Mumbai and Kalyan, and one each in Raigad, Thane, Ahmednagar and Aurangabad.

