64 new cases in Vid, Covid count crosses 850-mark
2020-05-18
Nagpur: Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha region surpassed 850-mark on Sunday with total 64 new confirmed positive cases reported from three Red zone districts in the region. Akola reported 38 cases, followed by 18 in Nagpur, and five in Amravati. 

Buldhana, which was almost Covid-free a week ago, reported four new cases in the last two days taking Vidarbha’s Covid-19 count to 858. These include two deaths — one in Nagpur and another in Akola.

In Nagpur, swab samples of a man from Shanti Nagar, who was brought dead to the IGGMCH, tested positive on Sunday confirming sixth Covid-19 death of the city. In Akola, a 48-year-old man had died on May 13 at Murtizapur, a tehsil headquarters 40km from the city. This man tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday which indicates that novel coronavirus has reached to rural parts of Akola district. 

Apart from the post death +ve, Akola recorded 37 new cases on Sunday which took total number of cases in the district to 257. Sudden surge in number of positive patients has put the district administration on alert. District collector Jitendra Papalkar announced that Akola district will observe full lockdown on May 19 and 20. From May 21 onwards, shops will remain open only between 7am to 1pm. Shops related to farming can stay open up to 4pm.

Buldhana, which was Covid-free till May 10, has reported five cases in the last six days. More worrisome fact is that all these cases are from different rural areas of the district. A 55-year-old fruitseller, who had travelled to Burhanpur in MP, tested positive on May 11. On May 16, a 35-year-old sanitary worker of Shegaon Municipal Council area tested positive. 

On May 17, a 60-year old woman, who had returned from Mumbai to her hometown Khamgaon, tested positive along with a seven-year-old girl who came from Mumbai to Narvel village in Malkapur tehsil of Buldhana. 

Health administration is also awaiting result of swab samples of 72-year-old man in Jalgaon Jamod, who had died on Saturday.

In Amravati, two SRPF jawans are among five to test positive for novel coronavirus since Saturday night, taking the district’s Covid count to 106. The SRPF jawans — aged 27 and 29 — were among the 56 called back to Amravati following six of their colleagues testing positive in Malegaon and quarantined here. Swabs of 17 of the 56 were sent for testing and reports of the duo came positive late on Saturday night. While they have been admitted to Covid ward, swabs of the rest 15, who tested negative, have been taken again and sent for testing. With these two jawans, the district has thus far seen nine corona warriors contracting the virus.


