64 who arrived from Singapore in quarantine
2020-05-09
GURUGRAM: Sixty four people who flew from Singapore to Delhi on Friday were sent to various quarantine centres in the city. Of them, 16 have been sent to Lemon Tree, three are staying in Sky City Western Hotel, four in an Oyo room while 41 people are in community centres located in Shukhrali and Dundahera.


All 64 people have been screened at IGI airport before being shifted to quarantine facilities. However, no one has shown any symptoms of the disease so far, according to the district administration. As per the WHO guidelines, these people will have to undergo quarantine at least for a period of 14 days.

“We have quarantined the people who arrived at IGI on Friday in different locations across the city. The flight was from Singapore. Now, they are all in quarantine facilities, some of which are paid while other centres are offering facilities for free,” said Amit Khatri, deputy commissioner, Gurugram. 

At present, there are five quarantine centres in Gurugram, including a 300-bed facility at SGT Medical College in Chandu Budhera, a 100-bed facility in SCERT hostel, a 400-bed quarantine centre at government PG College, a 100-bed facility in Pataudi and a 20-bed unit at the ESIC dispensary. Apart from the government quarantine centres, nine hotel chains, including Lemon Tree, Radisson Hotels and Intercontinental Hotels Group (IHG), are collectively offering 392 rooms as paid quarantine facilities in Gurugram. Their room tariffs have been capped at Rs 3,600. 

Gurugram is likely to receive more people in coming days. Additional chief secretary and GMDA chief VS Kundu said these people are from various districts in Haryana. “We have made arrangements for everyone here. We are working in coordination with the central government. We received the first batch of people on Friday. Travel arrangements will be made by other states in case we receive people from any other locations of the country. Also, if we get more people from a particular district in Haryana, we will ensure that those people will be moved to their own district,” said Kundu.

Spike in Covid cases again in the city

Eight more people were tested positive for Covid-19 in the city on Friday, raising the tally to 125 in the district. During the past eight days, Gurugram recorded 49 new Covid-19 cases. Of the eight fresh cases, one patient is from M3M Woodshire in Sector 107, one from Khandsa mandi, three from Char Marla, one from DLF-1 while two cases are from Mohit Hospital.

The new cases include two health workers, a social worker who was involved in distribution of free food in the city, a vegetable seller in Khandsa mandi and a person who had bought vegetable from him, a health official told TOI.

“We are taking all required measures to provide treatment to these patients. Our teams are scanning all market areas and densely populated parts of Gurugram such as Dundahera, Sarhul and Kapashera,” said JS Puniya, chief medical officer, Gurugram.

The number of cases is likely to increase in coming days, the official said. The health department has collected 37 samples from a building in Sarhaul where a patient was tested positive on Thursday. Of the 125 cases reported in the city, 75 are active while 51 patients have been discharged. The health official said 7,820 samples have been sent for testing so far. 

Of the 125 cases reported in the city, 75 are active while 51 patients have been discharged after recovery. The health official said 7,820 samples have been sent for testing so far. The department is still awaiting results of more than 500 samples.


