Gujarat: 65 quarantined for their contact with 7 coronavirus positive cases
2020-03-21
AHMEDABAD: Health department officials said that a total of 65 persons, who were in close contact with the seven positive cases, have been quarantined and their samples have been taken.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), told reporters on Friday that the majority of the persons are young and none of them are on ventilator. “They are under constant monitoring and their health is stable,” she said.

Health department officials said that those breaching the home quarantine should be reported immediately on 104 helpline or to the district health officer or collector office.

“Those flouting rules will be shifted to government quarantine. We are aware of apprehensions in members of society, but we are taking all precautions to ensure that quarantined persons are observed closely and we are also doing community-based survey to identify persons who have foreign travel history, apart from arrival at Ahmedabad and Surat international airports,” said Ravi.


Two more testing labs by weekend
Jayanti Ravi said that apart from the COVID-19 labs at Ahmedabad and Jamnagar, two more will come up at Surat and Bhavnagar before Sunday. “We had applied for four more labs at Bhavnagar, Surat, SVP Hospital in Ahmedabad and Vadodara. On Thursday, we have got in-principle nod for the two labs from ICMR whereas we are hopeful of getting the permission for two more by next week,” she said.


Govt trying to trace those possibly affected

Health department officials said that efforts are on to identify possible affected cases after the first positive cases reported from Gujarat The challenges are huge. “For example, a person from Rajkot who had returned from UAE had taken the international flight to Mumbai after which he had taken a train to Rajkot along with his family. Thus, the number of persons with whom he had come into contact is quite high,” said an official. 

