65-year-old, minor beat deadly virus with grit
2020-05-01
PATNA: Busting the common myth that elderly people and kids are more vulnerable to coronavirus, a 65-year-old from Bhagalpur and an 11-year-old from Siwan have won the fight against Covid-19. The duo claimed that their willpower and the availability of proper healthcare facilities helped them stay strong.

Coronavirus has infected over 400 people in Bihar, of whom two died and 65 recovered. 65-year-old Bijoy Kejriwal defeated Covid-19 in the face of high mortality rate in the older population globally due to the infection. The diabetic was discharged from the Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College and Hospital (JNMCH) in Bhagalpur on April 12.

His son, Ankit Kejriwal, told this newspaper on Thursday that Bijoy thought the 11-day quarantine period was no less than being in jail and thanked the doctors for giving him a new lease of life.

“Dad was depressed and is still recovering from that phase after being discharged. Youngsters can be active on social media platforms, watch films or play games on smartphones, but he is not tech-savvy. The only saviour was a television set in his ward that helped him kill time,” Ankit said and added, “The JNMCH medical staff gave him a special diet plan and encouraged him to do yoga to keep stress at bay.”

Bijoy had returned to Bhagalpur from the United Kingdom via Kolkata on March 18 and tested positive on April 2.

Another patient, 11-year-old Sahana Khatoon, was discharged from a Siwan hospital on April 28 after spending 19 days in an isolation ward. She had come in contact with a close relative, who returned from Oman and tested positive for coronavirus on March 31. Her sample was collected by a team of health experts and she tested positive on April 9. 

Sahana said, “I was really scared when my second test was positive, but I made up my mind to defeat the virus. I ate food items to boost my immunity and consequently, my third and fourth reports came negative.”

During her quarantine period, Sahana prayed to God, watched films and sketched.


