65-year-old is city’s third Covid-19 death; teen tests positive
2020-04-19
Aurangabad: The city recorded its third coronavirus-related death on Saturday morning when a 65-year-old resident of Bismillah Colony, who was detected with Covid-19 on Thursday, died at 6.50 am while undergoing treatment at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH).

The woman had diabetes, hypertension and kidney disease, nodal officer for media interaction at GMCH Arvind Gaikwad said. She was also suffering from pneumonia, he added. The woman was referred to the GMCH from a private hospital on April 13. She was tested by the GMCH for the virus as she had Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI). Her tests were confirmed on Thursday.

Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) health officer Nita Padalkar said the woman’s family has said that she did not have any travel history. However, the source of her infection is yet to be ascertained.

“We have screened the high-risk and low-risk contacts of the woman. More than 15 throat swabs have been collected and sent for Covid-19 analysis. She had started showing symptoms a week ago. So, we are investigating who all she came in contact with 14 days before that. According to the family, she had been complaining of respiratory on and off,” Padalkar said.

On April 5, a 58-year-old banker from Satara became the first Covid-19 casualty in the city. On April 14, a 68-year-old man, who was the father of 38-year-old Covid-19 patient from Aref Colony, had passed away. Both the deceased men had co-morbidities and died while undergoing treatment at the GMCH.

Meanwhile, a 15-year-old boy from Baijipura tested positive for coronavirus late on Friday night. The count of total confirmed Covid-19 cases in the city has now reached 29. The number includes three deaths and two recoveries.

As on Saturday evening, 25 patients were admitted at the GMCH as suspected Covid-19 cases. While 23 had tested negative for coronavirus, the swab reports of the remaining two are awaited. The reports of 39 people sent to GMCH from district civil hospital are yet to be received.


