67 newly screened, 47 under home quarantine
2020-03-18
Vadodara: An elderly woman and a middle-aged man, who were admitted in the isolation ward at the SSG Hospital, have tested negative of coronavirus disease (COVID)-19. The woman and the man who had recently returned from Saudi Arabia and Germany respectively had shown symptoms similar to that of COVID-19 and were being treated as suspected cases.

“Both have tested negative. We will however keep them under medication till their medical condition improves,” said Dr Rajeev Daveshwar, medical superintendent, SSG Hospital.

A total of 67 new persons were screened for COVID-19 at the hospital till Tuesday late evening and none of them have tested positive.

After sample of the US return Karjan native who was the first one to be admitted in the isolation ward tested negative of COVID-19, the male has been discharged as his medical condition too improved.

Earlier, in the day, Vadodara collector Shalini Agrawal visited the government hospital. She informed that 638 persons including 100 from district areas and 538 persons residing in the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) areas had been screened till Tuesday. “Presently, there are 47 persons under home quarantine and 53 others have already cleared their observation period,” she said.

She asked the hospital authorities to set up a flu corner near the isolation ward, start a help desk to assist those coming to resolve their queries and make seating arrangements for relatives of those who come for screening.

“A flu corner equipped with a team of medical officers can help in carrying out preliminary screening of those who come for check-up. After preliminary screening, if required, they can be admitted in the isolation ward,” she said.

Samples of suspected cases are presently being sent to Ahmedabad civil hospital. “If required the hospital is equipped to carry out such tests in future,” she said, adding that all the required logistics, medical staff, medicines and ventilators are available.


