67-yr-old from Ambala dies of Covid-19 at PGI
2020-04-03
Ambala: A 67-year-old man from Ambala Cantonment died of Covid-19 on Wednesday. He was undergoing treatment at PGIMER, Chandigarh, Ambala district civil surgeon Dr Kuldeep Singh confirmed.He is the first Covid-19 casualty in Haryana and had no foreign travel history. On March 31, he struggled to breathe. He was a heart and diabetes patient, and his family members, including his son and wife, had rushed him to the Ambala Cantonment civil hospital, from where he was referred to PGIMER. Dr Kuldeep Singh said, “The patient also had a history of kidney ailments. We received information from PGI around 1.30am on Thursday that he had died and tested positive for Covid-19.” Sources said, “The patient lived with his family of wife, son, daughter-in-law, and a granddaughter and had retired from Syndicate Bank. Mother of his daughter-in-law was also present at his residence. Besides, there were four persons living as his tenants.” Family, tenants quarantined On Thursday morning, the Haryana health department and Ambala district administration teams reached the residence of the deceased in Timber Market and sealed the colony. They also conducted a sanitisation drive by spraying disinfectants. Dr Kuldeep Singh said, “We have taken samples of seven persons living at his residence, including his family members and four tenants. All of them are asymptomatic and they have been home quarantined. Health teams will regularly keep a check on them. All of them have been provided N-95 masks, caps, and sanitisers. As the victim had no foreign travel or contact history with any Covid-19 patient, the doctors at PGIMER treated him as a general patient. On Wednesday afternoon, the PGI doctors noticed coronavirus symptoms and sent his sample for clinical examination at 1.15pm. They received the positive report at 11.45pm, but he in the meantime had expired. Initially, the doctors thought it a natural death, but after receiving the report, they immediately isolated his body. However, sources in PGIMER said the patient was kept at the same isolation ward of the hospital in which 65-year-old resident of Nayagaon, who had tested positive for Covid-19 and died on March 31, was admitted. Nayagaon man was the first Covid-19 death in Tricity. Daughter-in-law dealt with NRIsDr Kuldeep Singh said, “During investigation of the contact history, we came to know that his daughter-in-law works at the NRI branch of State Bank of India (SBI) and was dealing with the NRI accounts up to March 21. Despite lockdown advisories, the deceased had been visiting a gurdwara up to March 26, which was negligence on his part as he had weak immunity.” About the cremation, the civil surgeon said, “Following the protocol, we will ask the authorities in Chandigarh to cremate his body over there only.” Till the filing of the report, his body was at PGIMER mortuary and his son and wife were present there. 