68-yr-old from East Nagpur 1st Covid-19 victim in Ngp
2020-04-07
Nagpur/ Chandrapur: Swab samples of 68-year-old man from Satranjipura area in Nagpur, who died on Sunday at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH), have been tested positive for novel coronavirus infection on Monday. With this, Nagpur has recorded its first death due to Covid-19. Apart from this, a man from Chandrapur, who had gone to Indonesia on a religious tour and returned to Nagpur via Delhi, has been tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday. Two close contacts of four positive patients in Buldhana on Sunday also tested positive on Monday. With this, the number of cases in Buldhana have gone up to 11, all connected to patients having Delhi travel history.This took the total number of Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha to 36 including 3 deaths. For the first time since its outbreak, Vidarbha has reported four confirmed positive cases in a day, including one death. Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar confirmed the 68-year-old man as the first Covid-19 victim from the city.The deceased was a resident of Satranjipura Badi Masjid, ward no. 21 in East Nagpur. Till now, confirmed positive patients in the city have been reported only from South-West, Central and North Nagpur.Sources at Mayo Hospital said that the person had visited OPD complaining breathing problem and fever at around 12 midnight on April 4. He was admitted to ward no. 5 (Covid isolation ward) as he was showing symptoms of the virus infection. His samples were collected on Sunday for tests, but he passed away on Sunday night.Body of the deceased has been kept in Mayo Hospital mortuary. Soon after the test reports came, NMC team led by additional medical officer (health) Dr Praveen Gantawar rushed to the victim’s house. The team identified son, daughter and son-in-law. The doctor who had attended the senior citizen and his attendant have also been identified. All will be tested for the infection. NMC, with the help of police, has cordoned off the area and will identify more people, especially from a shop where the deceased used to spend time.The NMC will also launch door-to-door containment drive from Tuesday. The authorities will decide about the last rites of the deceased on Tuesday.Chandrapur still safe: Chandrapur’s patient and his seven companions, including wife, are in institutional quarantine facility at MLA Hostel in Nagpur from March 23, the day they arrived here. As neither of them had gone to Chandrapur nor anyone from there had visited them, chances of second phase infection in Chandrapur through them are negligible.Chandrapur collector Dr Kunal Khemnar said local authorities have decided to quarantine family members of the positive patient as precautionary measure. “Though the patient belongs to Chandrapur, he had not visited the city since his foreign travel. Still, his family will be kept in quarantine as precautionary measure,” said the collector.Civil surgeon of Chandrapur Dr ND Rathod informed that four couples, including three from Chandrapur city and one from Ballarpur, had gone to Indonesia in February. They returned to Delhi on March 22. They took domestic flight from Delhi on March 23 and arrived at Nagpur on the same evening. They were immediately quarantined at MLA Hostel in Nagpur. Sources informed that they all belong to Tablighi Jamaat, but none of them had attended the jamaat conference held during the second week of March.Swab samples of the Chandrapur were checked in the AIIMS Nagpur facility on Monday. Authorities informed that the samples were collected on April 1 but were pending for tests as the lab facility in IGGMCH had developed snag. The patient was shifted to isolation facility in IGGMCH on Monday night. Crisis deepens in Buldhana: Health officials from Buldhana confirmed that two samples from the close contacts of 4 positive patients admitted in Buldhana have been tested positive on Monday taking the total number of cases to 11, including 1 death. “These two are from the close contacts of one of the 4 positive patients from Buldhana. Their details are yet to be ascertained,” said Dr Premchand Pandit, civil surgeon of Buldhana. On Sunday, four men — all having Markaz Nizamuddin in Delhi travel history – had tested positive. They were from rural parts of Buldhana district. On Monday, two others belonging to rural areas were tested positive. One of the two is from Shegaon, which is popular religious centre in Vidarbha.With Chandrapur resident getting detected as Covid-19 positive, seven districts in Vidarbha are now affected with novel coronavirus. Confirmed patients are admitted in Nagpur (13 + Chandrapur patient = 14), Gondia (1), Buldhana (10) and Washim (1). Seven patients — 4 from Nagpur and 3 from Yavatmal have been discharged after they recovered. Three deaths have been reported from Nagpur, Amravati and Buldhana. Many samples yet to be tested: Suspects and close contacts of confirmed patients are admitted in Vidarbha are waiting for results of their samples. Highest number of swab samples — 121 — from Amravati are pending. The district administration is anxiously awaiting the test reports of the throat swabs of the relatives of Hathipura Covid-19 deceased and the medical staff of the hospital where he was admitted before he was shifted to district general hospital.“Because of the Covid-19 death, we have sealed and sanitized Hathipura and Itwara Bazar, Sakkarsath areas of Amravati. We were expecting reports on Monday itself, but they are still pending,” said district collector Shailesh Naval.The administration has sent swabs of 24 relatives of the victim besides 10 doctors and 15 hospital staffers who treated him. A lot depends on these reports, Naval said.The administration, in its attempt to trace the source from where the victim had contracted the virus in the absence of any travel history, is now checking his DCR from his mobile.Meanwhile, guardian minister Yashomati Thakur on Monday said that during a special drive launched across the district to check people for cough, cold and fever has covered 18 lakh people so far and found 17,000 suffering from cold, cough and fever.In Yavatmal, three suspects in the isolation of GMCH were tested negative and discharged on Monday. Test reports of 53 presumptive cases are awaited. Their swab samples have been sent to Nagpur since Wednesday last. District collectors of Washim, Buldhana, Yavatmal, Akola and Amravati have issued appeals to all those who have returned after visiting Markaz Nizamuddin to come forward and get themselves tested.