Coronavirus death: 68-year-old becomes Aurangabad’s 2nd casualty
2020-04-15
AURANGABAD: A 68-year-old resident of Aref Colony, father of 38-year-old confirmed Covid-19 patient, died while undergoing treatment at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Tuesday afternoon. The elderly man had first tested negative for the virus on April 9 before testing positive for the contagion on April 13.


District civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said the patient was admitted to the district civil hospital on March 30 along with his 38-year-old son, who is an IT engineer in Pune. Both their throat swabs were collected and sent for Covid-19 analysis.

In the report that came on April 2, the son tested positive though the father was negative. “We tested the 68-year-old man for Covid-19 twice, and he tested negative both times. Since the civil hospital is dedicated for Covid-19 patients, we moved him to the GMCH on April 8,” Kulkarni said.

Meenakshi Bhattacharya, the GMCH head of the department of medicine, stated in a release that the patient had started experiencing cough, fever, sore throat, difficulty in breathing and other complaints on April 3. “He was transferred from district civil hospital to GMCH on April 8. As his condition was deteriorating, despite appropriate treatment at the GMCH, the patient was tested for Covid-19 again on April 8, and his result came back negative April 9. However, his condition worsened. So his throat swab was tested again on April 11. The result came positive this time on April 13,” Bhattacharya said in the release.

She added in view of the patient’s critical condition, he was kept on ventilator support since April 11. “The patient died while undergoing treatment at 1.15 pm on Tuesday due to acute respiratory distress with acute kidney injury with Covid-19,” Bhattacharya stated.

The son, meanwhile, continues to be under treatment at the district civil hospital. The family’s 43-year-old house help and her 11-year-old daughter, who too were detected with Covid-19, are also under treatment at the district civil hospital.

This is the second death of a confirmed Covid-19 patient in Aurangabad and whole of Marathwada. Earlier, on March 5, a 58-year-old resident of Satara had died while undergoing treatment at the GMCH. The cause of his death, as told by GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar, was acute respiratory distress syndrome due to Covid-19, bilateral pneumonitis in a known case of diabetes with hypertension and ischemic heart disease.

Meanwhile, of the 24 patients, who had been detected with Covid-19 in the city, a 59-year-old woman has recovered, two have succumbed, 20 are under treatment at the district civil hospital and one at a private hospital.

