69 days on, textile & diamond markets to ‘unlock’ shutters
2020-06-01
Surat: More than two months later, Surat’s textile and diamond markets are set to reopen from Monday as the city prepares to ‘unlock’ in phase 5.0 of lockdown.

According to municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani, markets, which are outside the containment zones would reopen from Monday, and he hopes that economic activities will pick up steam. 

“Everyone and every establishments will have to adhere to the guidelines of wearing face mask and maintaining social distancing. We will send videography teams on the field as well keep a watch through CCTVs to ensure that markets do not overcrowd. If we find anybody flouting norms, strict actions will be taken,” Pani said.

“Bank services are considered as an essential services and they will be allowed to operate even in containment zones. Auto rickshaws with one plus two passengers will be allowed to operate outside containment zones in the city,” he added. 

Meanwhile, Surat recorded 49 more Covid-19 cases on Sunday, taking the total tally to 1,597 in the city. On the other hand, Surat district recorded six more Covid-19 cases on Sunday. 

Two persons succumbed to the virus too taking the death toll to 70 till date. The deceased include 80-year-old resident of Jalaramnagar in Udhana zone, Devnarayan Gujjar, and Shivram Parida, 65, a resident of Amroli Avash in Katargam zone. 

On Sunday, 22 more Covid-19 patients were discharged from hospitals. Of them, 13 were discharged from Covid Care Centre and nine from New Civil Hospital. Total 1,064 patients have been discharged till date in the city. 

Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) too will start operating from Monday. Pani said that BRTS buses would start operating in a phased manner to help people in commuting. 

BOX: 

Cyclonic storm may hit South Gujarat coast 

Surat: SMC chief Banchhanidhi Pani said that the civic body is preparing for the possible cyclonic storm which is likely to hit South Gujarat on June 3-4 as per India Meteorological Department (IMD) forecast. 

BOX: Covid-19 Meter 

Total Positive: 1548

Total death: 70

Total discharged: 1064


