69 new cases in city takes dist’s Covid-19 tally to 627
2020-05-12
Aurangabad: As many 69 people tested positive for Covid-19 in Aurangabad on Monday, taking the tally of the people who have contracted the infection to 627 in the district. 

Most of the confirmed Covid-19 positive cases were reported from Ram Nagar, Qile Ark, Datt Nagar and Juna Bazaar. Meanwhile, two people succumbed to the infection while undergoing treatment at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Monday, taking the tally of Covid-19 casualties in the district to 15. 

An 80-year-old man from Ram Nagar, admitted to the GMCH on May 8 with complaints of fever, cough and breathlessness, tested positive for Covid-19 on May 9. “He was under treatment at the ICU since May 8 and was placed on ventilator on May 10. He was suffering from pneumonia and respiratory illness and died while undergoing treatment around 1.10am on Monday. The cause of death is bilateral pneumonia with acute respiratory distress syndrome due to Covid-19,” said Arvind Gaikwad, nodal officer for media interaction at GMCH 

A 58-year-old man from Pundalik Nagar was referred to GMCH by the district civil hospital on May 9 and tested positive for Covid-19 the same day. “He was shifted to the ICU as a portion of his lungs was removed earlier due to tuberculosis. He was also suffering with brain TB, hydrocephalus and epilepsy. He was placed on ventilator after the oxygen levels in his blood dropped to 64. He died on 4.30pm on Monday due to a known case of epilepsy with hydrocephalus secondary to tuberculous meningitis lobectomy lungs with known case of psychiatric illness and Covid-19,” said Gaikwad. 

40 patients discharged

As many as 40 Covid-19 patients were discharged from different health facilities in Aurangabad on Monday.

District civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said that two patients each from Noor Colony and Sanjay Nagar-Mukundwadi were discharged from the district civil hospital after they tested negative for the two consecutive tests. The remaining 36 people were discharged from Aurangabad Municipal Corporation’s Covid care centre at Qile Ark. 

Of the 627 confirmed Covid-19 cases in Aurangabad district, as many as 113 patients have recovered and 15 have died. The remaining patients are undergoing treatment at GMCH, district civil hospital, the AMC's Covid care centres and private hospitals..

5 test positive in Latur

Five people tested positive for Covid-19 in Latur’s Udgir, taking the tally of positive cases in the district to 36. Meanwhile, 11 persons were discharged from the sub-district hospital in Udgir on Monday. Of the total cases, 19 have recovered, one has died and the remaining patients are under treatment.


