Rajasthan: 69-year-old Italian tourist cured of coronavirus dies of cardiac arrest
2020-03-21
JAIPUR: A pall of gloom descended on Sawai Man Singh (SMS) hospital doctors, after the news of death of 69-year-old Italian tourist, who was declared as cured from Covid-19 on March 15, broke out. He died of cardiac arrest in a private hospital on Friday. He was the first person tested positive for Covid-19 at the Sawai Man Singh hospital of the state.


“I am heartbroken. He responded well to our treatment and he recovered from the disease. It was a wonderful feeling with he defeated Covid-19. Even though he was shifted from the SMS hospital to a private hospital on Thursday, I stayed connected with the doctors of the private hospital. But, it came as a shock for all of us as he died early morning,” said Dr Prakash Keswani, treating doctor at SMS hospital of the Italian tourist.

Even though, Italian couple did not know English, the doctors understood what he tries to understand from his sign language. “He did not know English and we do not know Italian, despite of that we understood each other’s sign language,” said Dr DS Meena, medical superintendent, SMS hospital.

He underwent treatment for Covid-19 and chronic bronchitis, a pre-exisitng disease, at the SMS hospital. It was a moment of joy and happiness for the SMS hospital doctor, when he was tested negative for Covid-19 in two successive tests done on March 14 and March 15. Following that, SMS hospital proudly declared that the Italian tourist has been cured from Covid-19, but they asserted that he required further treatment for his pre-existing lung disease.

His treatment for ventilation for lung disease was continued along with antibiotics, oxygen (non-invasive ventilation) at SMS hospital after being shifted from isolation ward to emergency ICU on March 16 (next day after he declared free from Covid-19).

He was part of 23-member Italian tourists, who landed at Delhi airport on March 20. He was accompanied with his wife, who was also diagnosed with the disease on March 4, next day after her husband was diagnosed with the disease on March 3.

After touring Mandawa (Jhunjhunu), Bikaner, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and Udaipur, he reached Jaipur on February 28. He stayed along with his group at a hotel in Raja Park area. Since he felt difficulty in breathing and mild fever, he was rushed to a private hospital on JLN Road. After admission in the hospital, due to suspicion of Covid-19, he was referred to SMS hospital. The doctors admitted him to isolation ward. In the first test on March 29, he was tested negative for Covid-19. But, in second test on March 2, he was diagnosed with the disease. On March 3, National Institute of Virology, Pune confirmed that he had been infected with Covid-19. The doctors immediately shifted him to isolation ward and started the treatment.

He was undergoing treatment at SMS hospital before he was shifted to a private hospital on Thursday.

Treatment was continued and the patient was stable, the SMS hospital claimed. On March 17, patient was stable on oxygen with non invasive ventilator support and due to fear of fatigue, he was advised for intubation which his wife refused and she insisted for transfer to the private hospital, from where they were brought earlier to SMS hospital for further treatment. “Italian ambassador to India also contacted us and requested that the patient be transferred to the private hospital,” said additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh.

On Wednesday, his parameters were well maintained, the health department claimed saying that on Friday, a team of the private hospital came for transfer for further management of co-morbidity at their facility. They advised for intubation at SMS hospital only for transfer. Patient was intubated. There was a slight fall of blood pressure after intubation. BP was maintained on noradrenaline infusion. After stabilisation of the patient, he was in supervision of the private hospital team and was transferred to the hospital with discharge summary.

Officials said that his wife asserted that she is satisfied with the treatment given at SMS hospital and appreciated the team of doctors of SMS hospital. As per the feedback from the private hospital, patient’s death has occurred due to heart failure.

