6th Covid death in Bihar, 85 +ve cases in a day
2020-05-11
Patna: The state recorded the largest single-day spike with 85 fresh Covid positive cases and sixth death due to coronavirus on Sunday. They took the tally of coronavirus cases in Bihar to 696.

A 60-year-old man from Belchhi in Patna district died at PMCH before his test report came positive on Sunday morning. He was suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease that causes obstructed airflow from the lungs, a health department official said.

The total number of active cases in state now stands at 336 while 354 have recovered from the virus infection. Nine fresh cases were reported from Patna district, taking its tally to 61. Of them, five cases were reported from Barh, two from Pandarak and one each in Alamganj and Belchhi. However, 23 Covid patients in the district have recovered and discharged from hospitals so far.

Principal secretary (health) Sanjay Kumar said the man was in the last stage of lung disease. PMCH superintendent Dr Bimal Karak said the man complaining breathlessness was admitted on May 8. “He, along with his son and other family members, had returned from Delhi in a private vehicle on May 4,” he said. “The man was kept in isolation ward as he had symptoms of Covid-19. His sample result came positive after his death,” Dr Karak said.

Meanwhile, Nalanda and Munger reported maximum positive cases on Sunday with 11 each, followed by nine each in Patna and Bhagalpur, eight in Kishanganj, seven each in Saharsa and Madhepura, four in East Champaran, three each in Muzaffarpur and Arwal, two each in Nawada, Araria, Darbhanga and Gaya and one each in Khagaria, Bhojpur, Aurangabad, Samastipur and Begusarai.

Sanjay said almost all the new cases are those who had returned to Bihar by special trains from Delhi, Gujarat, Maharashtra and other states this week. “Their samples were collected from the quarantine centres where they have been kept for 21 days. The health department teams collected the samples randomly as it is not possible to test all the people coming from other states for want of enough testing kits. However, we are arranging more testing kits,” he said.

“Now, we have to make sure that those at quarantine centres do not mingle with other people and complete their 21 days in isolation,” Sanjay said.

State nodal officer for Covid-19, Dr Ragini Mishra, said eight of the nine positive people in Patna had come from outside the state last week. “Only a 56-year-old woman from Alamganj has no travel history. She is suffering from cancer as per the report at PMCH on April 28. Later, she went to IGIMS for treatment on May 2 and Mahavir Cancer Sansthan on May 3,” she said.

Dr Ragini said the woman was first admitted to NMCH after she developed high fever on May 8. “Her sample was collected on May 9 and her report came positive. Now, we are tracing her infection trail because she had also visited some private hospitals in Patna City area in April. We are also collecting the samples of her family members,” she said.


