Sixth death in Agra, 41 more Covid-19 positive cases in region
2020-04-19
AGRA: Agra district reported its sixth Covid-19 death on Saturday. Also, Agra and its neighbouring district, Firozabad, reported a total 41 positive cases. Alarmingly, they included a clerk posted at a Covid control room of Firozabad collectorate and a local journalist.


The deceased was identified as a 65-year-old Delhi-based man, who came to his relative's house in Agra’s Wazirpura area along with other Tablighi Jamaat members. 

The man was a patient of hypertensive heart disease and tested positive on April 5. On the same day, he was shifted to isolation facility of S N Medical College. According to Dr Mukesh Vats, the chief medical officer of Agra, the Covid-19 positive man died of a heart attack.

Earlier on Friday night, Agra health department received a list of 24 new Covid-19 cases and on Saturday, three more were confirmed - taking the tally to 199. “All have been shifted to isolation facility and contact tracing has begun. Half of the patients found positive on Friday came into direct contact of Tablighi Jamaat attendees," the CMO said.

Meanwhile, in neighbouring Firozabad district, a total of 14 were found Covid-19 positive on Friday and Saturday, and were linked to Jamaat. The latest Firozabad tally is 40. 

According to district administration, the positive cases include a nine-month-old baby, whose parents along with five other family members were tested positive. Dr S K Dixit, chief medical officer of Firozabad, said, “The eight members of the deceased man got infection after coming in contact with attendees of Jamaat. A 53-year-old local journalist who attended the cremation of a Nepal returnee, also tested positive.”

But the biggest concern for the administration is the 58-year-old government clerk, posted at Covid control room of Firozabad collectorate.

Speaking to TOI, Chandra Vijay Singh, district magistrate said, “It seems that the clerk’s father came in contact with attendees of Jamaat. We have shifted the clerk to isolation facility and have collected the samples of his family and colleagues as well as officers like deputy collector. Everyone who came in contact with the clerk will remain under quarantine until further notice.”

A total of 59 people have been quarantined after the clerk was found Covid positive. 


