7 cases of Covid-19 detected in 24 hrs, toll reaches 49
2020-04-26
Aurangabad: As many as seven new positive cases were reported from Aurangabad in the past 24 hours — between Friday and Saturday — taking the total number of positive cases to 49 in the district.

On Friday night, three women residents of Hilal Colony were tested positive while one each from Town Hall and Qile Ark area were detected with infection on Saturday. Even Samta Nagar area registered two cases on Saturday. 

Currently, 22 confirmed cases are under treatment including 18 at the district civil hospital and 4 at Government Medical College and Hospital.

Three women of Hilal Colony are all high-risk contacts of the 60-year-old woman, who had died on April 22. All of them are aged 18, 26 and 31 respectively and are undergoing treatment at district civil hospital. 

On Saturday, a 70-year-old man resident of Town Hall area and 60-year-old woman of Qile Ark the area was confirmed positive and subsequently admitted to Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). 

The Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) medical officer Meghna Jogdand said that both the localities have been sealed as containment zones. “Our health teams will begin door-to-door screenings of residents from Sunday,” she said.

The district civil hospital on Saturday screened 88 patients out of which 31 were home quarantine. “Throat samples of 65 people were collected and sent for Covid-19 analysis,” said Pradeep Kulkarni, medical officer at the hospital. 

In GMCH, 21 patients were screened out of which 11 swabs were sent for testing. The reports of two tested positive on Saturday while the results of five people are awaited. 

GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar said that the hospital has witnessed two deaths in the past 24 hours but they had no symptoms of Covid-19 infection.

Covid-19 positive women dies in Latur

A 70-year-old woman detected with Covid-19 infection died in Latur’s Udgir on Saturday evening said district civil surgeon Sanjay Dhage. “The woman was admitted to Covid-19 isolation centre on April 23. Her reports on Saturday afternoon confirmed her infection. She passed away while undergoing treatment at 4.15 pm. She had diabetes and high blood pressure,” Dhage said. The investigation to trace the source of her infection is still underway, he added.


