Kanpur: Seven foreign travellers quarantined at LLR, UHM hospitals, four at home
2020-04-02
KANPUR: The health department has quarantined all 11 suspected foreign travellers on Wednesday. So far, around 939 foreign visitors have been quarantined.


According to a health bulletin issued by the district administration, 7 out of 11 foreign visitors have been quarantined at hospitals and four of them had been isolated at homes. 

Nearly 615 persons arriving from other states have been sent for home quarantine on Wednesday. Around 1,626 persons have been home quarantined while seven have completed their 21-day quarantine period. There are nine and 12 patients quarantined at UHM Hospital and LLR Hospital, respectively. 

As many as 20 samples have been collected and sent to Lucknow. So far, around 124 samples have been sent to state lab.

Meanwhile, the Kanpur Municipal Corporation has asked its doctors to run OPDs at JM hospital Govind Nagar, Nehru Nagar, Geeta Nagar, Vijay Nagar, Colonel Ganj, Kidwai Nagar, Ram Bagh and Anwarganj homeopathic dispensaries from 9am to 1pm

Municipal commissioner Akshay Tripathi has asked KMC’s veterinary division to operate both dog catching squad and provide food for stray dogs and cows in the city. The squad fed food to stray dogs at 32 places.

To maintain cleanliness the KMC has started many schemes like a cash award to the zone for cleanliness and cash reward for best sanitary work. 

Several teams of KMC as per their program came on road to sanitize the city.It may be recalled that KMC had planned to sanitize the whole city every day. Under Telle medicine scheme as many as 38 citizens were benefitted on Wednesday.

The police department in a bid to implement lockdown strictly raised as many as 146 barriers and Naqa in the city and checked 1764 vehicles running on the road. The cops challaned around 213 vehicles and realized a fine to the tune of Rs 6000 as fine.It had also seized around 9 vehicles and registered a case against one black marketer.


