7 more test positive for Covid-19, 2 had been to Germany, Italy
2020-03-23
NAWANSHAHR: Seven more persons tested positive for coronavirus (Covid-19) on Sunday. They included four members of deceased Baldev Singh’s family, two persons who travelled with him to Germany and Italy and sarpanch of his native Pathlawa village in Nawanshahr district. His co-traveller Sant Gurbachan Sigh stayed in Anandpur Sahib during Holla Mohalla celebrations and moved freely among people in Pathlawa village with the other co-traveller, Daljinder Singh.


Six members of Baldev’s family and a local associate tested positive on Saturday. On Sunday, the health department and administration brought four members of his family from Sujjon village to the isolation centre in Nawanshahr civil hospital after they tested positive. Pathlawa village sarpanch Harpal Singh, who met Baldev and Gurbachan, also tested positive and was taken to the isolation centre.

Nawanshahr deputy commissioner (DC) Vinay Bublani said Sujjon and Jhikka villages have been blocked while Pathlawa village had been cut off. The administration is strict about implementing quarantine regulations for people coming from foreign countries. All those who have returned from abroad are also being tracked.

Gurbachan told TOI on Thursday that while Baldev Singh stayed in Anandpur Sahib during Holla Mohalla for three days, he stayed for around six days. He also said no one asked them to isolate themselves before Thursday. Even till Thursday evening, he and Daljit Singh met people freely and stayed at Sant Baba Ghanaya Singh Nirmal Bunga Pathlawa in Anandpur Sahib.

Deputy commissioners of Jalandhar and Hoshiarpur urged those who attended Hola Mohall from March 7 to 9 to voluntarily come forward for tests. The Hoshiarpur administration specifically asked those who attended the congregation or Langar at Nirmal Bunga Pathlawa in Anandpur Sahib from March 7 to 9 to come forward for testing voluntarily. 

The administration has given a time frame of March 7 to 9 on the basis of Baldev Singh’s stay while Gurbachan Singh stayed longer. Meanwhile, there was complete lockdown in Doaba region with only essential services functioning. 


