7 new Covid-19 +ve cases, including 1 in Deolali cantt
2020-05-03
Nashik: Seven new confirmed Covid-19 cases have emerged, including six from Nashik city and one from the Deolali Cantonment Board area. The cantonment patient is an official of the military supply department.

With the six new patients, the city’s overall Covid-19 tally has touched 16. Till date, three patients have recovered.

The Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) has sealed four more containment zones, including three in the Cidco division of the city — Savta Nagar, Uttam Nagar and Pathardi Phata — and one in Satpur colony. The city now has 10 containment areas.

Moreover, an area on the Kumar Mangalam Road, where an Army official resides, has been sealed. Contact-tracing has been initiated. A Deolali Cantonment Board official said the official was in charge of the supply department and often went outside for purchases.

NMC officials said they have sanitized the areas in four new containment zones and the health team are conducting door-to-door surveys.

“We have found 46 high-risk contacts from these four new containment zones, including 20 in Satpur, 14 in Uttam Nagar, eight in Savta Nagar and four high-risk contacts in the Pathardi phata area. They have been isolated in NMC hospitals,” the officials said 

A pharmacist, who is a resident of the Pathardi phata area, has tested positive. His wife works in the TB department. Seven high-risk contacts, including four family members, have been isolated in the NMC hospital.

A woman who tested positive is a resident of the Satpur area. She has a travel history to Malegaon. She had gone to Chinchangaon near Malegaon on April 7 to take part in a funeral. The woman had travelled with seven other people and returned to Nashik on April 28. She has been isolated in the Zakir Hussain Hospital.

A patient from Savta Nagar area also had a travel history to Jalgaon. He had come to Nashik city on April 28 by a milk tanker.

A journalist from the Uttam Nagar area too has tested positive. He has been isolated in the Nashik district civil hospital.

A staffer of the Nashik rural police, who is a resident of Hirawadi in Panchavati area, had been posted to Malegaon. He had given his swab for testing on April 26 and had come to Nashik by truck on April 28. He has been shifted to the Nashik civil hospital. As he has not been to his residence in Hirawadi Panchavati in the past fortnight, the NMC did not seal the area.

Finally, the sixth patient tested positive is a physician in the Nashik civil hospital. He had been staying in the quarters in the civil hospital campus. He also resided at the hostel in Tidke colony area of the city, but he had not gone there for in the past few weeks.


