7 new Covid-19 +ve cases found, Marahuli 7th hotspot
2020-04-25
Varanasi: Seven new Covid-19 positive cases were confirmed in Varanasi on Friday. 

Six of them are from hotspot area of Madanpura, who had offered namaj in a mosque with a Tablighi Jamaat attendee also diagnosed as infected in first week of April and one positive case was detected in Marhauli area. 

With the detection of seven new cases in the district, the number of hotspots has now increased to seven. The total number of Covid-19 cases in Varanasi has reached to 26. Of these 17 are in hospital, eight had been discharged after getting cured while one died on April 3.

After receiving reports from BHU laboratory on Friday, district magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma confirmed, “Seven persons including six from hotspot area of Madanpura and one person from Marhauli locality have been tested Covid-19 positive.”

Six new patients from Madanpur were in contact with a Tablighi Jamaat attendee, who was initially tested as infected and cured after being treated at DDU district hospital’s isolation ward, said the DM adding, while tracing the people who had come in contact with the Jamaat attendees in Madanpura it was found that 41 persons had offered namaj with the Jamaat attendee in a mosque. The samples of all such persons had been collected three days ago and were sent for laboratory test, he said adding that on the arrival of their reports six of them were confirmed as infected.

Madanpura hotspot had already seven positive cases and following Friday’s development the total number of cases in the locality has reached to 13. The number of infected Jamaat attendees and people confirmed coronavirus positive after coming in their contact has reached to 17.

A 29-year-old medicine trader of Marhauli area, who had reached district hospital on April 20 for test after suffering from cold and cough, was also tested as positive, said DM mentioning that his travel and contact histories are being traced to know the cause of his infection. Process to test other members of his family and persons who had come in his contact was started immediately after the arrival of his report. Besides, other precautionary measures were also started in the Marhauli area by sealing it and declaring it as the seventh hotspot of the district. 

Earlier, the district had six hotspots including Madanpura, Bajardiha, Lohta, Nakkhighat, Gangapur and Pitarkunda. 

In view of the rising Covid-19 positive cases, especially among Tablighi Jamaat attendees and persons coming in their contact, the district administration has kept 29 Jamaat participants, who were detected in the district after March 28, under close vigil. 

Initially, only two had been found Covid-19 positive while three, who were initially tested negative, also tested positive later, said DM. Despite getting cured, two Jamaat attendees have been still kept in the isolation ward of the DDU district hospital, where three others are also undertreatment. Other 24 Jamaat attendees are also being kept under close vigil at the Shivpur quarantine home. 


