7 new Covid cases in city, Satranjipura count is 59
2020-04-25
Nagpur: With seven more from city testing positive for Covid-19 on Friday, the number of positive patients from Satranjipura increased to 59. At the same time, number of cases from one family in Mominpura swelled to 11 in seven days.The total number of cases in the district increased to 105. The number in city went up to 101. One of seven new positive patients is from Satranjipura and reportedly neighbour of 68-year-old deceased, city’s first and only death of Covid-19. A female, she was under institutional quarantine since April 22 and has been admitted at IGGMCH after testing positive.Satranjipura case alone has contributed 56.19% of total cases. The reports of first and second samples of over 140 persons are still awaited.The samples of 150 people quarantined on Thursday were taken on Friday at MLA Hostel and Wanadongri. The reports of these, all neighbours of the deceased, are also awaited.Remaining six positive cases are from Mominpura taking total to 24 which is 22.85% of total cases in the district.Zonal medical officer of NMC Mahal-Gandhibagh Zone Dr Khwaja Moinuddin told TOI, “Five persons are immediate family members of 42-year-old who had tested positive on April 18. Two are his brothers, one wife of one of the four brothers and her 5-year-old child. Fifth person is brother of his father,” he said.The person’s five family members— father, mother, wife and two children had tested positive on April 21. Thus, total number of positive persons from this family is now 11.Immediately after the person was tested positive on April 18, the NMC team led by Khwaja had quarantined 27 persons from the family residing in one building at Chudi Gully, Mominpura. Reports of remaining are awaited.NMC has begun to trace close contacts of 11 positive persons. The 42-year-old was taking care of food and other requirements of 8 Tablighi Jamaatis. In late development, report of one more person (male, 38) from Mominpura came positive. The details of the person could not be known from the NMC.Mominpura Family* 42-year-old resident of Chuddi Gully, Mominpura, tested positive on April 18* He was looking after eight Jabalpur-based Jamaatis camping at Darul Falah, Takia Deewanshah, Mominpura.* His five family members— father, mother, wife and two children tested positive on April 21* Reports of his two brothers, wife of one of four brothers, her kid and brother of his father came positive on Friday* Reports of remaining 16 persons from the family are awaited* NMC is now tracing close contacts of all these persons