Seven pregnant women tested Covid-19 positive in Kerala, 5 from Kasaragod
2020-04-25
KOCHI: Of the seven pregnant women who tested positive for Covid-19 in the state, six are from the two main hotspots — Kasaragod and Kannur. They were all infected by relatives who had returned from abroad and had been advised room isolation. This despite the Indian Council of Medical Research’s (ICMR) constant reminder that pregnant women should strictly adhere to social distancing to lower risk of infection.


The women, all between 20 and 30 years of age, who had mild novel coronavirus symptoms were cured within a week of testing positive (with one testing negative after two days). They were admitted to the isolation ward of Kannur Government Medical College hospital. 

Besides, one of the women from Kasaragod delivered a baby on April 11. There is now a 27-year-old, the sole case from Kannur, in hospital who may go into labour any day. Three women — two in early pregnancy and another in her third trimester — were sent home after they tested negative for Covid-19. 

Another woman, who is in her 11th week of pregnancy, is still in hospital, despite testing negative, for observation. 

The seventh pregnant Covid-19 positive patient is from Parippally, Kollam, who is in early pregnancy.

“In other types of coronavirus infection (SARS, MERS) the risk to expectant women appears to increase especially during the last trimester of pregnancy. Since adequate studies are not available in India or abroad about the risk of Covid-19 to pregnant women and newborns, we are studying each case in detail,” said Dr A K Jayasree, professor of community medicine at Kannur MCH, who along with a student, Dr Jerrin Maria Jose, is conducting a study on each Covid-19 positive pregnant case in the hospital. 

Pregnant women are known to be at increased risk of certain infections such as the flu, but it’s unclear if they are at higher risk of contracting Covid-19. 

“During H1N1, we lost many expectant mothers. But from the evidence available so far, Covid-19 doesn’t seem to badly affect a pregnant woman. But it is too early and we can’t take any chances,” said Dr V P Paily of the Kerala Federation of Obstetricians and Gynaecology.

Meanwhile, the 21-year-old Kasaragod woman, who delivered her first baby via Caesarean, as she had fetal distress, is yet to hold her newborn. Though she tested negative two days before her delivery, as per state protocol, she will be in isolation till this week.

