7 relatives of district’s first Covid-19 patient admitted to civil hospital
2020-03-31
Nashik: Seven family members of the patient who tested positive for Covid-19 in a village near Lasalgaon in Niphad taluka were admitted to quarantine ward of the Nashik civil hospital around 1.30am on Monday and their swabs sent for testing.

The 30-year-old man, a bread seller from the village, who had been admitted to the civil hospital on March 27, tested positive on Sunday, following which the district health department swung into action and brought his family members to hospital. The doctor who initially treated him has been home-quarantined and his throat sample sent for testing.

The health department also ordered the screening of all the inhabitants of the village as a precautionary measure. A total of 28 teams of Aanganwadi Sevikas, health workers and Asha have been pressed into service to conduct a house-to-house survey. The village has has a population of 6,888 living in 1,400 houses, said officials.

District health officer (Zilla Parishad) Dawal Salve said, “We have mapped 3km radius around the village. A medical officer each is leading four teams. If the teams find coronavirus symptoms in any villager, he/she will be sent to the Nashik civil hospital for further investigation.”

Salve said that four teams are also working on contact tracing of the patient. “Swabs of people who came in close contact with the patient are also being collected for further investigation.” 

According to officials, the health workers are also screening people from other villages where the patient sold bread. People who visited the clinic of the doctor who had initially treated the Covid-19 patient are also being screened. 

The officials said that the bread seller neither has any international travel history nor came into contact with anyone with the history of foreign travel.

Meanwhile, superintendent of police Arti Singh said that a team of cops has gone to the village concerned to appeal to the inhabitants over there not to panic as the district administration was making all efforts to ensure that the disease does not spread.


