Jaipur: SMS Hospital doctors worked 24/7 to cure Covid-19 patients
2020-03-17
JAIPUR: The defining moment for the doctors at Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital came when a 69-year-old Italian tourist tested positive in the second screening test for Covid-19 on March 2. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

His samples were sent for confirmation to National Institute of Virology, Pune, which also tested positive on March 3. These were anxious moments at SMS Hospital. On March 2 itself, prominent doctors and hospital administration officials huddled and took it as a challenge to overcome Covid-19. It was the moment when the doctors pulled up their socks and took crucial decisions for initiating the treatment. 

Taking it as a challenge, the doctors and healthcare staff worked tirelessly. Most of the doctors worked for hours and did not go home even during the night. Those who went home maintained some distance with their family and took rest in sepa650rate room ensuring safety of their family by ensuring personal hygiene. A lot of doctors did not celebrate Holi, as they were busy handling Covid-19 patients and suspected cases. Without bothering about their own safety, doctors did not hesitate to enter the ICU, where the Covid-19 patients were undergoing treatment. 

“When I reach home, I sleep in a separate room for safety of my family, though I took proper care of my personal hygiene,” said Dr Prakash Keswani, professor (medicine), doctor treating the Italian couple who tested positive for Covid-19 and the 85-year-old patient, who returned from Dubai on February 28 and tested positive for the disease on March 10. 

Doctors also faced difficulty in communicating with the 69-year-old Italian patient who does not know English. For 14 days, the doctors learned his language of sign. “He was trying to communicate with us in sign language. He does not know English and we do not know Italian, so there was a communication gap. Despite that, we understood what he wanted. We provided him almost everything,” said Dr D S Meena, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital. 

The Covid-19 patients were kept at the first floor of the Isolation hospital attached to SMS Medical College. “Since, it is a highly infectious disease, we decided to keep them on the first floor of the isolation hospital. Guards were deployed to prevent entry of any other person except healthcare staff,” said Dr Ajit Singh, additional superintendent, SMS Hospital. 

Dr Singh said, “Doctors worked tirelessly. The SMS Hospital administration kept changing duties of doctors to give rest to the doctors in eight hours.”

“All the prominent doctors of medicine, microbiology, anaesthesia and hospital administration were asked to report immediately by Dr Sudhir Bhandari, who is principal and controller of SMS hospital and also head of the department (medicine). By that time, we were not sure what treatment we should give to the patient. We started looking through the literatures to find an answer. We decided that we should start anti-retroviral therapy, which is safe for the patients,” said Dr Singh. 

SMS Medical College wanted to tread cautiously before starting the treatment. “We decided to start the treatment. Before that, we wanted to take permission of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). Even the ICMR reacted promptly and gave a go ahead for the anti-retroviral therapy for the patient,” Dr Bhandari said. 

He said the credit goes to the entire hospital staff involved in the treatment of Covid-19 patients. 

Doctors were edgy on the next day when the Italian man’s wife was also tested positive. The doctors decided to provide the same treatment to his wife, he added. 

The hospital deployed resident doctors of medicine and anaesthesia, two medical officers and one faculty of medicine (professor, reader or lecturer) for the treatment of Covid-19 patients. 

Days passed, and the wife of the Italian tourist tested negative for the disease. Within five days, she was cured of Covid-19, the doctors claimed. However, they continued to take care of her husband and he was cured on March 15 along with the 85-year-old patient. 


