70% Covid cases asymptomatic, AMC worried
2020-04-21
Ahmedabad: Of the 1,248 Covid-19 cases detected in Ahmedabad, more than 70% showed no classic Covid-19 symptoms and were asymptomatic. This has become a matter of worry for municipal health officials. On April 9, the health authorities came across 30 asymptomatic cases from just one locality, Shafi Manzil and Sharukh Apartments in Danilimda. It was only then that the challenges of Covid-19 detection became evident. This is not all, contacts of Covid-19 patients are testing positive for the virus as long as 26 and 34 days after their contact. There are five such cases, senior municipal officials said. 

“The major challenge we face is convincing patients who are asymptomatic that they are positive. They show us our AMC awareness literature which speaks of high fever, dry cough, sore throat etc, and say they don’t have any of these symptoms and resist us. They feel we are targeting them,” said a senior municipal official who did not want to be identified. 

“We have been testing aggressively and tracing contacts of asymptomatic Covid-19 patients is the only way we can arrest further infections. It is laborious, but there is no other way. We will keep testing as long as we can,” said municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra. He added, “Over 70% of patients were found to be asymptomatic.” 

On whether there will be a change in strategy due to the high ratio of asymptomatic patients, Nehra said, “What change in strategy should you expect? Wherever there is Covid-19 infection or a hotspot, intensive surveillance is being made to spot patients with influenza-like illness (ILI). If they test positive, we trace their contacts. This is the only way.”

Senior municipal officials fear that the problem may get aggravated as a large number of factories become operational outside the side. “Most of the labourers who work there are from congested colonies, some of which have emerged as hotspots.” The curfew-bound areas account for nearly 71% of Covid-19 cases in the city.


