70% of Maharashtra’s fine during lockdown imposed in Marathwada
2020-05-30
AURANGABAD: Marathwada has emerged on top for traffic rule violations during the lockdown with around 70% of the total fine collected from errant motorists across the state — over Rs 4 crore of Rs 5.75 crore — being imposed in the region.

Police from across the state had started imposing fine on motorists for effective implementation of the lockdown. While doing so, Aurangabad city police ended up imposing a fine of over Rs 2.23 crore, leaving behind the metro cities like Mumbai and Pune, since the lockdown came into force over two months back on March 23.

At the same time, Hingoli and Beed districts avoided slapping fine and instead went ahead with registering of offences against the violators.

As per figures available with the state home department, a total of 1,16,670 offences have been registered under section 188 of the IPC since the lockdown — leading to 23,314 arrests and seizure of 75,813 vehicles.

“Rs 5,75,30,267 have been collected in fines from offenders,” tweeted state home minister Anil Deshmukh on Thursday.

With these figures coming to fore, allegations are being made that police used the lockdown period to achieve their annual target of slapping particular number of traffic violation cases and challans.

When contacted, Aurangabad commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad said, “The actual colection of the imposed fine has been about 10 to 20 per cent of the total fine imposed.”

He added that policemen on field have been issued directives to act only against those stepping out of homes for no reason. He also suggested that people should buy groceries, vegetables, milk and other essentials from shops within a kilometre radius of their homes.

Several commoners along with Aurangabad MP Imtiaz Jaleel, Shiv Sena MLC Ambadas Danve have expressed their anger over slapping of fines and vehicle seizure.“If a person steps out to purchase milk, how will he prove or convince a policeman that he is actually heading to purchase milk or vegetable?” Jaleel asked.

