Bihar: 70 people came in contact with three Covid-19 positive cases
2020-03-24
PATNA: Over 70 people have so far been identified, who came in direct contact with three positive Covid-19 cases in Bihar so far. The one from Munger died on Saturday. Sources said they are either family members or friends who were in direct contact with infected persons.


As per a press release issued by state health society, no positive case was reported in Bihar on Monday. Of the total 185 samples collected so far, three tested positive and 127 negative. Reports of 53 samples were still awaited and two got destroyed. 

The three Covid-19 cases were reported on Sunday. The Munger native had returned from Qatar and died at AIIMS-Patna. Other two positive cases are from the state capital and admitted in isolation ward of AIIMS-Patna and Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH).

Munger civil surgeon Dr K Purushottam said so far they had identified 62 people who had come in contact with the deceased. “The process of tracing others is still going on. Twenty of his relatives have been quarantined and their samples have been collected. We are requesting others, including all those who participated in his last rituals to come forward and give their samples,” Dr Purushottam said, adding, “A special team of doctors and nursing staff had been called from Bhagalpur hospital. After collecting all the samples, they will leave for Patna on Tuesday.”

He said a newly built school building where they gave their samples has been earmarked for quarantining.

A health department official said apart from relatives of the deceased, the samples of nursing staff who had attended him in Patna, had also been sent for the test. “This person had visited three hospitals in Munger, too, before coming to Patna. All those hospitals and doctors are being contacted,” he said.

State nodal officer for Covid-19, Dr Ragini Mishra, said eight relatives of a person in isolation ward of AIIMS-Patna and other three relatives of another person in NMCH have been kept in isolation and their samples have been sent. “We are also tracing all those people who came in contact with infected persons,” said Dr Ragini.

Regarding the one who returned from Scotland and admitted to NMCH, the health official said he had followed all the precautionary measures and avoided meeting people. “He himself isolated and was wearing a mask. He had not met many people. His three relatives have been identified and their samples have been sent to testing,” he said.

