70 quarantined, two private hospitals sealed in Patna
2020-04-17
PATNA: Two hospitals and two diagnostic centres in the city were sealed on Thursday and more than 70 healthcare workers quarantined for coming in contact with a 35-year-old man from Vaishali, who had tested positive on Wednesday night, and is said to be in a critical condition at AIIMS-Patna.

Patna DM Kumar Ravi said, “The Vaishali man is also a cancer patient and had visited two hospitals for treatment— Popular Hospital on New Bypass Road and Central Hospital in Khusrupur.”

He added, “He had gone to Max Life Diagnostics at Kankarbagh for various check-ups, while a staff of Sona Diagnostic at Meethapur had gone to him for collecting his sample. So far, 73 health workers, including doctors, nurses and sanitation workers, have been quarantined and their samples are being collected. We are tracing others, who could have come in contact with this person or the health centres.”

State nodal officer for Covid-19 Dr Ragini Mishra said he was admitted with brain tumour, but has also developed respiratory problems. “He has not travelled outside the state for the past three months. He was tested for Covid-19 virus as he was suffering from severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) and he was found positive for the virus," Dr Mishra said.

The Vaishali resident had first come to a private hospital at Khusrupur on March 23. He was admitted in the hospital for four days. He then went to a private hospital on Bypass Road on April 3 in an ambulance and was discharged on April 7. When his condition deteriorated he was brought to AIIMS-Patna on Tuesday.

Doctors and officials are now apprehending that the Vaishali native might have got infected in either of the two private hospitals or labs. “Since he has no travel history, we think he might have caught the virus from hospitals he visited,” said Dr Mishra.

She added that co-morbidity in Covid-19 has further deteriorated his condition and cited the example of the Munger native, who also had co-morbidities and later developed SARI and eventually died.


