70-year-old man from Mominpura is Nagpur’s second Covid-19 casualty
2020-04-30
NAGPUR: A 70-year-old man who had tested positive for Covid-19 on April 21 and was undergoing treatment at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) died at 3.30pm on Wednesday. It is Vidarbha’s first death in isolation ward after being tested positive. In all earlier 10 cases, the positive status became known only after patient’s death.


Number of Covid-19 deaths in city is now two, the earlier one being a 68-year-old person from Satranjipura. The two localities have become city’s hotspots for the epidemic.

Dean of IGGMCH Dr Ajay Keoliya told TOI, “The deceased was a patient of chronic hypertension. His condition was stable since being admitted in Isolation Ward. He suffered a sudden cardiac arrest on Wednesday.” The patient was not on ventilator during nine-day treatment.

“Patients of chronic hypertension can suffer sudden cardiac arrest. His condition deteriorated in no time and there was no scope for putting him on ventilator,” said Dr Sagar Pande, deputy medical superintendent of IGGMCH.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe has reportedly sent a team from the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) to conduct a death audit.

Mundhe told TOI, “Our team quarantined the person as he was family member of one of the positive persons. He was asymptomatic when admitted. We have to learn from things so need is to ascertain reason behind the death,” he said.

NMC sources told TOI, “Deceased was along with his wife in the isolation ward. He was given oxygen and was stable. Then, he had lunch and died soon afterwards,” sources said.

As per the guidelines, post-mortem of the deceased will not be performed. Last rites will be conducted as per protocol of the NMC with only five persons permitted in funeral.

The deceased was among 13 tested positive from single family from Choodi Gully, Mominpura. He along with 27 family members was quarantined on April 19 after his 42-old-son tested positive on April 18. Positive persons from the family are admitted in IGGMCH and GMCH. Those who have tested negative are in Vanamati under institutional quarantine.

The family belongs to the chain of cap seller (Mominpura’s first case) and Jabalpur-based Tablighi Jamaatis (TJs) who had tested positive before the family.


