7,000 arrested in Bareilly zone forviolating lockdown since March 25
2020-04-11
Bareilly: Around 2,100 cases have been registered and 7,284 individuals were held by the police for violating Covid-19 lockdown in Bareilly zone since March 25.

The maximum number of cases were from Moradabad district. Here, 767 cases were registered and 2,118 people have been arrested. In Bareilly, 300 cases were registered and 1,350 people were arrested.

Moradabad has recorded nearly 30 per cent of the total cases in the zone's nine districts. Additional director general of police, Avinash Chandra, has instructed all the SSPs to ensure compliance of lockdown in their respective districts and take necessary action against the violators. Residents of areas identified as hotspots which have been sealed by police can always dial helpline '112'. Movement is strictly restricted in "Covid-19 hotspot" zones.

“Since the beginning of the lockdown, people are looking for opportunities to get out on the roads. Sometimes it is difficult to keep youngsters at home. They roam around on their bikes for no reason. Many a times we give them warning, but they hardly listen. So, we even have to seize their bikes and sometimes book them under section 188 of IPC ," said an inspector in Bareilly.

Police have challaned nearly 1,200 vehicles and collected Rs 20 lakh as fines till April 9 in Bareilly district alone. But, people continue to violate the lockdown, the inspector said.

At least 1,392 have been arrested in Pilibhit district as people assembled in large numbers in marketplaces, and also attended social gatherings.

Additional SP (crime) RK Bhartiya told TOI on Friday, “We always request people to obey the lockdown guidelines. They should only come out of their houses if it is urgent. Dial '112' is working and district administration is ready to reach out to anyone in need. Even I carry essential food items on my vehicle and share it with the needy.”

“Those charged under IPC section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) - a bailable offence - are given bail from the area police stations," he added.


