72% citizens paid more for groceries during lockdown
2020-06-05
Nagpur: With the government mandate of staying at home as much as possible during lockdown-1 to 4 from March 25 till May 31, consumers juggled between shopping for essentials and at the same time keeping themselves and families safe by minimizing exposure.

A survey by LocalCircles, country’s leading social media platform followed by government and agencies, 72% consumers paid more for packaged food and groceries during the lockdowns with traders lowering discounts and charging over MRP main reasons.

“Despite lockdown relaxations via Unlock-1, 28% consumers are still getting packaged food and groceries delivered at their doorsteps,” says Akshay Gupta, general manager, LocalCircles.

Many consumers reported on LocalCircles that during lockdown-1 to 4, they ended up paying more for many essentials and grocery products as compared to pre-lockdown.

LocalCircles conducted a survey to get consumer pulse on their experience of buying essentials during and after the lockdown, with respect to pricing. The survey received over 16,500 responses from consumers located in 210 districts.

Consumers were asked about purchase of packaged food and grocery items done by them since March 22 and their experience with respect to pricing. Around 25% consumers said for the same items, prices paid were same as before the lockdown, while 49% said prices paid were higher as discounts were lower than before the lockdown; 23% said prices paid were higher as many times they were charged above MRP. Charging more than MRP, online or at physical retail stores, is a violation of Legal Metrology Act.

Prior to the lockdown, various retailers and e-commerce grocery apps were offering big discounts as the supply market has been heating up with the arrival of Amazon Pantry & Fresh, Flipkart, Big Basket, Grofers and the latest entrant JioMart. But during lockdown, retailers as well as e-tailers minimized or eliminated the discounts, forcing consumers to shell out more for same products.

In an earlier LocalCircles’ survey, 39% consumers had said that during the lockdown, they were charged above MRP by retail stores while 21% said they were charged above MRP by online sellers. The survey indicated that consumers found MRP compliance to be better on e-commerce sites, as compared to local retail stores.

Consumers were also asked now that the lockdown has been relaxed, how they and their family are buying most of the packaged food and grocery items — 17% said they have been buying via e-commerce/grocery apps while 8% said they call or WhatsApp retail stores and get them to deliver at the doorstep. However, 19% said they order via the colony/area neighbourhood store and 53% said they have been buying from the local retail stores or market.

“This means that despite lockdown relaxations, 28% consumers are still getting packaged food and groceries delivered at the doorstep. The primary reason for this seems to be the effort to keep themselves and their family safe from the coronavirus infection by not stepping out of home unnecessarily,” says Gupta.

In the online discussions on LocalCircles, many consumers indicated that with all physical retail now functioning after Unlock 1, they are hopeful that the discounts will once again make a comeback on retail stores as well as on the e-commerce grocery apps, allowing them to save on essentials in this time of crisis.


