72% want lockdown extension in 19 high virus load districts
2020-05-30
Nagpur: As lockdown 4.0 comes to an end in a couple of days, people have started discussing the possibility of fifth extension in view of the rising novel coronavirus (Covid-19) cases. Though the opinion is divided, a whopping majority — 72% — citizens feel a complete lockdown is needed in 19 high virus load districts in the country to contain spread of Covid-19.In the event of lockdown extension, 73% people want the government to re-deploy some ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ funds to support those who will lose livelihood in the high virus load districts. At the same time, percentage of citizens who want strict lockdown for two additional weeks in high virus load districts has increased from 45% on May 12 to 72% on May 28.LocalCircles, country’s top social media online platform, conducted a survey to assess what citizens think on what should the government do at the end of lockdown 4.0. The two-part survey received over 18,000 responses from 221 districts of the country. Citizens were asked what should be done with regard to two-week lockdown extension post May 31. In response, 60% of the respondents said there should be a full lockdown in 19 high virus load districts (that are also among the red zones with over 500 Covid-19 cases), partial lockdown in regular red zones and no lockdown in orange and green zones.While 13% respondents favoured a partial lockdown in 19 high virus load districts, regular red zone districts and no lockdown in orange and green zone districts, 6% said government should announce partial lockdown in these districts, no lockdown in regular red zone, orange and green zone districts. Also, 4% respondents said there should be a full lockdown in 19 high virus load districts, no lockdown in regular red zone, orange and green zone districts. Only 5% said there should be no lockdown anywhere and 8% said there should be a complete lockdown pan India.This clearly means 72% citizens feel a complete lockdown is needed in the 19 high virus load districts, which include Mumbai, Pune, Thane, Aurangabad, Nashik (Maharashtra), Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Surat (Gujarat), Indore, Bhopal (MP), Chennai, Thiruvallur (TN), Jaipur, Jodhpur (Rajasthan), Delhi, Agra, Kolkata, Hyderabad (Telangana) and Kurnool (AP), said Akshay Gupta, general manager, LocalCircles.The 19 high virus load districts have 80% active cases of the country and each one has more than 500 active cases. According to people, only home delivery of essential supplies should be allowed here and everything else should be shut. In the 121 regular red zones, public is in favour of continued partial lockdown. In orange and green zones, most people are in favour of permitting all normal activities.During the survey conducted on May 3, 74% citizens were in favour of two additional weeks of complete lockdown in high virus load districts. On May 12, this number dropped to 45% as the citizens were getting desperate to get out of their homes and get back to work. Now, looking at how fast Covid-19 cases are increasing, this number has again gone up to 72% on May 28, Gupta pointed out.“The government is under tremendous pressure to reopen the economy as the lockdown has led to reduced growth and enormous job losses. The informal sector and gig workers have been hugely hit,” says Gupta.On re-deployment of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ funds for people who will lose livelihood if the lockdown is extended, 73% answered in an affirmative while 17% answered said ‘no’ and 10% were unsure about it. “Such a move will ensure that if a complete lockdown is extended in high virus load districts, those without daily wages will be able to get some financial support so as to sustain themselves,” said Gupta.What People Want* 18,000-plus responses from over 221 districts* 53% male respondents, 47% female* 56% respondents from tier-1, 30% from tier-II & 14% from tier-III, IV and rural districts*72% want complete lockdown in 19 high virus load districts* 73% want partial lockdown only in 121 regular red zones* 82% want no lockdown at all in 600 green & orange zones