73-year-old Covid-19 positive woman cured after 18 days of treatment, discharged
2020-04-10
Pilibhit: “It’s nothing short of a miracle,” chuckled doctors buoyed by their success when 73-year-old Saudi Arabia-return woman tested negative for the second time after 18 days of intensive care and she finally walked out of the Pilibhit district hospital on Wednesday afternoon, even as nearly 40% of novel coronavirus victims worldwide are people above 60.

The woman left for home expressing her deep gratitude to the doctors and medical staff. “Allah and doctors have given me a new life for which I express my extreme gratitude to them. I had lost all hopes to see my family again,” said the woman feeling overwhelmed with emotions.

It was in the night of March 21 — only a few days after she, along with her husband and their 33-year-old son, landed in Mumbai after completing 20-day Umrah pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia — when the woman woke up abruptly complaining of breathlessness, sore throat and cough. As her restlessness grew, doctors were called in and she was quarantined. Her samples were sent for Covid-19 test to King George’s Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow.

As soon as she was confirmed positive, the district administration swung into action and launched a massive search for all those —nearly 34 people — who were part of the lot that returned from Saudi to Pilibhit. Later, her son — a B Tech — was tested positive, too.

Upon their arrival on March 18, the Mumbai airport authorities had allowed them to embark on their onward journey but not before putting a stamp on their arms, which required them to quarantine themselves in Pilibhit, but they erased the stamp and concealed their travel history from the Pilibhit administration when they reached home on March 19, said sources with the district administration. Besides, they kept on socialising until the woman was quarantined. On the complaint of chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Seema Agarwal, police booked them under sections 269 (unlawfully or negligently doing any act which is likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life), 270 (malignantly doing any act which is likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life) and 271 (disobedience to quarantine rules) of IPC on March 29.

The health department, meanwhile, added another feather to its cap when her son, too, was tested negative by KGMU on Thursday for the first time and started showing signs of improvement.

Bursting into emotions, the woman’s husband, a retired government teacher, said, “For the past 18 days, I have only been praying to Allah for the speedy recovery of my wife and son. I am the happiest man today. I don’t have words to thank the doctors and medical staff. I have immense respect for them.”

Reacting to the recovery of both the patients, district hospital chief medical superintendent Dr RP Singh and additional CMO Dr CM Chaturvedi said, “The recovery of a 73-year-old person, whose immune system responds slow, is no less than a miracle. It is an outcome of a concerted and sincere effort by doctors and the nursing staff, who did not feel scared in fulfilling their duty.”

“We kept boosting her moral strength as an integral part of the treatment and focused on her diet. She was, too, weak due to fever, cough and sore throat when admitted to the isolation ward, but it was the devotion of the entire medical team that she was fully cured,” said Dr Singh.

Expressing satisfaction over her treatment, district magistrate Vaibhav Shrivastav said, “The complete recovery of the elderly woman and her son is a matter of great relief, but we should not be overconfident about the results, as we still have a long way to go.”


