74-year-old 1st Covid-19 death in Telangana; total cases 67 as 8 more positive
2020-03-29
HYDERABAD: Twenty-five days after the first positive case in the state, a 74-year-old man became the first Covid-19 fatality in Telangana. Also, eight new positive cases were reported on Saturday, taking the total count to 67 in the state. The only silver lining was that test results of 10 who were earlier Covid-19 positive came negative and they would be discharged soon.



Coronavirus live updates

Confirming the death, health minister Eatala Rajender on Saturday said, "The 74-year- old man from Khairatabad had gone to Delhi on March 14 on religious work and returned to the city on March 17. He started developing symptoms, including breathing problems and fever on March 20 and died at a corporate hospital while undergoing treatment. His wife and son have been put under home quarantine."

Sources said the man had come in contact with hundreds and health authorities have started contact tracing.

The septuagenarian was first treated at a private hospital at Saifabad and later moved to a corporate hospital in the same area where he was declared dead on Thursday night. On suspicion, his body was shifted to Gandhi Hospital where doctors confirmed that the cause of the death was Covid-19.

"So far 67 people have tested positive with eight new cases coming to light on Saturday. Of the total local transmission cases, majority of them were from four families," he added.

"Among the positive cases were four members of a family from Qutbullapur, six of a family from the Old City and some people with a travel history to Delhi (religious work), doctors and staff working at the airport. In the Qutbullapur case, the person who returned from Delhi had not even informed his own family members about symptoms. As a result, the entire family got infected," the minister told the media on Saturday.

As of now, 13,000 people were under surveillance and quarantine and the number might drop soon as many of them had completed the mandatory 14-day isolation period, he said.


No dearth of beds, equipment: Minister

Claiming that there was no dearth of beds or equipment, the minister said 1,400 isolation beds and wards would be ready at the Gachibowli stadium in the next six days. The minister had earlier in the day inspected the stadium along with officials to oversee arrangements for providing temporary toilets and water supply.

He urged the people not to panic and inform the government about people who had returned from foreign destination after March 1 and appealed to returnees to not try to escape from home quarantine. “If anybody tries to escape from home quarantine, they would be sent to jail,” he warned.

While appealing to the people not to go to religious places, he said three positive cases had history of visiting places of worship in Delhi. “If one person tests positive, there is a chance of the entire family getting infected,” the health minister said.

Urging people not to ostracise doctors working at Gandhi Hospitals in their neighbourhoods, he said the health department was considering bringing a shift system. “The government is considering giving them 10-day duty and an equal number of days leave,” the minister added.

