Ahmedabad: 75% of Covid-19 cases found by surveillance
2020-05-28
AHMEDABAD: Three out of four fresh cases reported in the city are through active surveillance. Of the 245 cases reported on Tuesday, 184 were found through active surveillance said AMC officials.

Areas in New West Zone reported 21 cases, mostly from Vejalpur, Ghatlodia, Chandlodia areas, and a few from areas near Shivranjani Crossroads. Of these 21 cases, 11 were detected through active surveillance while 10 patients had gone for testing by themselves.

The city reported 248 cases till 5pm on Wednesday. Apart from Sarkhej, Vejalpur and Maktampura, cases were reported from Sepal Residency and Sath Sangath Apartment. Also, a 35-year-old woman tested positive from Ramdevnagar area. This was probably the first case from Ramdevnagar area which has slums like Gulbai Tekra.

From areas of West Zone like Nava Vadaj, Naranpura, Navrangpura, Vasna and Paldi, 47 cases were reported. On Monday, 67 cases had been reported from here, the highest figure for a day from the area.

Rajiv Gupta, ACS, forest and environment, who is overall in-charge of activities to control further spread of Covid-19 pandemic in Ahmedabad, said that to increase surveillance, AMC has launched 104 helplines and started Dhanvantari raths. A total of 74,000 people have been checked by the Dhanvantari and Arogya raths. The officer said as a part of the active surveillance drive about 80-odd Dhanvantari raths (ambulances) which have ayurveda, homoeopathy and allopathy doctors and lab technicians, pharmacists and paramedics, are moving in the city.

Gupta said that the Dhanvantari raths were started on May 17 and on the first day 40 raths covered 160 areas. The number increased to 50 raths and on Tuesday 84 raths covered 332 areas.

He further said that on May 17 there were 10% patients with fever, 32% patients had cough and cold and 0.6% patients had acute respiratory tract infection. This has now reduced. There was a drop of about 2% in patients coming with fever, while there had been a drop of 16% in patients with cough and cold and the number of patients coming with respiratory tract infections is now almost negligible.

8 new cases reported in rural Ahmedabad

The Ahmedabad district barring Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation has reported eight fresh cases taking the total number to 178 cases. Of these eight , four were from Bavla, one from Radhevandan Apartment in Sanand and three were from Dholka town. In three of these new cases the patients were below 30 years while in four cases they were between 31 and 50 years. One case was of a 70-year-old man. Officials said that there were seven men and one woman among these eight patients reported from the district including the woman from Bavla.


