75% of Dharavi's Covid patients in healthcare, other essential services
2020-05-23
MUMBAI: A study conducted by the BMC of 1,360 Covid-19 patients in Dharavi has found that more than 75% are essential service and healthcare workers. The study found that many of them went on to infect their family members. Earlier, the BMC had found that 35% of Dharavi's Covid-19 cases were within families. On Friday, 53 cases and one death were reported in Dharavi, taking the cumulative to 1,478 cases, including 56 deaths. Out of the 1,360 cases that were analysed by the BMC to study trends, the recovery rate was found to be 39% - significantly higher than the city and state averages. But the case fatality rate, at 4%, too is higher than the city and state averages. 

One of the earliest patients traced in Dharavi, in the first week of April, was a BMC sweeper. In the second week, a 50-year-old woman resident of Dharavi's Muslim Nagar, who worked as a help in a civic-run hospital in Parel, was found with Covid. BMC officials said that a significant number of those living in Dharavi are Class IV employees in various essential services. "As they need to step out for work, their chances of getting infected are higher," said Kiran Dighavkar, assistant municipal commissioner, G-North ward, under which Dharavi falls.

Some of the workers are with the fire brigade. Recently, a firefighter with the Dharavi fire station tested positive, requiring his family to be placed in quarantine. Operations at the fire station continued, though the building, equipment and premises were sanitized.

Friday's death was of an 85-year-old resident of Matunga Labour Camp, which continues to be a hotspot, with over 100 cases. Dr Baliga Nagar, from where the first Covid case in Dharavi was reported on April 1, registered a new case on Friday, that of a 62-year-old man. Meanwhile, in the other areas of G-North ward (which contains Dharavi), 23 new cases were reported in Mahim, taking its total to 286, while Dadar reported 13 new cases, taking its total to 205. -Richa Pinto 


