75 shops at integrated market to be makeshift Covid-19 isolation wards
2020-03-17
TRICHY: The Trichy district administration and public health and preventive medicine department are in the process of converting 75 shops of the Central market for vegetables, fruits and flowers at Kallikudi into hospital wards to accommodate passengers, who have returned from countries with Covid-19 cases.


The market, situated on the Trichy-Madurai four-way lane has remained unused since its inauguration in 2017. It has a total 830 shops, of which 75 are likely to be occupied by the public health and preventive medicine department as part of the preventive measure against Covid-19 in a few days as a makeshift arrangement.

“The idea is to quarantine passengers from countries worst-hit by Covid-19. Even if they are symptom-free, they will be isolated if they are above 60 years of age or anyone with comorbid conditions. They will be quarantined in the shops to be converted as wards for 14 days. It will also help us prevent the spreading of the virus in the community,” deputy director of health services (DDHS) Dr A Subramani told TOI on Monday.

The seven countries that have high numbers of Covid-19 cases include China, Italy, Iran, South Korea, Spain, Germany and France. Though special attention will be given to passengers from these seven countries, screening for the remaining countries like Singapore, Malaysia and Sri Lanka will also continue.

Public health department will provide food and accommodation to the passengers. Cots and other necessary equipment will be shifted to the market. Medicines will also be kept ready. Doctors and other health department officials will be posted here to monitor if the passengers show any symptoms of Covid-19.

“Health inspectors and doctors will check the health status of the people. If they are found to be fit during the quarantine period, they will be sent home. In case of any symptoms, they will be rushed to the isolation ward,” said Subramani.

As of now, four passengers with symptoms such as fever and cold are being monitored at the isolation ward of the Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) in Trichy.

A health official said that two of them are likely to be discharged on Monday as they were free from symptom after treatment from Friday night. 


