77 people complete 28-day quarantine for coronavirus
2020-03-01
Jaipur: As many as 77 people who returned from China, the epicentre of novel coronavirus outbreak, have completed the 28-day tenure of isolation on Saturday.They were worried when they reached Jaipur a few weeks ago. Since they have now completed 28 days of surveillance, they have heaved a sigh of relief. Varun (name changed) told STOI that they returned from China on January 13. They were the first who were kept in isolation. “We were asked to remain at home (home quarantine) for at least 28 days. I was kept in the isolation ward at Sawai Man Singh hospital for six days. They took my samples twice and both times, I was tested negative for nCoV. My 28-day ordeal has ended now,” he said. However, 261 people are still under surveillance. According to the health department figures, till date, a total 73 suspected patients had been admitted in isolation since the scare of nCoV gripped the state in mid-January. The health department has conducted 100 tests of nCoV, all of them tested negative, a health department official said. WHO has declared the recent nCoV epidemic as public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC). In India, so far only three confirmed cases of nCoV have been reported, all from Kerala. Keeping a close eye on nCoV, the health department is conducting nCoV screening at Sanganer airport, Jaipur. They are conducting screening of all passengers arriving from the eight international flights daily since January 28, 2020. For the purpose, five doctors and five paramedical staff have been deputed at the airport. Passengers are screened using non-contact thermal scanner. “Till today, 22,437 passengers of 152 flights have been screened,” said the official.The official said those who have travelled recently from the corona-affected countries must inform the national/state/district helpline number and remain under strict home isolation for 28 days from the date of arrival in India, irrespective of whether they are symptomatic or asymptomatic. Those who have travelled Wuhan-China since January 15, 2020 onwards must get themselves tested for nCoV at the government-designated centres. 