77 year old cancer patient, son beat Covid in Dhanbad
2020-06-03
Dhanbad: A 77-year-old woman suffering from blood cancer was discharged from hospital in Dhanbad after she made a full recovery. Paramjeet Kaur, a resident of Jamadoba, remained in hospital in Dhanbad’s Saraidhela area for 23 days before she was declared cured on Sunday evening along with a few other patients. Till Tuesday evening, 57 Covid-19 cases have been reported in Dhanbad and 45 of these are active.

Kaur, who was living in Mumbai with her son Manpreet Singh for a year for treatment was, tested positive for Covid-19 positive on May 9 soon after her return to Dhanbad on May 8. She was shifted to hospital on May 9 along with her son, who was also diagnosed with Covid-19.

Talking to TOI on Tuesday, Manpreet, whose family owns a garment shop, said, “We are looking forward to go to Mumbai soon so that my mother’s treatment can continue. She was diagnosed with blood cancer in Mumbai a year ago and was undergoing treatment there, but we had to return in May due to the spike in Covid cases in Maharashrtra.”

Singh, currently living in his ancestral house in the coal hub, said, “We are thankful to doctors. They too good care of us and ensured we returned home in good health.” 

Talking to TOI over phone, Dhanbad DC Amit Kumar said, “Treating her was a bit of a challenge as she is in an advance stage of cancer. We consulted Apollo Hospital oncologist Dr Karmakar for inputs for the Patliputra Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) team led by Dr U K Ojha.”

He added that Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCCL) management, led by its chairman-cum-MD P M Prasad helbed by making all its resource and best doctors available for her treatment. The Covid hospital in Dhanbad has been set up in BCCL’s Central Hospital at Jagjivan Nagar area in Dhanbad. 

Kumar added, “Staying positive and keeping the spirit up is crucial for treatment in such cases. All the patients, including Kaur, followed all the instructions given by the doctors during treatment and showed immense faith and confidence.”


