79% people want lockdown lifted in dists with no Covid-19 cases after April 14
2020-04-30
NAGPUR: Seventy-nine per cent citizens are in favour of unlocking all districts with no Covid-19 cases after April 15, while 63% citizens favour keeping public transportation systems (air, rail, bus) shut in districts that are kept locked post May 3. However, 47% citizens are for continuing lockdown till last week of May.


These are the findings of a survey conducted by LocalCircles, which works with states and central governments to take social media to the next level. The 3-poll survey, which was conducted last week and results declared on Tuesday, received more than 24,000 votes from 254 districts across India.

The ministry of home affairs (MHA) issued a notification on April 24 in conjunction with the April 15 notification, permitting all stand-alone shops and establishments to operate even to sell non-essential items in districts which lie outside the red or containment zones.

“People have been divided in their opinion on how unlocking of unprecedented 40-day lockdown should be done. Some are in favour of complete unlocking while others want a partial unlocking. Hence, LocalCircles conducted a survey among citizens to know their views on the process of easing lockdown,” said Akshay Gupta, general manager, LocalCircles, Delhi. 

In the first question, citizens were asked about districts with new Covid-19 cases after April 15, how Centre should go about lockdown after May 3. To this, 20% said the government should keep them fully locked till May 23, or another 20 days, while 27% said it should keep them fully locked till May 31. However, 47% said these districts should be unlocked fully post May 3, but hotspots within the districts should be kept locked. Only 5% said they should be fully unlocked post May 3.

A month after the nationwide lockdown, the Centre has allowed neighbourhood shops selling both essential and non-essential items in residential areas to open provided they work only with 50% strength of workers, ensure compulsory wearing of masks, and strictly adhere to social distancing norms.

To another question about districts with no new Covid-19 cases after April 15 or no Covid-19 cases at all till date, 7% said such districts should be kept fully locked till May 23 while 12% said such districts should be kept fully locked till May 31, but 67% said these districts should be unlocked fully post May 3, and only the old hotspots should be kept locked. Only 12% want the government to unlock them fully after May 3, even if there are old hotspots that were identified prior to April 15.

Interestingly, 79% citizens are in favour of unlocking districts with no cases or no cases after April 15, and 67% want just old hotspots in such districts to be locked post May 3. However, shops in marketplaces and malls will still remain closed till May 3, while relaxations will not be applicable to coronavirus hotspots and containment zones. 

Gupta said, “Citizens want lockdown to be carefully lifted with clear segregation between hotspots and non-hotspot areas. They also want the government to ensure that all containment zones are completely cordoned off.”

When asked how should the public transportation (air, rail, inter-city buses) function after May 3, 32% said all inter-district transportation systems must be kept shut, while 29% said only inter-district transportation between unlocked districts must be opened, while 34% said all inter-district transportation facilities must be opened with restrictions in lockdown districts.

“The survey shows that public opinion is in favour of opening lockdown in all districts with no Covid-19 cases after April 15, while keeping only hotspots under lockdown. LocalCircles will be submitting the findings to central and state governments to decide the way forward,” said Gupta.

