Coronavirus outbreak: 7,000 screened at Chennai airport, samples tested so far negative
2020-02-04
CHENNAI: More than 7,000 people, including 1,150 from China and surrounding regions, were screened for symptoms of novel Coronavirus at the city airport until Monday.


Patients are screened as per the standard screening protocol and advised 28-day home quarantine with or without blood test. Ten people have been admitted in various government hospitals across the state. Of the 1,150 in home quarantine, 319 are from Chennai, 72 from Coimbatore, 38 from Madurai and 50 from Trichy. “Blood tests and nasal/ throat swabs are taken for patients who come from Wuhan or patients showing symptoms such as cold, fever or breathing difficulty,” said health minister C Vijayabaskar. While a dozen of the 18 samples sent to the King Institute of Preventive Medicine tested negative, results of four samples being tested by the National Institute of Virology in Pune are awaited, he said.

While one patient with travel history to China was admitted to Villupuram Medical College with symptoms of the virus, a 35-year-old man, native of Needamangalam in Tiruvarur, who returned from China was admitted to Tiruvarur Medical College Hospital. The man who worked as a cook came home on January 31. “He came to the primary health centre near his house with fever, cold and cough. Doctors there referred him here,” said the medical college principal Muthukumaran. His condition is stable and test results are awaited, he said.

On Monday, health department officials held meetings with district collectors, heads of social welfare department, school and higher education department for drawing up an action plan against the virus. “Our aim is to prevent the infection in the state. We are asking schools to ensure personal and hand hygiene. All public places should be disinfected,” said director of public health Dr K Kolandaisamy. The state has also asked all schools to provide students with soap and running water. The state is also in touch with the Centre about the quarantined 53 students who returned from China, he said. 

Earlier, deputy CM O Panneerselvam said hospitals and border areas were being closely monitored to prevent the spread of coronavirus in the state. Farmers of the border districts have been advised not to shake hands or talk without covering their mouth and nose, specially while sneezing or coughing.

Deputy director of health services, Trichy, Dr A Subramani said health inspectors were visiting quarantined passengers to check for symptoms of the disease. “We have asked the inspectors to bring patients showing symptoms to the hospital as per protocol. They should be given a mask and transported in an ambulance. They will be kept in an isolation ward of the medical college hospital,” Subramani said.


