7L telecom staff to get full pay during lockdown
2020-03-27
Chennai: Nearly seven lakh employees, both direct and contract, will get their full pay for the current lockdown period, a senior official at the industry body said. 

India is under a lockdown after the coronavirus pandemic started spreading fast. PM Narendra Modi, ordered a 21 day lockdown from Monday night to end on April 14, ambushing most businesses.

The Electronics Manufacturing Services (EMS) which employs seven lakh people across factories in India, with high concentration in Noida and Sriperumbudur near Chennai has decided to shut down all manufacturing activities as it did not want its workforce battle a pandemic, besides moving people and materials to the factory gates would be tough considering the complete shut down of public transport. “We have decided to follow the collective wisdom of the prime minister and all the units have decided to shut down operation for the 21 day lockdown,” said Pankaj Mohindroo, founder and national president of Indian Cellular Association, the apex body of mobile handset industry in India. “Noida (NCR) is the biggest cluster followed by Sriperumbudur with nearly 25% to 35% of the all workforce.”

“We have shut our factories in Chennai (MEPZ) and other locations. All the employees will be paid their full wages for this lockdown period,” said Sreeram Srinivasan, CEO of Syrma Technology. The company employs nearly 2,500 persons across its Chennai and NCR factories. 

The lockdown in EMS is bound to impact the supply chain of several handset makers including Apple and Xiaomi. Early in the calendar year, manufacturing operations sputtered due to lack of parts supplies from China due to the Corona pandemic there. Just when China is getting back, India has announced a shutdown, forcing factories to down shutters. 

As per state estimates, TN ranks third in India in terms of electronic exports at $1.27 billion in FY 2017-18, with Chennai home to two Electronics and Hardware SEZs in Sriperumbudur (486 acres) and Oragadam (348 acres).

Suffering a slump after the exit of its key patron Nokia in 2014, TN’s electronic manufacturing sector, which is the second largest hub in the country after UP, has received a booster shot with Foxconn getting the go-ahead to set up a smartphone assembly plant at Sriperumbudur.

US electronics maker Flex is another large job creator in the state. Salcomp India, the manufacturer of chargers for smartphones and other devices, has agreed to take over the now defunct Nokia factory. 


