7th patient tests positive for coronavirus in Agra, shifted to Delhi hospital
2020-03-10
AGRA: After another person, the seventh in the city, tested positive for coronavirus on Sunday, the district administration and health department has shortlisted 375 “vulnerable” cases and is closely monitoring them.


At the same time, all 22 samples of suspected cases collected on Sunday tested negative. 

Confirming this, district magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “All 22 samples which had been collected at the district hospital on Sunday and sent to King George’s Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow have been tested negative. All these suspected patients have been advised home quarantine and we will keep them under surveillance for the next 14 days.” 

The DM said, “Till Monday evening, 238 samples had been collected. So far, seven positive cases have surfaced from Agra. Each and every suspected patient needs to follow the precautions issued by the ministry of health.” 

All the seven people who tested positive from Agra are associated with the group of shoe exporters that returned from Italy last month. All the patients have been shifted to the Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital and Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. 

Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats, chief medical officer (CMO), said, “We have completed the target of conducting survey at 1.65 lakh houses. People who had come in contract with the infected people or had recently travelled abroad have been screened. We have identified around 375 people who have a cold, fever or difficulty in breathing. We will be closely monitoring the health of these people for the next few days. The situation is completely under control. We have all the required arrangements to deal with any emergency.” 

Satish Verma, superintendent in-charge of the district hospital, said, “On Monday, we collected nasal, oral and blood samples of 59 people who had come in the contact with the infected patients. The samples were collected with full precaution by a team of experts and sent to KGMU. The medical reports are likely to be received on Tuesday.” 

The health department has set up another sample collection centre for suspected cases of COVID-19 at the employment office, near the district hospital. According to the CMO, the centre will start functioning from Tuesday.

Meanwhile, Agra Municipal Corporation (AMC) is carrying out a city-wide fogging and anti-larva spraying drive to put a tab on the possibility of spread of the disease.

