8 booked in Vaijapur for violating home quarantine
2020-03-29
Aurangabad: The Aurangabad rural police have booked eight people on charges of violating the mandatory home quarantine that they were supposed to undergo after returning from abroad.

An offence against the suspects has been registered with Gangapur police station under section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the Indian Penal Code. In addition, sections of National Disaster Management Act, 2005, have also been slapped on them.

According to a police officer, these people returned from Jordan and were living in Vaijapur. “Despite directives from the administration, they kept travelling in different parts of the district, including Gangapur and Pandharpur, to meet their relatives and friends. District collector Uday Choudhary got to know of this and after cross-verifying the information, he ordered registration of an offence against the suspects on Friday,” he said.

Authorities informed that all the suspects, after their return, were stamped on their hands and counseled about staying at home for a period of 14-days.

Choudhary said that no one is expected to violate the lockdown and risk the lives of other people. “We are initiating legal action against all those violating the lockdown orders. Moreover, we appeal to the people to come forward with whatever information they have regarding violations of the current lockdown and bring it to the notice of the administration, so that appropriate and timely action can be initiated.”

Meanwhile, health department is also keeping an eye on these suspects to see if they have started showing symptoms and if need be they may be shifted to an isolation ward.

Sources informed that the health authorities – after learning that people who have been stamped on their hands are violating the home quarantine – have decided to make random visits and check if they are available at the addresses given to the health officials.

The drive is set to kick start in Aurangabad city which has a higher number of people with travelling history.


