Chennai: Eight Chinese flyers test negative for coronavirus
2020-02-04
CHENNAI: The eight Chinese nationals admitted to the infectious diseases ward of Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital have tested negative for the novel coronavirus, health minster C Vijayabaskar said on Monday. Tests were done at the King Institute of Preventive Medicine and Research in Guindy.


On Sunday, after they arrived at the city airport and one of them was found suffering from fever and cold during screening, they were admitted to the isolation ward in Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital. All the eight, who came here on business, are from China’s Guangdong province that is nearly 800km from Wuhan, the epicentre of coronavirus outbreak. Throat and nasal swabs along with blood samples were drawn for the tests. “We don’t have an infected patient in the state. The health condition of the patients is stable,” Vijayabaskar told reporters. “We will be discharging them soon and have encouraged them to return home as soon as possible. They are looking at flight options.”

The patients were placed in tower 2’s isolation ward where 10 doctors, 18 staff nurses and around 20 paramedics have been posted . Care givers have been given personal protection equipment including special masks and gloves. “The only challenge we had in handling them was the language,” said hospital dean Dr R Jayanthi. None of them spoke English. “We serve as a quarantine hospital for the airport. Passengers from Kenya and Nigeria have been quarantined here when they entered our country without taking shots for yellow fever. But they knew English,” she said.

For the last two days, a translator hired by the the hospital coordinated with the patients and helped doctors explain the treatment plan and Union ministry’s health protocol. But when the translator was not around, doctors used google translator. “We found we should say Yàn shì zi for throat swab and Xiěyè yàngběn for blood sample,” the dean said, smiling. While they took boiled eggs, milk, bread and some clear soup from the hospital kitchen, they preferred ready-to-eat soups and noodles for lunch and dinner. Finally, what brought smiles to their faces was when they heard the computerised voice from the duty doctors’ mobile say, “Nǐ kěyǐ huí jiā”. It meant “You can go home”.


