8 foreigners recover from Covid, ready to leave Kerala
2020-04-10
Thiruvananthapuram: Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said eight foreigners who were undergoing treatment after testing positive of Covid-19 in the state have completely recovered and are ready to go back to their native countries. 

“This is a major achievement for the state health department since a few among them who are senior citizens were in serious conditions during treatment. Now, all foreigners who were treated in the state have been cured,” said the chief minister.

Eight foreigners: one from Italy and seven from the UK have been discharged from the hospitals. The person who had come from Italy was undergoing treatment at medical college hospital in Thiruvananthapuram. After becoming negative in successive tests he was shifted to another hospital. 

Seven UK nationals, including an 83-year-old woman, were admitted to Government Medical College, Ernakulam. All of them have been discharged from the hospital. “Among them, the last four people were shifted to a private hospital based on their recommendation. They said that they received the best ever treatment in their life and they are fully satisfied for the support from health workers of the hospital,” said health minister K K Shailaja.

“World over, people above 60 years of age are put in the high-risk category when they are tested positive of Covid-19. Among the foreigners, the condition of 57-year-old UK national had worsened. He was given HIV drugs with special sanction from Indian Council of Medical Research. But the dedicated team of the Ernakulam MCH saved his life,” she added.

On March 13, the first foreigner tested positive in the state when a person from Italy, who was staying in Varkala, became positive. He was cured and was later shifted to Nedumangadu district hospital since it was unsafe for him to stay at a hotel.

On March 15, a 19-member tourist group from the UK had tried to leave the state through Kochi airport. Of this, only one person had tested positive initially and he was shifted to Ernakulam MCH. However, later six more people from the group tested positive.


