8 fresh cases from Hindpiri, Dumka on virus map with 2 cases
2020-05-06
RANCHI/DUMKA: Ten fresh Covid-19 cases were recorded in Jharkhand on Tuesday as the microbiology department at Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims), the state’s largest testing facility, reopened after four days. The state had reported no new cases on Sunday and Monday, a respite that health experts attributed to a fall in the number of tests after the microbiology unit at Rims was shut down for on May 1 after a lab technician tested positive for the novel coronavirus on April 30. Tuesday’s figure is the biggest spike in positive case in the state since April 27, when Jharkhand recorded 20 new cases.

Of the new cases, two are migrants who on May 1 returned from Haryana to their homes in Dumka district, which became the 13th of the 24 districts in the state to be affected by the novel coronavirus. The other seven are from Ranchi’s Hindpiri, a containment zone in the heart of the city with 68 positive cases.

Meanwhile, nine patients — eight from Hindpiri and one from Koderma district — were declared cured on Tuesday. Jharkhand’s tally now stands at 125 positive cases, of which 86 are active while two have died and 37 have made a full recovery.

State health secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni: “We detected 10 fresh positive cases of COVID-19 on Tuesday; of which eight are from Hindpiri area of Ranchi and two are from Dumka.”

Dumka DC Rajeshwari B said: “The patients, aged 25 and 32, are migrant workers and are residents of Saraiyahat block. The duo had returned home from Gurgaon in Haryana on May 1 along with nine others. They were under institutional quarantine at a quarantine centre in Kasturba Gandhi Vidyalaya Saraiyahat. We had collected their samples on May 2 and sent them to PMCH, Dhanbad, for tests.”

She added, “We are setting up a containment zone in 3km radius of their residence and the patients have been shifted to the Covid-19 centre at Dumka Medical College and Hospital for treatment.”

Talking to TOI, Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said: “All patients from Ranchi are from Hindpiri and we are shifting them to CCL’s Central Hospital at Gandhinagar. Eight patients from the area have recovered and will returning home soon. They have been advised strict home quarantine for 14 days.”

The only positive patient from Koderma also recovered on Tuesday and was discharged from hospital. “The 28-year-old resident of Rajdhanwar in Giridih was admitted at Holy Family hospital in Koderma after he tested positive. He was discharged after his consecutive sample tests returned negative,” Koderma DC Ramesh Gholap said.


