Eight healthcare workers test positive for Covid-19 in Noida
2020-04-28
NOIDA: Eight healthcare workers in Noida, of whom only one worked with Covid-19 patients, tested positive for the virus on Monday. They were among 14 new cases, the single biggest surge in a day the district has seen so far, which took the Covid count to 129.

Six of the healthcare workers are from Child PGI Hospital — four nurses, an attendant and a kitchen staff. Another was from ESI Hospital, a surgeon who lives in Delhi, and one from the District Hospital, a 45-year-old nurse who worked in the maternity ward. Only a nurse from Child PGI worked in a Covid ward, which means she was the only one who wore protective equipment.

“Since most of them worked in the emergency and triage area, they did not wear PPE. However, protocol was being followed — the staff was tested every 15 days. We have now shut the emergency and other wards. Only the neonatal ICU is operational,” said Dr DK Gupta, director of Child PGI. “We are going to step up protection for our staff.” The hospital has quarantined 26 primary contacts of the six staff members. The emergency ward, triage, paediatric ICU and kitchen are being sanitised. Health officials said contact tracing is being done.

For the nurse at the district hospital, too, contact reports are yet to come in. Nithari village, where she lives, was sealed on Monday. “There were only two patients in the hospital. They will be tested and quarantined until reports come in,” said Dr Vandana Sharma, chief medical superintendent of the district hospital.

Also among the 14 cases is a plumber from Chauda village who works in the quarantine ward of the district hospital building. 

District magistrate Suhas LY said protective measures in hospitals may have to be stepped up. “Child PGI has been following the protocol strictly. Despite that, if there is spread of infection, it means we have to take more precautions, even while seeing non-Covid patients. We will try to get all staff, even those not treating Covid patients, to use PPE,” he said, adding that GIMS and WHO teams will train hospitals in management of non-Covid cases.

The surge in cases on Monday, meanwhile, was attributed to the bunching of reports from labs. “Nearly 200 reports came in on Monday,” an official said. The district has 58 active cases now.

Those reported positive on Monday include a 23-year-old man from Jonchana village who had gone to GIMS to get his child treated. “The baby was brought dead. The family was tested and only the man tested positive,” Brigadier RK Gupta (retired), director of GIMS, said. A 36-year-old woman from Chotpur (near Sector 63) who was referred from ESI Hospital to AIIMS, a 30-year-old pregnant woman from Kulesara village, a 40-year-old man from Sector Pi 1 in Greater Noida who had influenza-like illness symptoms and a nine-year-old from Acchar village were the others who tested positive. “Sanitation and sealing is underway in areas where the new cases were reported,” Noida chief medical officer Deepak Ohri said.


Level 2 Covid wards in 3 Noida hospitals
The state government on Monday approved the establishment of Level 2 Covid wards in 42 hospitals across the state, including GIMS, Child PGI and Sharda Hospital. So far, Noida has no L2 ward and only one L3 ward (at Sharda Hospital). 

