8 more test +ve for Covid-19 in Agra, district tally now 335
2020-04-24
Agra: At least eight new cases of Novel Coronavirus (Covid-19) were reported in Agra on Thursday, taking the district tally to 335. 

Out of these, one person is a shopkeeper, one is related to a ward boy of SN Medical College, one of them is a vegetable seller, one a female technician of a private dialysis centre, and one a private driver of a government official. A farmer, a labourer and an unemployed man, who had come in contact with an infected friend, were also found positive. 

The localities from where the new cases surfaced on Thursday were Balmiki Basti near Bypass Road, Masta Ki Bagichi, Jagdishpura, Vijay Nagar colony near Inner Ring Road, Sulltanganj Ki Puliya, Freeganj and Mehtab Bagh locality. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All eight new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

According to health department, out of the 335 cases which have surfaced in Agra, at least 104 are linked to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts. While 92 cases are linked to a private hospital on National Highway-2. Another nine are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality. 

Besides, 26 cases are related to people who returned from abroad and their contacts. While 43 of them are linked to healthcare workers and their contacts, and 36 are related to Fatehpur Sikri where a tour guide was tested positive, earlier this month. 

District magistrate (DM) Prabhu N Singh said, “Total number of active Covid-19 cases in the district is 283. So far, 30 people have been cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. The area where the infected people were staying is being sanitised. We are conducting massive sampling to identify all the infected people and send them to institutional quarantine."

In Agra district, a majority of the coronavirus patients are male and people in the age group of 21 to 40. Out of the 335 cases, 76 per cent are male while 56 per cent are in the age group of 21 to 40. And 10 per cent cases are related to age group nine to 19 and 6.5 per cent cases of age group 61 to 80. 

“A majority of the cases in the district are related to youngsters. Almost all of them are asymptomatic. They are not suffering from any kind of health problems. They also have the best recovery rate," the DM said.


