8 more test Covid-19 +ve, Satranjipura cases go up to 48
2020-04-21
NAGPUR: Eight more persons tested positive for Covid-19, all of them connected to the 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura, the city’s first death in the pandemic. The results on Monday took the number of cases in this cluster to 48. This case has alone contributed 59.25% of the total positive cases in the district’s total number of 81.

NMC officials told TOI, “Reports of first and second samples of over 144 persons quarantined in connection with Satranjipura case are awaited. Total number of persons traced, examined and quarantined in this case crossed 200 on Monday,” they said.

Of the new eight positive cases, seven are residents of Satranjipura, where the house of the deceased is situated. One is a 60-year-old woman, a resident of Shanti Nagar.

On April 18, a 40-year-old person from Shanti Nagar had tested positive. The deceased’s daughter-in-law and daughter with three children were residing in the house of this person. Some more from Shanti Nagar were traced, examined and quarantined after the deceased’s nephew, who runs a tours and travel agency, tested positive.

The 68-year-old passed away at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) on April 5, and his reports came positive on April 6. The civic body had immediately notified Satranjipura as containment zone. 

Under municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe, NMC teams led by chief medical officer health Dr Yogendra Savai, additional medical officer health Dr Praveen Gantawar and zonal medical officer Dr Minakshi Mane have traced, examined and quarantined over 200 persons from Satranjipura, Shanti Nagar, Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, Dalalpura and adjoining areas.

Some of these contacts came positive, leading to four more containment zones — Shanti Nagar, Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, Bairagipura and Dalalpura.

Two more chains of infection may be opening up, as cases from Shanti Nagar and Rajiv Gandhi Nagar are on the rise.

Satranjipura containment zone completed 15 days on Monday. Earlier, NMC had ended containment zones of Bajaj Nagar-Abhyankar Nagar-Swawlambi Nagar, Khamla, Jaripatka and a housing scheme in front of Gandhisagar after 14 days, as no one was found positive in close contact.

But with new cases coming to fore, Satranjipura containment zone has been extended. Also, NMC has decided to continue containment zone of Mominpura as 11 cases were registered from there.

Mundhe said, “People who came in close contact with Satranjipura deceased or his family members, other positive cases should come forward and get tested. People from other parts of the city should give correct and proper information so that we can avoid Satranjipura like scenario, where large number of positive cases came from a single case. Instead of creating a monster, we need to become warriors of Covid-19,” he said.

NMC sources told TOI, “It is going to be a tough task to identify persons who visited the clinic at Satranjipura as attendance register lacks contact number and address of many who visited between April 2 and 6. One of the attendants from this clinic tested positive a day ago. We are taking help of register, doctor, attendants and other sources to identify all patients. Clinical examination of these persons will be done at their household itself as number of persons is high, and already 14-19 days have passed,” the officials said.


