8 new Covid-19 cases come up in Varanasi, 9 in Mau
2020-05-21
Varanasi: Eight new cases of Covid-19 came to light in Varanasi while nine infected persons were detected in Mau district on Wednesday. Total number of hotspots in the district reached 55.

Alarming for Varanasi was to see that a jaggery trader of Visheshwarganj wholesale market and a fruit vendor of Madhopur also turned infected but their contact history could not be known. 

District magistrate Varanasi Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “We received 40 reports from BHU lab in which eight had been found positive. With it total tally of Covid-19 positive cases in the district reached to 123. Discharging of six patients increased the figures of cured patients to 70 while four had died. Now, active cases in the district are 49.”

A 50-year-old jaggery wholesaler of Visheshwarganj market, who dwells in Habibpura Pishachmochan area of Chetganj, and a 36-year-old fruit vendor of Madhopur Sigra, who sells fruit near Bharat Sevashram Ashram in Sigra area, had been tested positive without having travel history, he said adding that efforts were on to detect their contact history.

Apart from these two, he said, a 22-year-old person of Narainpur (Chaubeypur) ,who had returned from Mumbai by train, was also tested positive. Four migrants including 40-year-old motor mechanic of Kurauna (Jansa), a 20-year-old fruit vendor of Chhatauna (Chaubeypur), 18-year-old bangle maker of Khevasipur (Lohta) and 18-year-old artificial jewellery artist of Maidagin, were also tested positive. They all had returned home from Mumbai in trucks, he added.

A 61-year-old autorickshaw driver of Khargipur (Chaubeypur), who had returned home from Ahmadabad by bus, was also found infected, said Sharma. Following detection of new cases Madhopur (Sigra), Narainpur and Khargipur of Chaubeypur, Habibpura in Chetganj, Dulahigadhi in Maidagin, Kurauna of Jansa and Khevasipur of Lohta also became hotspots. Total number of hotspots in the district reached 55.

District magistrate Mau Gyan Prakash Tripathi said that six members of a family of Fatehpur in Madao block, who had returned from Mumbai by train four days ago, had been tested positive. Besides, a 9-year-old girl of Chitbisao village, and two persons of Ahilad and Khedachavar villages had also been found infected, he said adding, they all were in contact of previously detected Covid-19 positive cases.

With the detection of nine more infected persons the number of total Covid-19 positive cases has reached to 13, he said adding, one persons had become cured and now 12 active cases are there in the district.


