8 new labs in Maharashtra to test Covid-19 samples
2020-03-19
PUNE: Maharashtra health minister Rajesh Tope on Wednesday announced eight new testing laboratories for coronavirus across the state.


He said among these facilities, the ones at BJ Medical College in Pune and KEM hospital and Kasturba hospital in Mumbai would start fuctioning from Thursday. 

The minister said the additional laboratories would test 180-250 samples each day to reduce the burden on Pune-based National Institute of Virology (NIV).

Tope said the necessary technical support and training would be imparted by NIV, which would also issue accreditation to these laboratories for carrying out tests for confirming the novel coronavirus infection.

With the contagion entering its second phase, Tope said, the administration needed to be careful and more facilities have to be provided for faster testing of the Covid-19 samples. “The testing facilities are to be cleared by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). The new testing laboratories, apart from the ones at BJ Medical College, KEM and Kasturba hospitals, would become functional in the next 10 days,” he said. 

One testing centre would be set up in Mumbai’s JJ Hospital and two at Haffkine Institute. There will be a facility each in Aurangabad, Dhule, Miraj and Solapur, the minister said.

On the spread of coronavirus cases in the state, he said 33 of the total infected people were the ones, or “import persons”, who returned from abroad. “Only nine were cases were that of local transmission (local persons who came in contact with people who returned from foreign countries),” Tope said.

Referring to some complaints of shortage of kits, the minister said the state has sought 10 lakh additional kits have been sought from the Union government. He said the state has 700 ventilator kits and 600 isolation beds. In Pune, which reported the highest cases in the state so far, as many as 100 isolation beds are being readied at Naidu hospital and 60 isolation beds at the YCM hospital in Pimpri-Chinchwad. 

The health minister said the NIV in Pune was networked with over 50-60 laboratories around the country.

“There is a protocol for carrying out Covid-19 testing. The suspect person’s travel history and symptoms for coronavirus are first ascertained before being recommended for a test,” he said.


