8 of a family test +ve after discharge from quarantine centre
2020-05-06
Agra: In yet another case of carelessness by the health department in Agra, eight members of a family tested Covid-19 positive after they were discharged from a quarantine centre. They were sent home after spending 17 days in institutiona quarantine. 

The family claims that they were not tested for coronavirus even once during their stay at the quarantine facility.

The samples of all the 12 members of the family were only collected on April 28, the day they were sent home. 

After a person tested Covid-19 positive in Lohamandi locality, 12 members of a joint family of two brothers living in a neighbouring house of the infected man were sent to the institutional quarantine centre near Waterworks Crossing.

On April 28, all the 12 members of the family were sent back home after they completed 17 days at the quarantine centre. 

On Monday, evening, eight members of the family were confirmed Covid-19 positive. Then, they were transferred to an isolation facility on the national highway- 2. 

The older brother, who runs a provisional shop in Lohamandi locality, said, “On April 11, we were first taken to the district hospital. Here, staffers after screening, directed us to an institutional quarantine centre. They said our samples would be collected after 2-3 days. However, during the 17-day quarantine period, none of our 12 family members was tested for Covid-19. Our samples were collected just before we were directed to go home,"

The younger brother, who is a wholesaler of wheat, said, “My wife and I, my brother and his wife along with our four children had to suffer a lot at the quarantine centre. The arrangements were poor and social distancing could not be followed. The centre did not have proper sanitation and hygiene. We believe we got infected at the centre. We kept on requesting the officials to get our tests done but in vain. Now, eight of us will have to stay in isolation. The government should take strict action against the officials for this carelessness.”

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The matter has come to my notice. I am enquiring about the details.”


