8 quarantined docs asked to rejoin duty
2020-04-14
Ahmedabad: Eight doctors working with the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) in Kheda district are in a quandary. They were placed in home quarantine by the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) after they were exposed to a colleague detected with Covid-19. But their administration has ordered them to report for duty soon by terming their quarantine as self-imposed.As many 180 doctors, pharmacists, and health workers attended a three-hour programme at Arogya Bhavan at Geeta Mandir on April 7. They are posted in nearby districts and deputed to AMC areas. One of the doctors, who was deputed to Danilimda, later tested positive for coronavirus. The rest got instructions to get home quarantined. Among them are eight doctors who are on RBSK contract in Kheda district.These eight doctors received instructions from the Kheda district administration as well as the AMC to remain in quarantine at their homes for 14 days. Red stickers were pasted outside their residences on Saturday announcing that a person has been quarantined.However, on Sunday, the quarantined doctors received a notice from the Kheda’s chief district health officer (CDHO) taking exception to them opting for “self quarantine”. CDHO D C Jagani said that after their deputation ended with the AMC, the medical staff should have straightaway reported to their workplaces in Kheda. It is contended that those living in Ahmedabad city chose to go into “self-quarantine” without seeking any guidance or permission of their respective taluka health officers (THO).The notice further asked the seven RBSK teams from Kheda to contact their respective THOs and follow their instructions. Their failure to do so could invite departmental action, the notice read.On the condition of anonymity, one of the doctors told TOI, “The authorities think that we do not want to work, but this is not the case. The doctors too are very much afraid.” The doctor went on to say: “But we have a dilemma whether to breach the quarantine and invite an FIR or not to report for duty and invite departmental action. If I go out now, I will be putting others’ lives at risk because I may be a possible carrier. They have not conducted tests on me yet.”When contacted, Jagani said, “After their deputation with the AMC, they simply disappeared. They should have informed the administration whether they are injured or ill.” Jagani went on to say: “They should send official documents. How can I presume that they are asked to stay quarantined?”