Mangaluru: 8 quarantine facilities set up in DK; 49 people in self-quarantine
2020-03-12
MANGALURU: With the test report on an international traveller who returned from Dubai with light fever on March 8 testing negative for Covid-19, the district administration that received the report on Wednesday said the traveller will be in self-quarantine for the next 14 days. The administration had dispatched the traveller’s swabs to the testing centre in Bengaluru on Tuesday, and the report from the centre on Wednesday, cleared him of Covid-19.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Confirming this, deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh said 49 international passengers have been quarantined in Dakshina Kannada and five have completed the 28-day quarantine period, and none tested positive for Covid-19. Out of the 10 swabs sent to Bengaluru, including that of the above international traveller, the district administration has received seven reports, all of which are negative for Covid-19, and three other reports are awaited, she said.

If international passengers have fever, cold and cough that are symptomatic of Covid-19, they will be kept under quarantine at their homes, and under medical watch for 28 days. Swab samples, where found necessary, will be sent for testing, and if someone tests positive for Covid-19 positive, they will be shifted to any of the eight isolation facilities, including seven opened in as many medical colleges. ESI hospital will be turned into an isolation facility if the need for it arises, the DC said.

With Covid-19 positive cases reported from Bengaluru, Sindhu said the district administration through a task force under her stewardship has stepped up their vigil in the district. She said two meetings of this task force have been held, and she said that guidelines by WHO and the Union and state governments are being followed. In all, 100 people including medical officers, paramedical staff and lab technicians have been trained to deal with people symptomatic of Covid-9 and to collect swabs, she said.

The screening mechanism at Mangaluru International Airport has been strengthened with the posting of physicians from medical colleges in the district on rotation, to help the physician and para-medical staff of the airport health office. A 108 ambulance with trained paramedical staff has been kept on standby at MIA to shift people with Covid-19 symptoms to Wenlock Hospital for testing. All those trained have been issued personal protection equipment kits.

A control room has been set up at the DC’s office. People in need may call: 104/1077/0824-2442590. With cruise ships entry at New Mangalore Port Trust banned till the end of this month, Sindhu said the district administration will extend help, if sought, for crew of cargo vessels calling on the port with signs of Covid-19. They too will be subjected to the same quarantine protocols, the DC added.


