8 succumb to Covid-19 in Solapur city, death toll 115
2020-06-09
Kolhapur: The number of Covid-19 cases as well as the patients succumbing to the viral infection is increasing sifgnificantly in Solapur city.

While 33 new Covid-19 cases were registered in Solapur city on Monday, 28 people tested positive for the contagion on Sunday. As many as 55 patients were discharged on Monday. The tally of positive patients in Solapur district stands at 1,221, of which 412 are active cases.

After six people died of Covid-19 in Solapur city on Sunday, as many as eight patients succumbed to the viral infection on Monday. An official communication from the district administration stated that six of the eight patients who died on Monday were above 70 years and had various health complications. The death toll in Solapur city has reached 115. 

Meanwhile, six janwans of the Railway Police Force (RPF), who had arrived from Mumbai to Kurduwadi junction in Solapur district, tested positive for Covid-19 late Sunday night. 

Officials from the Solapur district administration said that they have undertaken the contact tracing exercise as a batch of 10 RPF jawans had come to Solapur on June 2. 

As per official information, the RPF jawans were deputed at Kurduwadi junction when they showed symptoms of Covid-19. Previously, they were also posted at Pandharpur and Jeur railway stations in Solapur district. Officials had made separate arrangements for the RPF jawans as they had come from Mumbai.

The RPF jawans were first taken to a railway hospital in Kurduwad when some of them started showing symptoms of Covid-19. They were immediately shifted to Solpaur civil hospital. The throat swab samples of the all the 10 jawans were collected and sent for Covid-19 analysis, of which six returned positive.

So far, 1,303 positive cases have been identified in Solapur district. Of this, 494 are active patients taking treatment at various hospitals. The southern part of Solapur district has recorded 29 cases--the highest among the rural areas in the district. Karmala tehsil has not recorded a single positive case so far. 


