80% Covid-19 cases due to Delhi: Health official
2020-06-14
CHANDIGARH: With the number of Covid-19 cases in Haryana rising from 2,356 on June 1 to nearly 7,000 on June 12, an official of the health department has claimed that around 80% infected cases in the state were due to Delhi. 

Also, on contact tracing, most fresh patients have been found infected because of their connections in Delhi. As per the details, they had been traveling to Delhi frequently because of work or residence.

Apart from border districts Gurugram, Faridabad and others, a Delhi connection has also been found in cases reported in Panipat and Karnal.

Talking to TOI on the surge in cases, Haryana additional chief secretary (health and family welfare) Rajeev Arora said it was natural to see some increase in Covid-19 cases after most areas were opened in the state on lifting of lockdown. “Majority of cases in the state are from Gurugram, Faridabad, Sonipat and Jhajjar, which have direct access to Delhi. People travel frequently to Delhi for work or other reasons. Also, in other districts, we found from the examination of data that a majority of cases were connected to Delhi. Around 80-85% cases in the state are due to Delhi connection,” claimed Arora.

Denying reports of community spread in some parts of Haryana, Arora said the situation had become stable in the state in the past three days and they were hopeful it would come under control in few days.

He accepted that the health machinery of the state was focussing on Gurugram, Faridabad, Sonipat, and Jhajjar to contain the spread.

Talking about the strategy adopted in view of the spike of cases, Arora said maximum symptomatic cases were being isolated at their home and only those who developed serious problems were being admitted to hospital for intensive care. Even those isolated at home have been linked to medical teams who are making regular calls to monitor the situation. They are taken to hospital in case their condition deteriorates, he said.

The purpose is to keep hospitals in reserve and keep them ready only for serious cases, he explained.

Arora said the state had around 33,000 beds, 9,000 isolation beds, 2,086 beds with oxygen facility, 1,100 ventilators, and sufficient number of PPE kits and N-masks. “The current facilities were developed in two months. We have the facility of testing around 7,500 persons every day and the focus is on developing more testing in government hospitals and medical colleges,” he added.


