800 passengers being screened for coronavirus at Hyderabad airport daily
2020-02-04
HYDERABAD: Scaling up of the thermal screening system for novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) at the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) has helped health officials cover flights arriving from Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Thailand apart from China. They are able to screen as many as 800 passengers daily.

One new suspected case of coronavirus was reported in the city on Monday, while reports of 19 suspected cases out of 28 have been confirmed negative.

 
 

The state health department has also issued orders to increase surveillance testing of all passengers who have arrived from Wuhan since January 15. Also, any passenger with a travel history to other parts of China and coronavirus-affected countries or showing symptoms of the virus will be tested.

“In Telangana, 2,733 travellers have been screened at Shamshabad airport so far and 27 passengers are under home quarantine for the past 28 days. One passenger admitted at Nallakunta and another admitted at Gandhi hospital are currently under observation in isolation wards. Till now, 19 samples have been taken from passengers and sent to the National Institute of Virology, Pune, and all were found to be negative. All passengers under observation in homes and hospitals are stable,” said a medical bulletin by the state health department.

In a detailed memo issued by the state government late in the day, officials were asked to trace all passengers who have arrived from Wuhan since January 15, quarantined and tested for the virus even if they do not have any symptoms. “Even if their tests are negative they are to be kept in quarantine for another 14 days. Passengers who have arrived from other parts of China and affected countries too have to be followed up,” said the memo. Also, it was decided to do contact tracing (test all immediate family contacts) of all suspected cases.

Meanwhile, state health minister Etela Rajender inspected the ICMR laboratory of Gandhi Medical College before operations began. He visited other state-run hospitals to review the preparedness and facilities to deal with a possible outbreak.


