81% want relaxations in red zones, barring 14 high virus load districts
2020-05-13
Nagpur: Even as the government is getting ready to take a decision on how to proceed after the third phase of lockdown comes to an end on May 17, 81% citizens have supported relaxations in curbs with Covid-19 distancing norms at offices, shops etc in red zones.

With people starting to believe that they will have to learn to co-exist along with coronavirus for a long time, LocalCircles, India’s leading community social media platform which helps governments make policies, conducted a survey to get citizens’ pulse on what should happen post May 17. 

The survey conducted last week received more than 21,000 votes from people residing in 277 districts. While 81% favoured relaxations in red zones, 45% citizens are in favour of continuing full lockdown for 2 weeks after May 17 in top 14 high virus load districts. Only 15% citizens said they are likely to travel in the next 3 months. 

Akshay Gupta, general manager of LocalCircles, Delhi, said that citizens were asked what should be the lockdown relaxation approach for 14 high virus load districts that are also among the red zones with over 500 Covid-19 active cases.

In response, 45% said full lockdown should continue for two more weeks in these districts, 19% said it should be significantly relaxed and all offices, markets, businesses be allowed to operate with Covid-19 distancing norms, while 35% said lockdown should be somewhat relaxed and only offices at 33% capacity and standalone shops should be permitted to open.

“In the survey conducted on May 3, 74% citizens had said that high virus load districts should be kept under complete lockdown and no relaxations should be given there. This number has come down to 45% as on May 12,” Gupta said.

Many citizens have also raised concerns about the approach undertaken to unlock high virus load districts. People are in support of relaxations in green and orange zones as well as in low virus load red zones. But, they are greatly concerned about how some high virus load districts are being treated at par with other red zone districts in terms of relaxations.

High virus load districts as identified by the Niti Aayog included 14 districts where the intensity and number of Covid-19 cases are more than 500. They include Mumbai, Delhi, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Pune, Indore, Thane, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Surat, Kolkata, Agra, Hyderabad and Bhopal.

Many citizens have specifically stated that given the urgent need to restart economic activity, a close watch must be kept on all these districts and as soon as they fall into regular red zone category, the relaxations should start applying.

For other 115 plus red zones (beyond high virus load districts), 24% said lockdown should be significantly relaxed and all offices, markets, businesses should be allowed to operate with Covid-19 distancing norms.

Altogether 33% said lockdown should be only somewhat relaxed and only offices at 33% capacity and standalone shops should be permitted to open. However, 16% said full lockdown should continue for 2 weeks and 3% citizens did not have an opinion.

On opening airlines, trains and buses for operations, how do they foresee personal travel in the coming 3 months? 9% people said they will not travel at all, 72% said they will not travel unless it is an absolute emergency, 11% said they will surely travel, while 4% said they are likely to travel.

“LocalCircles will be escalating these findings to key stakeholders in the Central government and various state governments so they can be considered and if found fit, be incorporated in the lockdown approach undertaken post May 17,” said Gupta.

Survey demographics

21,000 plus responses were received from over 12,500 citizens located in over 228 districts of India

63% respondents were males while 37% respondents were females

63% respondents were from tier 1, 22% from tier 2 and 15% respondents were from tier 3 and beyond locations

Survey was conducted via LocalCircles platform and all participants are validated citizens registered with LocalCircles


