83 PMC staffers detected with coronavirus, 7 die & 40 recover
2020-06-12
PUNE: Eighty three Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) staffers have tested positive for Covid-19 so far, of which only 40 (48%) have recovered, while seven have died.

“Most of the employees detected with Covid-19 infection are the frontline workers, who have been working on the field at various locations. Many staffers are working in the containment zones and at other vulnerable localities to contain the spread of the virus. They are from different departments and have been assigned the tasks of containment,” a senior PMC official said. 

Among these workers, a senior sanitary inspector involved in PMC’s health and sanitation activities in the containment zones returned to work recently after beating Covid-19. Another sanitary inspector, who got infected, was visiting various containment zones to monitor the sanitation measures. 

Many frontline staffers were on the field for the last three months since the beginning of the Covid-19 outbreak in the municipal limits, a sanitary inspector said. “We are on the field for last three months. The work is massive and challenging. We have to ensure sanitation in the containment zones, help in contact tracing and do many more tasks,” he added.

As per PMC’s data, among the seven deceased, six were permanent staffers, while one was a contractual worker. They were engaged in conservancy, cleaning and sanitation works. About 36 staffers are under treatment at present, of which 27 are permanent while nine are contractual. Among the 40 staffers, who have been discharged, 29 are permanent and 11 contractual.

Shivaji Daundkar, chief labour officer at PMC, said various welfare measures have been promised for those infected with Covid-19. 

The civic body has promised Suraksha Kavach of up to Rs 1 crore for death of civic workers due to Covid-19, besides 100% reimbursement of medical bills, special leave with a 14-day home quarantine for staffers testing positive for the contagion. For the contractual workers, treatment of Covid is free and they get paid leave for the entire duration of their treatment. 

The administration has also said safety gear like masks, sanitizers, PPE kits were being provided as per requirement to the staffers.


