86-yr-old ex-Armyman loses life to Covid-19
2020-06-03
Ludhiana: An 86-year-old former subedar died of Covid-19 here on Tuesday, taking the death tally of the district to 15, including six from outside. Dr Navneet Chaudhary, director of Mohandai Oswal Hospital, said, “The patient, a resident of Fauji Mohalla, near bus stand, Miller Ganj, had come on May 28 evening with complaints of breathlessness. He later tested positive for novel coronavirus. He was in a critical state and immediately put on ventilator support. He had coronary artery disease, post-coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) and his kidney and liver had failed, besides he developed pneumonia. On Tuesday morning, his condition deteriorated and he had cardio-respiratory arrest. Despite our efforts, he could not be revived and died around 11.15am.”A few days ago, the elderly man had visited Christian Medical College and Hospital (CMCH).Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “The man has died due to Covid-19 as his heart was not functioning properly. His son, daughter-in-law and their two sons have been quarantined.”The casualtiesMarch 30: A 42-year-old woman from Amarpura Mohalla was referred to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala, on March 29. The Covid-19 patient could not be saved a day later and her body was sent to LudhianaApril 5: A 69-year-old woman from Shimlapuri, with no contact history with a Covid-19 patient, was the second casualty. She was admitted to Fortis Hospital, Ludhiana, on March 31 and breathed her last in its isolation ward on April 5. She had tested positive on April 2. She had stayed with her niece in Mohali from March 17 to March 31 and had commuted there by a busApril 17: A 58-year-old man from Payal, who worked as a kanungo in the revenue department, had tested positive on April 16 and died the next dayApril 18: A 52-year-old Ludhiana police ACP tested positive on April 13 and succumbed on April 18 at Satguru Partap Singh HospitalMay 3: A 62-year-old woman from Basti Jodhewal was admitted to Dayanand Medical College and Hospital on May 3 and died the same dayMay 9: A 59-year-old man from Manuke village had returned to the city on April 30 from Hazur Sahib, Nanded, and was sent directly to the isolation ward of the civil hospital. He was the first casualty among Nanded returnees in the stateMay 17: A six-year-old boy from Badi Haibowal succumbed at PGIMay 30: A 53-year-old corona positive man from Chowni Mohalla, passed away at Dayanand Medical College and Hospital 