89% at NIT-Karnataka get job offers despite Covid outbreak
2020-05-13
MANGALURU: The global slowdown due to coronavirus pandemic could not prove to be a dampener at the recently-concluded placement drive at National Institute of Technology-Karnataka, Surathkal.


This season, pre-placement offers (PPOs) increased by about 10% as compared to last year, wherein about 165 students got placed. At the end of March 2020, 89% of the 665 undergraduate students and 60% of postgraduate students at the institution got placed by various companies.

The highest domestic package is Rs 49 lakh offered by Atlassian from Bengaluru which visited the campus for the first time. A total of 256 companies visited the campus till March 15, said Vijay Desai, chairman of Career Development Centre. He said that another 20-25 companies that had lined up for visit could not make it due to the pandemic. “However, a few of them are doing the process online. Offer revocations by six companies due to Covid-19 affected 16 students,” he added. 

PPO, a recent trend in campus placements, has seen a jump of around 35% at NIT-K. “Placements through internships are an attractive proposition for both the company and students. It represents the future trend of hiring,” he said, adding that companies are looking for six-months long internships and students can intern after the completion of second year of the course.

Desai said this year, the campus witnessed visits from PSUs like IOCL, GAIL, HPCL, CDAC and ITI for recruitment. The best part was ISRO visiting the campus and offering placements to three students each from BTech mechanical and electronics courses. “All the high value and branded companies from IT core, IT service sector and core engineering visited the campus. Some of these companies, including PSUs like BEL CRL, have indicated that they may continue the placement for the 2020 batch once the issues pertaining to Covid-19 are resolved,” he said.


CS/IT clock 99 % 
Nearly 99% of the students from the computer science and information technology branches were placed with an average annual package of Rs 16-18 lakh. Electrical, electronics, mechanical, metallurgy and chemical branches saw about 86-90% of placement. Civil branch recorded about 70% placement. The average package for all the nine BTech branches is around Rs 10.7 lakh. About 89% of MCA students were placed. The placement of PG students saw a major increase with CSE and IT departments having nearly all students placed.

Desai said had all the companies visited the campus, NIT-K would have witnessed 94-95% placement. About 50 UG students opted out of placement as they are going for higher studies. “Over 95% companies who made job offers have honoured the offers. Based on business cycle a few companies have shifted the joining dates by about 2-3 months,” he added.

