UP: Nine Covid-19 positive cases found in Meerut zone
2020-04-07
MEERUT/BIJNOR: There were reports of several Covid-19 positive cases in parts of western Uttar Pradesh on Monday. Three Amroha residents and one from Bijnor were tested positive. All four individuals had taken part in the Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz recently. They were traced from Haldwani and Kanpur. Three others were found positive in Shamli, two in Bulandshahr and four in Saharanpur.


The tests for all the nine cases - in Saharanpur, Bulandshahr and Shamli - were conducted by a microbiology laboratory at the Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College in Meerut on Monday. With the fresh cases in place, the number of cases in Saharanpur is now 17 - out of which 12 are hospitalised in Lucknow. The tally in Bulandshahr is five, and the total number in Shamli reached 17, out of which two are admitted in Agra while three are in Auraiyya.

Dr Amit Garg, microbiology head, LLRM Medical College, said, “Four people tested positive in Saharanpur, two in Bulandshahr and three in Shamli on Monday.”

Notably, all 71 samples from Meerut were found negative. Confirming this, Meerut chief medical officer Dr Raj Kumar said, “No individual has tested positive in Meerut on Monday. All the 71 samples sent for testing have been found negative.”

Meanwhile, contact tracing has begun in the districts of Bijnor and Amroha. Officials said that the men with Covid-19 infection had left Amroha on March 6 and Bijnor on March 8.

Sources said 11 Amroha-based individuals who had attended the Delhi event were found in Uttarakhand’s Haldwani and were kept under isolation in a hospital. Out of them, three have been tested Covid-19 positive.

Amroha district magistrate Umesh Mishra said, “The three belong to Bachhraon police station limits. They had left Amroha on March 6. We approached their family who were placed under quarantine. They informed us that the infected individuals did not return home. However, we are still trying to trace their contacts to know if they had come back or not.”

A fresh case was reported from Kanpur, and the person is said to be a resident of Bijnor’s Chandpur. Bijnor’s chief medical officer Vijay Yadav said, “A resident of Bijnor’s Chandpur was tested Covid-19 positive. He had left Bijnor on March 8 and is still in Kanpur. He took part in the Delhi event and then went to Kanpur. We are trying to trace his family to ascertain whether he returned to Bijnor or not. Probe is currently on.”

In Bijnor, samples of 54 people were sent to Meerut for testing on Monday. Results are awaited.

