9 discharged after testing -ve for coronavirus in past 30 days
2020-03-06
Puducherry: Four men with flu symptoms have been undergoing treatment at the isolation wards in Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (Jipmer) and Puducherry government-run tuberculosis and chest diseases hospital in the Union territory as on Thursday. 

Two people are in Jipmer and two others at the TB hospital. 

The doctors have taken swab samples and have sent them to King Institute of Preventive Medicine and Research in Chennai to test for coronavirus infection. Director (health and family welfare services) S Mohan Kumar said nine people with flu symptoms underwent treatment at isolation wards at Jipmer and the TB hospital in the past 30 days. 

They were discharged after they tested negative for coronavirus.

“Earlier, the swab samples were sent to the National Institute of Virology, Pune, to test for coronavirus infection. But, now we have started sending the samples to the King institute in Chennai. We are now in a position to get to know the test results within eight to 10 hours,” said Mohan Kumar.

Presently, Jipmer has an isolation ward with a facility to treat 12 patients and the TB hospital to treat six. The health and family welfare directorate has directed private medical colleges and hospitals to set up isolation wards to treat 10 patients each.

Mohan Kumar emphasised that good personal hygiene practices will largely prevent any infection. He said washing hands periodically and covering the mouth and nose with a tissue while sneezing or coughing and not touching eyes, nose and mouth will also help in preventing any infection. 

“People need not panic. There is no incidence of coronavirus in south India. Three patients with coronavirus infection in Kerala underwent treatment and were discharged after they tested negative. We have taken adequate measures to prevent the spread of any infection. We have adequate stock of drugs and masks,” Mohan Kumar said.

The lieutenant governor’s secretariat has suspended all public appointments, visitors’ hour, open house sessions in Raj Nivas for a period of two weeks from March 4 in compliance with public health safety guidelines. 

Raj Nivas has also postponed events proposed in the next few days, including the international women’s day celebrations. Bedi has cancelled her programmes in New Delhi and Amritsar to mark the women’s day celebrations.

Meanwhile, Cuddalore collector V Anbuselvan on Thursday appealed to those who have returned after visiting China, Japan, Thailand, South Korea, Singapore and European countries to approach nearby government primary health centres or government hospitals for medical examination.


