9 fresh Covid-19 cases in Jharkhand, count at 13
2020-04-10
RANCHI/BOKARO: Jharkhand recorded a surge in Covid-19 cases on Thursday after nine more, including a man who died at a Bokaro hospital, tested positive for the disease. The state capital of Ranchi recorded five new cases while Bokaro districts recorded 4, taking the total count of the state to 13 — of which 12 are now active case. Eleven of these cases are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat markaz held in New Delhi last month.


None of nine has any travel history and they were infected through direct or indirect contact with the carrier, who are family members, officials said, adding they are trying to find out likely source of infection.

All five new cases in Ranchi are from Hindpiri locality, where the earlier two positive were also detected, and are family members of the 54-year-old woman, who tested positive on Monday. She is under treatment at Rims. She is likely to have got infected after she came in indirect contact with 22-yr Malaysian woman, who attended the Nizamuddin markaz and became the first Covid-19 case in the state. 

State health secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni said, “Five members of a family from Hindpiri have tested positive for Covid-19. Their samples were collected on April 6 and their 54-year-old relative tested positive on Monday. The patients have now been shifted to the Covid-19 block at Rims for treatment.”

Ranchi civil surgeon Dr V B Prasad said, “All five patients are males aged eight, 23, 26, 35, and 60. We are tracing their contacts in Hindpiri as well as other areas of city to screen and collect their samples, too. Till now, we have collected samples from 40 people based on contact tracing.”

Of the four new cases in Bokaro district, three are family members of the 51-year-old woman of Telo village in Chandrapura block, who has links with the Tablighi Jammat and tested positive last week. The fourth is a 75-year-old resident of Sadam village in Gomia block, who died at the Bokaro General Hospital on Thursday morning. He had no travel history and no known contact with any patient.

Bokaro civil surgeon Dr A K Pathak said, “Three persons from the 51-year-old woman’s family, including her two granddaughters, aged eight and 18, and her 75-year-old brother-in-law, have tested positive. They are asymptomatic.”

Pathak said the Bokaro woman, who is the first to test positive in the district, had attended the markaz at Delhi’s Hazrat Nizamuddin before returning to home. She had also visited Dhaka, Bangladesh. He said, “She had not informed us about her travel history and we came to know only on Thursday that she visited Nizamuddin last month before coming back to Bokaro.”

