9 hrs to find an ICU bed. Covid kin say they were turned away
2020-05-21
Pune: Harrowing accounts are emerging from citizens who said loved ones with suspected Covid-19 symptoms were turned away by private hospitals in the city. 

One BT Kawade Road resident, whose mother developed breathlessness, said he spent at least nine hours trying to get her emergency care. 

The first hospital they approached directed them to Naidu hospital fearing the woman could be a Covid-19 patient. But doctors at Naidu, following an examination, cited a lack of ICU beds and directed them to another hospital.

After reaching the third hospital — an empanelled one that's duty-bound to care for Covid patients — the desperate family were again told there were no available ICU beds.

By now four hours had passed and the woman's condition had worsened. They then approached Sassoon general, which turned them down as well — again claiming "no available ICU beds". 

“I started to lose all hope. My mother was finally admitted at Symbiosis hospital. Doctors there noted her severe condition and immediately started treatment in the ICU," the son told TOI.

The issue of patients being denied beds was brought up recently during a discussion between empanelled private hospitals and divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar, who has started investigating hospitals that have allegedly failed to prove they turned patients away because of exceeded capacity. 

Reports have also come in of private hospitals — that have signed an agreement of care with PMC — turning down people with Covid symptoms.

A Kondhwa resident said his brother, who vomited blood, was turned away by two private hospitals in the city. "He was finally admitted at a hospital near the Bund Garden Road," he told TOI. 

Mhaisekar admitted the problem exists. “We now have a software that will give us the exact situation in each hospital." He added that the software will help create a public dashboard, which will help people pick a hospital before leaving their homes.

This dashboard, Mhaiskar said, will provide category-wise details: availability of beds for Covid and non-Covid patients and availability of ventilators and oxygen systems. “But there will be a thorough investigation of private hospitals that have been accused of turning away patients. They may face action if it's found they turned people away despite having free beds.”

There are 650 private hospitals within Pune city limits; 18 are empaneled to treat Covid-19 patients. From the 18, six have been declared 'Covid-19 hospitals', where the maximum number of infected patients, including those who are critically ill, are being treated. The rest are called Covid-19 care centres, which will care for non-critical Covid patients and those with other ailments.


