9 more cases take covid +ve to 160 in south TN
2020-04-06
Madurai: With nine new cases being reported, the total number of Covid-19 positive patients in the southern districts went up to 160 on Sunday. One of them, a 55-year-old man from Mathoor near Kallandari in Madurai East, is in ICU at GRH with respiratory problems and diabetes. Besides him, Madurai reported another case of a 34-year-old man from Mehaboobpalayam in corporation limits. District collector Dr T G Vinay said the young man was asymptomatic and was also admitted to the isolation ward at GRH. Containment plans were in place in the area surrounding their residences and people living in a 5 kilometre radius were being screened.

Among the nine new cases were two females, one from Kanyakumari and another from Tuticorin who had both been in contact with infected people. The others included males, two each from Madurai and Dindigul, one each from Theni and Tirunelveli and all had a travel history to Delhi to participate in the Tablighi meet. A man and woman from Tuticorin also tested positive, following contact with a positive person.The nine southern districts now have a total of 160 cases, Madurai - 19, Dindigul - 45, Theni 23, Tuticorin - 11, Kanyakumari - 6, Tirunelveli 38, Virudhunagar - 11, Sivaganga - 5 and Ramanathapuram - 2. 

Meanwhile, containment plans were implemented at Keezhakarai in Ramanathapuram on Sunday, where the body of the 71-year-old man who had died at Stanley Medical College hospital was buried on Thursday. His test results received on Saturday showed that he had tested positive for Covid-19. Ramanathapuram district collector K Veera Raghava Rao oversaw the disinfection process in the municipality. He said that 41 people from the district had participated in the Tablighi conference and 25 of them had returned. 

Two of them had tested positive and the other 23 negative. So far, 34 people had been screened for Covid-19 in the district out of which 32 had tested negative.

Among those who returned from abroad, 4,777 people had been quarantined and 2,711 who completed their 28-day quarantine allowed to come out. As many as 2,066 people were in home quarantine in the district at present. The eleven family members of the man who died in Stanley hospital had been asked to self-quarantine. As it was found that over 50 people had attended his funeral, they too have been asked to self-isolate and quarantine, the collector said.


