9-month-old youngest and fastest to recover from Covid-19: Health dept
2020-04-25
DEHRADUN: A 45-year-old man who came in contact with a Tablighi Jamaat member in Dehradun and ended up passing the infection to his 9-month-old child — who made a miraculous recovery in a record time of six days — is now going through an agonising wait to see his son. The father, who has remained in the isolation ward of the Government Doon Medical College & Hospital (GDMCH) for 20 days now, has no access to a smartphone to see his child on video. 


Additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant meanwhile said that the 9-month-old is possibly “the fastest recovery in the country.”

The hospital authorities are now trying to arrange for a video call but admit it’s no easy task. A long list of safety protocols have to be adhered to, said Ashutosh Sayana, principal of the hospital. 

A nurse at the facility, who did not wish to be named, said, “The child is with his mother — who has tested negative — at a quarantine facility. She also doesn’t have a smartphone but it will be easier to arrange one there than for someone in a Covid-19 ward because of the risks associated.” She added that there were still no clear answers to how long the virus can survive on surfaces, such as a cellphone. “Would it be safe to bring back a phone used by a Covid-19 patient? Can it be sanitised? We have to look at all these things before a call can be arranged,” she told TOI. 

As the wait continues, the father is growing more desperate. The man had tested positive after he came in contact with a Tablighi Jamaat member in a local mosque where he worked. He was shifted to the Covid-19 ward on April 5. Later, the infant also tested positive and was admitted to the hospital on March 17. He was discharged within six days. 

Dr NS Khatri, nodal officer for Covid-19 at the Government Doon Medical College & Hospital (GDMCH) told TOI that the case had been a challenge for doctors. “Because of the tender age of the infant, the situation was challenging as he could not be kept in isolation without his mother. The doctors had to take care of both the baby and the mother who had tested negative.”

Dr Anurag Agarwal, who treated the baby, added that despite the challenges in treating infants due to restrictions on certain medications, the baby managed to make a quick recovery.

“The good thing was that the child was totally asymptomatic and remained cheerful. We didn’t even use much medication in his case. His recovery has spread smiles among the entire staff of the hospital,” he said.

Commenting on the case, Dr Deepjyoti Kalita, associate professor of microbiology and nodal officer of Covid-19 at All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Rishikesh said, “We cannot clearly say since how long this child was infected, which is also a factor that influences the speed of recovery. However, it is established in some researches that kids are less susceptible to the coronavirus than adults. There are various reasons for this and one is the vaccinations that are given to them on a regular basis,” he added.

While the child’s recovery has given hope to the father, he wishes to see him and his family just once. Back home in Azad Nagar, the couple’s seven children under home quarantine also haven’t seen their parents for days. Their eldest son, all of 19 years, is now in charge. “We are barely managing to keep it all together. Thankfully, our father left some money at home before he was admitted to the hospital,” he said.

