Nine samples sent for testing negative: Odisha government
2020-03-23
BHUBANESWAR: Odisha government heaved a sigh of relief when all nine samples sent for testing for Covid-19 found to be negative on Sunday. With 3,474 foreign-returned people registered with the government till Sunday, the state is on its toes to check the coronavirus outbreak in the state with a slew of preventive and precautionary measures. Two positive cases have been reported from the state so far. 


“The health condition of the two coronavirus patients is stable. The first patient is undergoing treatment at Capital Hospital and the second one is at AIIMS, Bhubaneswar. Their family members have also been kept in home isolation,” said Subrato Bagchi, government spokesperson on Covid-19. Besides, 28 persons are in isolation wards in different hospitals in the state, he added. 

In case of the second patient, an official said, 56 persons had came in contact with him. Communication has been made with 53 persons while effort is on to communicate rest three. Nine monitoring teams are working for the purpose, Bagchi added.

The state government on Saturday announced lockdown in five districts —Khurda, Cuttack, Ganjam, Kendrapada and Angul and eight major urban centres — Puri, Rourkela, Sambalpur, Jharsuguda, Balasore, Jajpur Road, Jajpur Town and Bhadrak in first phase till March 29. People have been asked to stay indoors and not to come out without any emergency. 

Expecting people’s cooperation during the lockdown, Bagchi said, “Lord Jagannath experienced lockdown like situation 22 times in the past. This fact indicated that when Lord Jagannath can experience lockdown during emergency or difficult times, we humans must obey the instructions and stay indoors. The chief minister had clearly mentioned that strong action will be taken against those who will violate the instructions during the lockdown.” 

The state government also imposed restrictions on plying of private vehicles during the lockdown and those want to buy necessary items like grocery or milk should go by walking, a senior officer said. 

All the sports hostels running under the sports and youth services department have been closed from March 23 to May 5. The inmates will be given food expenses and allowances for this period and paid travelling expenses for safe return to their homes.


