90% Covid-19 patients in Lucknow hospitals asymptomatic
2020-04-20
LUCKNOW: About 90% of Covid-19 patients admitted in isolation wards of various hospitals in the city are asymptomatic, a TOI reality check has revealed.

From March 10, when the first Covid-19 case was reported, till Sunday evening, 177 people (including 106 city residents and 71 outsiders staying in Lucknow) have tested positive for novel coronavirus infection. 

 


Of these, 10 have been discharged after recovery while one patient has died. The remaining 166 are under treatment.

According to chief medical officer Dr Narendra Agarwal, though no database has been maintained on the basis of symptoms but as per feedback from various hospitals, most patients are asymptomatic.

To assess the situation, TOI spoke to officials of eight hospitals where 166 patients are undergoing treatment and found that eight patients had mild symptoms and one was critical, while remaining 157 were asymptomatic. Major symptoms of Covid-19 are dry cough, high fever and respiratory problem.

Chief medical superintendent of RSM hospital, Bakshi-Ka-Talab, Dr VK Singh said: “Of 62 patients in the hospital, only one has mild flu-like symptoms.”

Similarly, Era’s Medical College principal Dr MM Faridi said all 26 patients at his hospital were asymptomatic.

Director, Ram Manohar Lohia Institute of Medical Sciences, Prof AK Tripathi said all 12 patients at the institute were asymptomatic.

Doctors at Integral Institute of Medical Science also said that all 56 patients had no symptoms as of now.

“Two patients admitted to Lok Bandhu Hospital after testing positive on Sunday evening are asymptomatic,” said Yogesh Raghuvanshi, spokesman at CMO office.

Dr D Himanshu, in charge of KGMU’s isolation unit, said all five patients at present had mild symptoms, including one having asthma.

SGPGIMS has cases from various districts and the one belonging to Lucknow is critical. Two patients at Central Command’s Base Hospital also have mild symptoms.

Virologist and former head of microbiology department, SGPGIMS, Prof TN Dhol said it was good that most cases were asymptomatic, but it increased the responsibility of health authorities. 

“They should go for aggressive pool testing in other parts of the city because asymptomatic patients are likely to infect others without knowing about it,” he said.

Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Narendra Agarwal said: “Sealing of hotspots has prevented asymptomatic patients from spreading infection in other parts of the city. Further, putting suspected patients under quarantine has also decreased infection rate within the hotspots.”


