90% Covid -19 patients asymptomatic: Docs
2020-04-28
RANCHI: More than 90% of the 91 (to be changed later) Covid-19 patients in the state have remained asymptomatic so far. None among the patients being treated at Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims) here has shown even the mildest complications and all are being provided with prophylactic treatment (intended to prevent disease). Based on the observation of the patients, doctors at Rims have asked people in general to not be scared of tests or even when infected.

Sharing details of treatment of patients, Dr J K Mitra, head of medicine department at Rims, said they are providing prophylactic treatment with hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) to the patients. “If there are mild symptoms, which less than 10% at the Covid-19 block, have, we are giving them supportive therapy — treatment according to the symptoms,” he said.

While all the admitted patients are being administered a dose of HCQ, a few others with mild symptoms like sneezing, cough and fever have been administered with azithromycin (an antibiotic), paracetamol and cough syrup. “Vitamic C and calcium tablets are also in stock for patients to augment their immunity,” Mitra said.

Other doctors at Rims said they have seen even elderly patients remaining asymptomatic or with mild symptoms like those of normal cold and flu. “There is no need to panic. Though the medical fraternity is worried about the rapid spread of the virus, not everyone progresses to a condition that requires tertiary medical care,” said Dr Pradip Bhattacharya, head of trauma, emergency and critical care.

Manzoor Alam (65), who recovered from Covid-19 and was discharged from Rims on April 20, told TOI that he was initially scared when his entire family was quarantined and their samples were sent for tests. “Of the six members in my family, only I tested positive even though I had no symptoms,” he said. Despite suffering from Type II diabetes, Alam remained hale and hearty throughout his weeklong stay at Rims.

“I was given two tablets a day for two days and thereafter one tablet twice every day. I never felt any difficulty. I neither had fever nor cough. In fact, all other patients around me in the hospital seemed healthy,” he said, applauding the team that looked after them in the hospital.

Medical experts at Rims said only two patients became critical at the hospital and both eventually died. “The first casualty was a man who was suffering from several ailments and had developed severe acute respiratory syndrome and needed a ventilator, but his wife, who died later, had tested negative for the virus,” Mitra said.

Bhattacharya pointed out that the mortality rate for Covid-19 is less challenging in the state compared with the infection rate. “Though we want people not to be scared of any infection, they must not take any risk. Once they become a carrier, they can infect the elderly in their families. The aged are likely to develop complications if they are infected,” he cautioned, explaining why the entire machinery is trying to prevent the spread of the disease at the community level.


