‘93% students don’t want exams during pandemic’
2020-04-30
MUMBAI: A survey of 5,500 students conducted by St Xavier’s College’s economics department has revealed that 93% of them do not want the exams to be held during the Covid-19 pandemic. While the survey throws up the most obvious results, a majority of the students have cited concerns about safety in public transport (96.1%), parents’ unwillingness to send them to exam centres (92.9%) and also not being in the right mindset to appear for exams (87.1%). While more than two-third of the surveyed students said they are in self-quarantine, a third declared they live in containment zones.

Though the survey was conducted among students from across regions in the country and abroad, 75% are from Maharashtra alone. Aditi Sawant, head of the department of economics, started the survey to gauge the general student sentiment and bring it to the notice of policymakers. “I get calls and mails from several students who say they are not in the right frame of mind to take the exams. Some of them have even tested positive for the virus. Many final-year students are worried the delay in getting their final marksheets could impact their job prospects (over 60%) and some worry about losing admissions to international universities this year,” said Sawant.

Online exam, too, is not a solution, say students, as 76% said they are not trained in it and 36% do not have computers or laptops at home. Almost 50% said they do not have WiFi facilities. A majority agree they should be marked on their performance in the internal exams and the previous semesters. NCP MP Supriya Sule tweeted the results of the survey on Wednesday and even requested higher education minister Uday Samant to look into them. Samant reportedly told the media undergraduate and postgraduate exams are unlikely by May 31. St Xavier’s College principal Rajendra Shinde said it is not possible to conduct exams in the near future. “Trains need to start. Parents may not want to send their children. Maintaining social distancing will be a major issue.”


