Tamil Nadu: 95 cured Covid-19 patients sent home in central districts
2020-04-16
TRICHY: The central region of the state has something to cheer on Wednesday in the fight against Covid-19 as 95 patients were discharged from hospitals in Trichy and Karur districts after recovery. Meanwhile, ten new positive cases were admitted to hospitals in the delta districts on Wednesday. A new born baby born to a Covid-19 infected woman tested negative.


As many as 61 of the 69 Tablighi Jamaat delegates quarantined at Jamal Mohammed College (JMC) in Trichy since April 5 tested negative for Covid-19 in the swab tests. Trichy district administration said that doctors have been monitoring the quarantined people constantly. None of them tested positive in the first round of tests in the beginning of April. Yet, they were kept in quarantine as mandated by the protocol.

Since they tested negative in the laboratory tests now, they were sent back to their homes. They were told to be in home quarantine for 14 days, said Trichy collector S Sivarasu in a statement. Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) so far had 43 positive cases from Trichy district, all TJ delegates, their family members and relatives. Sources said that the hospital administration had taken swabs of many positive patients at the hospital for the second round of testing. Karur discharged 26 patients on Wednesday.

 While 21 of them were from Dindigul, four were from Namakkal and one from Karur. The hospital also sent home eight patients who tested negative. In total, 34 patients left the hospital on Wednesday. A new born baby boy born to a 32-year-old Covid-19 positive woman at Thanjavur on April 7 tested negative on Monday. The woman was a family member of a TJ delegate. Seven new positive cases were reported in Nagappattinam taking the total count to 41, all of them are close contacts of the TJ delegates. They were admitted to the Government Medical College in Tiruvarur.

In Thanjavur, a 62-year-old man from Athirampattinam tested positive. He was a close contact of a TJ delegate who tested negative. Thanjavur had 16 positive cases so far. In Tiruvarur, two more close contacts of TJ delegates also tested positive. The total of number of positive cases is 18.With Wednesday’s cases, the total number of Covid-19 patients in the central region has climbed to 160.


(With inputs from D Vincent Arockiaraj)

