Coronavirus: 95 of 150 deaths in Mumbai were in 51-70 age group, most positive cases among 21-30
2020-04-23
MUMBAI: A majority of coronavirus deaths in the city have been in the age-group of 51-70 years, even though more hospitalizations have been in the younger population. An analysis of 150 deaths reported in the city till Tuesday showed that 63% of the victims were between 51 and 70 years old. A further breakdown of the numbers showed maximum deaths among those aged between 61 and 70. Till Tuesday, this age bracket accounted for a third (50) of the 150 deaths.

A study of 3,077 positive cases and 150 deaths till Tuesday showed that the highest share of hospitalisations (22%) was in the age-bracket of 21-30 years, which saw only three deaths though, roughly translating to a death rate of 2%. Contrarily, the worst affected age-group of 61-70 years accounted for only 10% of hospitalisations but 33% of the deaths, underlining that those from higher age-groups and pre-existing health conditions face higher chances of getting critical or dying from Covid-19.

Hospitalisations have been around 6% in those over 70 years old, presumably due to less mobility. In absolute numbers, nine nonagenarians have tested positive so far, with no mortalities. The only 101-year-old who had tested positive succumbed to the infection. 

The numbers also show that around 80 children, who are less than 10 years old, have caught the infection in the city, while in the age-bracket between 11 and 20, there have been 202 cases. There have been no deaths in the paediatric age-groups and among young adults. “We have seen diabetes, high blood pressure, hypothyroidism, heart disease, history of cancer and lung disease in a significant percentage of deaths. Having one or more of those conditions increases a person’s risk of severe symptoms,” said Suresh Kakani, additional municipal commissioner. “What we have seen is people reaching hospitals at the very last minute,” he said. An official said some patients have spent less than two hours at the hospital before they succumbed. 

Mumbai has not just been the state’s epicentre for cases but also for deaths. Out of the 269 deaths recorded in Maharashtra since the onset of coronavirus on March 9, Mumbai accounted for 161 (60%) of them as on Wednesday. Mumbai’s share in the national death toll too stood at around 23%. The large number of deaths has pushed the state to start audits, a decision that has been dubbed controversial, and what experts believe is an attempt to cap the mortalities attributed to Covid-19.

A civic doctor involved in the treatment of Covid-19 cases said many patients had uncontrolled diabetes and hypertension and by the time they reached hospitals, they had very low oxygen saturation levels, which contributed to their rapid deterioration. Kakani said it was to detect this vulnerable population early that the BMC has decided to identify the individuals who are more than 60 years old and have either obesity, diabetes and are hypertensive. A civic circular said these individuals will be checked for their oxygen levels by a pulse oximeter given for a team comprising an assistant medical officer and a community health volunteer.

“Those individuals who are low in oxygen level should be identified and picked up for further action,” the circular said. Kakani added such people will be shifted to non-Covid hospitals and their condition addressed.

