A bride-to-be rides home on a scooter, spares quarantine for kin
2020-05-07
Kaliyikkavila: If not for Covid-19, she would have been busy planning promo for wedding or a pre-wedding shoot, but Anuja, a final year PG medical student was patiently waiting with a token at the screening camp at the border check-post at Inchivila on Wednesday. 

Her wedding is on May 24 and the student of the Salem Medical College is on her way to her home at Parassala to ensure that she completes her mandatory quarantine period on time.

Her family helped her with all the plans. While she reached the checkpost, her uncle was waiting for her with a scooter. Soon after her clearance at the checkpost she can ride home on the scooter and quarantine herself at home. Nobody else from her family will have to be quarantined as they had made arrangements for her to ride home on her own. 

The family has booked a hall for the wedding and hopes that lockdown will be lifted after May 17. “If that doesn’t happen, we will conduct the ceremony at home in a simple manner. The groom’s family is in Palakkad,” said Suresh, her uncle.

Anuja, who tested negative at Salem for Covid 19, said she was prepared to comply with the protocols. “I never thought I would have had to come home for wedding this way. But it is okay, at least I will reach home soon,” she said.

Inside the waiting room, Juan munched on snacks along with her sister Jewel. They have been separated from their parents since March. They had gone to Marthandam to a relative’s house with their grandparents and have been stuck for the past three months. “They missed their mother. There were no more games and fun. We had gone to Marthandam for vacation but the kids have been distraught,” said Rose Mary, the grandmother. Satheesh, the kids’ father, drove from Pathanamthitta to pick the family from Inchivila. 

Things went smoothly on Wednesday at Inchivila with authorities having to deal with lesser inflow compared to other entry points. 

The number of counters were also increased on Wednesday to ensure minimal crowding and faster clearance. As many as 80 persons who came from red zones in Tamil Nadu had to be taken for quarantine at the Covid care home at Nalanchira.


