A death in Nagpur & Akola; Vidarbha Covid cases at 2,266
2020-06-08
NAGPUR: Two patients died of Covid-19 on Sunday in Vidarbha taking the total death toll to 78. Apart from this, 94 new cases were reported from the region and 81 patients recovered and discharged in a day.

Total cases in Vidarbha have now reached 2,266, with 1,519 of them recovered. The recovery rate of Vidarbha is 67.03%, which is higher than state and the national average.

First death of the day was reported from worst-hit Akola. Swab samples of an 85-year-old man, who was admitted on March 31 in a critical condition and died on June 6, tested positive on Sunday. Second death was in Nagpur when a 58-year-old woman patient from Amravati died in the GMCH. Suffering from Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI), she was brought to Nagpur on June 4. She had tested positive for Covid-19 the same day.

Apart from a death, 57 new cases were reported from Akola on Sunday. These include 24 women and 33 men from 12 different localities in the town. Total number of Covid-19 cases in Akola crossed 800-mark and reached 813 — which is highest for a city in Vidarbha. 

Nagpur reported 16 new cases. Here, total number of cases reached 708 — second highest in the region. Chandrapur recorded its highest single-day spike of 11 new patients. Amravati reported four new cases taking the patient count to 279 — third highest in Vidarbha. Yavatmal also recorded three new cases and reached 158.

Recovery of patients also continued in the region. With 23 from GMCH and nine from IGGMCH, total 32 patients got discharge from Nagpur followed by 13 in Amravati, 11 in Yavatmal and nine in Akola. 

Bhandara and Gondia reported no new patient, but saw six and five patients, respectively, being discharged on Sunday taking the count of active patients down to 17 in Bhandara and five in Gondia.

Wardha and Washim recorded no new patients. A couple, which had returned from Mumbai, tested positive in Gadchiroli on Sunday. Two patients got discharge the same day, due to which the count of active patients in Gadchiroli remained at 15.

Amravati: An eight-year-old boy is among the four who tested positive on Sunday, taking the district’s Covid count to 279. On the brighter side, 13 patients were discharged from Covid Hospital, taking the number of recovered patients to 185. With 16 deaths reported so far, the number of active Covid cases here today is 76, while two are in GMCH, Nagpur. An official release from civil surgeon’s office said four, including a female, tested positive, all from different localities.

Yavatmal: The district recorded three new cases on Sunday which are from the high-risk contacts of the deceased man from Mudhana of Mahagaon tehsil. On the other hand, 11 patients in the GMCH isolation ward were discharged on Sunday. Currently, there are 33 active patients in the GMCH isolation ward of whom one has tested positive for the second time.

Chandrapur: With 11 persons testing positive in a day, district witnessed largest spike of Covid-19 infections on Sunday. Officials claimed that nine out of the 11 tested positive were under institutional quarantine, while the remaining two were under home isolation. The number of positive patients in the district has now jumped to 39. Previous single-day largest high of positive patients was seven, detected on May 23. 

Officials said so far 22 patients have been treated and discharged from hospital. With addition of 11 new cases, the number of active patients now stands at 17 in Chandrapur. All the patients are stable.


