A lull in Covid-19 storm, no +ve cases in 2 days
2020-04-16
Coimbatore: Three days after the district crossed 100 positive cases and discovered a new Covid-19 cluster in the city, there seems to be a let-up in the spread of contagion. The district didn’t report any positive case for the second consecutive day on Wednesday, even as the public health department heaved a sigh of relief as nearly 700 of the 1,800-odd people who were screened on Sunday tested negative for the virus. The remaining test results are yet to come. Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, confirmed that the district hasn’t reported any new case since Monday, when it recorded seven fresh cases that comprised two doctors, a former MP’s personal assistant and a five-year-old child from Kinathukadavu. “Around 50 of the 100 people who were screened at the apartment on West Periyasamy Road have tested negative for the virus so far. The 40 cops from Thudiyalur police station have also tested negative and so are a few postgraduate students at the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH). The child’s mother remains asymptomatic and is most likely to test negative,” he said. While two more doctors at CMCH were isolated on Tuesday after they showed mild symptoms of the virus infection, they have also been tested negative. The official, however, admitted that the child’s case was worrying as the source of infection was not traceable. He said they have been working on to contain local transmission of the virus by screening the people who are living in the 5km radius of the child’s residence. “We are going door-to-door as part of the containment drive, testing everyone who has cold, cough or fever, because that would give us a clue on the source of infection and if there is any spread,” Kumar said. Speaking about the testing facilities in the district, Kumar said the samples (nearly 500) that were collected a day were split among the ESI Hospital, CMCH and Microlabs. Pointing out that some samples were also sent to Chennai for tests, the deputy director of public health said, “It takes more than 24 hours for test results to arrive from Chennai. Our labs used to announce results within five hours. But since the sample load is high, they now take around 18-24 hours to give us the results.” While the district has around 2,000-2,500 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) kits, the state government has allocated a quota of 500 to 1,000 kits a day, depending on the requirement. 