Doctor's apology on Tablighi remarks: ‘A mom says ‘go to hell’ to kids, then hugs them’
2020-06-03
KANPUR: Two days after a video of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Memorial Medical College principal Dr Arti Lalchandani went viral in which she allegedly made objectionable comments on Tablighi Jamaat members, she issued an open apology on Tuesday.

Seen sitting with Kanpur's Shaher Qazi, Maulana Alam Raza Noor, in the video, Dr Lalchandani said, “I apologise if I hurt sentiments of anyone, particularly Muslim community.”

Alleging that the video had been made with the ulterior motive of blackmail and extortion, she said, “I have always served all humans alike. This video is old and released now by some adversaries for ulterior motives.”

“I have many Muslim brothers, sisters whom I have loved and served like my own. We treated the Tablighi patients who initially attacked our workers and later developed good relations with them. They (Tablighi Jamaat patients) later even apologized after few days and thanked us for taking every possible care. Muslim leaders helped us to pacify and convinced them that we were working for their welfare,” she said.

“I am especially considerate towards Muslim patients and students and ensure they don’t face any discrimination. I offer free services to Muslims anywhere, anytime. My mobile number has been distributed freely in Muslim population and I have been providing free treatment to all Muslims for rheumatic heart disease for which I have devised a non-injection treatment,” she said.

“Even a mother in anger says go to hell to her children and then hugs them the next moment,” she said.

“My actions have always spoken louder than words and will continue to do so. I shall continue serving you all and you can always send to me anyone in need. I work 24 hours for you. There is only love and compassion in my heart for all,” she said.

On Sunday, Dr Lalchandani had landed in a controversy as a video in which she is heard making controversial remarks against the Tablighi Jamaat patients went viral. She was heard making objectionable remarks against Jamaati patients and calling them terrorists and saying they should be dumped in jail and thrashed with batons.


