Pune: A ray of hope as Covid-19 cases stay steady in 19 mini-clusters in Peths
2020-06-01
PUNE: The number of Covid-19 cases has stabilized over the last fortnight in 19 mini-containment clusters in the old parts of the city, including those under the jurisdiction of Khadak and Samarth police stations, and the Shivajinagar police station area, data compiled by the Pune police said. 


No fresh case has been reported from these 19 mini-clusters because of containment efforts implemented by the Pune Municipal Corporation and the Pune police, who are playing a key role in contact tracing. 

 

Localities such as Kachi Aali in Khadak had 102 cases on May 18, but did not report a single case thereafter. 

Similarly, Golden City and Chamade galli in Samarth area had 89 and 37 cases, respectively, on May 2 and April 20, but no fresh case was reported thereafter. 

 

In Shivajinagar, Rajiv Gandhinagar had 29 cases on May 19, but none later.

Deputy commissioner of police (Zone I) Swapna Gore said, “No shop was allowed to open in these areas. People were discouraged from gathering in groups. Measures like sealing of areas after a spike in cases, effective contact tracing, large-scale doorstep distribution of masks, sanitizers, food packets, grocery packets and gas cylinders helped police in containing the spread of the virus.” 

These areas had a high rate of infection. 

However, a coordinated effort by the police and the PMC has led to a reduction in cases, Gore added.

“The staff of each of these police stations played a key role in maintaining 24/7 vigilance in these areas. Many have slum pockets like Kasewadi in Bhawani Peth and in Mangalwar Peth where police appointed a large number of special police officers, who not only maintain the law and order in the slums, but also cleaned up the common toilet, bathrooms with sanitizers.”

Fixed timings of grocery delivery and vegetable delivery were maintained in these areas. “Social distancing norms were implemented by the police. All the directives of the government were in place in these areas and the results were good,” she said. 


