Road crash is 10 times more likely to kill than coronavirus
2020-05-17
NEW DELHI: A road crash is 10 times more likely to kill someone than getting infected with the Covid-19 virus. According to updates available on Aarogya Setu, as of Saturday afternoon 2,752 out of total 85,940 coronavirus infected persons had died, a fatality rate of 3.2%. But at least 381 had died in 1,200 road crashes, according to data compiled based on media reports by SaveLife Foundation. This translates to a fatality rate of nearly 32%.



Even during 2019, the fatality rate per 100 road crashes was around 30. “Based on the media tracking and de-duplication done by our organisation, 145 out of the 381 road deaths between March 24 and May 16 were migrants,” said Piyush Tewari of SaveLife Foundation.

Road safety experts have been demanding measures including keeping one lane free from vehicles for safe passage of migrant workers who are walking back home and thorough briefing to bus drivers with regard to emergency protocols, identifying rest areas where food and water can be provided to travellers, engaging drivers well trained in long-distance driving and familiar with particular terrains.

Road Safety Network, a coalition of road safety experts and organisations, has also sent recommendations to the Union home secretary suggesting the need to include temporary lanes for cyclists and pedestrians on highways and urban roads.Seeking immediate intervention from the road transport ministry, Harman Singh Sidhu of ArriveSAFE has urged Union minister Nitin Gadkari to “issue directions to keep one lane ‘vehicle free’ as soon as possible.”

The road deaths during a nationwide lockdown have stumped experts and government officials as well. Speeding is being seen as the main reason behind such fatal crashes and it has once again reinforced how road users’ behaviour is responsible for a majority of crashes and fatalities in India.

Taking note of the vulnerability of pedestrians on major roads and highways, the home ministry has issued advisories asking states to ensure that migrants are walking on roads to reach home.


