Chennai: A sanitizer to kill genetic material of coronavirus
2020-04-17
CHENNAI: Anna University researchers have developed a novel hand sanitizer they say can eliminate the coronavirus’ genetic material and break the chain of transmission. Existing hand sanitizers only break the outer surface and not genetic material of the virus which can still infect if it enters the human body.


To ensure all components including genetic material are destroyed, the university’s National Hub for Healthcare Instrumentation Development (NHHID) has come up with AU-Sanitizer (AUS) that can be directly used on hands, gloves, body parts, surfaces, medical equipment and devices. It can also be added to available sanitizers to eliminate coronavirus from masks, personal protective equipment (PPE), dresses and large surfaces.

“We have tested on RNA from yeast and our sanitizer formulation with enzyme degraded it successfully. Since coronavirus shares the same type of nucleic acid, it would breakdown the virus’ genetic material,” said professor K Sankaran, network consultant of NHHID who developed the method.

High risk people like doctors, nurses, healthcare workers and relatives of Covid-19 patients. “Entering a cell, the virus injects nucleic acid and multiplies, hijacking the host’s machinery. If we kill the genetic material, we can reduce the transmission by breaking its chain.”

It would increase the sanitizer’s price by only Rs 8 to Rs 10 per litre.

The team is looking to use it as nasal drop or spray after further clinical trials. “Asymptomatic patients may act as carrier and infect others. If we use it as nasal drop or spray it may kill it genetic material and stop further infections.”

The researchers distributed 200 samples among clinicians, families, students and workers. Most found it acceptable with respect to smell and consistency.

“It provides an additional layer of safety to healthcare professionals. We have applied for provisional patent for the formulation. The university wants to join with governments and big companies to break the chain of coronavirus,” said S Muttan, coordinator of NHHID.

