This shantytown in the heart of Bengaluru faces hunger in lockdown
2020-04-20
BENGALURU: Around noon on Saturday, Netravathi, 33, and her dog Putta step out of their tin-shed home adjoining Thimmaiah Road in Vasanthnagar and desperately wait to spot someone bringing food. Her job is to shout aloud at any vehicle carrying rations and stop it. Hoping to hear her call behind a brown door is her entire colony of over 300 people, including children and the aged, wracked by hunger.


In this shantytown located in the heart of the city, 49 families of construction workers from Raichur and Kalaburagi districts have been struggling to get a decent meal for days together during the lockdown. 

The 12-year-old settlement is hardly a kilometre from the state Congress headquarters on Queen’s Road. “We are all construction workers from parts of Raichur and Kalaburagi districts. The lockdown has left us with no money or ration and we have been reduced to beggars seeking food,” laments Basavaraj, a mason from Manvi taluk.

A few days after the lockdown was enforced, most of these hunger-struck residents tried to head back to their hometowns and villages in tractors. “We managed to go only till Nelamangala where police stopped us midnight and forced us to turn back,” Amera Gowda, who drove one of the tractors, recalls. 


The food spotter 

A dark brown main door on Thimmaiah Road opens into a dingy line of single-room tenements made of rusting tin sheets and pinned to each other, where workers live in pathetic conditions. Not too long ago, they earned a living from construction work across Bengaluru. But the lockdown has confined them to their colony with the only hope to fill their stomachs being some social organisations or state workers, which is a rarity, turning up at their doorstep with food or rations. 

It was Netravathi’s turn on Saturday afternoon to spot someone coming with food and the nearly three hours that the TOI team was in the shantytown she was unable to see any vehicle.

“We can’t even come out in twos and threes as police will chase us. So we take turns to stand outside and call any vehicle carrying food. A few BBMP staffers came and took our details, including Aadhaar, a few days ago. But nothing has happened. If someone can arrange rations for us, we will be grateful,” a teary-eyed Netravathi says. 

Only pulav on their plates

Some local politicians have put in a word for food with the nearby Indira Canteen which, however, serves only pulao. Some workers manage to get palao once in a day or two and that too not for all. “Our children and the elderly are forced to eat the pulao despite the heavy masala in it. We are not in a position to complain lest we die of hunger,” says Basavamma, 66, from Chittapur. 

Some residents like Mallaiah, 72, who are diabetic, have no means to buy medicines. But pitiable of them all is Mehaboob, 65, from Maski taluk, who is immobile following a stroke and has gone without medicine and enough food for days. “Some ration is all we ask for,”says his wife.

Ironically, these labourers are all Kannada-speaking. Their woes seem to have been compounded by the fact that they reside in the heart of the city, while most of the food distribution for migrant labourers is happening in the outer areas.

