A sweetener for Chhindwara residents in bitter lockdown
2020-05-08
Bhopal: Adding a tinge of sweetness to the bitter lockdown 3.0, the Chhindwara administration gave its nod to home delivery of sweets on Thursday. The district in orange zone where so far 5 positive cases have been reported. At present there are only 2 active patients, as two of them have recovered and one had died. For now, the district administration has given permission to 11 sweet-sellers for home delivery of sweets, while adhering to appropriate security and social distancing norms. “As per the guidelines all shops could be opened in orange zone districts. So a change has been made in the order issued under section 144 and sweet shops have been allowed home delivery of products from their workshop or shops”, sub-divisional magistrate Atul Singh told TOI.He said, “Before giving the permission, the old stock of all shops was verified and appropriately certified by the food safety officers under the food safety Act. After getting the certificates, these shops have been allowed to deliver sweets at consumer’s home. But the traders have been asked to ensure that social distancing norms are followed and all precautions are taken. The decision was taken at the meeting of district-level crisis management committee. We have also deployed food safety officers to ensure strict compliance of norms.” A sweets-seller Saket Bhandari said, “We did not open our workshop or shop as adhering to all safety norms is quite difficult. So we are preparing limited sweets at our home kitchen and our family members are preparing the sweets and supplying it to the people. Since we have also not advertised about it much, very few orders are being received. Only items like Kaju Barfi, Milk-Cake which can be easily be prepared at home are being delivered now,” he said. Bhandari said, “We are also not sure if this permission will last long as the covid-19 situation is very fragile and if some new people test positive, the relaxation will be rolled back. We got only a few orders on the first day.” 