A ‘well’ utilized lockdown
2020-04-26
Nagpur: The lockdown period — over 31 days now — has given most of us ample time that can be utilized in some or the other constructive activity. 

But a couple from Karkheda, a hamlet in Washim district, has done something unthinkable during this period. Working day and night, the couple has dug a 25-feet deep well in their front yard without taking any outside help or using drilling machines. 

Their hard work was rewarded as they hit water at 21 feet. Now, Pushpa and Gajanan Pakhmode are ready to share this water with their neighbours who mocked at the couple when the digging work started on Gudi Padwa, Maharashtrian New Year Day, on March 25.

“Anybody would have ridiculed this idea, even me too,” said Gajanan, who owns a 2.5 acre rain-fed land in the village but also works as a construction labourer on sites around Washim and Akola districts. 

“When Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced lockdown, work at our construction site stopped. I came back home. The idea clicked right then,” he added.

But the seeds of the idea were sowed some time ago. “In our village, we start feeling water scarcity right from February and the situation worsens by May-June. My wife has to fetch water from a well 3km from here. So, having a well in the house was always our wish,” said Gajanan.

When Gajanan shared his plan with Pushpa, she readily agreed. “I told my husband that we will keep digging until we hit water, come what may,” she said adding that the hard work put in digging the well was better than the daily pain of fetching water from 3km away. 

Gajanan, being a skilled construction worker, knew all the technicalities involved. They started on a 5ft diameter area and after digging for 7 feet, they reduced it to 4.5ft. They used to work from 8am to noon. Work would resume after lunch break, and carry on till late in the night. This continued for 20 days. 

“After soil cover of up to 5ft, the next 3ft was full of crumbly rock. The next 1ft was the toughest as it was just hard rock. After that, it was barren blackish soil up to 21ft where we hit water,” Gajanan said. “That was the best moment,” said Pushpa who was confident of getting good quantity water from the well.

Gajanan plans to build the well properly after the lockdown ends. “It will serve not only us but our neighbours too. I will also build a small tank beside the road to make water available to stray cattle and other animals,” he said. 

Washim’s district collector Hrishikesh Modak said Pakhmode couple’s story is inspiring for the entire country. “It’s the greatness of hardworking people of India. We have such young and inspiring icons right here in our villages,” he said.


