Aadhar offers Covid warriors cheaper loans, health cover
2020-06-02
Mumbai: Blackstone-owned Aadhar Housing Finance, a provider of loans for the affordable segment, has said that it would reduce rates for essential service providers who were in the frontline during the Covid-19 lockdown. The product also has a complementary health insurance cover with a Rs 1-lakh sum insured and a four-month validity.

Covid frontline workers can avail of the loan to buy a home, to construct, to renovate or take a loan against property with Aadhar Housing Finance’s ‘Covid Warriors Griha Loans’. The frontline workers include municipal employees, those associated with the healthcare sector, the police and law enforcement department, private security guards, drivers and employees of other institutions. In addition, the loan can be availed by self-employed shopkeepers, vegetable & fruit vendors and milk suppliers.

Speaking to TOI, Aadhar Housing Finance MD & CEO Deo Shankar Tripathi said that the company has been providing masks gloves and sanitisers to essential service providers as part of its corporate social responsibility and decided to come out with a new product for this segment.

“After the government subsidy for affordable housing, the EMI on a Rs 1-lakh loan comes down to Rs 800, whereas before subsidy it works out to Rs 950. The best rate after subsidy would come down to 7%, and before subsidy will be 10.25%,” said Tripathi. He added that the affordable housing segment cannot be compared to loans provided by mainstream banks as both risks and cost of acquisition are higher.

Tripathi said that 38% of borrowers had availed of the moratorium. “While many do have the resources to repay, they have decided to stay liquid as a precautionary measure,” said Tripathi. He said that he expected demand for home loans to move from bigger cities to small towns on the outskirts of large cities following the Covid-19 crisis. “We are already present in these centres,” he said.

Blackstone, which acquired Aadhar from DHFL group in June 2019, increased the capital of the company to Rs 2,370 crore from Rs 875 crore earlier. “Because of this high net worth position, we can borrow funds very comfortably,” said Tripathi.


