Telangana: Abandoned pets wander through deserted streets under Covid-19 lockdown
2020-04-01
HYDERABAD: A yellow Labrador scavenges from a garbage bin near Secunderabad without a collar or owner in sight. Similarly, a German Shepherd, also without a name tag or collar, was found tied to a pole in Narayanguda Government Veterinary Hospital earlier this week. 


While the city’s streets have become deserted since the lockdown was announced, animal rescue teams say that they are witnessing an unusual increase in the number of pet dogs being abandoned on city roads due to the spread of Covid-19.

The average number of calls received by Animal Rescue Shelter, an NGO, regarding such cases, has increased from one to two cases per week to at least three cases per day.

“It is very concerning. We have been receiving at least two to three calls every single day. One of our recent rescues was of a Lhasa Terrier from Attapur. The dog was so scared that it used to constantly shake in fear when someone would go close to her. Another Pomeranian that we rescued was left at a car mechanic workshop in Jeedimetla,” said Shruti Darak, founder of Animal Rescue Shelter. Animal welfare organisations also say that the number of calls from pet owners wanting to give up pets is also on the rise.“There is a sudden surge in number of pet owners wanting to give up pets. Our Facebook page on pet adoptions is a proof that people are scared they might get infected. We are working on overcoming that by counselling them and disseminating correct information,” said Aanchal Khanna, an animal activist.

Despite the World Health Organisation (WHO) clarifying that Covid-19 cannot be transmitted through dogs, many are either abandoning their pets on streets or frantically calling shelter homes to give them up. 

Clearing the air about the misinformation, Dr Jasleen Kaur from Allvet Pet Clinic said, “Pets do not get Covid-19. They do not get the strain of coronavirus that can be transmitted from them to humans. There is absolutely no reason to abandon your pet or send it to a shelter.” 


