Abhinav Bindra on Coronavirus and Olympics: An athlete's life is about adapting to unforeseen scenarios
2020-03-16
Abhinav Bindra's visit to Gurgaon was all about business. He was here to launch a branch of his wellness and fitness centre. When we meet him at the rooftop of the building in DLF Phase 3 overlooking the city landscape, the former World No 1 and Olympic gold-medallist shooter tells us he has been meaning to come to the Millennium City for quite some time. He says, "We were looking at two populations – the athletes and the non-athletes. Of course, there are athletes in the region but also, there are lots of corporates, and what we do here is well suited for them. I have always wanted to be here and I finally got a chance now."


On Olympics in the time of coronavirus Bindra's centre deals with physical fitness and wellness of people. But much of the conversation at the launch event was about a different kind of wellness threat – the global coronavirus scare. Increasing number of cases of coronavirus across the world, particularly in East Asia, has led to calls for the Olympic Games – to be held in Tokyo in July-August – to be either postponed or cancelled. Several events being held in the run-up to the Games are seeing athletes drop out as well. Bindra agrees that this isn’t the perfect environment for an athlete in the lead-up to the biggest sporting event in the world. "It plays on every human being’s mind and an athlete is no different. It does (affect) to a certain degree but you just have to block it out and focus on your sport and your performance," he tells us.

The ace shooter may find some parallels in the situation with the Zika virus scare preceding the 2016 Rio Olympics, where he participated, too. Back then, the World Health Organisation had issued an advisory for people travelling to Rio de Janeiro, the Games' host city, which had an increasing number of cases of the disease. Bindra recalls, "I think the Zika scare wasn’t as bad. From an athlete’s point of view, you just have to leave it to the experts and prepare to the best of your abilities. Just focus on your preparations. An athlete’s life is all about adapting to situations, adapting to new scenarios that you haven’t thought may come by. That’s exactly what this current situation is as it is currently impacting qualification tournaments, scheduling. But that is the situation for everybody. My advice to all athletes would be to accept the situation, adapt to it, and be prepared."

 
 

'The society is much more competitive, which has translated into sporting performance' For decades, India has produced several world-class athletes in various sports, who haven’t been able to translate their form and skill at the Olympics. Bindra believes this will change now. He says, "At present, there is a very different lot of athletes that we have going into the Games. There are very young athletes in my sport of shooting but also in a variety of other sports. The young generation of today is far more competitive, not just in sport but in general. Society is much more competitive and that has also translated into sporting performance. We’ve been seeing these superb performances in many sports in the last few years and that is because of that element of competitiveness in the society. I’m hopeful that things will change and our rate of conversion of potential to actual medal will become better and we will come back with multiple gold medals."
 News in BriefExplore Briefs
