About 90 % Covid-19 cases are asymptomatic: Authorities
2020-05-04
Aurangabad: Close to 90% of the Covid-19 positive cases reported from Aurangabad as well as parts of Marathwada region are asymptomatic, say authorities. The latest findings have stunned the authorities after which the precautionary as well as screening measures are being scaled up.

The total number of Covid-19 patients in Aurangabad stood at 283 till Sunday evening. However, the health experts are hopeful of high recovery rate amongst the asymptomatic patients due to age factor as well as better immunity. Initially about 25 to 30 cases cases reported were symptomatic. However, after the administration went for large scale contact tracing, testing and isolating, there has been a surge in the number of cases.

The phenomenon of getting high number of asymptomatic Cocid-19 positive patients in Aurangabad is no different than other cases being reported from Jalna, Hingoli and Nanded districts.

Revenue divisional commissioner Sunil Kendrekar has confirmed the reports that a large number of people who have tested positive for Covid-19 are asymptomatic. “Almost 80% to 90% of the total Covid-19 positive cases reported so far are asymptomatic,” said Kendrekar.

Authorities said that asymptomatic patients and their relatives are in denial mode about being infected due to lack of awareness, making it difficult for authorities to convince and counsel them.

In the Sanjaynagar area of the city, after two people tested positive, the authorities went for large scale contact tracing and identifying high-risk and low-risk patients and quarantined 117. “All the 117 we quarantined were asymptomatic and appeared healthy, but when the tests were carried out, 64 of these people tested positive,” said AMC law officer Aparna Thite.

A total of 194 jawans from the Hingoli-based State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) returned from their duty in Mumbai and Malegaon last week. None of them had any symptoms. Hingoli SRPF commandant Manchak Ipper told TOI, “When first four-five men tested positive, they did not had any symptoms. We frequently tested all of our men and of the 46 positive cases we have, 36 are asymptomatic.” He said that the other cases have very mild symptoms.


