Accidents in Kochi during lockdown raise safety concerns
2020-05-15
KOCHI: With six people being killed in accidents reported from the district soon after lockdown restrictions were eased, experts say that this transition period is a dangerous time for commuters and they have to be extra cautious while driving.


About a week ago, in an accident reported from near Muttom at Aluva, three people who were standing by the road, including a girl, were killed when a car went out of control and rammed into them. A day before this incident, three persons were killed as their car rammed a house by the road. The impact was so much so that a couple of guest workers who were having dinner inside the house sustained injuries. Several minor accidents, where vehicle carrying commodities overturned, were also reported from rural areas of the district during this period.

According to road safety expert P D Sunil Babu, most accidents at this transition period, when there is no public transport and fewer vehicles altogether, can be associated only with human error.

“This is not a time when damaged roads or adverse weather becomes an issue. At this time, we can easily avoid an accident by being careful as there is very little chaos on the roads as compared to the usual situation. Many are not showing that carefulness and this is causing accidents,” said Babu.

He said that roads, especially highways, would have less traffic at this time and people tend to drive rashly. “Road safety is a very serious matter and you can’t drive without focus. Seeing the road empty, many would tend to speed. Those who speed might be careful, but there would be people driving carefree since the road is vacant and when the two meet, an accident is bound to happen,” said Babu.

A senior police officer with Ernakulam rural police meanwhile said that there are still people who drink and drive. “It is a fact that there is a ban on liquor sale, but many are finding liquor to party since they are stuck at home. Going out after having such a party and then driving through the road with less traffic would mean that there is a high chance of people speeding and later causing an accident,” said the police officer.

Babu added that not only the drivers but pedestrians and those who go out for jogging and morning walk should also stay careful.

“Pedestrians shouldn’t drop their guard thinking that there is far less traffic. Let’s be careful not only to contain the virus but also to safeguard ourselves from road accidents,” he said.


