Active coronavirus cases in district drop to nine
2020-05-01
COIMBATORE: Four more Covid-19 patients were discharged from the ESI Hospital and PSG Hospitals on Thursday, taking the total number of recovered people to 132 in the district. Presently, there are only nine positive cases in the district.


According to a health department source, the district would be free of novel coronavirus cases by Monday (May 4), if it doesn’t report any fresh cases.

However, those discharged from the hospitals have been advised to remain in home quarantine for another two weeks.

The district has not recorded a new Covid-19 case for the past seven consecutive days. If it maintains the status quo for another seven days, the district would be eligible to be considered an orange zone.

The public health department said 132 of the 141 Covid-19 patients have been recovered and discharged from hospitals in the district so far. Most of them had stayed in hospitals for at least 14 days and were tested negative for the virus twice, before discharged.

Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said, “While there are another nine patients, who are undergoing treatment in the ESI Hospital and PSG Hospitals, they are all stable and have no major symptoms. They are likely to be discharged in another four days, provided that they test negative twice.”

The district is, however, still in the red zone. Hence, the public health department would continue to screen as many people as possible. The had screened 333 people on Wednesday. They are likely to subject the same number of people in the coming days as well.

“The drive to screen police officers and working media professionals is going on. We have also begun testing all the patients coming to PSG Hospitals, Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital and primary health centres, etc., with sore throat, cold, cough, fever, severe acute respiratory infection or breathlessness and pregnant women. On Wednesday, at least 43 samples were taken from primary health centres,” Dr Kumar said.

On Thursday, testing of conservancy workers and sanitary workers in and around containment zones has also begun. “We have a stock of 1,750 viral transport medium (VTM) kits. We receive almost 5,000 of them a week. So, screening of vulnerable sections of people will continue until we are told to slow down,” the deputy director of public health said.


