Addition of 4 pvt labs boosts testing in state
2020-05-05
Kochi: Giving a boost to Covid-19 testing facilities in Kerala, four more private labs in the state received permission from ICMR to conduct tests. With this, there are now six private labs and 14 government labs that can test for coronavirus.

More testing facility in the private sector also means that hospitals can now plan their elective surgeries without much delay. The four new private labs to receive Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) permission are at Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Aster Medcity in Kochi, Dane Diagnostics Pvt Ltd at Palakkad and Medivision Scan & Diagnostic Research Centre in Kochi. DDRC SRL Diagnostics at Kochi and MIMS Lab Services at Kozhikode had received permission earlier.

As on May 3, about 32,217 tests have been conducted in the state, with an average daily test of 758. This is much less compared to neighbouring states of Karnataka or Tamil Nadu that is conducting average daily tests of 2,344 and 4,881 respectively. DDRC SRL Diagnostics, which started Covid-19 testing from mid-April, has so far tested 896 samples. “Majority of the tests – about 300 – were for Lakshwadeep evacuation, some were on suspected cases in the ICU and the rest were tested before surgeries. Few contacts of the health workers were also tested,” said Dr Ajith Joy, managing director, DDRC SRL Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd.

RT-PCR and US-FDA-approved GeneXpert are the two testing kits approved by ICMR as confirmatory test. Private hospitals can test patients within their hospital or take samples from other places. However, they need to notify the results to district health authorities. Once private labs conduct tests, district authorities needn’t do any confirmatory tests. A private hospital can charge Rs 4,500 for tests.

However, just like in the government sector, even in the private sector, shortage of kits or cartridges remains a concern. “Despite the permission, there are still lots of challenges. The cartridges for kits available in the market are limited in numbers. We plan to save our kits for doing tests on patients for an emergency surgery or a really sick patient who come to the hospital. We expect to receive around 25 kits this week,” said Dr Anup R Warrier, head, department of Infectious Diseases & Hospital Infection Control, Aster Medcity.

If major hospitals decide to run their operation theatres to full capacity, then each hospital would require to test minimum 30 to 40 persons per day. However, due to limited availability of kits, the private hospitals have decided to limit elective surgeries to one or two days in a week. “We are planning to start elective surgeries this week after proper scheduling so that there is no rush in the hospital,” Dr Sanjeev Singh, medical superintendent, AIMS.


