Ahmedabad: Adding hope and humanity to patient deaths in Covid-19 wards
2020-06-06
AHMEDABAD: Earlier last month, a man in from Vatva, in his late sixties, succumbed to Covid-19 at the 1,200-bed Covid-19 hospital at Civil Hospital. For the statistics, he was yet an unnamed victim like several others on the same day. But for the staff at the hospital, his was a case that needed empathy.


“When we phoned his wife, we came to know that she was also at the hospital, getting treated for Covid-19. The couple was living alone, and their family was in Bengaluru,” said Dr Badal Gandhi, leading the team at Covid-19 hospital for dead body management. “We contacted the family but due to lockdown, it was not possible for them to come. We not only arranged for the last rites but also to collect his ashes and send it to the family.”

As a trauma expert, Dr Gandhi is no stranger to deaths. “But Covid-19 is something else. The initial few days were surely difficult as we were managing multiple bodies. The death toll increased then and we observe about 10-odd deaths daily,” he says. 

Deaths in Covid-19 wards are no less than a ritual. After the vitals are no more sensed, a team of doctors declare the patient dead. After disinfection on the bed itself, the body is put in a blue body bag and then taken out on a stretcher. Two workers disinfect the bed, the room, and walk with the stretcher for the entire path till the enclosed area on the ground floor of the left wing of the hospital. The inquest is again filled up and the body is disinfected before it’s packed in a bag and the relatives are contacted. The body is identified and handed over in sanitized mortuary vans as they depart for the patient’s last journey.

Even as he talked, his phone kept buzzing with the updates of bodies to be brought down or of coordination with the relatives. “I would be lying if I say that I don’t fear Covid-19 – I see death every day. I am concerned about safety of my family. But I also know that it’s my work and I must do it in the best possible manner with all precautions,” he said, adding that a team of 15-odd persons right from doctors to helpers are working round the clock to ensure that all patients get dignified death.

Does the daily toll affect him? “It’s not all about despair – it’s also about finding hope and humanity. The relatives go to great lengths to ensure that their dear ones get the best possible last rites. Even that was difficult during lockdown,” said Dr Gandhi, who often has to inform the relatives about their loss. “We keep on telling the staff that it’s not just a person – he or she meant the world for someone and we must respect that. Deaths can move you and also make you see the good around you when you realize that life is too short.”


