Admin to conduct Covid-19 testing of medical & police personnel
2020-05-23
Nagpur: After Nagpur bench of Bombay high court’s poser, the collector and commissioner of police (CP) have agreed to conduct reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests on medical and police personnel deployed in containment areas of Mominpura and Satranjipura.

On Monday, justice Rohit Deo, while equating police and medical staffers with “brave hearts in the armed forces”, had asked both respondents to explore conducting Covid-19 testing on a pilot basis on those discharging duties in these containment areas.

“The RT-PCR tests for medical and police personnel are proposed to be conducted where more than 15 Covid-19 positive cases are found in each of the containment zones. Those would be held in staggered phases,” a joint affidavit by collector Ravindra Thakare and CP Bhushan Kumar Upadhayay said.

Quoting a survey, the affidavit mentioned that Mominpura and Satranjipura are hotspots areas, where about 798 police personnel are discharging their duties. Those ageing over 55 or showing signs of comorbidity aren’t deployed in these areas.

Referring to the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) medical officer’s data, the affidavit stated that 295 doctors, nurses and other health care workers are working in these areas. Of them, 42 are already tested.

It was filed in the public interest litigation (PIL) by the ‘Citizen Forum for Equality’ through counsel Tushar Mandlekar, praying for conducting Covid-19 testing on all front-line workers, including doctors, cops, pharmacists and paramedical staff.

After HC’s poser on Monday, the CP convened a joint meeting of all senior officials at his office on Wednesday. It was attended by the expert doctors — Dr Ravindra Khadse from the IGGMCH, Dr Kanchan Wankhede from the GMCH, Dr Sandeep Choudhary from MAFSU and Dr Sandep Shinde, in-charge at police hospital.

Joint police commissioner RG Kadam and deputy commissioner Sweta Khedkar, besides Upadhayay and Thakare, were part of the meeting, where the decision to test front-line workers was taken.

While directing collector and CP to reply within 48 hours, justice Deo stated that the citizens appear to be broadly appreciative of the bureaucracy’s role in handling the extraordinary situation. “The only anxiety is that both should come with a structured response to the suggestion of a pilot project and take a decision either way,” he said.


