Administration ask suspects for home quarantine after isolation ward scare
2020-03-18
Nagpur: The episode of four suspected cases of the novel Coronavirus (Covid-19) giving the slip to the Mayo Hospital administration on Friday night has brought to the fore issues like lack of management and confusion over isolation and quarantine measures. 

Even as there is no clarity on the contentious issue, the administration announced that it will ask people to follow home quarantine. 

The four in question were asked to wait at the hospital till the results of their throat swabs were out. As per the hospital authorities, these suspects were ‘quarantined’ in the isolation ward. 

While briefing the press on Saturday, district collector Ravindra Thakare said, “The suspects left without permission as they feared contracting the virus from the positive patient.” 

The ward is on the same floor of the same building, Ward number 5 and 6 of Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (Mayo Hospital), where Nagpur’s first positive Covid-19 patient was admitted for treatment. 

This is in contravention of the best medical practices which prescribe isolation of a sick person from those who are not sick. Quarantine means separating those who have come in contact with infected persons and observing them if they show any symptoms for 14 days. 

As per the World Health Organization’s (WHO) interim guidance issued on February 29 to contain Covid-19 virus, “Quarantine of persons is the restriction of activities or separation of persons who are not ill, but who may been exposed to an infectious agent or disease, with the objective of monitoring symptoms and early detection of cases. Quarantine is different from isolation, which is the separation of ill or infected persons from others, so as to prevent the spread of infection or contamination.” 

When TOI asked Thakare why the isolation ward was being used as a quarantine facility, he said, “What is the problem? When he (the first positive patient) lived in his house for some days, only his wife tested positive. We are taking all preventive measures. There are over 20 persons quarantined in the isolation ward. Nursing staff and doctors are more exposed. 80 people have so far been inspected. They are there only for two to three hours,” he said. 

Mayo dean Ajay Keoliya said rooms for suspects and confirmed patients are separate. “One or two persons are kept in a room during their wait for test results. Each positive patient is kept in a separate room having separate toilets. There is a distance of an entire corridor,” he said. 

Yet, in the wake of the apprehension of people coming forward for getting themselves tested and being anxious to wait, the district collector announced that from Saturday “home quarantined” would be followed in all such cases. 

Earlier this week, home quarantine guidelines were issued by the union health ministry to contain the Covid-19 virus. In fact, on March 12, divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar, too, had said that teams would be formed to collect swab samples and people should adhere to ‘home quarantine’. 

Lack of coordination and management leading to non-compliance of the plan has raised a question on measures to fight the contagious diseases. 


