Madhya Pradesh: Administration using ‘Jatkhedi model’ to stem Covid-19 spread
2020-06-04
BHOPAL: Jatkhedi which was emerging as a Covid hotspot is now only reporting isolated cases. For now, it seems as the coronavirus crisis has been averted in the area. 



What was the difference in the approach adopted by the district administration to stem the spread of coronavirus in the locality? In battle mode, the administration adopted the ‘Jehangirabad strategy’ but with some upgrades.

Explaining the approach, collector Tarun Pithode said, “Under this strategy, the entire family of a person found coronavirus-positive is shifted to a Covid-care centre, drastically reducing the chances of infection spreading among other residents of the area. After being shifted to Covid-care centre, all of them are tested for coronavirus and those found positive are shifted to Covid hospitals.”

In addition to this, intensive contact tracing of the person found positive is carried out. Not only are the ‘first contact’ persons identified and quarantined, but even the ‘first contacts’ of those in quarantine identified and kept under surveillance by health teams. 

“The strategy is to get the ‘epicentre’ (house of the first infected person) vacated and also get his acquaintances in the colony or elsewhere quarantined before the infection spreads,” said district administration spokesperson, Arun Rathore. A health survey is conducted among persons with whom the positive person came in contact with and their status is monitored, in addition to strict surveillance in the containment area. “This is how we contained the spread of infection in Jatkhedi, which was emerging as a hotspot but of late only isolated positive cases are coming from the area,” Rathore said.

Meanwhile, the district administration, which received a lot of flak for not being able to effectively stop exit and entry into containment areas and not making provision of essential goods for the residents seems to have learnt its lessons as the coronavirus infection continues to grow and is spreading to new areas of the city.

“Now we are appointing a volunteer in each area under containment’ restrictions, who provides BMC officials a list of essentials required at each household in the area and only the BMC makes the supply. Entry and exit points are closed and nobody is being allowed to go out of the barricaded area. A publicity campaign is being carried out in all such areas and people are being requested to observe physical distancing norms. We are also distributing masks and sanitisers in those localities,” said Rathore.

The same strategy is being replicated in other containment areas and ‘emerging hotspots’ — Mangalwara, Hanumanganj, Qazi Camp and Banganga — to check the spread of the deadly virus. 

 “We have turned 60 red aeas into green, which is no.mean feat going by the fact that new positive cases are still coming and nowhere else in the state more than 15,000 tests for coronavirus are being conducted anywhere in Madhya Pradesh,” he said.


