Adopt best practices for Covid-19 treatment: CM
2020-04-27
Bhopal: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan has said that best practices must be adopted everywhere in the state for treatment of Corona virus. Presently, Chirayu Hospital is providing the best treatment in Bhopal.

Chouhan reviewing Corona situation and control arrangements in the state through video conferencing on Sunday said, “We have to make every effort to ensure that every Corona infected person recovers and goes home. Arrangements to start ICU facility in every district must be made. In suspected cases, home quarantine should be preferred.”

Chief minister has given instructions to improve the arrangements of RD Gardi Hospital in Ujjain. Even the slightest carelessness in the treatment of Corona patients will not be tolerated. The chief minister in the past too had expressed concern over complaints about poor arrangements at RD Gardi hospital in Ujjain which has been notified as a Covid-19 hospital.

Chouhan warned, “In case of any negligence, strict action will be taken.”

Chief Secretary Iqbal Singh Bains informed that a team of two officers has been sent to Ujjain to monitor the work.

Meanwhile, Chouhan said that labourers of the state stranded in other states are being brought to Madhya Pradesh by buses. Besides, labourers are also being sent from one district to their districts / villages in the state. He instructed that it should be ensured that they reach their destination without any trouble, they should be screened at both the places from where they started travelling and their destination.

The chief secretary informed that instructions have been issued not to recover toll tax from vehicles that are bringing labourers to the state. The chief minister said that the health workers and policemen and other staff engaged in the task of dealing with Corona should take full care of their health. They should work with utmost care and caution so that they do not get infected. They should use N95 masks, PPE kits.

Secretary public relations P Narhari informed that activities for entertainment of patients are being started in the Corona Hospitals and quarantine centres for the patients so that they remain positive and stress-free. Chief secretary Bains instructed that these activities should be started soon after talking to the district collectors and in-charge of Covid hospitals.

Director general of police Vivek Johri, additional chief secretary health Mohammed Suleman were also present in the meeting.


