Advisories on novel coronavirus aside, residents turn a blind eye to precautions
2020-03-22
Prayagraj: Even as the government steps up its preparedness to deal with the novel coronavirus outbreak, organisations and residents in Prayagrraj have a long way to go when it comes to taking the required precautions to keep the virus from spreading.

In one such example, members of Allahabad Distributers Association were seen giving out free masks to residents near Subash Crossing of the city on Saturday. Throwing caution to the wind, scores of citizens queued up creating a stampede-like situation. Even the organisers of the drive didn’t bother to warn citizens or request them to stand two metres apart.

During the two-hour event, the association distributed over 5,000 masks without any supervision of police. 

“Despite our efforts, there are many people who still do not have access to masks. We have ordered more masks from Delhi and will distribute them next week in a similar drive,” said president of the association Naresh Kundra. He acknowledged the fact that in future, the body would ensure that citizens stand at a fair distance from each other.

A similar event was organised a couple of days back in Chowk, wherein too the organisers and citizens did not observe any precautions. 

On Allahabad University campus, authorities conducted the elections of employees’ union while ignoring government advisories which prohibit such gatherings. The elections were conducted despite the fact that the university is shut and examinations have been postponed in the wake of the contagion. 

Many of the varsity employees were seen moving on the campus, shaking hands and seeking support. 

Although the electoral process ended on Friday, but the carelessness of the employees and the administration was evident. Notably, the administration had cancelled a meeting of its Executive Council as a precautionary measure in view of the novel coronavirus threat. 

Amidst these incidences of carelessness, there were authorities like Prayagraj division of north central railways which has closed the two gates, out of the three gates of the DRM (Divisional Railway Manager’s) office. Staffers are allowed to enter only after getting their identity cards checked and the entry of outside persons has been completely prohibited. Use of sanitizer has been made mandatory for every employee while entering the divisional office. Besides, 50% of the non-essential employees of the division have been asked to work from home. 


