Coronavirus outbreak: Aerobridge assigned for China passengers
2020-02-05
CHENNAI: An exclusive aerobridge will be linked to flights that carry passengers from China and seven other countries affected by novel coronavirus. All passengers will be screened in an isolated area before they are sent home for the 28-day mandatory quarantine. Those who show flu-like symptoms such as cold, fever or respiratory distress will be taken to the nearest tertiary care centre for quarantine.

Meanwhile, police said a 45-year-old man was admitted to Kilpauk Medical College and Hospital with symptoms of coronavirus late on Tuesday. He had travelled to China between January 14 and January 22. He was referred to the hospital after he complained of cold and fever to doctors at Tambaram PHC. 

Earlier in the day, health minister C Vijayabaskar said there were no confirmed cases of novel coronavirus in the state. “We know we won’t be able to stop people from travelling to the country, but we are doing all we can to stop the virus from spreading. There is no positive case in the state so far,” he said at a press conference. “We advise people not to travel to affected country or state,” he said.

In the last two days, the number of passengers coming into India from China has come down, he said. In the last 24 hours, 75 passengers from China landed in the state taking the total number to 1,125, he said. “Since the virus is imported, we quarantine those from affected countries. The incubation period for the virus is two weeks, but we quarantine passengers for at least twice as long so that we are sure they don’t have the virus. This will prevent its spread to people with no travel history,” he said. The names, contact details and addresses of passengers have been shared with the home department as a ‘preventive measure’, he said.

On Tuesday, four samples of a family of Chinese passengers quarantined in a government hospital in Coimbatore sent to NIV in Pune tested negative. Eight Chinese citizens admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital who tested negative were discharged. Five other samples sent to King Institute of Preventive Medicine in Guindy also tested negative and results of three samples are pending, he said. If tests are positive, patients will be moved to quarantine wards of the nearest government hospital by ‘108’ ambulances, he said. The health department has set aside nearly 288 beds across state-run facilities. Health inspectors and nurses visit the houses of people who are on home quarantine to lift samples and screen them every day. Staff from ‘108’ also make calls to ensure they get necessary information.

Information about the virus has been shared with civic bodies, education and police departments. “Civic bodies have been asked to disinfect public places, police have been asked to alert their personnel so that they can use protective gear and prevent reuse of disposables in breathalysers. Education department will promote hand hygiene,” he said.


