After Priyanka, Akhilesh Yadav now tweets support for Agra mayor, asks UP govt to ‘wake up’ about Covid-19 crisis
2020-04-28
AGRA: A day after Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi tweeted support for Agra’s BJP mayor Naveen Jain who urged UP CM Yogi Adityanath to “save Agra from becoming another Wuhan”, former chief minister Akhilesh Yadav asked the state government to “wake up”.

“According to Mayor, the much touted Agra model of chief minister has failed and will make Agra, Wuhan (China). No testing, no medicines and private hospitals for other diseases, no life-saving kits and now mismanagement of quarantine centres is proving deadly. Wake up government,” Yadav tweeted. 

A total of 384 cases of coronavirus were reported in Agra till Monday. While ten people have died, 52 were treated and discharged. The number of active cases is 322.

In his letter to the CM, the mayor had said, “Testing of people at quarantine centres does not take place for days together. Patients suffering from renal problems and other diseases have been dying as there is no arrangement for their treatment. The situation is very serious. Nursing homes are not ready to admit expectant mothers. Family members of Covid-19 patients are forced to wait for many days to get tested. People of Agra are in a state of panic. Due to the inefficiency of the officials, people are cursing the BJP government and public representatives. There is a lot of anger among the common people.”

In his letter, Jain had said, "I am writing this letter with a very sad mind that my Agra is going through a phase of excessive problems. The need is to take bold decision to save Agra, where the situation has become very serious. Hence, with folded hands, I am praying you to please save my Agra, please save it."

The letter written by the Agra Mayor was also tweeted by Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Sunday.

The Congress leader had also said that transparency and testing were important to contain coronavirus.


