After much suspense, 16th DK resident tests +ve for Covid-19
2020-05-01
Mangaluru: After a little over a 19-hour wait from 5pm on April 29, a strong rumour that the 16th resident of Dakshina Kannada had tested positive for Covid-19 was confirmed. 

When the state bulletin was released at 12.25pm on Thursday, the first entry in it read: “P-536, female, Dakshina Kannada, Contact of P-501, designated hospital, Dakshina Kannada”. She was among the 22 positive cases the state reported since the evening bulletin of April 29.

The presence of a positive case in Boloor village was almost confirmed, when the city police on Wednesday evening started preparations to seal specific areas of the village from where P-536, a 58-year-old woman, hailed from. However, the district administration was hamstrung in either confirming or denying it, for they received the report of the woman testing positive only after minister Suresh Kumar had finished his daily media briefing on the state’s situation, in Bengaluru.

Gayathri Nayak, deputy director, DUDC, said that the district authorities have clear instructions not to release information prior to it being announced in either the afternoon or evening state bulletin. In the interim, health authorities had shifted P-536, a patient treated for brain TB at First Neuro Hospital, and discharged on April 20, to Wenlock Hospital, and started her treatment. First Neuro Hospital is a supervised Covid-19 isolation centre.

B A Khader Shah, senior assistant director, department of information and public relations, said that the media was after him to get the district administration to release a special bulletin on the Boloor case. Reports of this case had spread like wildfire on social media, and police action on ground only fuelled it, he said. 

Deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh has appointed executive engineer 3 of MSCL as the incident commander for the containment zone in Boloor, which has a population of 640.

Dakshina Kannada now has seven active cases, and has recorded 22 positive cases overall. While 16 are residents of this district, the remaining four are from Kasaragod in Kerala and one each from Karkala in Udupi and Bhaktal in Uttara Kannada. Out of this, a husband-wife duo from Uppinangady, are likely to be discharged either this weekend, or early next week. 

CAPTION RAvi Posavanike

Policemen seal Boloor area in Mangaluru on Thursday after a woman tested positive for Covid-19.


