After two more cases turn positive in city, 24 close contacts put in quarantine
2020-03-22
Surat: Total number of COVID-19 cases in the diamond city has reached to three after two male patients, a 67-year-old and another 23-year-old, tested positive of the virus on Saturday. The condition of the 67-year-old patient is stated to be critical and has is on ventilator at the Mahavir hospital located in Athwalines. 

Official sources said that both the COVID-19 positive patients have foreign travel history. The 67-year-old patient is a diamond trader operating from Mahidharpura diamond market and is a resident of Nanpura area. He had recently gone to Jaipur and Delhi on business tours where he is believed to have come in the contact with coronavirus positive patient. He was admitted in the Mahavir hospital after his health deteriorated from suspected coronavirus symptoms on March 17. 

“The condition of the 67-year-old patient admitted in Mahavir hospital is very critical. We are in the constant touch with the Mahavir hospital authorities to get updates on his health. He has been kept on ventilator after he stopped responding to the treatment,” said deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), Dr Ashish Naik. 

According to Dr Naik, another patient, a 23-year-old male from Athwa zone who visited Sri Lanka and Dubai and returned from a foreign study tour on March 15 has tested positive on Saturday. He was admitted in the isolation ward of the New Civil hospital for suspected symptoms of coronavirus on March 19. His samples were sent for laboratory testing at Ahmedabad. 

Earlier, a 23-year-old woman having foreign travel history to London had tested positive of the virus on Thursday. The patient, who is studying in London, had landed in Mumbai on March 13 and reached Surat on March 14. She was admitted in the New Civil hospital’s isolation ward March 16. “The coronavirus positive cases in the city has gone up to three. A total of 24 close contacts of the two positive patients were shifted to the quarantine facility at VNSGU’s Samras hostel for 14 days,” said deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), Dr Ashish Naik.


