After Corbett, 8 cameras go missing from Rajaji Tiger Reserve during lockdown
2020-05-24
DEHRADUN: Four pairs of camera traps, installed in Rajaji Tiger Reserve (RTR) to keep a watch on wild animals and protect them from poaching, have gone missing in the past one-and-a-half months of the ongoing lockdown. This comes soon after a pair of camera traps went missing from Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR) sometime ago.


The instances of camera traps going missing in RTR have been recorded from Motichur forest range, Haridwar forest range, Beriwala forest range, and Ramgarh forest range between the months of April and May as per RTR administration. Notably, the Chilla-Motichur corridor is one of the most sensitive and wildlife-rich zone of RTR. That camera traps have gone missing from here has raised concern among the forest officials. The camera traps were installed there for monitoring wild animals and for keeping a tab on their population.

The officials are speculating various reasons behind disappearance of these cameras. Some believe that the theft is an outcome of “personal enmity among forest staff” while others feel that this is a case of “intrusion by those forest dwellers who live close to the reserve”.

RTR warden Komal Singh told TOI, “At Beriwala, we are suspecting that Van Gujjars may have removed the cameras while entering into the forest to collect fodder for livestock and easy fuel wood. And at Ramgarh range, it is probably a deliberate act of forest staff itself. We could not find any broken pieces of camera or snapped wire in that place. It seems that cameras were removed by someone who is acquainted with the system. The cameras were removed with the help of proper equipment.”

The official added that all the four cases have been filed at RTR’s register of complaints and the nearest police station has also been apprised of the matter. However, none of the cases has yet been solved.

“We have put our teams on high alert and have increased night patrolling and ambush to avert any poaching instance in the reserve. We are looking into various angles behind cameras going missing. It may be an act of poacher or an intrusion by forest dwellers. The probe into the matter is underway. The areas are being combed rampantly and fortunately, we have been successful in preventing poaching,” said Amit Verma, RTR director.

Another RTR official requesting anonymity said that abandoned anti-poaching posts may have encouraged such crimes. “Some of our forest posts have turned into abandoned buildings, like the ones close to river Suswa in Faduvata. Consequently, even staff members do not want to be deployed there as they fear attack by leopards or elephants. This is probably why the anti-social elements are daring to pull off such crimes,” said the official.

However, Verma said that the infrastructure of RTR will be improved. “Our prime focus this year would be to get the pre-existing structures revamped rather than investing on new infrastructure,” he added.

Meanwhile, the Corbett Tiger Reserve administration has also failed to crack the case of missing camera trap pair from the reserve till now. “We haven’t found the accused yet but we continue to investigate the matter. We have got a lead though and we are hoping to crack the case soon,” said Rahul, CTR director.


