Mumbai: After scare, Malabar Hill man declared virus-free
2020-02-14
MUMBAI: Paras Society at Malabar Hill on Thursday called for BMC’s intervention to urgently test a resident it suspected of being infected with coronavirus. The man works in Singapore. Commotion over the matter lasted for over two hours in the building and ended after health volunteers arrived and ruled out any signs of infection. In a first, BMC issued a certificate, stating the 30-year-old resident was asymptomatic.


Civic officials said they got a call around 10am from the housing society’s chairman, who told them the 30-year-old was seen “wearing a mask”. The building’s chairman called BMC’s disaster management cell which put him in touch with the ward’s medical officer, Dr Pramod Patil, who sent an assistant, along with an ANM (auxiliary nurse midwife), to check on the man, who was at home with his family. The medical team found that he had no coronavirus symptoms. “The man works in Singapore, and had gone to Sri Lanka to attend a wedding recently. He returned to India on February 10. He didn’t show any flu symptoms. He also didn’t have any signs of fatigue, usually seen when a person is recovering from flu,” said the doctor, adding that the man postponed his return to Singapore where 58 cases of coronavirus have been reported so far.

 
 

Dr Patil said he issued a certificate to quell the fears of the building’s other residents. “We have certified that he doesn’t have symptoms and he has been screened by us,” the doctor said.

The man at the centre of the storm told the BMC team that he was screened at the airport’s international terminal and was cleared. Prashant Gaikwad, assistant municipal commissioner of D-Ward, confirmed Thursday’s sequence of events.

Dr Patil said the man was wearing a mask as per guidelines issued in Singapore that say masks are an effective way to prevent the transmission or contraction of the viral infection. Cases of housing societies and even offices demanding health certificates have been reported as the infection continues to spread beyond China.

The state government on February 7 issued an advisory saying people should not discriminate against Chinese citizens or those with a travel history to affected areas.

State epidemiologist Dr Pradeep Awate said multiple requests have come from corporates wanting to know whether employees who had recently travelled to China for work had tested positive for coronavirus. “We had to tell corporates that medical reports are confidential and cannot be simply distributed,” he said. “People should be assured that the health department is following up with people travelling from affected areas for two weeks.”

Dr Patil said a team would be in touch with the Malabar Hill man till he completes 14-day isolation as a precaution.

