After 58-day lockdown, Telangana back in business, but buzz missing
2020-05-20
HYDERABAD: Over 58 days after being under lock and key, the shutters finally went up on commercial establishments in Hyderabad on Tuesday, even as many continued to stay away from resuming business just yet.

While automobile and AC showrooms had already restarted their engines last week — following a go-ahead from chief minister, K Chandrasekhar Rao — they were joined by textile, jewellery, footwear and other standalone shops dotting the city’s landscape.

The largest crowds were spotted outside salons with residents making a dash for them, either for a long-pending hair-cut or a grooming session. Many outlets were, however, compelled to send back some clients so as to ensure social distancing within their premises. 

According to the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) records, there are about 2.5 lakh commercial establishments within its limits. 

While malls and restaurants kept their doors closed for walk-ins and takeaways, online delivery portals resumed operations, albeit with restrictions on timings — between 7 am and 5.30 pm only. 


Most companies still working from home

Cabs, auto-rickshaws, and inter-district RTC buses too hit the streets, bringing much relief to travellers dependent on public transport. Drivers said that demand was slow on Day 1, while hoping for it to pick up in the days to come. 

The Secunderabad Cantonment area, comprising over 6,000 shops and commercial units, continued to stay shut with authorities stating that it will reopen on Wednesday. SCB officials said that they would also implement the odd-even rule being followed by GHMC.

But the norm, some said, failed to prove useful on Tuesday with the municipal authorities unable to mark almost 50% of the shops (as odd or even) on the first day of business, amid the lockdown. Some traders said that lack of clarity over the policy forced them to stay home.

The footfall in offices too remained thin, despite the government allowing them to work with 100% strength. Employees that TOI spoke to said that was either because companies are still insisting on work-from-home or due to limited availability of public transport within the city. Most of the workforce, they said, use the metro or inter-city RTC buses that are still shut.


