Punjab: After Covid-19 case, Payal subdivision villages seal borders
2020-04-06
LUDHIANA: As a Covid-19 case has been reported from Payal subdivision, more and more villages in the area have sealed their entry and exit points to check the spread. 

On April 1, Payal SDM Sagar Setia in an advisory to the block development and panchayat officer (BDPO), Doraha and Malaud, had wrote that as deputy commissioner had ordered imposition of curfew to check spread of coronavirus, it had come to his notice that villagers in some areas go to city for small works in violation of the curfew norms. He had directed the BDPOs to issue stern advise to the panchayats to seal the limits of the villages and enforce a complete lockdown.

Giving details, the SDM told TOI of the 110 villages in the sub-division Payal, only few villages were yet to take the steps for restriction of movement even as more than 100 villages had already enforced restriction on movement of villagers. He added that these villages had set up small barricades for the purpose, where volunteers inquired from persons entering or leaving the villages.

The officer said this would help in checking the spread of the disease even as a case had been reported from the area. He added that he was monitoring the curfew and had been visiting various areas in this regard.

The SDM further said Payal DSP, tehsildar and some other officers were also working together to ensure movement of people was checked while excluding those who were facing some emergency.

The officials said that though the Police is also there and does Patrolling across the villages but services of volunteers to check Unnecessary movements of people adds to the strength of administration and police. They clarified that those with valid passes are allowed to move through the villages.

In the meanwhile, a Maloud area resident said that volunteers along with police on the barricades to check any unnecessary movement in the area which helps in checking spread of Covid 19. He added that only those people with valid curfew passes were allowed to pass through the barricades.


What the advisory says

As per the advisory, anyone entering the village will have to be asked the reason before allowing him entry to the village and those going out should be allowed to do so only after proper inquiry. Vegetables, fruits, milk supplies, medicines will be allowed.


Volunteers taking precautions
Payal SDM has said there were one or two volunteers at every entry and exit point in the village and they had been asked to follow social distancing. He added that besides this, the volunteers wear masks, wash their hands every hour and have sanitiser.


