After last case tests -ve, Goa is free of Covid-19 for now
2020-04-20
Panaji: Goa on Sunday became the first state to be free of Covid-19 patients for the moment as the seventh patient recovered from the virus. The tiniest state has not reported a single Covid-19 case since April 3 and all seven patients—six had a travel history, while one was the brother of one of the patients—have now recovered.

“It is a moment of satisfaction and relief for Goa, but we can’t relax. The state will continue to be on a high alert since cases have risen in Belagavi. The borders will remain sealed and those coming into Goa will be put under quarantine,” CM Pramod Sawant said.

Belagavi is an important link for Goa as it is from here that the state procures most of its vegetable and fruit supply.

“Zero indeed has great value! Immensely happy to announce that all the Covid-19 positive cases in the state are now negative,” health minister Vishwajit Rane tweeted.

Two cured patients have been sent home after seven days in quarantine. They have been asked to remain in home quarantine, while five others are under facility quarantine.

Sawant said it was the efforts of doctors and medics, who worked hard despite the risk, along with various administrative measures to implement the lockdown, and cooperation of the people that helped contain the spread of the virus.

As of Sunday, approximately 800 tests have been conducted in the state, and more tests will be conducted after the door-to-door survey reports are screened, he said. “We will know how many more tests have to be conducted on Monday,” he said. 

Sawant added that all 88 tests conducted on Saturday were negative for Covid-19.

Sixty-four tests conducted on Sunday were also negative.

“We will not have positive cases if people continue to cooperate,” Sawant said.

The state has procured 1,000 thermal guns and the order for procuring ventilators has been placed as a precautionary measure. Over 200 public places were sanitised in past few days, he said.


