After lockdown, Kolkata to take off with 40 flights
2020-05-21
KOLKATA: Authorities at Kolkata airport have their work cut out. In the next four days, the terminal battered by cyclone Amphan has to be repaired and made fit to resume operations as domestic flights that had been grounded for two months take off again on Monday. Around 30-40 flights are expected to take off from Kolkata.

The announcement that flight operations would resume came on a day the airport was being hammered by the cyclone. Domestic passenger flights will resume on Monday in a calibrated manner, said civil aviation minister Hardeep Singh Puri. He hinted that the social distancing by keeping the middle passenger seat vacant was unlikely to be part of the SOP for airlines. 

While the SOP for both airlines and airport operators will be announced on Thursday, sources told TOI a 14-year-old security measure that prohibited passengers from carrying liquids beyond 100ml in the passenger cabin would be junked to enable flyers to carry sanitizer bottles to protect themselves from the novel coronavirus. 

“Passengers will be allowed to carry up to 350ml of sanitizer with 70% alcohol content. The security may use a chemical analysis machine that will detect traces of explosives to ensure safety,” the source said. However, passengers may not be initially allowed a cabin bag, the only exception being handbags for women and laptop carriers.

The ban on carrying liquid was enforced in 2006 in airports worldwide after the liquid bomb plot to blow up transatlantic jets from Heathrow to North America was uncovered in the UK.

While the airport had more than 200 domestic flights in operation when flights were grounded across India on March 24, services from the city are expected to resume with only a fifth or even fewer flights initially. 

The airport operator said all passengers would have to arrive at least two hours before the flight, wear masks and install the Aarogya Setu app on their cellphone. “Flyers will have to show their ID as well as their status on the Aarogya Setu app. They will then undergo a temperature scan,” an airport official said, adding that CISF officers would check the credentials through glass shield. 

Even entry into the washrooms will be regulated to ensure there is no queue inside.


