Telangana: After cops test positive, police stations sanitised to stave off Covid-19, says ADG
2020-05-28
Even as more police personnel test positive for Covid-19, 
Mahesh Buddi speaks with 
Jitender, Additional Director General of Police (Law & Order)


Can you elaborate on additional duties taken up by police during lockdown?

During the past two months, our main duty has been enforcement of lockdown, especially the night curfew part. Another important thing has been sending migrant workers to their native places through special trains. We are supporting the revenue department in sending migrant workers home. We have been locating migrant workers, enumerating them and then taking them from their place of stay in the state to the railway stations. We are also providing security at quarantine facilities and hospitals where Covid-19 patients are being treated as also assisting the health department in tracing contacts of the infected. We are also providing support to health and revenue departments in keeping a watch on people who came from abroad. 

What measures have been put in place to ensure the safety of cops?

Police stations are being sanitized every day. Cops have been advised to take care of their personal hygiene, wear masks, use hand sanitisers and maintain social distance while talking to people. Once they reach home after duty, they are advised to wash the uniform and take bath immediately. We have also distributed, homeopathy preventive medicine to boost immunity. Chavanprash has also been distributed. Ayush department has also given advisory on usage of citrus fruits and turmeric to boost immunity.

Police personnel and visitors who are of of certain age group are more vulnerable to the virus. What’s being done in this regard? 

Cops who are above 50 years old are not normally being sent on Covid-19 field duties. We have also advised staff to immediately seek medical advise if they notice symptoms like fever, cough, cold and body pains. Visitors at the police stations are being provided soap and water to wash their hands.


