West Bengal: After lockdown, air fares to pinch pockets
2020-04-11
KOLKATA: Once domestic flight operations resume post-lockdown, air travel will be at least 50% more expensive than before with airlines forced to cut passenger capacity on flights by 30%-40% to ensure social distancing between flyers.


Airlines industry sources said fares would escalate as airlines keep the middle row empty, accommodating four passengers in place of six in each row. Also, the last three rows have to be kept empty to move isolated passengers in case someone is detected with Covid-19 symptoms during the flight. While low cost carriers like IndiGo and SpiceJet operated at 100% capacity with 180 passengers in Airbus A320 or Boeing B737-800 aircraft, they will now be able to take only 108 passengers on board.

“Flying after the lockdown is withdrawn will be a new experience with multiple measures to ensure distancing norms so that flying is perceived safe. Airlines have to use more coaches to transfer groups of passengers to planes parked in remote bays. On the flight, service of food and beverage will be restricted. The former means more expenditure for the airline, the latter less revenue,” a senior official of a private carrier pointed out. 

Senior management of all airline are, however, worried about dip in passenger figures once fares rise. “Some airlines have not been able to making operating profits despite flying with high loads because they had to keep fares low to be competitive. Now, with over 30% less capacity, how much can fares be increased without discouraging passengers to fly. Going back to fares prior to 2003 in the pre-LCC era could reverse the growth that the airline industry has been witnessing in India for the past 17 years,” said an official, adding that the industry was hoping for financial help from the government.

DGCA has hinted at a phase-wise opening of the sky with a quarter of flights being introduced across time slots to ensure there is no crowding in the airport terminals. In Kolkata, operations could resume with only 75-80 flights a day and slowly ramped up over the weeks as Covid-19 cases subside. But when that will happen is anyone’s guess with the government announcing extension of flight suspension till April-end.

Airlines though continue to sell tickets for this month, arguing that no notification has been issued from the DGCA yet. The ticket sales had been opened on April 6 and witnessed a flurry of buying initially but has now reduced to a trickle. 

“Indian carriers other than AirAsia India are not offering fare refunds even if t”he airline does not operate the flight. They are instead waiving reschedule charges or offering credit note against which tickets can be purchased later. Only some international carriers like Singapore Airlines, Lufthansa, Qatar and Emirates are giving refunds. We think it is, therefore, best to wait till there is more clarity on operations. Or one can make travel plans three-four months from now," said Travel Agents’ Federation of India chairman (east) Anil Punjabi. 

