After Spanish flu & WWII, coronavirus halts palkhi tradition in Maharashtra
2020-05-30
PUNE: For the third time in the centuries-old history of the palkhi tradition in Maharashtra, there won’t by any `wari’ or procession this year because of the Covid-19 pandemic. 

A decision against the annual procession was taken unanimously at a meeting chaired by deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar on Friday. 

The trustees of Sant Dnyaneshwar and Tukaram maharaj temples in Alandi and Dehu, respectively, Pune’s divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar, district collector Naval Kishore Ram and police chief K Venkatesham were present.

Lakhs of pilgrims called warkaris from all over Maharashtra walk 250km in 17 days from Dehu and Alandi temples near Pune to Pandharpur in Solapur district, accompanying the chariots with the padukas (footprints) of Sant Dnyaneshwar, Sant Tukaram and others. They congregate for Ashadhi Ekadashi which falls on July 1 this year. 

“As per our records, the palkhi processions could not be taken out on two earlier occasions during the Spanish Flu in 1920, and later in 1942 during the World War II. The padukas of Sant Dnyaneshwar and Tukaram maharaj were then taken by train to a place near Pandharpur and from there in a procession to Lord Vitthal temple in Pandharpur,” Vikas Dhage-Patil, chief trustee of Sant Dnyaneshwar Maharaj Temple Trust in Alandi, told TOI on Friday.

The padukas will either be flown by a special plane or helicopter or taken by road in a bus to Pandharpur, Ram told TOI. “A decision on air or road transport will be taken a day before Ashadhi Ekadashi, depending on weather conditions,” he added. 

Sant Tukaram Maharaj Temple Trust’s chief trustee Sanjay More said, “Narayan Maharaj, the younger son of Sant Tukaram, had started the palkhi procession in 1685. He, and a group of people would carry Tukaram Maharaj’s padukas to Alandi. Then, the padukas of Tukaram and Dnyaneshwar Maharaj would be taken to Pandharpur. This tradition went on till 1832 till a devotee of Sant Dnyaneshwar, Haibatravbaba Arphalkar, popularly know as ‘Haibat Baba’, a courtier of the Scindias, the Maratha rulers of Gwalior, started organising Sant Dnyaneshwar’s Palkhi separately.”

The padukas will be taken out from the sanctum on June 12 and 13, respectively, and kept on the temples’ premises till June 30, as per the set tradition.

Depending on the government’s decision, they will be taken to Pandharpur on June 30. A traditional pooja will be performed at Pandharpur the next day, More added.


