After two heart attacks, 74-year-old Gujarat cancer patient slays Covid-19
2020-05-10
VADODARA: ‘Cancer mera kuch nahi bigaad paaya toh corona kya cheez hain (If cancer could do me no harm, what can Covid do?”) This was the confidence that 74-year-old Yusuf Hotelwala exuded while leaving for the Covid care centre at Ibrahim Bavani ITI on Ajwa Road after testing positive a week ago.


On Saturday, Hotelwala, who suffers from peritoneal mesothelioma — a rare type of cancer affecting the abdominal lining — was beaming at his Wadi residence. He went home from the after doctors there confirmed his recovery.

The septuagenarian, who has already survived two heart attacks, said his positive attitude, zest for life and selfconfidence were the panacea for recovery. “Doctors said my condition was stable and I can stay quarantined at home,” Yusuf told TOI.

Dr Mohammed Hussain, who treated Yusuf, said, “Considering his condition, he has recovered well and hence was discharged early. While the medicines and nutritious diet worked, Yusuf’s positive attitude did wonders in his quick recovery.”

Yusuf ’s wife Fehmida had tested positive for the virus on May 2 and he reportedly got infected from her. “My family was worried after I tested positive but I was never scared. I always knew I would recover. I have to be under quarantine for the next few days and undergo another test. And I am sure I will test negative,” he added.

Yusuf was diagnosed with peritoneal mesothelioma in July last year. “Doctors then told me that I won’t survive for more than six months. But here I am, alive and talking to you,” Yusuf said gleefully.

Yusuf ’s daughter Ishrat, a high-school teacher, was in tears when TOI spoke with her. “I cried when my father tested positive. He is already suffering pain due to cancer as well as chemotherapy and I was worried how he would cope with Covid treatment. But he was always mentally tough,” she said.

“Just before leaving for the hospital, he smiled at me and said that he will be back. We are so relieved that his condition is now stable,” she added.

