Spike in cases after 10 days, 19 more test coronavirus positive in Kerala
2020-04-22
THIRUVANANTHPURAM: Kerala reported 19 new Covid-19 cases on Tuesday after registering a steady decline in these numbers over the past 10 days. The new cases were being reported in single digit since April 11, when 10 cases were reported. The total number of cases reported so far has gone up to 426, of whom 117 are admitted to hospitals.

As many as 10 cases reported on Tuesday were in Kannur, four in Palakkad, three in Kasaragod and one each in Malappuram and Kollam. Nine of these persons had come from aborad while three persons had come from neighbouring Tamil Nadu. Kannur has the most number of active cases (53) now while the total number of reported cases in the district is 104.

The number of persons who recovered from the infection on Tuesday is 16, seven of them in Kannur, four each in Kasaragod and Kozhikode, and one in Thiruvananthapuram. As many as 36,667 persons are under observations in the state, of whom 332 are admitted to designated isolation facilities. Till date, 20,252 samples have been sent for tests, of which 19,449 had come negative.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said the state would further strengthen vigil at its borders as the new cases are being reported among those who crossed the borders. Police have been instructed to check illegal crossing at the borders. A person in Kulathupuzha in Kollam, who returned from Tamil Nadu but did not reveal this to authorities, has tested positive for the virus. Three panchayats in the region have been sealed now.After single-digit trend, it’s 19 on Tue


After single-digit trend, it’s 19 on Tuesday

After a gap of 10 days, Kerala reported maximum cases in a day (on April 11 10 cases were reported). On Tuesday, 19 new cases were reported, of which 10 cases were from Kannur. Now, Kannur has the most active cases (54, one is from Kasaragod) and its total stands at 104. 

The other cases were reported from Palakkad (4), Kasaragod (3) and one each from Malappuram and Kollam. Among the lot, nine arrived from abroad and three from Tamil Nadu.

Also, 16 persons kept in isolation tested negative and seven of them are from Kannur, four from Kasaragod (one person under treatment in Kannur), four from Kozhikode (two Kannur natives) and one from Thiruvananthapuram. 

The total number of cases reported in the state stands at 426 and only 117 are active cases. Now, 36,667 persons are placed under surveillance, of which 36,335 are in home isolation and 332 are admitted at designated isolation facilities. Till date 20,252 samples were sent for testing of which 19,449 turned negative.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said Kerala will augment border security as positive cases are persons who came from other states breaking lockdown norms. Police were told to keep such incidents in check.

The positive case in Kollam is a person from Kulathupuzha who came from Tamil Nadu and kept mum about his travel. Now, three panchayats in the region were sealed.

Vijayan said the virus has become unpredictable. “People should realize that the 62-year-old patient in Pathanamthitta is staying in isolation room of Kozhencherry district hospital for past 42 days as she has not tested negative. Of her 21 tested samples, only once it became negative,” he said. 

There are reports that a few cases in Kannur lacked symptoms. This was reported earlier in other districts. Such incidents are seen during our crisis. Hence we all should continue caution and relaxation shouldn’t be seen as an opportunity to feel that we have overcome everything, he added.

He urged the people of Kannur to stay indoors. The government has given specific instructions to authorities that lockdown should be strictly enforced in the district.


