Andhra Pradesh: After 80 days of lockdown, Tirumala temple to reopen
2020-06-06
TIRUPATI: The Lord Venkateswara temple at Tirumala will reopen its doors for pilgrim worship from June 11, after remaining closed for nearly 80 days due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The timings would be 6.30 am to 7.30 pm

Several precautions and curbs will be in place both inside and outside the temple to ensure social distancing and hygiene. 

 

There would be a trial run for three days starting June 8. Darshan would be restricted only to employees of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams and their families on June 8 and 9, while Tirumala locals can have darshan on June 10. Darshan for general public will start from June 11.

Only 6,000 devotees would be allowed entry into the temple per day as against the daily normal rush of over 60,000. Devotees will need to maintain six feet distance between each other and wearing of face mask would be mandatory. 

Children aged below 10 years and elderly people above 65 would not be allowed into the shrine. TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy and EO Anil Kumar Singhal appealed to devotees to strictly adhere to the guidelines to ensure a safe pilgrimage for everyone.

All TTD employees involved in regulating devotees would be wearing personal protection equipment (PPE) suits

Before permitting devotees, TTD would study their travel history and randomly conduct COVID-19 screening. Those found having symptoms such as fever would be immediately sent for quarantine, the officials said

A total of 3,000 special darshan tickets each priced at Rs 300 would be available online daily.

The remaining 3,000 quota would be set apart for free darshan and devotees opting for it can register themselves for the time slot at designated places here, including Alipiri at the foothills of Tirumala.

TTD had barred entry of devotees from March 20 into the temple for a week in the wake of the coronavirus scare and later extended it after Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the nation-wide lockdown four days later

The Centre in its recent "Unlock 1" guidelines has allowed opening of temples for public darshan among other relaxations

A temple official said that during the lockdown so far, the over 2000-year old shrine incurred a loss of about Rs 500 crore revenue.


