MP: After nightmare in lockdown, migrants vow not to leave home
2020-05-03
BHOPAL: Guddu, who was once very fascinated to work outside his hometown, is no more interested in working away from his home in Betul district after he ended his almost a month long nightmare at Misrod station on Saturday. Guddu is not the only migrant worker who has developed the feeling of not working outside home after being stuck-up in an unknown city like Nashik without any work. 

Guddu was a construction labour in Mumbai. After lockdown was declared he and his other friends decided to walk. “I had a friend in Nashik. By the time we reached he left home for his native town in Seoni district. As Nashik was an unknown city and we had not enough money we found it better to stay in the shelter homes provided by the local administration. Now, I do not want to work outside any more. Whatever I earn in my place I will be happy but working outside is no more my dream,” said Guddu. 

Hailing the Nashik administration for providing them good stay and regular food, migrant workers said they were keen to come back home. “After boarding the train I did not look back. I wanted to reach Bhopal as early as possible. I could not sleep for a single minute. After reaching Bhopal I immediately called my family and inform them that soon I would meet them,” a jubilant Ram Prasad said. 

Several workers could not even collect their money from against their work from their contractors. “I was working at a factory in Mumbai. After lockdown was declared, the factory was closed down and I reached Nashik. Now, I am going back to home, but I do not whether the factory would return my dues or not. I am happy to be back home,” said Sunil Yadav of Betul district. 

There were young migrants, who started working a few days before the lockdown. “I worked for hardly a week and this lockdown was imposed. I had no option except to come back home,” said 20-year-old Munna of Bhind district. 

Some workers were accompanied by a few family members with their kids and reached Bhopal from special train. “We are going to Bhind. I and my husband used to work at a place in Nashik. We are back home but no work in hand. God knows what will be our future,” said a woman who refused to disclose her name as tears rolled down from her eyes. 

These migrant workers were sent by bus to their respective districts without charging any money from them. 


