Covid-19 outbreak: After cancellations, flyers scamper around for refunds in Hyderabad
2020-03-14
HYDERABAD: Despite assurances from airline operators, scores of flyers from the city were seen scampering around for refunds, on Friday, after cancelling their tickets in the wake of the Coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. Passengers complained that the carriers were either not responding to their requests or forcibly withholding their payments, for future bookings. Worse, in some cases they are even levying a cancellation charge, flyers added.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


“Our ticket is on March 13, which is between 12th and 31st March. We have cancelled the ticket before flight departure and for our and other passengers’ safety. Please do fair business and issue us a refund (sic),” wrote a passenger on social media, as the airline insisted on charging a cancellation fee. 

Along with the international sector, travel agents say, 70% to 80% of domestic bookings too have been called off, over the last few days. And while the cancellations were limited to March, so far, passengers have now started rescheduling or scrapping their April plans too. In fact, IndiGo stated that its daily bookings in recent days has seen a 15% to 20% drop and that it expects its “quarterly earnings to be materially impacted” because of this.

Meanwhile, the lack of clarity over refunds has left several passengers fuming. “@goairlinesindia @GoAirFlights @makemytrip @makemytripcare very disappointed with your service. My flight from Kolkata to Bangalore via Hyderabad which was one stop was cancelled while I was waiting at Kolkata airport. kindly help me out to get refund,” wrote another passenger, adding, “Because of your service I have to suffer the whole night at Hyderabad airport and Goair ground staff were like I can’t help you out. You can book bus or take any medium to travel. This is so horrible. (sic)”

Another international flyer posted: “@AirAsia following directions from GOI I have to reschedule my flight from Sydney to Hyderabad. However, I am being charged $150 for date change. Messages to Air Asia support remain unanswered.”

“There is a serious concern with refunds. Not all airlines are offering it. Instead, some are asking passengers to use it on their next booking,” said Abdul Majid Faheem, chairman, Travel Agents Federation of India (Andhra Pradesh and Telangana).

