Pune: After kin, woman’s husband tests positive for Covid-19
2020-03-24
PUNE: The husband of the 41-year-old woman, who is undergoing treatment at Bharati hospital for Covid-19, was also found infected with the contagion late on Sunday evening, pushing up Pune’s case tally to 28. 


In the state, the count of covid-19 positive cases touched 97 on Monday, with Mumbai recording its sharpest single-day jump with 13 new cases. Incidentally, 10 of the 13 new infections are close contacts of the patients, raising questions on whether quarantining measures are adequate. Overall, Mumbai now has 37 positive cases, while MMR has 53 cases.

“The Pune woman’s husband works as manager in a hotel. We are also tracing his close contacts. The woman’s father and her nephew have tested negative for Covid-19. Her mother and daughter also tested negative earlier on Sunday,” said a civic health official.

About 100 people who have come in close contact with the woman have been traced and advised home quarantine. The woman’s sister who is a nurse at the Bharati hospital was one of the four family members who tested positive for Covid-19. 

“She is the one who moved the woman from a private hospital on Sinhagad Road to Bharati hospital on March 16 after she was diagnosed with viral pneumonia,” the official said.

Of the 28 positive cases in Pune since March 9, 16 patients are residents of the areas within the limits of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) and another 12 are the residents of the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) areas. Of the patients in Pune municipal limits, eight are residents of housing societies in Sinhagad Road area. 

Health minister rules out community transmission

Health minister Rajesh Tope said there was no case of community transmission in the state as of now. “All those who have tested positive are either high-risk contacts of previous positive patients or have a foreign travel history,” he said. Mumbai guardian minister Aslam Shaikh said a decision to add isolation facilities at ST George, JJ and GT hospitals was taken on Monday, and these would be readied in the next six days. 


