After a lull, Covid-19 puts a few dists on the back foot with new +ve cases
2020-05-01
Coimbatore: Health authorities in Salem were hoping that the district would soon join neighbouring Erode and Nilgiris that reported zero Covid-19 cases for the past couple of days. 

However, much to their disappointment, a person from Salem tested positive for the virus after a gap of five days on Thursday . It’s not Just Salem that has reported fresh case of Covid-19 after a lull. Madurai which did not have any positive cases for two consecutive days, reported five new cases on Thursday. Similar is the case of Ramanathapuram, where three people tested positive after a gap of three days. So were Perambalur and Ariyalur districts which had two and one Covid positive cases respectively when they were showing signs of hope without cases for consecutive days. 

The Salem patient is an employee of a sub-court in Mettur. “He is from Kottagoundampatty village near Omalur. We have traced his source of infection to a woman patient from Suramangalam,’’ R Balajinathan, dean of the Salem government Mohan Kumarmangalam medical college and hospital (SGMKMCH). He also said that the woman was tested positive at Kerala border when she was heading to Kerala as part of her work, a few days ago. Health officials have sealed the street in which the patient was residing and sprayed disinfectants in the entire locality. 

There was slight disappointment among health officials, particularly in places like Madurai because of the unexpected spike in cases when they were hoping to flatten the curve. Nevertheless, they say it’s not alarming. Among the five positive cases in Madurai, for instance, two were frontline workers and one was from a containment zone, officials point out.

Among those who tested positive is a 26-year-old man, a native of Tuticorin, who is serving in the disaster management team. He had been working in Chennai and was deployed to Madurai. Another Covid positive patient, a 42-year-old woman, was a health worker working at the Government Rajaji Hospital.

In Ramanathapuram, all the three who tested positive were frontline workers - a 30-year-old traffic police constable, a 29-year-old fireman and a 33-year-old domestic breeding checker. The southern district reported the last Covid case on April 26. 

“The police station and fire station have been closed following the test results. The traffic police station is now functioning just outside the station building as a temporary measure. We are screening all the personnel in the police station and fire station,’’ said a health official. 

Health authorities said the number of people testing positive would drop in the coming days. 


