After decades, noise pollution silenced during lockdown
2020-06-13
NAGPUR: For the first time in decades, the noise levels in the city saw a drastic decline and came at par with the prescribed standards. Just like air pollution, noise pollution too has seen significant improvement during the lockdown.

To assess noise pollution at source and receptor before and during the Covid-19 lockdown period, a scientific study was conducted by National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (Neeri). Done under the guidance of Neeri director Rakesh Kumar and implemented by Ritesh Vijay, scientist and head at Neeri’s Mumbai centre, and PhD scholar Vijayalaxmi, the aim of the study was to quantify the impact of lockdown on noise pollution.

The noise monitoring was carried out at the national highway on Wardha Road, which was considered as source of the noise and nearby residential areas and silent zones were the receptors of noise. According to Vijay, continuous noise monitoring was done for 48 hours at all the locations. 

For pre-lockdown period, decibel readings of January were compared with the readings of lockdown period taken in April. A total of 1.6 lakh readings were assessed by the scientists. 

The study brought to fore drastic reduction in noise levels. Along the national highway, the decibel levels dropped by 10dB (A) and 11.3 dB(A) during day and night time respectively. “Further, the noise levels complied with the prescribed limit for residential zone as well as silence zone during day and night time,” said Vijay.

As per the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the prescribed limit of noise level in residential areas for day time is 55 dB(A) while for night it is 45 dB(A). For silent zone, the limits for day and night time are 50 dB(A) and 40 dB(A) respectively. 

According to scientists, the major reason behind decrease in the noise pollution is low traffic volume, including reduction in honking incidents. “For the first time in last 40 years, the levels are so low. The study revealed that prescribed standard of noise levels are achievable during lockdown in residential and silence zones. The study prescribes new dimension of thought process to control the noise pollution in urban areas,” said Vijay.

Stating that the study is an eye-opener for the government, the scientist stressed that many aspects of the current lockdown period can be carried forward and updated in making new guidelines and policies to curtail noise pollution later. “The government needs to brainstorm and come up with strategic solutions in traffic management, no honking policy and effective public transport system keeping in mind sanitization and social distancing,” added Vijay.


