Covid-19: After spike, all suspected cases to be at MLA hostel
2020-03-29
NAGPUR: The district administration on Saturday decided to keep all Covid-19 suspect cases compulsorily under 14-day institutional quarantine rather than send them back home with instructions to self-isolate.


The administration has around 4,000 rooms at MLA hostel, Ravi Bhavan, Nag Bhavan, Vanamati and VNIT hostels to be used as quarantine facilities. MLAs hostel’s Building 2 is city’s first institutional quarantine facility hosting 124, mostly flyers, as on date. Building 3 having 60 rooms is yet to be utilized.

City’s Covid-19 tally jumped to 11 after six people were found positive in the last 24 hours and more than 60 people reportedly came in direct contact with them leading to fears of further spread in different parts of city. So far, the cases were restricted to south-west Nagpur but that barrier was broken when first man from north Nagpur tested positive. In all, 42 suspected cases from Friday and Saturday are likely to be put up at MLA hostel now. This means the MLAs hostel Building 3 may also be put into use. 

Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar told TOI 14-day institutional quarantine was necessary to prevent further spread of the disease. “They tested negative but we have to now isolate them to prevent further spread. We have all proper facilities for the people who would be kept there,” he said.

Officials said if need be the administration would also start a centre at VNIT hostels that itself has over 4,000 rooms available.

Kumar said food arrangements wouldn’t be an issue at these places. “We had acquired only institutions that traditionally have canteens and mess services,” he said.

Officials said the administration was identifying places having uninterrupted power supply, water and beds. MLAs hostels have three buildinsg but one is under renovation and can’t be used.

The district health office would be providing clinical support through three groups at all these places. Each group will work in 8-hour shift.

In a couple of cases, flyers landing in the city had been found to violate home quarantine guidelines. The administration now doesn’t want to take any chances and therefore it was decided to bring all cases to quarantine centre.


