After father’s death from Covid, family not tested
2020-05-08
Ahmedabad: Nayan Rami (30) and six of his family members were grieving the loss of their father on Wednesday when they received a call from Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) that the test report of their deceased father confirmed him as Covid-19 positive. Rami doesn’t know whether he or any of his family members are Covid-19 positive, as the AMC is yet to conduct test on them. 

“If the AMC immediately conducts test on us, we can have some time to prepare ourselves for the crisis. My brother has a nine-month-old baby. I have an 82-year-old grandparent. My mother has co-morbid conditions, but unfortunately the AMC doesn’t have kits,” said Rami. 

On May 4, Rami had rushed his father Indravadan (57), who had been bedridden for the past two years, to the civil hospital in Asarwa after he developed breathing difficulties. Indravadan was immediately shifted to a ventilator that afternoon. Sample was taken for Covid-19 as was the norm. But his condition began to deteriorate further forcing Rami to request the hospital authorities to shift him to the ICU. 

After three and half hours, the hospital revealed that there was a bed at the ICU but there was no assistant to transfer the patient. Rami and one of his friends wore PPE kits and volunteered. “After being shifted to the ICU, my father’s condition began to deteriorate, till a point when doctors suggested that he needed a dialysis. But my father struggled till 9 am on May 5 after which doctors pronounced him dead,” said Rami. 

The following day, AMC declared his father Covid-19 positive and pasted a quarantine notice outside his home. Rami said: “The only private lab the AMC recommended was not functioning for some days, according to the AMC officials, owing to a small problem.” 

Now Rami is extremely worried for his family members after their father’s death. “I don’t yet know how many of my family members are Covid-19 positive. Since the civil hospital authorities suggested that we cremate my father’s body following the Covid-19 protocol, we did the same,” he said. 


