After missing Padwa, coronavirus positive patients in Nagpur hope to meet families soon
2020-03-26
NAGPUR: “Although I missed celebrating the auspicious occasion of Gudi Padwa at home, my children made my day by raising the Gudi on their own for the first time, watched by me and husband from hospital,” said the emotional mother recuperating in isolation after testing positive for coronavirus.


Although the Maharashtrian New Year was celebrated on a smaller scale in most households due to ongoing lockdown and curfew, the four persons who tested positive and are recuperating in hospital missed out on being with their families on the occasion.

“Obviously, I’ve missed it badly being a wife, homemaker and mother, but my children made my day. This is the first time I am away from my family, which was disappointing. My daughter studying in Std VIII standard, however, compensated by trying her hand at sweets with my mother-in-law,” said the wife of the first Covid-19 patient in Nagpur.

She added that she would be getting new year gift as her husband told her that he would be getting discharged on Thursday.

Echoing similar sentiments, the second positive patient said that being away from home during such occasions is certainly painful, but being in a joint family has an advantage. “I am happy at the maturity shown by my family members, who are all in quarantine because of me, and also by my friends, relatives and neighbours. They’re maintaining restraint and not venturing outside. I had apprehended that we may face social stigma, but fortunately it didn’t happen with my family members,” he said.

Expressing concern over his two daughters, who’re confused on their condition, the second patient says all these happenings may have a psychological impact on their tender minds in the long term. “However, being in a joint family has its advantages, and my family members are taking their good care,” he says.

Like the other two, the third patient is also upset over being in the isolation ward and not being able to celebrate the occasion. “I am staying with my parents and obviously they are missing me. But I am content after watching the entire hospital staff working for us day and night that included doctors, nurses and others. They take very good care of us without caring for festivals or their families. They clean our rooms thrice a day despite facing threat of getting infected,” he says.

After testing negative in the subsequent tests, all four are hoping to be discharged after 14 days of isolation, which they term as ‘vanvas’ or exile. While the first patient is likely to be discharged on Friday, the second and third would be released on Saturday.

The wife of the first patient, however, would take a couple of days more to be released, as her fourth test was inconclusive. Even at home, they would have to remain in quarantine for 14 more days, to avoid any chances of spreading the infection, they told TOI. All of them hope the new year would bring them good tidings, of reuniting with their families after the trauma and isolation period.


