After goofup, Goa Medical College sets up policy for discharge of Covid-19 cases
2020-04-01
PANAJI: After last week’s blunder, in which Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital discharged a patient who turned out to be positive for coronavirus, the hospital has now drafted a discharge policy. The document says all coronavirus suspects will be kept in isolation at the medical facility until their laboratory results are declared, and will be treated symptomatically in accordance with the guidelines.


Patients who test negative for coronavirus will be discharged vis-à-vis a provisional or confirmed diagnosis. His discharge from hospital will be decided by the physician treating him, guided by the patient’s clinical condition. Even after discharge, the patient will be monitored for 14 days from the date of arrival in India or last exposure, whichever is later.



However, if the patient tests positive for Covid-19, he will be treated according to protocol, states the policy. 

Such a patient would only be discharged after evidence of chest radiographic clearance and viral clearance in respiratory samples after two negative Covid-19 tests within a period of 24 hours.

A GMC doctor said that the hospital would treat any case as suspect if the patient suffers from acute respiratory illness and has a history of travel to a country or area detected with local transmission of coronavirus, 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms.

Also, the hospital will consider healthcare workers as Covid-19 suspects if they suffer from any acute respiratory illness and came in contact with Covid-19 positive patients 14 days prior to the first evidence of their symptoms.

The GMC doctor also said that any patient with severe acute respiratory infection who requires hospitalisation (with no explanation for this serious condition) will be automatically treated as a coronavirus suspect.

He said that policy was required in black and white to avoid any kind of confusion while treating suspects. “Even a small mistake can prove costly if utmost care is not taken at this critical juncture,” he said.

Similarly, the policy defines contact, high-risk contact and low-risk contacts. 

The doctor said that even vehicles used to transport essential supplies and services to GMC will be disinfected. 

“Procedure has also been laid down to be followed if any Covid-19 patient dies. In such an event, the state will conduct the last rites of the deceased,” he said.


