After a month of lockdown, Maharashtra has 6 more districts in red
2020-04-27
MUMBAI: While 21 states reported an improvement in caseload in one or more districts at the end of the 30-day lockdown, most in Maharashtra went the other way—from green to orange or orange to red, under the Central coding system—thus qualifying for a further tightening of measures. 

On April 15, there were 11 districts in Maharashtra in the red zone—these are the hotspots; 18 in the orange zone—these are non-hotspots but with cases; and 7 in the green zone, with no cases. By April 24, the situation had worsened: Maharashtra had 17 districts in the red zone, 16 in the orange zone, and three in the green zone.




Thus, at least four districts in the state that did not have a single case till 10 days ago started to report cases, thus altering their status from green to orange under the tri-level coding introduced for surveillance. At the national level, only two other states with high case loads showed a similar decline in status—Delhi and Madhya Pradesh—in this duration. In 21 other states including AP, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, UP and WB (see box), no cases were reported in this time for periods ranging from 14 to 28 days in one or more districts.

Senior officials said the deterioration in Maharashtra reflected in some way on the enforcement of lockdown rules. “The argument in favour of a lockdown was that cases could not be controlled if routine life continued, but after a month of the lockdown we have risen to 7,000-odd cases,” said a senior official.

Districts like Nandurbar, Nanded and even Parbhani that did not have a single case till April 15 and whose borders were sealed have since reported cases. The point of the lockdown, said an official, is that people should not step out unless for an emergency. “Even the presence of one patient can create a cluster,” he said. He gave the example of Nandurbar, which had one case till 10 days back but now has 11 cases.

“We should presume the novel coronavirus is out there. At least in areas with high incidence, this could be the case. So the best way to break the transmission chain is to not step out,” he added.

Health minister Rajesh Tope, however, disputed the perception saying Maharashtra has seen improvement since the Central data was last updated. “Districts are showing improvement, they have not added new cases in the last many days. But as per guidelines they have to continue like that for 14 days to be categorised as an improvement. Our containment plan is working and due to rigorous contact tracing and testing we continue to add more cases, but there is definitely improvement in some districts,” said Tope. He said Washim, Gondia, Beed, Solapur, Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg have reported very few cases and have not added any for the past 7-10 days. In all, 11 districts have not reported any fresh cases in the last 3 days.

A senior official said Maharashtra is now seeing “clusters of cases”. Basically, these are clusters with high transmission rates confined to small areas. “The entire state isn’t affected nor are entire cities. We only have clusters with transmissions. Containment zones are hence the most effective way of breaking the trend,” he said.

However, many doctors agree that the lockdown has not been successful in high density zones like Mumbai. Dr Ajay Hariani from Kandivli said he is shocked to see crowded markets in and around Kandivli while driving to hospital. “I was going to see a patient and I was taken aback at the crowds. There is no social distancing and most wear masks that seem of the wrong kind,” he said.


