Kolkata: After Covid, cyclone Amphan derails hospital operations
2020-05-24
KOLKATA: Hospitals in the city are now facing a massive second wave of disruption — courtesy the 165-kmph monster that hit Bengal on Wednesday — after being laid low by Covid-19. And, in an irony of sorts, the patients hit hardest by Amphan’s after-effect are those laid low by the novel coronavirus.

Cyclone Amphan has had a devastating effect on internet connectivity and cellphone services, dealing a body blow to Covid patients’ treatment across private hospitals in Kolkata. Other than consultation with doctors, which have been largely dependent on remote access, hospitals have been struggling to contact Covid patients’ families for treatment consent.

Covid test reports, which are usually sent via the e-route (e-mail or WhatsApp), have also not reached hospitals since the cyclone struck on Wednesday, stalling Covid suspects’ treatment as well as non-Covid patients’ surgeries. Partial restoration of internet and cell phones allowed some hospitals to resume communication on Saturday but the disruption has been a crippling blow, say hospital managements.

All interaction between Covid hospitals and patients’ families have been restricted to phone and internet for the last two months. The current disruption has left patients marooned and hospitals groping in the dark. Peerless Hospital, which has 19 Covid patients, has not been able to communicate with their families to apprise them of treatment or seek consent for future action. “Almost all family members are quarantined and cannot visit us. They depend on phones to know about patients’ condition. Phone services are now down but, since treatment cannot wait, we are being forced to go ahead without consent,” Peerless medical superintendent Sudipto Mitra said.

As many as 12 patients lined up for surgery at Peerless have been asked to wait since their Covid reports have not arrived. The hospital has its own lab but has run out of kits, forcing it to depend on private laboratories that have mostly shut after the cyclone. AMRI Hospitals, which has 65 Covid patients across three units, has not received any Covid report since the cyclone. Here, too, several surgeries have been put on hold because of the pending reports even as the hospital is desperately trying to get in touch with patients’ families. 

AMRI labs at its Salt Lake and Dhakuria units have run out of kits as well. “With internet down, private labs are not being able to send the reports. This has held back surgeries and delayed confirmation of Covid suspects. We expect fresh kits to arrive at our labs now and that will at least revive the flow of reports,” AMRI CEO Rupak Barua said. He added that the hospital had decided to go ahead with Covid treatment without waiting for patients’ families’ approval.

The delay in reports has “temporarily set back treatment of Covid suspects at RN Tagore Internartional Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS), leading to anxiety for the patients and their families”. “But treatment has been continued, depending on the clinical presentation of the patient as well as all other lab and diagnostic parameters,” zonal director R Venkatesh said.

“Some of our partner labs, which have been supporting us with Covid reports, have suffered major destruction to their physical infrastructure as well as network capabilities. They have been facing challenges in reporting and dispatching Covid tests. But they have somehow resumed operations now and are dispatching pending reports. Teir response has been commendable,” Venkatesh added.

All surgeries at Ruby General Hospital were cancelled on Wednesday and Thursday even as the hospital struggled to establish contact with patients’ families.

