Age no bar: Online pleasure is now their lockdown leisure
2020-06-11
Nagpur: Sources of entertainment like music videos, movies and series during lockdown are no more limited to the younger generation. The lockdown also made children and senior citizens binge watch their favourite genres. 

Classics, be it regional cinema, serials or cartoons, trending on digital platforms are on their watch list. Almost all age groups are now hooked to online entertainment platforms such as Netflix, Hotstar, Amazon Prime etc, especially the elderly. They are enjoying evergreen movies and songs and slowly getting the hang of entertainment on mobile screens. 

A teacher by profession, Kavita Shah feels that apart from the various activities she is performing in the lockdown, she loves to watch her favourite shows and series on Netflix. “I watch ‘Money Heist’ and it keeps me charged. I also like mystery and thriller series. It helps kill the monotony of work from home (WFH) and other household work. I also like to watch standup comedy,” she said. 

For writer Swati Sani, the lockdown is helping her in writing her fifth book. Apart from watching series, she loves to listen to audio books and podcasts. “I’m enjoying listening to audio books and podcasts (Amazon audible) during my one hour exercise in the morning and also while doing my daily chores.” she said. 

Mrunal Naik, project head at SGR Knowledge Foundation, has been enjoying a variety of series, cinema and thriller webs on all the online platforms. “We enjoy an array of series such as the Mentalist, Grays Anatomy, House of Cards, Suits etc. It’s entertaining and there is so much to learn from them,” she said. Her mother-in-law Vijaya, too, has a list of her favourites that she can’t do without. ‘Permanent roommates’ is her favourite.

Senior citizen Pushpa Guhe wasn’t aware of online entertainment earlier. But now, she watches all of her favourite regional cinema, old Hindi and Marathi songs. 

Even doting parents are allowing their children to watch lighthearted shows and series. “My kid enjoyed watching Ketie and Alexa, Mind the Malhotras and some family drama shows that we all can relate too,” said Arumita Pawa, a lecturer.

Student Nirmal Kaur made elders in her family watch and enjoy shows, classic cinemas and music videos on online platforms. It was a new discovery for the elderly. “These online video platforms are filled with all types of drama, thrill, romantic and comedy movies. I watch with my family. It has helped us in improving our bond and keeping even the elderly in a cheerful mood,” she said.


