Age no bar: Many elderly win Covid-19 war, come out strong
2020-04-26
HYDERABAD: While senior citizens are highly vulnerable to the novel coronavirus, there are several instances of elderly patients, in the state, recovering from Covid-19, say doctors. And this, despite many of them having more than one comorbidity.

 Their average time of recovery -- about 14 to 20 days from the start of treatment. 




The oldest among them, so far, is a 76-year-old patient who attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi. He was discharged from Gandhi Hospital on April 21. Another 82-year-old patient is currently on the path to recovery. There are five others, all above the age of 70, who have recovered from Covid-19, confirmed state health authorities. 

The 76-year-old was admitted with all symptoms of Covid-19 and had hypertension. He underwent treatment for over two weeks before being discharged. “The patient had lung infection and some other complications too. He was treated for 14 days. Like him, most of the other older patients have some comorbidity like diabetes, hypertension or kidney issues,” said Dr Narasimha Rao Netha, deputy superintendent, Gandhi Hospital. 

Another 65-year-old patient from Hyderabad who had a history of diabetes and had developed complications during treatment, is also among the elderly lot of patients who have recovered completed. “The patient’s case was complicated. He also developed pneumonia, which further added to the severity. But ultimately, he recovered after 20 days of treatment,” said a source at Gandhi adding, “Apart from the few patients in their 70s, there are many in their 50s and 60s who have also recovered from the virus.” 

Speaking to TOI, the relative of a 57-year-old patient from Warangal, who was recently discharged from the Gandhi Hospital said, “My father had cough and high-grade fever when he was admitted to the hospital. He was treated for 14 days following which the tests were conducted. The test reports took a few days to come and he was discharged after 21 days of stay. He did not develop any complications.” 

According to the son the family is taking utmost care not to allow anyone with symptoms of cold near him. 

The family is exercising self quarantine for the time being.

Meanwhile, allaying fears of people, experts say that senior citizens can recovery from the virus but need extra attention — early diagnosis, aggressive treatment of comirbidities and intense monitoring and intervention. 


