Agra district Covid-19 tally reaches 500, 15 more discharged
2020-05-02
Agra: By Friday evening, 26 new Covid-19 positive cases were reported in the district, increasing its tally to 500. The same day, 15 people were declared cured of the infection and discharged. 

In the last 30 days, 471 people had tested positive in Agra. On average, 16 people are being found positive every day. So far, 14 Covid-19 patients have died in the district, though, according to the health department, all of them had pre-existing co-morbidities. 

The new cases include a pregnant woman who had gone for checkup at a private hospital, a retired teacher of an Agra college, six vegetable sellers, an e-rickshaw driver, an auto-rickshaw driver, a cable TV lineman, a heart patient at a private hospital and a hardware businessman. 

Five of the 26 cases were traced to Hasanpura village in Khandoli block, where migrant labourers who had returned from Delhi were tested positive. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All new Covid-19 patients were put in isolation, attended by a team of doctors. Their contacts are being identified, people living in their neighborhoods and places they visited recently are being screened.”

According to the health department, of the 500 cases in Agra, 105 are related to the Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi and their contacts, 95 to a private hospital on NH-2, 25 to a private hospital in Rakabganj and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan. A further 60 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts, and 26 cases to people with overseas travel history and their contacts. 

DM Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 124 people have been cured and discharged. Anyone who has come in contact with a Covid-19 patient is being screened, their neighborhoods sanitised. Currently, there are 39 active hotspots in the city. They are being closely monitored. We’re doing massive sampling in these areas to identify all infected people, and putting them in institutional quarantine.”

There was something to cheer at S N Medical College, where a 26-year-old Covid-19 patient delivered a healthy baby via C-section on Friday evening, the fifth such case in the district in the last 11 days.


