Agra shoe barons, kin queue up at district hospital for coronavirus screening
2020-03-04
AGRA: People in Range Rovers seldom come to a district government hospital. But Tuesday was different when Covid-19 scare proved to be an equalizer of sorts. Agra leather exporters’ fraternity and their relatives descended on the district hospital premises in their premium SUVs on Tuesday to get themselves screened for coronavirus. 


Health department officials tried to calm down the panicking people outside the isolation ward as at least 50 shoe exporters and their family members queued up outside the premises.

A shoe exporter, who had come with his wife and two kids wearing N-95 masks, said “Last month, my family and I had visited Italy to attend a leather trade fair. Following reports of the spread of coronavirus in Italy and now in India, we have come for a medical examination. We have given our blood and throat swab samples for tests. Hospital authorities have told us that the medical report will come after 48 hours.” 

Puran Dawar, president of the Agra Footwear Manufacturer and Exporters Chamber (AFMEC), said, “There were four major shoe and leather component trade fairs in Italy from February 17 to 22. Over 45 shoe exporters had gone to attend these fairs. Some of them travelled with their family members and staff. They all returned in the last week of February. Following reports of coronavirus positive cases linked to Italy which were found in India, we have requested all the exporters who have recently visited abroad to get themselves screened. I sent my own son, who was also in Italy recently, to the district hospital. For now, there is nothing to panic. We need to be alert and follow government advisory.” 

Satish Verma, superintendent in charge of the district hospital, said, “On Tuesday, we collected nasal, oral and blood samples of 35 people from the leather exporters’ fraternity having foreign travel history. The process will be continued on Wednesday. The samples have been sent to Lucknow and reports are likely to be received between 48 and 72 hours.” 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “We have already constituted a 10-bed isolation ward at the district hospital and SN Medical College. Besides, a Rapid Response Team has been formed to tackle the situation and ambulances to transport suspected patients.” 

Meanwhile, a high-level team of National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) inspected the district hospital to check all the arrangements. District magistrate PN Singh also chaired a meeting of the CMO and other health officials to ensure required arrangements are in place to deal with any emergency.

