Agra doctors to spread awareness about Covid-19
2020-03-17
AGRA: Amid the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (also called Covid-19) pandemic that has infected eight city residents, mayor Naveen Jain on Monday ordered Agra Municipal Corporation (AMC) administration to select some prominent doctors from private and government facilities in the city, to create a three-minute video to debunk misinformation on the disease and create mass awareness on it. The video will be played on LED screens installed at various city junctions. He also sanctioned masks, gloves and sanitizers for sanitation workers, who are working tirelessly to maintain a high level of cleanliness. 


Jain said, “We have decided to involve government and private doctors to spread awareness about novel coronavirus and its prevention. Their videos will be played on LED screens at different city crossings. AMC is also going to place posters at public places to spread awareness on dos and don’t’s to prevent infection.

Officials have been directed to ensure cleanliness and hygiene in the city. The private company managing the city’s sewage system has been warned to ensure public complaints are addressed in a time-bound manner. 

Leader of the sanitation worker’s association, Vinod Allahabadi, said, “Sanitation workers wear fearing they would get infected. Accepting our demand, the mayor has ordered masks, gloves and sanitizers for over 4,000 sanitation workers of AMC. We are taking all possible efforts to keep the city neat and clean.” 

AMC is also carrying out a city-wide fogging and anti-larval spray drive to reduce the possibility of spread of other seasonal diseases. 

For better municipal solid waste management, the civic administration is going to distribute three dustbins to each household. The green garbage bin will be for biodegradable waste (kitchen waste, garden litter, solid paper, house dust), blue for non-biodegradable waste (glass, metal objects, wires, plastic, leather, furniture, packing material etc) and red for hazardous waste (paints, batteries, solvent, cleaning agents, pesticides etc).

Jain ordered the AMC administration to provide the set of three dustbins to each household that don’t have any pending house tax dues free of cost. 


