Agra district Covid-19 tally crosses 700 mark
2020-05-09
Agra: The total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Agra have now surpassed the 700 mark. At least 28 more corona cases were reported on Friday evening, taking the district tally to 706 - now a major cause for concern. 

Notably, the number of cases doubled in 15 days. On an average, one positive case was reported every 40 minutes in the past week. So far, 22 deaths have been reported in the district. 

The cases which surfaced on Friday included a 28-year-old junior doctor of SN Medical College, a fourth-grade employee of the same hospital, a 30-year-old pregnant woman who was admitted at a private hospital, a couple of Dhuliyaganj locality and two vegetable sellers. 

The remaining cases are all related to Kedar Nagar, Khandari, Awas Vikas, Lohamandi, Baluganj, Awas Vikas Colony, Jeevani Mandi, Ashok Nagar, Idgha, Nai Ki Mandi and Panchkuiyan locality. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

According to health department, out of 706 cases reported in Agra, at least 90 active ones are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts, while 80 people are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway-2. Another 22 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. 

Besides, 50 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts. These included a senior resident doctor and four junior doctors of SN Medical College. So far, 30 vegetable sellers have also been diagnosed with the deadly virus.

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 300 people have recovered and discharged. Those who came in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. We are doing massive sampling in hotspot areas to identify all the infected people and send them to institutional quarantine."


