Agra dist's Covid tally now 924 with eight new cases, two die in Meerut
2020-06-04
Agra/Meerut/Firozabad/Etah/BIJNOR: A 62-year-old pneumonia patient, who had tested positive for Covid-19, died while being treated at SN Medical College in Agra on Wednesday. As of now, 45 Covid-19 deaths have been reported in Agra district. Notably, the number of cases in this west UP's Covid "hotspot" is now closing in on the 1,000 mark.

In Meerut, the west UP's other major Covid "hotspot", at least 16 cases were reported on Wednesday with, importantly, two cases of deaths. While the total tally reached 474 which included one found in Kanpur, the death toll is now 30.

Meerut's chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Raj Kumar said, "Two people died in Meerut on Wednesday. They included a 60-year-old from Brahmpuri and a 79-year-old former military staff from the Military Hospital."

Meerut's district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, "The positive cases were reported from Brahmpuri, Jagriti Vihar, Gandhi Nagar (Delhi), Chappel Street, Azrada block (Kharkhauda), Baghpt Gate, Purva Ilahi Baksh, Shastri Nagar L Block, Purva Mahavir (Delhi Road), Jasora village - currently lodged in temporary jail, Laliyana, and a few other locations."

In Agra, at least eight fresh cases surfaced till Wednesday evening, taking the district's tally to 924. Three patients of SARI admitted at SN Medical College, a patient suffering from chest pain at a private hospital, a kidney patient and a student were among the fresh cases - with at least four of them above the age of 60. The new cases belong to Shahganj, Tedi Bagiya, Lohamandi, Rasoolpura, Nagla Padi and Guru Ka Taal locality. Also, three Covid-19 patients were discharged on Tuesday. Of the 924 cases, 87.26 per cent have recovered. There are now 73 active cases in the district.

In Firozabad, a 60-year-old woman councillor died on Wednesday. She had tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday night. Firozabad's Covid toll - following her death - rose to 14. The district also reported seven new cases which included a CMO office staff. The individual is a resident of Labour colony under Linepar police limits. The district tally is now 295.

In neighbouring Etah district, seven people were diagnosed with the disease on Wednesday, taking the tally to 40. While in Bijnor, two more tested positive, taking the tally to 116. Of them, 52 are active ones. Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav said the patients belong to Kaziwala village and Mandawar town. The resident of Kaziwala had recently returned from Kuwait and was quarantined.


