Agra district Covid-19 tally rises to 667, 35 discharged
2020-05-07
AGRA: At least 27 more Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Agra till Wednesday evening, taking the district's tally to 667. Also, as many as 35 more patients were declared cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. 

The new cases include a medicine wholesale dealer in Fuwarra market, a 28-year-old pregnant woman, resident of Paschimpuri locality, and a couple. The remaining cases are related to Lohamandi, Baluganj, Awas Vikas Colony, Jeevani Mandi, Ashok Nagar, Idgha, Nai Ki Mandi and Panchkuiyan locality. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people."

According to the health department, out of the 398 active cases in Agra, at least 90 cases are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts, while 80 are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway-2. Another 22 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. 

Besides, 50 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts, while 26 cases are linked to people who had overseas travel history and their contacts. So far, 28 vegetable sellers have also been tested positive in Agra.

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 269 people have recovered and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. At present, we have 42 active hotspots in the city. These are being closely monitored." 

Further, directorate of health service in UP, on Wednesday, claimed that total of 12 positive cases were reported in Firozabad district, taking the tally to 177 with 126 active cases. However, district administration claimed that only one corona positive case was confirmed, which took the tally to 168 with 117 active case. The Covid-19 positive patient is a woman - a resident of Madina colony - and she is undergoing dialysis. 


