Agra district Covid tally rises to 536, 10 more discharged
2020-05-03
Agra: At least 36 more Covid-19 cases were reported by Agra's district administration till Saturday afternoon, taking the district tally to 536. On an average, one positive case has surfaced in the district every 45 minutes in the past three days. Besides, one person out of 14 is being tested positive. 

Also, six more people, including three women, tested positive in Aligarh on Saturday, taking the district's tally to 42. While in Hathras, two more tested positive, including a police constable, who is posted in Firozabad. The total number of cases rose to seven in the district.

The new cases which surfaced in Agra district on Saturday, include 10 vegetable sellers, one pregnant woman of Bodla locality and five related to Hasanpura of Khandoli block. The remaining cases are related to people already under institutional quarantine. They were shifted to isolation facility after being confirmed with the infection. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

According to the health department, out of the 536 cases which have surfaced in Agra, at least 105 are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts. While 100 cases are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway-2. Another 25 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in the Ghatiya Azam Khan locality.

Besides, 60 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts, while 26 cases are linked to people who had overseas travel history and their contacts. District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 134 people have been cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. All those who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. At present, there are 39 active hotspots in the city." 

Meanwhile, the district administration sought public suggestion for containment of Covid-19 in Agra. In an hour's duration from 3pm to 4pm, a total of 59 suggestions were recorded. Some of these included deploying Army personnel for strict enforcement of lockdown in colonies, red zones should be completely sealed, more testing, screening of all residents, home delivery of all the essential items, closing of banks and insurance offices, and vegetable supply should be restricted to only one day a week. 


