Agra footwear industry stares at losses due to coronavirus
2020-02-05
AGRA: The outbreak of the deadly novel coronavirus (nCoV2019) in China has affected the footwear industry in Agra as supply of raw material from that country has stopped completely. Industry sources say raw material worth Rs 15 crore for manufacturing finished footwear is imported from different parts of China to Agra every month. Now, with the virus spreading fast, supply from China has dried up, affecting manufacturing here. 

The virus is taking a toll in the economic front as well, shutting down businesses, curbing international travel and impacting production lines of major global businesses. In Agra, which is the largest footwear hub in India, the industry is adversely impacted as manufacturers imports several components such as laces, shoe lining, buckles, ornaments, insoles, outsoles, cellulose board, shank board, foam and packing material from China. 

Every year, leather shoes worth over Rs 3,000 crore are exported to European countries from Agra. The US and several African countries are also important destinations for Agra footwear, say industry sources. 

Talking to TOI, Puran Dawar, president of Agra Footwear Manufacturer and Exporters Chamber (AFMEC), said, “The spread of coronavirus has affected the shoe industry at a crucial time. January and February are peak months when manufacturing is done for exports during summer. Some of the shoe components are imported from China because these are not manufactured in India as it too expensive here.” 

The footwear industry in Agra is renowned for leather products that it sells. Footwear alone accounts for 46% of the overall exports from leather industry. Agra has a share of 28% in the total footwear exports from the country and 65% of the domestic requirement. 

Shoe exporter Gopal Gupta said, "We depend heavily on footwear components supplied from China. The factories in China remain closed for their traditional new year on January 25. Due to the outbreak of coronavirus, factories in that country have shut. Imports from China will remain affected even if the factories there start operating, as delivery of consignment would get delayed due customs and other security clearances. We are searching for alternatives. Footwear components can be imported from Italy or Spain but they cost more as compared to China.” 

President of Agra Shoe Factories Federation, Gagandas Ramani, said, “Due to coronovirus outbreak, import of footwear component from China has completely stopped since January. This has affected manufacturing of finished footwear in micro units in Agra. Medium and large scale manufacturers maintain stock of components supplied from China. The footwear industry of Agra will suffer major losses if the situation does not normalise in the next one month.” 

According to AFMEC sources, Agra has around 10,000 micro units, 30 medium scale units and around 15 large scale units. On an average, more than two lakh pair of shoes are manufactured in the city every day, and there are over 3.5 lakh people employed in the footwear industry in Agra.

Reputed global brands like Florsheim, Nunn Bush, Stacy Adams, Gabor, Clarks, Nike, Reebok, Ecco, Deichmann, Elefanten, St Michaels, Hasley, Salamander and Colehaan are manufactured under licence in India, especially in Agra. Besides, due to cheap labour, many global retail chains seeking quality products at competitive prices actively source footwear from Agra.

Meanwhile, UP tourism department has issued an alert to travel industries Agra and the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Agra circle, to immediately inform the health department about any visitors from China in the city. 


