Agra Covid-19 infected woman never entered Bengaluru city, says Karnataka govt
2020-03-15
BENGALURU: Contrary to the claims made by the UP government on Friday, Karnataka said on Saturday that the Agra woman, wife of the Google techie who tested positive for Covid-19, never entered Bengaluru city. After arriving at the Kempegowda International Airport (KIA), Bengaluru, on March 8, she took a flight to Delhi in barely two hours, much before her husband tested positive on March 12, said medical education minister Dr K Sudhakar.
 

Coronavirus outbreak live updates

 UP health officials had claimed that the 25-year-old escaped from a Bengaluru quarantine on March 8. Refuting this claim, Sudhakar said: "On March 8, the couple took an Indigo flight from Mumbai and landed in Bengaluru at 11.45pm. The wife did not step out of KIA. She took another flight from Bengaluru to Delhi at 1.40am on March 9, and reached Delhi at 4.25am. From Delhi, she took a train, Gatimaan Express, to reach her parent's house in Agra." When contacted, the techie's brother told STOI that his sister-in-law never refused to be quarantined. 


Don’t hide travel details: Minister

The techie’s brother added that his sisterin-law is not infected with Covid-19, as claimed by the UP officials. “The first test report was ‘inconclusive’. The second one is still awaited. But even before that, my sister-in-law has been declared Covid-19 positive, which is not true,” he said.

Officials who investigated the woman’s itinerary spoke to her husband and gathered information, said Sudhakar. The techie tested positive on March 12 and was admitted to the hospital the same day. He is currently being treated in an isolation ward of a Bengaluru hospital.

The medical education minister further said that educated individuals and families should not hide their travel details from the surveillance team. “Travelling to another country is no crime. But every responsible citizen must now equally care for their and others’ health. Not all travellers would be infected with Covid-19, but everyone must co-operate with the health department officials in screening and contact tracing,” Sudhakar said.

Javaid Akthar, additional chief secretary, health and family welfare, reminded that “hiding travel details and not adhering to the home isolation are both morally and legally wrong”.

