Agra coronavirus cases cross 100, push Uttar Pradesh tally to 491
2020-04-13
LUCKNOW: Agra continued to report high number of cases -- 12 on Sunday -- as UP’s tally weent up by 32 to reach 491. Eight of Agra cases were linked to a single source — a private hospital whose owner and son had tested positive earlier.


 They were also responsible for six cases in Firozabad. The total number of cases linked to Tablighi Jamaat congregation now stand at 283, including 11 found on Sunday.

Twelve cases of Agra took its overall tally to 104, including 52 Jamat attendees. According to CMO Agra, Mukesh Vats, “two out of the 12 new corona positive cases reported were contacts of people who had attended the Nizamuddin Jamaat while nine infected people were family members of a staffer of a private hospital who tested positive on April 9. The 12 the patient is a relative of the 76-year-old woman who died of coronavirus on Wednesday last.” Eight patients from Saharanpur tested positive at LLRM Medical college, Meerut. All are linked to Nizamuddin’s Jamaat. CMO BS Bodh said: “District authorities informed us that four of these patients are residents of Maharashtra, one each from Indonesia and West Bengal and two are from Assam. They were traced from Deoband, Gangoh and Saharanpur city.” With this, the district tally reached 28. Five patients were reported in Meerut. CMO Raj Kumar said that three of these patients were relatives of Amrawati businessman while two were contacts of Tablighi Jamaat attendees. “The new cases took district total to 56.”

Firozabad reported six cases, all linked to an Agra hospital. CMO Dr SK Dixit said, “The main patient is a lab assistant who worked in Agra’s private hospital whose owner and his son tested positive to covid last week. All patients were screened at PGI Saifai. The man passed on the infection to his wife and four of his friends. We traced listed 38 other contacts. The entire village is being sealed for sanitisation.”

In Mathura, a 14-year old boy tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, taking the district tally to four. Mathura CMO Sher Singh said: “The boy had returned after attending a religious programme in Bharatpur district of Rajasthan.”

Meanwhile, in a shocking incident, a suspected cororna patient lodged in the quarantine centre set up at Galgotia College reportedly committed suicide. According to officials at Knowledge Park police station of Greater Noida, “the deceased was a resident of slum area in sector-8. He was depressed and wanted to go to his home.” The person was declared ‘brought dead’ by doctors at Regional PG Institute Noida.

