Coronavirus outbreak: Agra university cancels exams till March 16
2020-03-15
AGRA: Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar University administration cancelled the session 2019-20 exam scheduled to take place on Saturday and for the next two days after cases of cheating and other malpractices surfaced in various exam centres. Students came to know about the cancellation of exam when they reached the examination center. Later in the afternoon, the university administration placed the notice on its official website. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Talking to TOI, vice-chancellor Ashok Mittal said, “The exams have been cancelled and the next three days will be utilized in changing those exam centres from where cases of cheating and other malpractices have been reported in the past few days.”

The VC also stated that this break will be used to increase the number of exam centres so as to have fewer students at a time in one place.

Meanwhile, during the inspection conducted by varsity officials at a nodal exam centre in Firozabad on Friday night, one set of question paper of BA/BSc Mathematics and Biology was found missing. 

The inspection at nodal exam centre Thakur Biri Singh college was done by a seven-member team headed by varsity registrar Rajeev Kumar. Vice-chancellor has received complaints that question papers are being leaked from the centre. 

The registrar called principal of the college Bahadur Singh and other staffers. According to the varsity officials, Singh was not able to give a satisfactory answer regarding the missing question papers. 

Confirming this, the registrar, who is also the examination controller, said, “The question papers of exam scheduled to take place on Saturday were found missing from the nodal centre in Firozabad. The college principal and staffers were not able to provide a satisfactory answer regarding the issue. We are going to register an FIR in the entire matter.”

He said, “On Sunday, VC will chair an examination committee meeting. In this, a decision will be taken regarding changes in the exam centres where cases of cheating and other malpractices have surfaced.” 


