Agra man who died of breathing problems tests +ve for Covid-19
2020-04-16
Agra: A 57-year-old man, who died of breathing difficulties on Tuesday, was later tested positive for Covid-19, taking the toll to four. Also, the total number of Covid cases in Agra is now 149. In neighbouring Firozabad district, six more were tested positive, taking the tally to 24.The deceased man was a resident of Shastripuram. He was admitted to an isolation ward of SNMC on April 7. According to health officials, his first sample taken on April 8, was found negative. His condition later deteriorated and on April 13 another sample was taken. By the time report arrived, he had passed away and also cremated.Now, all the family members and people, including doctors who came in his contact, are being screened and their samples are collected by the health department.On Wednesday, chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The man was under treatment for respiratory illness at the SNMC. Doctors tried their best, but were not able to save him. The man died due to respiratory failure. He was later confirmed with coronavirus infection.”Earlier, three women who were admitted to SNMC and a private hospital with multiple medical conditions were tested positive for Covid-19 - after their death. So far, 149, including two junior doctors and a ward boy, have been tested Covid-19 positive in Agra.In Firozabad, out of 24 corona positives, only five patients have no Jamaat link. The majority of the infected patients belong or came in contact with attendees of Jamaat in Durgapur area of Rasoolpur police limits.On Wednesday, six more samples were found of corona positive in Firozabad, taking the district tally to 24 . Dr S K Dixit, chief medical officer of Firozabad, told TOI, "On April 13, a bunch of samples were sent to Saifai PGI in which six samples were found Covid-19 positive. All the infected patients were in direct contact with attendees of Jamaat.""We have thoroughly sanitised Durgrapur area of Rasoolpur police limits from where all the infected patients hailed. Contact tracing is being done, while all the infected have been shifted to isolation facility at a Tundla-based private hospital," he added.