Agra’s tally of Covid-19 positive cases crosses 400, highest in Uttar Pradesh
2020-04-29
AGRA: 15 new Covid-19 cases have been reported in Agra on Tuesday, taking the district's tally to 404, highest in the state. Among the new cases, one is related to a pregnant women who had gone for a check-up at a private hospital, two cases are that of the mother and the wife of a tourist guide who was tested positive earlier, one case is related to the wife of businessman who had died last week due to Covid-19. 

A ward boy of SN Medical College and a personal driver of a government official had tested positive last week. Two of the new positive cases that surfaced on Tuesday are related to them. A dialysis patient of a private centre and two patients of private clinics have also been tested positive. Besides, another vegetable seller tested positive for the virus. 

Chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the areas around their house and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check-up of all those people." 

According to the health department, of the 327 cases that have surfaced in Agra, at least 104 cases are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts. Nearly 92 cases are linked to a private hospital located on national highway-2. Another 25 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. 

Besides, 58 cases are related to health care workers and their contacts in Agra. Twenty-six cases are linked to people who had overseas travel history and their contacts. 

Meanwhile, six vegetable sellers, a medicine seller and a milk seller have been tested Covid-19 positive. These people are not aware about their source of infection. 

“So far, 54 people have been cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patient are being screened. The areas in the vicinity of places where the infected people were staying are being sanitized. Fourteen spots have been completely neutralized, and 30 active hotspots are being closely monitored. We are doing massive sampling in these areas to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine,” the CMO said. 

Meanwhile, in neighbouring Firozabad, two more Covid-19 positive cases were reported, including a 72-year-old man who died on Tuesday, taking the tally of positive cases in the district to 98, according to the administration. 

According to the health department, the 72-year-old victim had returned from the US in February and he complained of breathlessness only on April 25. “The victim was shifted to a Firozabad hospital on Monday and his sample was collected, but he died later in the day. On Tuesday, his sample was tested positive. As a precautionary measure, we have asked his family members to remain in home quarantine until their samples are examined,” said Firozabad CMO Dr SK Dixit. 

“The second Covid-19 patient is an 18-year-old youth and hails from Mohalla Nali Ki Pulia, a hotspot. The victim’s case is linked with attendees of Jamaat,” he added.


