Agra district Covid-19 tally rises to 675, three die at SN Medical College
2020-05-08
AGRA: At least eight more Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Agra till Thursday evening, taking the district tally to 675. Also, three Covid-19 positive patients died at SN Medical College. A 50-year-old local journalist succumbed to Covid-19 infection on Thursday. According to DM Agra Prabhu N Singh, “The victim tested corona positive on May 3.”

They included a 11-year-old jaundice patient, resident of Tedi Bagiya locality, and a 65-year-old woman of Sikandar locality who was a kidney patient. Besides, a 63-year-old, resident of Kamla Nagar locality, who died on May 2 was found positive.

The new cases which surfaced on Thursday included a 28-year-old resident of Dauki village who had returned to Agra from Delhi, a 32-year-old man of Tajganj locality, a pregnant woman admitted at the SN Medical College, and a 46-year-old businessman of Jagdishpura locality.

The remaining cases are related to Lohamandi, Baluganj, Awas Vikas Colony, Jeevani Mandi, Ashok Nagar, Idgha, Nai Ki Mandi and Panchkuiyan locality.

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people."

According to health department, out of the 675 cases in Agra, at least 90 cases are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts while 80 are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway-2. Another 22 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality.

Besides, 50 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts while 26 are linked to people who had overseas travel history and their contacts. So far, 28 vegetable sellers have been tested positive in Agra.

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 296 people have recovered and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. At present, we have 42 active hotspots in the city. These are being closely monitored."


