Coronavirus cases in Uttar Pradesh: Agra factory worker tests positive
2020-03-08
LUCKNOW: A factory worker who came in contact with the Covid-19 positive businessman from Agra has also tested positive, pushing the total number of coronavirus cases in Uttar Pradesh to six.


The new patient was admitted to Agra district hospital while three suspected patients from Aligarh and four from Siddharthnagar have been quarantined.

Earlier, six members from the businessman’s family were admitted to Safdarjung hospital in New Delhi. Of these, five tested positive.

Health authorities have already screened more than 150 persons who came in contact with the Agra businessman. Gearing up to tackle the situation, authorities have taken additional measures to strengthen surveillance in Agra and around. 

“A team of 40 officers has been deployed to manage the coronavirus situation in Agra. Besides, three Epidemic Intelligence Services officers from Delhi have been posted in Agra to keep an eye on the developments and situation,” said Dr Vikasendu Agarwal, nodal officer, coronavirus, UP. 

He said infrared thermometers had been made available to health teams deployed at Taj Mahal. Authorities are also tracking contacts of the new case. The sensitization drive at Agra covering houses in an area of three kilometre radius around Master Plan Road has been extended till March 9 and 314 teams have been deployed for it.

Report of the suspected case from Ghaziabad is still awaited. “Treatment of the patient who returned from Iran continues at RML Hospital, New Delhi,” he said.

Principal secretary health, Amit Mohan Prasad reviewed situation in UP and said everything was under control. As part of additional measures, screening labs are also being set up in Saifai, Aligarh and Varanasi, said officials. Doctors at pulmonary medicine department in KGMU have constituted a rapid response team.

The head of pulmonary and critical care medicine department, Dr Ved Prakash said, “The task force will work to prevent the transmission of disease.”

