Agra’s first 100-bed multispecialty Covid-19 facility becomes functional
2020-04-17
AGRA: Agra got its first a state-of-the-art 100-bed multispecialty centre for novel coronavirus patients. After a round of sanitisation and dry run, the facility at SN Medical College will start its operations on Friday.


A team from the World Health Organization (WHO) inspected the facility on Tuesday and gave its approval with a "few suggestions". 



The facility equipped with modern machines has been developed at the maternal and child health (MCH) wing of SNMC. The MCH department has been shifted to the Lady Lyall hospital. The location to develop the facility was chosen to ensure complete isolation and no scope for spread of the virus. 

Talking to TOI on Thursday, district magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, "After starting the Covid-19 testing facility at the microbiology lab of the SNMC, all the required arrangements were made to start operations of a multispecialty treatment facility for Covid-19 patients. The state-of-the-art isolation centre have a labour room to attend to pregnant women with Covid-19 infection. It has an operation theater and an intensive care unit. If required, dialysis can also be done here. The facility has been developed following guidelines of the ministry of health and family planning. It also fulfills the WHO standards."

So far, the Covid-19 infected patients were admitted to the emergency ward of the medical college. Now, the place with 58 beds will be used for screening people and quarantine them. 

In-charge of the Covid-19 centre, Dr Prashant Gupta said, “The multispecialty facility has been developed to ensure the patients do not face any inconvenience and best possible treatment can be provided to them. Adequate arrangement of ventilators and other equipment have been made at the centre. A dedicated team of 30 health staffers will run the facility." 

Deputy in-charge of the centre Dr Akhil Pratap Singh said, “The facility has all the arrangement to even attend to any child infected of coronavirus. The entire premises will remain under the surveillance of CCTV cameras. A modern control room connected with public address system has also been set up at the centre to manage the operations better." 

Chief medical officer of Agra district Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The facility will start its operations from Friday onwards. It will be a major boost to our efforts for providing best possible treatment to coronavirus-infected patients. Besides, the facility - developed in a separate block - will ensure that other patients and their caretakers do not get infected. We have determined a standard operating procedure from the start - when the patient arrives to the centre till being cured of infection and discharged from the hospital."

