Agra gurdwara feeds over a million during lockdown
2020-06-04
Agra: Several gurdwaras in the country received high praise for their dedicated community service during the Covid-19 lockdown. And one such popular gurdwara in Agra stood out for feeding over a million people and distributing nearly 5,000 footwears to the distressed migrants who have been braving the blistering heat and walking hundreds of kms to reach home.

Guru ka Tal gurdwara in Agra continued with its ‘langar sewa’ or community kitchen and provided food for all the people, including migrants and the city's needy, in the past two months - even as its doors remained completely shut for devotees due to the lockdown.

The community kitchen, in fact, has been operational round the clock, serving hot food to those coming at its doorstep. Besides, the gurdwara distributed 5,000 rubber slippers and shoes to migrant workers. Notably, the food preparations here start at five in the morning and continue till late at night.

"We have set up a tent outside and are serving meals on paper plates with all precautions, while maintaining social distance," said Baba Pritam Singh of the management committee. Singh added that fruits are also provided with the meal.

Though, earlier, on any given day around 12,000-13,000 people visited the gurdwara for "langar", according to him, their numbers increased during the lockdown and now they are feeding around 18,000 people a day. He pointed out that they don’t keep any record of the quantity of food prepared per day, but assured that "no one will ever go hungry from here".

The kitchen has adequate stocks of food grains for at least six months to a year - largely from donations by farmers of Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur and Sitarganj of Uttarakhand. "According to Guru’s directions, these farmers donate 'dasvandh’ [10 per cent] of their total produce to the gurdwara annually," he added.

"Our 500 staff usually stay inside for routine work along with preparing food and organising everything," said Gurnam Singh from the committee, adding that all the people involved in the kitchen work are strictly advised to sanitise their hands before entering the premises.


