Karnataka: Agriculture product sales plunge, farmers demand MSP amid Covid-19 scare
2020-03-24
BENGALURU: Agricultural crops in Karnataka harvested between December and March have been severely hit by the Covid-19 pandemic.


The worst affected have been mango farmers, especially exporters. About 15,000-20,000 tonnes of mangoes are exported each year to eight countries, including the US, Singapore, London, Brazil and UK. With these countries and India reeling under the contagion, no exports are expected this year.

 
 

“By this time, farmers normally finalise the export orders. But this year, not even a single order has come from foreign shores so far,” said M Kamalakshi Rajanna, former chairman of Karnataka State Mango Development and Marketing Board.

Exporters couldn’t even get visas to go to these countries to sign contracts. The prices of mangoes in the domestic market too have nosedived after the state government announced a lockdown. While in normal years, the prices range between Rs 145 and Rs 300 per kg depending on the variety, this time they are around Rs 40.

Even in Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra, which are among the earliest to harvest the fruit, prices have crashed.

Kiran Kumar Vissa, coordinator of the National Coalition for Sustainable Agriculture, said the state government must set up mango storage facilities across the state and start procuring the fruit from farmers.

Maize has been badly hit because its main consumer, the poultry industry, has almost stopped procuring maize given the sharp decline in chicken sales. Chicken sales are down because of both Covid-19 and the bird flu scare. While 14 lakh quintals of maize were sold till mid-March last year, only 6.6 lakh quintals has been sold till now this year.

“The government cannot procure maize under the minimum support price scheme because there are few takers for it in the public distribution system. But we are planning some contingency measures which would help farmers,” said Mallikarjuna Mallammanavar, regional marketing director of Karnataka State Cooperative Marketing Federation.

Trade in all commodities at 144 APMC yards in the state has been lacklustre following the lockdown of malls and the steep decline in the hotel and restaurant businesses.

“In the Yeshwantpur APMC yard, which is the biggest in the state with a turnover of Rs 100 crore per day, business is down by 50%,” said Rameshchandra Lahoti, president of the Bangalore Wholesale Foodgrains and Pulses Association.

