Ahead of harvest season, farmers stare at loses due to lockdown
2020-03-30
NAINITAL: As the harvest season for the Rabi crops nears, farmers across the state are worried that in face of the crisis caused by the novel coronavirus and the lockdown imposed across the country, they will have to bear severe losses.


Speaking to TOI, several farmers termed migration of workers out of the state as a problem for farmers in many areas, while others saw the closure of mandis and disturbance of the supply chain as a major threat. “I have crops ready to be harvested in a week in almost four acres. But the availability of labour is going to be a serious issue. Even if I have to employ a threshing machine, we will need several labourers to cut the crops which is going to be very difficult in the coming days,” said Ramzani, a farmer from Udham Singh Nagar district.

These fresh problems come after the already devastating months of February and March when untimely rains and hailstorms damaged several acres of wheat fields. “The hailstorms in the past two months have already damaged much of the crops but whatever remains now is also under threat if we do not get the labour to harvest it,” Ramzani added.

Meanwhile, another farmer from Jhabreda area of Roorkee said that the problem for him is the breakdown and confusion around the supply chain. “We will start harvesting in eight to ten days. The unavailability of labour is an issue because there is a total lockdown in the state and we are not sure if the administration will let people assemble for the harvest. We are also unsure how we will take the total produce to the market,” he said.

Government officials meanwhile said that the farmers will be helped to get labourers and also to get the harvested crops to the market. “We will approach the farmers and work out a mechanism to get the crops to markets. Since the major crop to be harvested is wheat, it can be stored for the time being. And as far as labourers is concerned, we will also speak to the local officials and work out a plan on the issue as well,” said a senior government official on condition of anonymity.


