Coronavirus in Maharashtra: Ahmednagar gets 3 hotspots, 25 cases in district
2020-04-08
NASHIK: Three areas in Ahmednagar district — Jamkhed, Sangamner and Mukundnagar — have emerged as Covid-19 hotspots with as many as 17 residents testing positive. 


With three new positive cases on Monday night, the total number of patients in the district has swelled to 25. 

District collector Rahul Dwivedi told TOI that the administration has put in place the cluster containment action plan at these three places to restrict the spread of the virus. 

“We have already sealed these three places and an extensive survey is under way to check the health of every resident,” he added.

If district officials come across any suspicious case, the person is being quarantined and swab samples are collected for tests.

According to district officials, of the 25 positive cases so far, 21 are linked to the Tablighi Jammat members or their contacts in Ahmednagar. 

A total of 35 people, including 29 foreigners, who had attended the Jamaat’s congregation in the Hazrat Nizaumuddin area of Delhi had come to Ahmednagar in three batches and continued to stay at mosques. 

After the district administration came to know that these people had taken shelter in Mosques, all were quarantined. Among the group, four foreigners tested positive for Covid-19. 

“The 17 local residents of Jamkhed, Sangamner and Mukundnagar, who came into contact with those who attended the religious congregation in Delhi, have tested positive,” district officials said. 

Four of the 25 cases have no connection with the Delhi event. Two of them had returned from Dubai, one was a local doctor and the other was a resident of Shrirampur. Both have no travel history.

Meanwhile, Ahmednagar guardian minister Hassan Mushrif held a review meeting on Covid-19 with district officials. The district authorities briefed him about the positive cases and what steps they have initiated to prevent the spread of the virus in the district. 

Mushrif appealed to the people in the district to remain indoors and help the local administration in preventing the spread of the disease. 

