Ahmednagar cops file FIRs against 35 Tablighi Jamaat event attendees
2020-04-07
NASHIK: The Ahmednagar police have initiated legal action against 35 Tablighi Jamaat event attendees, including 29 foreigners, for entering the district after taking part in the religious congregation at Nizamuddin (Delhi) in mid-March without informing the local administration.


Additional superintendent of police Sagar Patil said the FIRs have been lodged against the 35 individuals in three different police stations of the district.

“The FIRs have been lodged under various sections of Indian Panel Code (IPC). The 29 foreigners had tourist visas, but they were involved in religious activities, which is a violation of the visa conditions. The local police were kept in the dark about the arrival of these foreign nationals in the district. If need be, we will also arrest them,” added Patil.

Jamkhed police lodged FIRs against 10 foreigners and two Indians. Nevasa police lodged FIRs against another 10 foreigners and the Bhingar Camp police station lodged FIRs against nine foreigners and two Indians.

“The foreign nationals hail from countries like Malaysia, Brunei, Ivory Coast, Ghana and Indonesia. Some of them are Islamic scholars and preachers. All 35 individuals were staying in local mosques in the area,” a police officer said.

After being informed about the presence of the Jamaat event attendees, the district administration swung into action and picked the first lot of suspects from a mosque in Jamkhed. The remaining two batches were picked up from mosques in Nevasa and Ahmednagar city.

According to a district official, of the total 21 positive Covid-19 cases in Ahmednagar, 18 are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat markaz.

“While four of the foreigners have tested positive, 14 of the local residents who came in contact with them have also tested positive. Reports of some of the other locals who met these individuals are still awaited,” he said.

Meanwhile, district police have ruled out the possibility of presence of any more Tablighi Jamaat groups in Ahmednagar. “We have taken feedback from across the district and no more groups are present here,” a police officer said.


