AIIMS gets its first Covid-19 patients
2020-05-24
NAGPUR: Two patients of Covid-19 have been admitted at the Covid ward and undergoing treatment at AIIMS Nagpur on Saturday. A 27-year-old man, and his father, 52, residents of Butibori, were admitted on May 23 morning as suspects for Covid-19 following the screening at AIIMS Nagpur. 

Their nasopharyngeal swabs were collected and sent for testing at the Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, AIIMS Nagpur, which came positive late afternoon.

The 27-year-old son was working in Mumbai and returned to Nagpur on May 16. He developed symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection (fever, cough and sore throat) since the last 7 days. His father, a known case of bronchial asthma and systemic hypertension developed cough and sore throat since May 22. The clinical condition of both father and son are stable at present. 

The father son duo is first covid-19 patients admitted in the AIIMS Nagpur. Until now, only GMCH and IGGMCH are the two hospitals where Covid-19 patients are treated. 

Sources at AIIMS informed that the institute is ready with a separate ward for Covid-19 patients and they can treat the two patients admitted on Saturday as they don’t have any serious symptoms. However, the AIIMS is currently running only it’s out patient department (OPD) and its inpatient department is not ready and fully functioning yet. So, in case the condition of these patients deteriorate, they will be shifted to either of the government hospitals in city.

Covid ward at AIIMS has isolation facilities for 16 patients at present. It was ready since last 2 months. As people are now returning from Mumbai, Pune and other places, the number of suspects is set to grow. AIIMS is in the vicinity of Butibori industrial area and MIHAN where several IT companies are set to start afresh post lockdown. It could be the first choice of many returnees to get themselves tested as AIIMS also owns an advanced Covid testing facility. 

Sources said that patients were happy to see the world class facilities, regular monitoring by doctors wearing PPE kits and 24 hour CCTV monitoring of the Covid ward at AIIMS. 


