AIIMS Nagpur mentors 20 Covid testing labs in Maharashtra
2020-05-30
NAGPUR: The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS Nagpur), which was designated as a mentor institute for Covid-19 testing labs in medical colleges, universities and institutions in Maharashtra in April, has helped the state boost its testing capacity by adding 20 new facilities in just one-and-a-half-month.

With the addition of six labs recently, the state’s daily testing capacity will touch 13,750 soon.

The laboratories recently approved by AIIMS Nagpur include Civil Hospital, Ahmednagar, GMC Jalgaon and GMC Baramati (CBNAAT & RTPCR), Civil Hospital, Satara and Civil Hospital, Parbhani (TruNAT) and Vasantrao Naik GMC, Yavatmal (CBNAAT). 

“Quality checks are being conducted to ensure proper functioning of labs as per guidelines. All approved labs send daily reports of the assessments conducted to AIIMS Nagpur. We are assisting them in case of any problem,” said director and CEO of AIIMS Nagpur Maj Gen (Dr) Vibha Dutta. 

To ensure each district and sub-district has a testing facility, AIIMS Nagpur has proactively contacted collectors and civil surgeons to start Covid-19 testing in all district hospitals across the state. “Six districts have applied to establish Covid-19 labs in their respective hospitals and three have already been granted approval and are functional now,” said Dr Dutta. 

The team of proficient medical microbiologists of AIIMS Nagpur has also conducted rigorous programmes with hands-on training for designated staff (microbiologists and laboratory technicians) from 25 medical colleges and institutions till date.

From setting up of molecular diagnostic laboratory for Covid-19 testing in a span of 12 days; providing vital recommendations on Covid-19 preparedness and response by rapid response team for Nagpur, Yavatmal and state of Goa; establishment of Covid-19 labs across the state, to caring of corona patients admitted to designated Covid ward at the institute; AIIMS Nagpur has been playing an active part in the war against Covid-19 and will continue to do so, she said.

