Covid-19 outbreak: AIIMS doctors make sanitisers to beat shortfall
2020-03-20
NEW DELHI: One of the biggest challenges healthcare workers are facing in dealing with the Covid-19 outbreak is shortage of hand sanitisers and protective equipment, such as masks. They are in short supply in hospitals as well as wholesale markets.


To deal with this crisis, which may worsen in the coming days, the infection control team at AIIMS has started preparing both alcohol-based handrubs and plastic face shields in their own lab.

Dr Purva Mathur, professor of laboratory medicine at the hospital, who heads the infection control team, told TOI they have already prepared about 20 litres of hand sanitisers. Larger quantities of the alcohol-based handrub can be prepared at short notice, she said.

“We don’t have a crisis in our hospital at present. But this exercise is being done to prepare the hospital for a crisis situation,” she added.

According to Dr Mathur, making alcohol-based hand rub isn’t difficult. It requires Ethanol, Hydrogen peroxide, Glycerol and distilled water that are easily available in the market and the process of mixing them is clearly laid out by World Health Organisation. “Fifteen years ago, when commercial hand sanitisers weren’t available, this is how hospitals used to prepare them,” Dr Mathur explained.

Doctors deputed for the screening of Covid-19 patients need to cover their face with masks to reduce the risk of contracting infection. In anticipation of scarcity of the crucial personal protective equipment, the AIIMS team has also been working to develop their own indigenous mask.

“We have prepared a few using transparency film and foam at a fraction of the cost of the masks available in the market,” Dr Mathur said. “In the coming days, we would be able to prepare more of these protective items,” she added.

While the common people have been advised to stay home to check the spread of Covid-19 and reduce the risk of contracting the infection, healthcare workers are on the ground to care for patients. However, this comes at a high risk of catching the infection. Data shows 1,700 medical workers have been infected by Covid-19 in China and at least six have succumbed to it.

Though no healthcare worker has been affected in India, the anxiety level among the staff at hospitals such as Safdarjung and Ram Manohar Lohia, where coronavirus patients are being treated, is high. Some of the doctors TOI spoke to said the lack of masks and gloves was the trigger behind it.


