Air India pilot couple’s SevenHills Hospital quarantine ‘horror stories’ a cause for concern
2020-04-09
MUMBAI: An Air India pilot couple that has been in quarantine at the civic-run SevenHills Hospital in Andheri since the past four days, put down their experience, an indictment of BMC’s handling of its coronavirus quarantine facility, in a widelyshared message that has led to concerns among the pilot community.


An AI top official said the pilots’ lab test reports have come negative and they will be released for home quarantine soon.

The wife had operated a flight from New York on March 19, and was under home quarantine when within a week she developed a cough. From March 30, she started taking medicines prescribed by an AI doctor and turned down the April 2 Mumbai-Frankfurt flight she was rostered for. The next day, she felt feverish and decided to get tested. The couple lives with their elderly parents and 11-month-old child.

The couple couldn’t get a private lab to come home for swab test as AI couldn’t give them the referral on a doctor’s letterhead. The AI doctor referred them a doctor from a private hospital. The next morning, the couple reached the hospital, but the said doctor wasn’t there. Another doctor directed them to SevenHills, where they put in quarantine after their samples were collected. The pilots called up their AI bosses who delivered their clothes and essentials.

The pilots said a doctor visited them only in the evening and asked basic questions about health. “The same staff who looks after positive patients come to our ward. One or two people who are coughing whole night are positive and not separated...On one instance, this guy came coughing... almost opposite to our bed at night, found out he reached here by mistake, was supposed to go to Kasturba,” the pilots’ message said. They also alleged that WHO guidelines weren’t being followed at the facility. “No gloves, no sanitizers, no N95 or triple layer mask, not disinfecting the whole area including common washrooms…”

Dr Mohan Joshi, in-charge of Seven-Hills, said people kept in quarantine don’t need to be attended regularly as most are asymptomatic. “Regular monitoring is done for patients in isolation who have symptoms,” he said. Another doctor said the pilot couple could have chosen to stay in a hotel-based quarantine instead of getting admitted to a public facility. “Even in hotels, the treatment of suspected patients in quarantine is bad.”


