Air pollution rises as lockdown eases in Rajasthan
2020-05-21
JAIPUR: As the state moves towards a modified lockdown, except in containment and curfew zones, the pollution levels have started to rise across Rajasthan. In a recent study, conducted by the Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB), the air pollution levels have been rising in the state when compared to pre-lockdown and complete lockdown figures.




When compared to pre-lockdown phase, the air quality improved during the complete lockdown phase. However, if we compare the data between the complete lockdown and modified lockdown phases, pollution is getting worse.




The overall percentage increase in air quality index (AQI) from the period of lockdown to the modified one has ranged between 4% at Jaipur (police commissionerate) and 15% in Udaipur).

However, in Ajmer, Alwar, Kota and Pali, the air quality has improved in the modified period when compared to the lockdown one, ranging from 5% (Pali) to 13% (Kota).

Chief environmental engineer at RSPCB, Vijay Singhal says, “This is the third report of our study during the lockdown. With the economy opening up, the level of pollution will increase. Now, the pace at which pollution will return to pre-lockdown levels will depend on the rise in the number of vehicles and the opening up of industries.”

When compared to the lockdown period, there has been a significant percentage increase during the modified lockdown for all three pollution parameters i.e. PM10, PM2.5, NO2, as observed in Jaipur (Science Park), Jodhpur and Udaipur whereas in Bhiwadi and Jaipur (Police Commissionerate), an increase of average concentrations of PM10, PM2.5 has been observed. However, air quality has improved in terms of all the three parameters in Alwar and Pali.

The noise levels during the lockdown period decreased at all monitored locations except at Science Park, Shastri Nagar, during night time, in Jaipur. Despite the lockdown, the noise levels exceeded the prescribed standards at all locations except Jaipur Nagar Nigam Office, Patel Marg, Mansarovar (day time), Science Park, Shastri Nagar (day time), Gali No. 3, Raja Park (day & night time), and near Kotwali Thana, Chhoti Chaupar (day & night time).


