Covid-19 in Chennai: Air crew worried over lack of screening
2020-03-20
CHENNAI: Chennai airport authorities screening passengers arriving from infected countries are letting pilots and cabin crew go without checks. Airline crew say they don’t enjoy the privilege because they don’t want to fall ill or pass on the virus to their families and others who they closely interact with.


“Especially the cabin crew spend hours with passengers in a closed environment, but not every one of them is checked. Now passengers from certain countries are made to go into quarantine even without Covid-19 symptoms, but pilots and cabin crew cannot take such a break as they have to get back to the next flight,” said a pilot. Some of the airlines staff felt services should be curtailed. “Airlines continue to operate flights though patronage is low and people are advised not to travel. This is putting the cabin crew and the cockpit crew at risk,” said the pilot. 

For passengers, too, there is no uniform screening across Indian airports, where domestic flights go unmonitored. There is no uniform screening of passengers across the country. Some airports screen domestic passengers and crew. Chennai has started doing this after a couple of Covid-19 cases were reported in the city.

Ground staff are equally concerned. “We are worried there could be passengers coming in with infection. We constantly look for ill people, but we are not given proper protective gear during check-in and boarding, when we come close passengers. “Many members of the ground staff have to share a sanitizer bottle. Many of us have bought masks and gloves out of our own initiative,” said an airline ground staff at Chennai airport.

Airline staff feel that the Chennai international terminal should be shut as 12 airlines now operating have less than 50% load factor. However, AAI is yet to take a decision. With Sri Lanka shutting all its airports, there is a call in India to restrict port of entry of flights from abroad to two or three airports.

“A small country like Sri Lanka is ready to shut down its airport to prevent flights from landing from abroad. We are yet to do it. Pilots and cabin crew are worried to fly to foreign countries affected by Covid-19,” said another pilot.

An airline official advocated concerted action by airlines and the government to ensure that all crew members are safe. 

