Airfare drops by 10% as people avoid travel due to coronavirus scare
2020-03-16
PATNA: Air ticket prices have been reduced by almost 10% due to cancellations of tickets as people are avoiding travel out of coronavirus (Covid-19) scare, airlines executives said.

GoAir executives at Patna airport said the demand for air tickets would further drop in the next coming days as people were postponed their travel plan and cancelling tickets. “After Holi or any festival, the airfare increases up to 15-18% than the average price. But the prices have drastically dropped on several routes, including Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad and Kolkata,” he said.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

SpiceJet executives said the aircraft is sanitized after passengers deboard the flight. “The city airport has provided hand sanitizers at boarding counters. Although the number of sanitizers is less than the requirement, we are still taking all precautionary measures,” the executives said.

The travel mobile applications and web portals showed that Patna-Delhi airfare has come down to Rs3,366-Rs4,564 compared to above Rs6,000 after Holi. Airfare on Patna-Kolkata route dropped to Rs2,886, on Patna-Mumbai route to Rs6,246 and on Patna-Hyderabad route to Rs5,824.

Many people who had come home on Holi are avoiding to go back to their places of work. Some people are also stuck in big cities as they avoid travelling to come back home.

Mayuri Jaiswal, who studies in Delhi, said she was supposed to return to Delhi after Holi, but the college has been closed till March 31. “I cancelled my air ticket,” she said.

Kunal Singh, a software engineer in Mumbai, also extended his stay after his company asked the employees to work from home. “I spent Rs9,865 on a flight ticket to Mumbai, but had to cancel my ticket and got only half the amount as refund,” he said.

Many people rescheduled their tickets by paying extra money. Rohit Kumar of Budhha Colony said he planned to visit his son in Hyderabad on March 17, but rescheduled his flight to April 3 by paying Rs1,800 extra.

However, ECR chief public relations officer Rajesh Kumar said there were very few cases of ticket cancellations. “Even people who are in Delhi are coming back to Bihar as schools, colleges and other places are shut,” he said.


