Airlines told to take precautions at Delhi airport on coronavirus
2020-03-04
NEW DELHI: The airlines and the Airport Health Organization (APHO), which is responsible for screening of flyers for the coronavirus, have been asked to stay alert and heighten vigil by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) at the Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA). 

While the passengers from Italy and Iran are also to be screened now, an airport official said no instruction had come to scan domestic travellers.

Till early February, only four countries — China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Thailand — were on the mandatory screening list. It has now been expanded to 12 countries, including Japan, South Korea, Nepal, Indonesia, Vietnam and Malaysia.

“To prevent the spread of Covid-19 (novel coronavirus 2019) in India, it has been decided to expand the universal screening of all passengers arriving on flights from Italy and Iran,” said a DGCA circular dated March 2. The universal screening of all passengers coming on flights from these 12 countries will be carried out immediately after they step out of specific locations at all airports and fill up a self-declaration form as per the instructions of the Union health ministry, it added.

An APHO official at IGIA said filling up the self-declaration form, either in-flight or after deboarding, was mandatory. Following this, passengers will have to undergo a thermal screening. “Those showing symptoms are placed under a 14-day quarantine, while those without any symptom are also logged in and we have their data stored. If they develop symptoms or are infected later, we can track them,” said the official.

The instructions further stated that all airlines should make in-flight announcements while flying from these countries and strict compliance needed to be ensured. 

On Tuesday, DGCA also asked the airlines to disinfect any aircraft arriving from Italy, Japan and South Korea, while boarding and departure of flights to the listed countries will need to be done only after a health screening of all passengers. The airlines have also been asked to provide masks, gloves and sanitisers to their staff and also at airports.

The government on Tuesday suspended both regular (sticker) and e-visas granted to Italy, Iran, South Korea and Japan issued on or before March 3.

An airport official said all precautions were being undertaken by the staff. “Our staff is providing all assistance to APHO for screening and further precautions will also be incorporated,” said an official.


