Chennai: Airport retail, duty-free shops to remain shut after lockdown
2020-04-09
CHENNAI: The experience of flying out of Chennai airport when airlines resume services after the lockdown will be different for at least a few weeks. You might not be able to relish that favourite drink of yours, skim through a book or shop before you hop on to that flight as retail and duty free shops will remain closed to ensure social distancing. A few kiosks selling food and water will be available. 

The Airports Authority of India (AAI) will also impose restrictions on moving around at terminals, queuing at check-in counters and boarding gates, seating near boarding gates and in baggage pick-up areas.

A senior official of AAI said it would be impossible to open all the shops inside the terminals. “Retail and duty free shops may not open because it could lead to crowding. And all products on display will have to be disinfected regularly as passengers touch them and could pose a risk. Only a few shops will be allowed to sell food and beverages.”

He also said the airport will have to ensure social distancing of both passengers and staff. “This is going to be a challenge. It will be like setting the clock back to 20 years. Passengers may experience a bare terminal as it used to be in the olden days,” he added.

Source said the airport may have to draw up a plan to ensure social distancing among staff, especially in the baggage handling area and also consider the way luggage is handled. “These are sensitive areas that need to be watched, to ensure that passengers and employees are safe from infection,” said an official.

The international terminal is expected to remain closed even after the lockdown is lifted as airlines are not confident to operate international flights. IndiGo has announced that they are suspending all international flights till April 30.

The ministry of civil aviation has not clearly stated whether flight operations will resume on April 15. Initially, it was thought that flights on trunk routes, connecting major metros, may be allowed. But it looks like that too may not happen for fears of overcrowding.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Singh Puri on Wednesday tweeted, “these restrictions will be lifted once we are fully confident that the spread of the virus has been controlled and it poses no danger to fellow Indians. I thank everyone for their cooperation and help in these testing times.”


