Kolkata airport gets corona ready, won’t be same again after lockdown
2020-04-12
KOLKATA: Travelling through airports will be a whole new experience for flyers when the facilities re-open after the lockdown. Passengers have to compulsorily wear a mask before stepping into the terminal. Travelling with a temperature will be a strict no-no. And it will be best to buy some food while waiting for the flight for on-board service is likely to undergo a sea change. 

A Kolkata airport official told TOI that while the airport would look familiar, the feel would be different once it reopened with multiple thermal checks to detect a possible Covid-19 suspect. “The first thermal check will be conducted after entry to the terminal. If someone is detected with fever, the person will not be allowed to proceed further and will have to report to a designated area, where the person can either cancel the travel or reschedule it ,” the official said. Some airlines, too, plan to conduct the checks to be doubly sure. This will be at twin points: one at the check-in counter and again, at the boarding gate to ensure anyone who walks in with an e-boarding pass is also scrutinized. 

While in the terminal, passengers will be advised to wear masks so that droplets are not spread by asymptomatic carriers. “Safety and social distancing messages will be displayed everywhere. We expect travellers to wear a mask to not only protect others but also themselves,” another official said.

In the terminal itself, alternative check-in desks will be in operation with airline staff members ensuring adequate gap among passengers in queue. While there are 90 check-in desks in the domestic wing of the Kolkata airport, only 45 will be in operation at any given point of time. 

Also, alternative boarding gates will be allocated to flights, both with aerobridge facility and those parked in remote bays. This is to ensure adequate social distancing among passengers of a particular flight. Airport officials may even block off alternative seats in the security check area. “With the middle seat blocked in flights to adhere to social distancing norms, there will be fewer passengers on each flight. In addition, we will ensure only six of 12 boarding gates for aerobridges and three of five gates for boarding buses to go to planes parked in remote bays are open at a time,” said the official.

Restaurants and food courts will not function initially with only ready-to-eat or pre-packed food being available. No live kitchen will be in operation. It will be either microwave or cold stuff. A housekeeping staff team will be specially deputed to sanitize frequent touchpoints, such as desk tops, railings, buttons in elevators and handles. Airlines will also have to sanitise buses after each trip between the terminal and a plane. 


