Mumbai airport health body asks for more hands to screen all international passengers for coronavirus
2020-03-06
MUMBAI: The Airport Health Organisation (APHO) team working at Mumbai airport to scan passengers for suspected Coronavirus cases has asked for more manpower from the state as the government has extended the screening to include all international arriving passengers.


Currently, a team of 65 personnel from APHO works in shifts to carry out round-the-clock medical screening of international arriving passengers, said a source. On Wednesday, the government extended the screening to all international passengers. 

“Each passenger isn’t individually screened for high temperature or other symptoms like cough and breathlessness. Most pass through thermal scanners, which are monitored by APHO staff. But given the high volumes handled by the Mumbai airport, we need more staff if effective screening of all passengers has to be done,” said a source.

So what is the procedure currently followed at the airport? “On board an arriving flight, announcements are made and passengers on all international flights have to fill out a self-declaration form,” said an airline source. The form asks for the list the countries the passenger visited in the past 14 days, whether they have high temperature, cough, and so on. 

“On landing, every international passenger passes through zones that are being captured by thermal scanners. Some are readily visible, you can see the stationary cameras pointed to take images of passengers walking by. Some are stealthily hidden, probably to screen passengers who try to avoid the scanners,” said an airline pilot who operated an international flight on Wednesday. 

The second kind of screening is more intrusive and is largely used for passengers arriving on direct flights from countries battling a Covid-19 outbreak. After exiting the aerobridge and before reaching the immigration counter, passengers fall into a queue where they face a hand-held camera that scans for high body temperatures, said a source. “The airport has four stationary thermal scanner cameras and 25 hand-held devices that take the temperature,” said a source. Depending on the traffic, there are four-eight counters for hand-held thermometers.

Passengers who have fever or cough are sent for further medical examination where they are asked about their travel and health-related details to ascertain if they should be quarantined. 

Meanwhile, National Disaster Response Force has begun conducting Coronavirus awareness programs for immigration, ground staff and luggage handlers, said Mahesh Nalavade, deputy commandant, NDRF. A total of 65,621 passengers have been screened since January 18. 

