Rajasthan: Ajmer mayor, 60 councillors stage protest over ration amid lockdown
2020-04-10
AJMER: Councillors of the Ajmer Municipal Corporation, both from the Congress and BJP, as well as mayor Dharmendra Gehlot staged a protest against the district administration on Thursday, violating the lockdown rules and Section 144 of the CrPC. They alleged irregularities in the distribution of the ration for the needy.

The protest took place in front of the collectorate and, later, the protesters were detained and taken to the Civil Lines police station. They were, however, released soon after counselling.

They alleged that the rationing system had failed and claimed that the people were not getting food supplies meant for them. 

There was also anger against district collector Vishwa Mohan Sharma, who had recently issued orders preventing councillors from distributing food on their own.

MLAs Vasudev Devnani and Anita Bhadel along with mayor Dharmendra Gehlot reached the spot and spoke with the protesters. Later, a meeting was held at AMC and it was decided to sanction Rs 1 lakh from the budget to all councillors from 60 wards.

Earlier, the councillors gathered outside the collectorate and sat on the divider on the main road and shouted slogans against the collector. 

They alleged that the survey undertaken by BLOs was wrong and the figures incorrect.

Deputy SP Priyanka Raghuvanshi came to the spot and warned that the protest was in violation of the lockdown. But councillors were adamant and refused to move until the collector came and held talks with them. At first, some women councillors were detained and taken to the Civil Lines police station.

Extra force was called in and preparation was made to forcibly disperse the protesters. SP Kunwar Rashtradeep requested the councillors to disperse. 

When they didn’t comply, he warned them. But the protesters still did not budge and were taken to the police station and later released.

Mayor Dharmendra Gehlot said that people who were not getting ration or supplies had accused the councillors of their respective ward and blamed the administration for failing to set up a supply mechanism. He said the AMC would provide food to the poor with funds from their own budget.

Officials said that, as per the order of the district administration, councillors cannot supply government ration or food, including those from Akshaya Patra.


