Alarm bells as SARI patients from non-hotspots testing +ve for corona
2020-05-17
Nagpur: The fifth Covid-19 victim from Nagpur, a 65-year-old man from Gaddigodam who died at GMCH Covid Hospital on Saturday, neither had travel history nor contact with any positive patient. Admitted on May 14, he was a patient of Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI).Many patients of SARI being reported from non-contamination zones across Vidarbha have also tested positive for Covid-19, causing a major cause for the health authorities.Nagpur has recorded two deaths of SARI patients who tested positive for Covid-19. Out of the 38 victims of Covid-19 in Vidarbha so far, seven were SARI patients — three in Akola, and two each in Amravati and Nagpur. On May 15 alone, four patients of SARI were admitted to GMCH, Nagpur. They included a 65-year-old woman from Hiwari Nagar, 26-year-old youth from Manohar Nagar, 75-year-old man from Surendra Nagar and a man from Ramtek. Fortunately, none of them tested Covid-19 positive on May 16. According to pulmonologist Dr Rajesh Swarnkar, if SARI patients testing positive have no known Covid contact and not coming from hotspot, it signifies that we have community transmission of the disease now. “We are not able to do community surveillance or screening to find out community prevalence of Covid as we still don’t have Rapid Antibody Tests. We probably didn’t do enough testing during lockdown,” he said. If any of the SARI patients from non-hotspot zones tests positive for Covid-19, the entire locality would be declared a contamination zone.This has happened in case of Jawahar Nagar in Manewada. On May 9, a 55-year-old SARI patient from the area tested Covid-19 positive. His family members were quarantined and area was sealed. Two of his close contacts were tested for Covid-19. On May 16, two women from his family tested positive. Now, all three are admitted in Covid hospital. “SARI is one of the most common causes of death. There are many reasons behind SARI. Covid-19 is one of them. Every patient of SARI is tested for Covid-19 as per guidelines. But that doesn’t mean everyone is infected. At Super Specialty Hospital, we are now planning a research on how many SARI patients in Nagpur or Vidarbha are infected with coronavirus and its impact,” said Dr Sushant Meshram, head of department of pulmonary medicine, GMCH Nagpur.As per present guidelines, all hospitalized patients with SARI showing symptoms like fever and cough and or shortness of breath are screened for Covid-19. In Nagpur, more than 55 SARI patients admitted in Mayo and GMCH have been tested for Covid-19. Six of them have tested positive so far. Facts about SARI Only 1.8% of total SARI patients test positive for Covid-19 Covid-19 positivity is higher among males and patients aged above 50 yearsAs per the SOP, all SARI cases in Covid, non-Covid and private hospitals need to be isolatedTests such as random blood sugar, electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, complete blood count, serum creatinine, Truenat/CB-NAAT are conducted If the patient tests negative, he/she is shifted to a non-Covid ward On testing positive, patient is admitted in Covid hospital and treated symptomatically