Curbs Eased, Bhopalis Forget Covid-19 Lessons
2020-05-24
BHOPAL: Heavy crowd in front of shops violating social distancing norms, missing masks and absence of senitisers sums up the condition in the state capital during the ongoing Lockdown-4. TOI did a reality check on Saturday to find that citizens are not adhering to the lockown norms making the state capital vulnerable for Covid-19. 


In order to ease the life of the citizens, the district administration has allowed several facilities to open in 6 sectors — Kolar, BHEL, Ratibad, Hoshangabad road, Bairagarh. However, problems were witnessed in Kolar, BHEL and Bairagarh where situation is alarming after several failed to adhere to the norms. 

Such is the situation in BHEL area that markets in morning and evening are full. “This is a bad situation. People are not understanding that their such attitude can make Bhopal a ticking bomb. Administration has given them permission but even not wearing mask is somewhat is not acceptable,” said Hari Narayan Mishra, a retired govt employee. Major markets of grocery, hardware and eateries in BHEL area (Vijay market, Piplani and Indrapuri) have been opened. 

Situation is worse on Kolar road where people could be seen loitering in several locations. Few shopkeepers tried to get the physical distancing done infront of their shops but citizens refused to follow them. When TOI team visited areas in Kolar, people could be seen arguing with the shokeepers. A shopkeeper Vinod Jaiswal said, “I asked the customers to keep a distance and wear masks while purchasing products my shop they found it better to buy from somewhere else. I am fine not selling anything but I can’t allow anyone to challenge guidelines as it is the safety of my family also,” said Jaiswal. 

Locations near Lalita Nagar were also found same where both shopkeepers and fruit sellers were spotted selling products without wearing mask. “Has the corona left Bhopal?” asked Sudhira Yadav, reacted a resident of Kolar. He added that it is the responsibility of every citizen whether he is a businessesman or a customer that this is high time for us and such attiy will lend up everyone in trouble,” said Yadav. At Hoshangabad road also appearance of people without following the safety norms. People were seen not wearing mask inside the Barkatullah University which is one the major campuses at Hoshangabad road. Bairagarh which is a walled area and one of the trading centres in Bhopal also failed to follow norms. Major concern of Bairagarh are Chanchal square, Station area and Premrai Chand road where people come out in large number not even wearing mask. When people were asked about it their justification were hilarious. 

Notably, realising the situation district administration has refused to open saloo s and beauty parlours. Important work related to construction, automobile, eateries, hardware and such other have been allowed to open for public since past three days in Lockdown-4. 


