Alert Jodhpur villagers maintain tight lockdown vigil in rural areas
2020-04-25
Jodhpur: While police have been struggling to enforce the lockdown in cities by invoking punitive measures against violators, villagers are doing their part and keeping an eye over people arriving in their areas.

On Thursday night, three persons reached Kaparda village, some 60 km from Jodhpur on Jodhpur-Jaipur highway, taking advantage of the dark.

But vigilant villagers got a whiff and informed the local administration, which immediately swung into action and quarantined them at the wellness centre of the village and later sent them back to Jodhpur for testing.

All the three were working in an industry in Mandore Industrial Area and had set out on a motorcycle on Wednesday night to reach their homes.

Earlier, 10 persons had reached Tena village in Shergarh subdivision from Jodhpur who had also been sent back to Jodhpur after the villagers tipped off the administration. 

According to block level officer (Tena) Bhojraj Singh, five persons arrived on Tuesday and five more reached on Wednesday. “We informed the primary health centre incharge and sent them to the wellness centre for quarantine. From there, they were sent back to Jodhpur for screening,” said Singh.

These people had gone to Jodhpur to attend a function at a relative’s house on April 17-18.

“With the spurt in positive cases in Jodhpur, villagers have become very cautious and have been guarding the borders of the village to stop anyone coming from cities,” villager Bhagwan Singh Tena said.

Their fears are not unfounded. All these 10 persons had visited the area in Jodhpur which is close to a hotspot and had reported a series of positive cases in past four days. 

Corroborating this fear, SDM (Luni) Gopal Parihar said a resident of Barmer had tested positive when he was intercepted at the Jodhpur-Barmer border on Thursday.

“One Omaram of Barmer, who had been working in Dharavi of Mumbai, had returned to Jodhpur in a truck from Mumbai and was heading towards Barmer with a relative on a motorcycle,” said Parihar.

“He was stopped at the border and sent to Jodhpur for examination. He has tested positive,” Parihar said.

Now all the 11 members of the family of the relative, who had accompanied to drop him to Barmer from village Uttesar of Dhava in Jodhpur, have been quarantined at MG Hospital in Jodhpur and their reports are awaited.


