Goa: Alert neighbours help to keep tabs on persons under home quarantine
2020-04-10
PANAJI: Tracking persons who have been quarantined is a tough task in itself for health officials but over the last few days, with increased public awareness about corona virus it has become easier. Sort of. With neighbours keeping a close watch on quarantined patients, the ‘information’ that health officials receive vie from alert citizens needs to be vetted well or it could sound alarm bells.

Health officers say that a lot of times, over-enthusiastic neighbours keep tab on those who are quarantined and immediately call the health department if they find anything amiss. But not all tips can be accurate.

Health centres end up wasting their time when inaccurate information gets passed on about suspects. “People get so worked up, that they call to report flimsy complaints. At times, the information is totally wrong. We waste lot of our time investigating such complaints but when we receive a complaint, we have to investigate it,” said a health officer at primary health centre in North Goa.

Two days ago, the officer said, they received a call that a couple staying at a farmhouse in Bicholim had travelled from outside Goa. The caller remained anonymous, but the address given turned out to be right. An inquiry followed, which revealed that the couple were locals.

 “Since offices are shut, the couple had come to stay at their farms house. They live in another village in Sattari and had not travelled from outside Goa,” he said.

While alert villagers and neighbours can be of help to the officials, over-enthusiastic neighbours can be a headache as was discovered by another health officer in south Goa. The officer said that the team received a call from the neighbour of one Covid-19 suspect to say that the suspect had stepped out to buy vegetables. But as it turned out, precautions were being followed. “The suspect had not defied quarantine stipulations. He had completed 14 days in quarantine and after being locked in the house for 14 days, he had gone out,” she said. With repeated complaints being phoned in from his neighbours, the health officer finally requested the man to be stay indoors for a few more days. Justifiably upset, the suspect asked if the villagers want him to be shut in his house for the remainder of his life. “We try our best to explain to people. Some understand, some do not,” she said. 

Health workers make it a point to phone-in people daily who are under quarantine, or even up to two calls if needed. If a call is not answered, the team calls the patient again. Some people do not answer or even return their calls. “If repeated calls remain unanswered, we intimate the police to check on such suspects,” said another official.

But not all is lost as most health officers said at least 50% of people they deal with are sensible and cooperate with their team. Some even call up their health official every morning with a status of their health.


