Aligarh admin tests cancer patient for Covid, to issue travel pass to Noida for treatment if report is negative
2020-04-25
Agra: Aligarh administration on Friday directed the health department to immediately conduct a Corona screening test of a cancer patient, in order to facilitate his travel to a private hospital in Noida for treatment. The action followed TOI’s story on his plight on April 24. The patient is the father of an acid attack victim, who also co-starred in the Deepika Padukone film Chhapak.

The police has also ordered the release of the salary of the patient — an employee of the UP Police department — which was stuck due to administrative reasons.

The test was ordered because the Noida hospital insisted on a health certificate from local authorities that ensure the patient is Covid-free. Travel pass for the patient and his family will be issued after the test report is received, said an official. 

Taking cognizance of the TOI report carried on Friday — “Acid attack survivor, who worked in Chhapaak, pleads for dad’s treatment” — Aligarh district magistrate C B Singh instructed officials to contact the family and ensure all possible assistance. He said, “A health department team has been sent to their house to collect the sample of the patient, Somdutt Sharma. A pass for their travel to Noida will be issued after the report is received.” 

Mainpuri SP Ajay Kumar also contacted Sharma, a head constable posted in Mainpuri, and asked him to submit an application to get his salary regularised. Kumar told TOI, “We asked the family to submit an application for sanctioning medical leave, in order to release his salary, which will probably be credited in his account by tomorrow.”

The TOI report had highlighted how the acid attack survivor, Jeetu Sharma, was running from pillar to post seeking treatment for her father, suffering from throat cancer. Even AMU’s medical college had refused to admit him as they were not taking any new patients during the lockdown. 

When contacted, Jeetu expressed hope that her father’s treatment would commence soon. She said the health department has taken her father’s sample to test for Covid-19, adding, “I’m thankful to TOI and UP administration for initiating the process of providing medical and financial help to my family. Now, we are hopeful of going to Noida for further treatment.”


