All arrivals from 7 countries since Feb 15 to get Covid-19 screening
2020-03-13
Nagpur: A day after a city-based IT professional, who returned from the United States recently, tested positive for coronavirus, the divisional commissioner on Thursday issued a revised Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) making it mandatory to screen every incoming passenger from seven countries, though the USA is not on the list.

Those who wish to get themselves tested as a precautionary measure need not visit government hospitals, as teams from the civil surgeon’s office and Deputy Director of Health Services (DDHS) would be sent to collect swab samples.

The measure is in line with the Central government’s decision to quarantine itself from the rest of the world after WHO declared coronavirus as a pandemic, though it fails to take into account local developments. So, all international passengers from these seven countries who came after February 15 would be put on compulsory screening.

When asked why the US has been left out, divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar told TOI the list of seven nations has been finalized by a group of ministers (GoMs) led by Union health minister Harsh Vardhan, and local authorities cannot go beyond the guidelines. “They (Central government) are not going by a fixed set of norms. The guidelines may be modified from time to time,” he said. 

Kumar along with DDHS Sanjay Jaiswal, district collector Ravindra Thakare, municipal commissioner Tukaram Munde, and deans of both government hospitals, Sajal Mitra and Ajay Keoliya, held a press briefing after panic gripped the city in the wake of its first positive case.

They emphasized on the need for ‘home isolation’ while announcing dedicated helplines to prevent assembly of crowds at outpatient departments (OPDs) beside reviewing screening measures to fight the pandemic.

Kumar said he received instructions from the health secretary to now compulsorily screen all passengers who have come from France, Germany, Italy, Iran, South Korea, Spain and China since February 15.

Amid a series of meetings with different stakeholders, the district administration has convened another meet with all overseas tour operators to identify such travellers and quarantine them for 14 days. 

So far, 604 travellers have been screened at Nagpur International Airport while 59 suspected cases belonging to Nagpur, Wardha, and Chandrapur had to be quarantined. The revised screening will cover passengers who came in through all transport channels.

“Some 40 suspected cases were from Nagpur, 15 from Wardha and two from Chandrapur. Of these, 45 were kept under observation and reported free of the virus. Rest of the 15 are still quarantined,” said Kumar. 

From Friday, compulsory screening of overseas passengers is likely to begin in the city. 

Kumar said adequate measures are in place to deal with the situation. “Besides isolation wards at GMCH and IGGMCH, we would start a quarantine facility at MLA Hostel,” he said. Officials said more places can be identified as per the need.


