Coronavirus scare: All international flyers to undergo thermal check at Kolkata airport; Singapore advisory withdrawn
2020-03-06
KOLKATA: Health officials at Kolkata airport have begun universal screening at the international wing, bringing more than 4,000 flyers a day under the ambit of thermal check to detect fever. On Thursday afternoon, the National Disaster Relief Force held a training and orientation programme for all ground-handling staff on Covid-19 virus and ways to prevent its spread at the airport.


So far, more than 45,000 passengers have been screened at the airport since January 17. The check, which initially began on flyers from China and Hong Kong, was extended to those arriving from other South-East Asian countries, including Vietnam, Thailand and Malaysia from February 2. Last week, the list was extended to Nepal and Singapore. But with the virus now spreading to 78 countries, the ministry of health and family welfare has asked airports to make thermal screening mandatory for all flyers from abroad. “Passengers arriving in Gulf carriers, flights from South-East Asia as well as South Asian countries Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Sri Lanka are being screened. Earlier, only flyers with recent travel history to China, South Korea, Iran, Italy and Japan had to undergo mandatory thermal screening. Later, Macau, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Nepal, Thailand, Singapore and Taiwan were added to the list,” said a senior airport official. 

Flyers of all international flights entering India from any airport are to submit a self-declaration forms with personal details, like numbers and addresses in India and travel history to health and immigration officials at the airport.

On Thursday, the central advisory removed Singapore from the travel restriction advisory. But flyers arriving from there will continue to be screened. Though Singapore Airlines officials are relieved that the city nation has been taken off the restricted-travel list, they aren’t sure when traffic loads would normalise 

While Singapore Airlines has continued with its flight schedule despite the traffic decline, other airlines have reduced frequencies to Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi, while those to Kunming, Guangzhou and Hong Kong have been suspended. The largest number of daily connections from Kolkata are to Bangladesh, followed by Thailand and Malaysia. Dubai is next with Bhutan, Doha, Abu Dhabi, Kathmandu, Yangon and Colombo to follow. 

With the nCoV scare now real, following detection of multiple positive cases in India, airport authorities established fresh protocols for disinfecting surfaces, including counters, chairs and door handles. Also, hand sanitizes have been provided at immigration counters and health desks. Housekeeping staff in charge of washrooms have been asked to clean them with disinfectants more regularly.


