All coronavirus suspects from Madhya Pradesh test negetive
2020-02-08
BHOPAL: All the coronavirus suspects in Madhya Pradesh and those from the state quarantined in Delhi have tested negative for the disease, said health department officials on Friday.

Six students from Madhya Pradesh were among those quarantined in Delhi.

Talking to TOI, health minister Tulsi Silawat said, “All those from MP quarantined in New Delhi were students studying in China.”

In addition to these six, all the other cases — including those from Indore and Ujjain — were found to be negative, he said, adding that blood reports of all these suspects will be reviewed again in 14 days. This is in line with the National Centre for Disease Control’s (NCDC) new guidelines on 2019-nCoV, which recommend tracking of “suspected coronavirus patients for 14-days.”

The NCDC guideline states, “Kindly correlate the results with clinical findings. A negative result in a single upper respiratory tract sample does not rule out 2019-nCoV infection. Hence, in such cases, a repeat sample should be sent. Lower respiratory tract samples (sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL), endotracheal aspirate) are appropriate samples for 2019-nCoV testing, especially in severe and progressive lung disease.”

NCDC policy of suspected cases states that the discharge of patients will be governed by his provisional /confirmed diagnosis and it is up to the treating physician to take a decision. Patients shall be monitored for 14 days after their discharge.

The minister also said that the government was compiling a list of frequent travellers from Madhya Pradesh to China. They include people from business community and students. Silawat said that, I have been monitoring the issues on day to day basis. Authorities are in constant touch with the district administration and civil hospitals.”

Meanwhile, the authorities in Bhopal have lodged an awareness campaign in Bairagarh and Mandideep, two business hubs, where people frequently travel to China.


