Delhi: All lockdown measures extended till May 3
2020-04-15
NEW DELHI: As Delhi waded into the second phase of the Covid-19 lockdown, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal appealed to the people to be more conscientious in following the need to stay indoors in order to defeat the coronavirus. All the existing prohibitive measures have been extended to May 3, with the electronic passes issued for essential services to be valid till then. Kejriwal had spoken in favour of the extension in a recent video conference that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had with all the chief ministers.

Welcoming the move to close down the country till May 3, Kejriwal said at a press conference that the rising number of Covid-19 cases was a cause for concern. The chief minister expressed disappointment over reports that attempts to create a divide between communities and said the nation could win the battle against the novel coronavirus only by staying united.

"In the last few days, there has been a considerable increase in Covid-19 cases in Delhi. On April 9, there were only 51 new cases, but the following day, 183 new cases came up. On April 11 April, there were 166 additions, and on April 13, 356 new cases,” Kejriwal said. The CM plans to visit some of the 52 containment zones in the city to assess the situation.

Kejriwal pointed out that Delhi being the country’s capital has borne a big burdened because innumerable foreigners landed in the city in the past two months. “But we know and I believe that we will overcome this, as we have done until now, despite a rise in the number of cases," he assured. He added, “Delhi’s people have consistently supported us by following the lockdown rules and bearing with the restrictions imposed on them. I believe that if we continue to strictly follow the rules for the remaining phase of the lockdown, we will be able to win the battle against the coronavirus.”

The CM said he knew that the closure of the city was causing hardship and difficulties for the common people, but the lockdown was necessary. The announcement to prolong the shutdown has come as a blow to hundreds of thousands of people who earned their living on an every-day basis. All shops, except those dealing in essential supplies, have been closed. The public transport is off the roads, leaving thousands of drivers of public transport vehicles without an income. Similarly affected are a large number of people engaged in small trades.

The government is going to intensify its fight against hunger by strengthening its ration distribution mechanism among non-ration card holders and distributing food among the needy. The government shelters for the homeless and many other points in the city are offering two meals a day to people to ensure no one went hungry. Many social organisations are also offering dry and cooked foods to people in distress.

"We have started the process of providing Rs 5,000 as compensation to paratransit drivers,” Kejriwal said. “I have received some complaints regarding the non-functioning of the website, which is because the portal is overloaded because many people are registering on the portal at one go. I want to appeal to all the people registering on the portal to stay patient. Every one of you will be given the compensation.”

He also said, “We have identified 47 containment zones (this increased to 55 after the press conference). These are areas that have three or more Covid-19 cases and have been sealed. Our Operation SHIELD has been implemented in these zones to contain the spread of the virus within or outside those areas.”

Kejriwal elaborated on the measure his government was taking, among them the use of 60 hi-tech sanitising machines across Delhi, 10 of them procured from Japan. Around 14,000 corona foot warriors were also working across the length and breadth of the city to spread awareness about the virus, especially in the containment zones. 


