All eyes on Markaz Nizamuddin after spike in coronavirus cases
2020-04-01
Hyderabad/Vijayawada: After a sudden spike in positive cases in AP and Telangana, the focus has now shifted to ‘Markaz’ (central office) of Tablighi Jamaat at Hazrat Nizamuddin basti of old Delhi. 

About 1,800 people from both Telugu states had attended the biannual three-day session, which was held from March 15. Most of the positive cases reported in the Telugu states are either participants at the congregation or their close contacts. 

All the six deaths reported thus far in Telangana are linked to old Delhi.

The virus spread among the locals, as some of the participants came from Covid-19 affected countries, including Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand. None of the participants had shown symptoms of Covid-19 when they left the Markaz before the official lockdown. About 1,000 people, including some from the Telugu states, are still stranded at the Jamaat headquarters. Most of them had travelled by train and a few by air. The first victim of coronavirus in Telangana went to Delhi by train and returned to Hyderabad by air after his health deteriorated.

According to Jamaat sources, 746 people from AP and 1,030 from Telangana attended the congregation at the century-old Markaz, which can accommodate about 10,000 people. Most of those who attended the meeting from the two Telugu states have been traced and kept under isolation, while about 300 are yet to be contacted. Some of them are in Delhi and could not reach their homes due to the lockdown.

Mohammed Ilyas Rizvi, principal secretary, minorities welfare, AP, has appealed to the attendees to voluntarily notify themselves before district collectors. “They can also inform 104 helpline immediately in their own interest as well in the best interest of the society to stop the spread of the virus,” Rizvi said.

“Markaz offers the entire premises as a quarantine facility to help the authorities tide over the challenge of current pandemic,” he said.

Out of the 40 cases reported in AP, 22 people had attended the Delhi meeting or came in contact with the participants. Of the 746 persons from AP, 122 are quarantined in the hospitals, 207 sent to government quarantine centres and 297 are in home quarantine. Search is on for the remaining. 


