Covid-19: All malls, theatres to remain closed in Telangana till March 31
2020-03-20
AMARAVATI: The government has ordered the closure of all movie theatres and shopping malls in the state till March 31 to prevent the possible spread of novel coronavirus (Covid-19). The decision was taken at a high level meeting chaired by chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy at his camp office on Thursday.


A decision on reopening the malls and theatres will be taken after reviewing the situation at the end of the month.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Deputy chief minister Alla Kali Krishna Srinivas (Nani), who also holds the charge of health ministry, said the government is confident of handling the crisis effectively as adequate measures are in place to contain the spread of the virus. “Only two positive cases have been reported in the state so far, which is mainly due to the many preventive and precautionary measures taken by the government,” he said. The minister further informed that a nodal centre has been set up inside the health university campus in Vijayawada.

“Test labs have been set up in Vijayawada, Tirupati and Kakinada, and one more will come up in Ananthapuram. Isolation wards and rooms have been set up at all district and teaching hospitals in the state. Around 80 ventilators have been kept ready at the teaching hospitals and we are procuring another 100 ventilators as precautionary measure,” added the health minister. Government officials have been asked to conduct meetings through video-conferencing mode to the extent possible, while private firms have been told to encourage employees to work from home. The government has also instructed restaurants and hotels to strictly follow handwash protocols besides maintaining cleanliness and hygiene in their premises.

All marriage and function halls have been told not to accept new bookings. “Weddings which are already planned should have limited gathering. All non-essential social gatherings, including religious congregations, should be postponed,” the minister said.


