All cops on frontline Covid duty only working 8 hours to ensure they get enough rest
2020-04-16
Bhopal: As 14 cops and their 16 family members have tested Covid-19 positive in the city so far, the senior police officials are working hard to boost the morale of the on-duty personnel. With police personnel staying away from their families amid the pandemic, it has become important to keep them motivated, said officials. Police have already arranged for a doctor to counsel the cops working on the field about their doubts on coronavirus. SP (South) Sai Krishna S Thota said that police have asked senior physician Dr Gurudatt Tiwari to visit the control room for an hour daily and counsel the police personnel.ASP Zone-1 Rajat Saklecha said, police personnel are working as frontline Covid-19 warriors and stritcly enforcing the lockdown. Many initiatives have been taken to boost the morale of the cops and their families. The duty hours of all cops have been reduced to eight hours so that they get proper time to rest. They are being provided masks, gloves and sanitisers regularly for their personal safety. Senior police officials keep on interacting with the cops on checkposts for updates. They also visit the hotels and lodges where the cops are staying to check on them and resolve their problems, if any. Saklecha said that as advised by the doctors, the police personnel are being provided hot water to drink, for which 300 thermos bottles have been distributed. Arrangement of hot water has been done at all the police stations. The cops are provided personal medical kit in which ayurvedic, homeopathic and allopathic medicines are provided to them. The families of police personnel, who tested positive, are being shifted to a quarantine centre at Govindpura police lines. Police teams are taking care of their food and other needs.ASP Saklecha said, police personnel deployed at containment zones are provided PPE kits and are instructed to take all necessary precautions. The cops are being provided fruits rich in Vitamin C to boost their immunity. Police — in association with members of society — are providing canopies or big umbrellas to the policemen deployed at checkpoints. 