Coronavirus outbreak: All 9 isolated travellers test negative twice, discharged in Maharashtra
2020-02-06
PUNE: The civic-run Naidu hospital has discharged all the nine isolated patients after their throat swabs tested negative for the novel coronavirus infection twice.


 
 
“Now, we don’t have any new admission to the isolation ward. All the isolated travellers were discharged after their throat swab samples tested negative for the virus ,” Ramchandra Hankare, chief of the health department at Pune Municipal Corporation, said on Wednesday.

Even as the threat of infection has been put to the rest in the city for now, four more travellers in Nagpur and Mumbai were isolated on Wednesday after they complained of minor illness.

Their throat swab samples have been sent to the Pune-based National Instiute of Virology (NIV) to rule out the novel coronavirus infection. “Three travellers have been quarantined at a designated isolation centre in Nagpur and another traveller has been isolated in Mumbai. All of them recently returned from coronavirus-hit China. We will get the result of their throat swab tests on Thursday,” a state health official said.

A total of 12,799 passengers returning from China and other affected countries have so far been screened at the Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport since January 18. Of them, 119 travellers, who are residents of Maharashtra, are under surveillance. 

“Of the 119 passengers, 44 have completed the 14-day surveillance period. The remaining travellers who are unsymptomatic are being followed up about their health telephonically,” the official said.

Earlier, travellers with a travel history to China were kept under observation for 28 days as there were doubts about the exact incubation period of the virus. “Now, there are enough information that suggests that a person after being exposed to virus may develop illness within 14 days. Hence, travellers who returned from China on January 15 and onward are being followed up for 14 days now,” the official said.

Meanwhile, Mumbai’s molecular diagnostics PCR laboratory at Kasturba Hospital and Indira Gandhi Medical College in Nagpur have been shortlisted to share the burden of coronavirus testing with the Pune-based NIV.

Garlic pod, coriander not effective cure: Officials

There is no truth in the rumour that garlic pods, coriander leaves or cow’s urine are effective against the novel coronavirus infection, the state government’s health officials said on Wednesday. “There is no scientific basis for such rumours. The health ministry hasn’t endorsed such views,” state health minister Rajesh Tope said. 

There is no specific medication to treat the novel coronavirus but Chinese doctors have reported success with off-label use of certain drugs.

Earlier, the AYUSH ministry had clarified that it didn’t claim “effective treatment” for the newest coronavirus. The ministry had put out an advisory suggesting “preventive management steps,” including some herbs.

(With inputs 

from Mumbai)


