All 51 Covid-19 suspects in Kheri, including patient who died during treatment, test negative
2020-04-13
Bareilly: The Kheri administration took a collective sigh of relief after results of all 51 Covid-19 suspects in the district, including the man who died during treatment at the isolation ward of district hospital, who were tested on Sunday, returned negative. Four people had earlier tested positive in the district, forcing the administration to seal off Dhaurahra town to contain the spread of the infection.

On Saturday, family members of a Sikh farmer had refused to accept his body after the farmer died in the Covid-19 isolation ward of district hospital. Health department had sent his sample for Covid-19 tests along with that of his wife, who was regularly in touch with him. On Sunday, district administration informed his family that he had tested negative for Covid-19, so they could take the body without fear once autopsy was conducted. They were yet to arrive to accept the body at the time of this report going to press.

Health department was eagerly awaiting the results of samples of 20 people from Dhaurahra, who had come in contact with three Tablighi Jamaat members who had tested positive earlier. Fortunately, all of them were found negative. The entire Dhaurahra town is currently sealed by district administration, and screening of nearly 20,000 residents is being done by health teams.

CMO Dr Manoj Agarwal said, “Both the patient who died in the isolation ward on Saturday and his wife have tested negative. His family is expected to accept the body today after autopsy. All 51 other suspects have also tested negative.”

SDM Sunandu Sudhakaran told TOI, “We have kept 20 people who had come in contact with Jamaat attendees at quarantine centres. All have tested negative. Also, nearly 2,300 migrant labourers, who were kept on quarantine in shelter homes, have been given certificates after medical examination and sent to their villages. They have been advised to remain in quarantine for another 14 days inside their houses.”


