Coronavirus scare: All charity hospitals in Pune told to set up quarantine facilities
2020-03-14
PUNE: Joint charity commissioner (JCC) Dilip M Deshmukh has directed all city-based charity hospitals and those in Satara, Solapur and Ahmednagar to set up quarantine facilities as per the requirement of coronavirus-infected patients. 


He told the hospitals to scrupulously follow the directives issued by the state health officials for tackling the viral threat.

“Pune alone has 58 hospitals run by charitable institutions,” said lawyer Shivraj Kadam of the Public Trust Practitioners’ Association, which had earlier made a representation to Deshmukh seeking appropriate directives in the wake of the Covid-19 crisis. “The move was prompted by the fact that JCC facilities suffer needless crowding by people,” said Kadam. 

Directives for visitors 

Deshmukh issued a set of directives for the litigants and visitors to the charity commissioner’s office at Sangamwadi, on Dhole Patil Road, for various errands. This includes an appeal to the people against crowding court rooms. Only petitioners/appellants and respondents directly associated with litigations, and their lawyers, should enter the court rooms, was one of the directives. 

Litigants and visitors have been appealed to extensively use the sanitiser liquid placed at the entrance of the JCC office before entering the premises. They have been urged to maintain a safe distance and have been told to avoid shaking hands. 

Conversation with the office staffers should be limited only to official purposes and people should not bide their time on the premises without any purpose, the directives stated. Litigants/visitors suffering from cold, cough and fever should use apt protective masks or handkerchiefs while entering the JCC facilities, the directives added.

In a related development, Pune Bar Association president Satish Mulik wrote a letter to principal district and sessions judge N P Dhote, requesting apt steps to avoid crowding of people in the court rooms and other precautionary measures.

On an average, more than 20,000 people, including litigants, lawyers, police and court staff, visit the Shivajinagar district court complex with several important courts witnessing heavy crowd every day. 

In view of the health concerns posed by the novel Coronavirus, the Bar association has urged the principal judge to issue directions that people should avoid visit to the court premises unless it is extremely urgent or necessary. Also, to protect the interest of lawyers and litigants who may not be able to appear in person for a given matter in view of the ongoing health concern. 


