Covid-19: With first case in Bundi, all 33 districts in Rajasthan affected
2020-05-28
JAIPUR/KOTA: All districts of the state now have Covid-19 cases with Bundi being the latest addition where a person was found infected. As on Wednesday, 280 cases were reported across the state in addition to three deaths. The death toll now stands at 173 and the infected count at 7,816. 

A 22-year-old woman, who recently returned from Mumbai, tested positive in Bundi. “The woman is a resident of Shankarpura village. She returned from Mumbai along with her two children on Monday night and was put in institutional quarantine facility. Her samples were taken on Tuesday. She was found infected with the virus though her two children tested negative,” said Bundi collector Antar Singh Nehra. 

Among the casualties are a 78-year-old man, resident of Bagru Walon Ka Rasta of Chandpole area in the Walled City. He was admitted to SMS Hospital on Tuesday and he died on the same day. He had co-morbidities such as diabetes, hypertension and coronary artery disease. 

A 35-year-old woman, who failed to reach hospital on time, was declared brought dead at SMS Hospital on Tuesday. Her samples were taken after her death and she was found infected on Wednesday. She was a resident of Handipura Katla in Kishanpole Bazaar. There was one more casualty who is yet to be identified.

Districts which reported cases are Jhalawar (64), Jaipur (42), Jodhpur (33), Pali (21), Kota (18), Sikar (13), Nagaur (12), Bharatpur (10), Rajsamand (9), Bikaner (9), Hanumangarh (7), Bhilwara (7), Jhunjhunu (6), Udaipur (6), Tonk (4), Baran (3), Sriganganagar (3), Sirohi (2), Dholpur (2), Karauli (2), Bundi (1), Chittorgarh (1), Dausa (1), Barmer(1), Dungarpur (1) Ajmer (1) and and one from other state. 

In Jaipur, five persons each were found infected in Tilak Nagar and Central jail, four from Shastri Nagar, three from police lines and two from Chandpole area, while one each tested positive from Sanganer, Shivdaspura, Jhotwara, Sanwalia, Ramganj, Mansarovar, Kartarpura, Mahesh Nagar, MD Road, Phagi, Van Vihar housing colony, Kanshali, Hingonia, Harsoli, Sunderpura, Itawa, Luniyawas, Lalasar, Gadri, Badhal, Jyoti Nagar, Jawahar Nagar and Sirsi Road. 

The number of migrants who tested positive since May 1 has increased to 2,114 and out of those, 103 were found infected with the virus on Wednesday. As many as 288 more have been cured 19 bringing the tally of such patients to 4,562.

