Coronavirus scare in Delhi: All primary schools to remain shut till March 31
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: All primary classes in Delhi schools will remain closed from Friday till March 31 as a precautionary measure against the novel coronavirus (nCov), deputy chief minister and education minister Manish Sisodia said in a circular on Thursday.


“The circular has been issued as a precautionary measure to stop the spread of nCov, which was first reported in China and also has a few travel related positive cases in Delhi. All government, aided, private and schools run by civic bodies have been directed to remain closed for their primary classes. Preventive measures are important to stop the spread of this disease. There is no need to panic,” the circular stated.


 Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

According to the Directorate of Education, primary schools up to Class V have been shut as students of nursery and primary classes are too young to understand the risks associated with the virus.

The DoE circular added: “Children are more prone to infectious diseases and mingle around with their classmates more often. They must be trained in the do’s and don’ts of prevention from coronavirus under the care and supervision of their parents at their home.”

For many of the students in private schools, assessments were to be held from next week. After the exam, the schools would have been shut for the spring break.

Jyoti Arora, principal of Mount Abu Public School, said: “Internal assessments were scheduled for the junior classes but their safety is more important. For the senior classes, examinations are being held so assembly is already cancelled.”

According to a senior government official, the assessments will now be done at a later stage. The new academic session 2020-21 will begin from April 1.

Students and staff of higher classes, meanwhile, will have to report to the school and examination will be held as per schedule. As board exams are underway, Central Board of Secondary Education has allowed students to wear mask and carry hand sanitisers.


