Allow use of cars during daily ease in lockdown : Senior citizens
2020-04-20
Dehradun: For many senior citizens in the city, the ban on use of four-wheelers during the lockdown is proving to be a problem, especially when they want to venture out to buy essentials during the daily six-hour relaxation in lockdown. A number of senior citizens told TOI that they are unable to ride two-wheelers at their advanced age, and therefore, special concession must be made for them so that they could use their cars. 

Kanhaiya Lal Pokhriyal, 71, a former mountaineer and police officer, said, “The ban on cars is worrying for senior citizens like me. I feel if I suddenly fall ill, I will have to seek someone’s help to get me to a medical facility. The administration must fairly assess the situation and verify if someone does have a valid reason to step out in a car.”

Retired Colonel Arun Sareen, 70, added that it was “humiliating to be stopped by a constable after serving for nearly three decades in the Army.” “I do not own a two-wheeler. If I have to move out for buying necessary supplies, it has to be in my car. Since most stores are running out of essential items and home delivery now takes longer than expected, one has to step out once in a while. People like me, who are senior citizens, should certainly not be humiliated on the road, especially when they have a valid reason.”

Shevata Rai Talwar, 58, a resident of Race Course, said that she had been unable to stock essentials for herself and the stray dogs she feeds daily because of the ban on cars. “In the absence of any other option, I am forced to carry heavy bags all the way home from the market,” said Talwar. 

A 87-year-old resident of Dalanwala said that she had sent her daughter-in-law to fetch some medicines for her in a four-wheeler on Friday but her car got challaned. “We do not own a two-wheeler and travelling by car is the only option for us,” said the woman, who did not wish to be named. 

The president of Doon Residents’ Welfare Front, Mahesh Bhandari, 73, said that these are genuine concerns of senior residents of the city and should be addressed. “I am a senior citizen myself and understand the difficulties being faced by others. I receive messages and calls from several senior citizens from all over Dehradun, who either need medical help or are finding it difficult to get supplies. The situation is worse for elderly women, most of whom are not in a condition to drive a car or a two-wheeler.”

Dehradun additional district magistrate (ADM) Ramji Sharan Sharma when queried about the matter, said, “We are allowing cars in special cases through the online facility of issuing passes. Although, in the interest of all, the number of passes issued are limited and involve a verification process.” 

Speaking on the issue, SP City, Shweta Choubey said, “We are facilitating passes to people in cases of emergency. In some cases, the passes have also been sent on WhatsApp. In case of an urgent need, people can ask for help at the local police station or the nearest police outpost.”


