Almost impossible to follow Covid-19 norms, say schools
2020-05-24
NAGPUR: Following the norms of Covid distancing in schools, especially English private-aided ones in the city which have a huge number of students, has drawn some sharp reactions among school officials and principals.

They feel it will be almost impossible to implement the Covid distancing norms in English private-aided schools considering the high enrolment figures. Almost every section in these popular state board-affiliated schools is brimming with more than 50 students, where rising aspirations and zero or negligible fee has led to a spurt in admissions. Some of these schools are already operating in two shifts, which means there is no wriggle room left to implement Covid distancing guidelines. 

The idea being floated by education officials, health professionals and activists focuses on having classes on alternate days after dividing each section in two batches. “That won’t work in our schools because it’s already operating at double the capacity. Even if we split, there will still be minimum 20-25 students left in each class which even may be higher than the intended figure,” said a principal. So far no official guidelines have come but schools know that implementation of Covid distancing is dependent completely on physical infrastructure and capacity. 

Another principal said, “A couple of such schools are already working in double shifts because they are unable to adjust all students in a single one. If such schools have to implement the Covid distancing guidelines then students will have to be called just one in four days.” 

Another principal said the English private-aided schools cannot reduce the number of admissions. “Every parent from poor and lower middle class background aspires for English medium education for their children. The private unaided schools are beyond their financial reach while civic schools are not English medium. In such schools, they pay negligible fee till primary section as it is not under aided category, after which education is free. Only two schools in Nagpur have aided primary section, so at others you have to pay some about,” said the principal. 

The principal further said,“We would love to stop admission after 30 students in each section, but there is tremendous pressure from education officials and politicians to ‘honour’ their recommendation letters. That’s how over the decades our class sizes have swelled up.” 

Now, all eyes are now on new standard operating procedures which the state education department is expected to officially announce next month.


