Almost home: How Covid tests delayed returnees by 7 hrs
2020-06-10
Visakhapatnam: Passengers on an IndiGo flight from Bengaluru were delayed by almost seven hours upon reaching Vizag city due to the Covid-19 test that is mandatory for all flyers to the state. The test usually takes around three hours. 

The flight landed at 6.55 am and by 8 am all passengers had reached the Sitharama Kalyana Mandapam near the port hospital for the test. By 8.30 am registration process was complete but the wait had just begun and would last till 1.30 pm.

District health officials told TOI that the problem took place after a new swab collection team underwent training and joined duties on Tuesday. Members of earlier teams, who were working continuously, were sent to quarantine on Monday evening as per norms.

“On Tuesday the newly-trained batch formed a few teams, each comprising two dental surgeons, two digital assistants and one paramedic and went to different testing centres. They took more time to assemble with their machinery and required kits from different places, as it was their first day. Four such teams were sent for testing the airport passengers. It was an unexpected delay. Food counters were, however, available at the test centre for the passengers,” special officer for Covid-19, Dr PV Sudhakar, told TOI.

Passengers claimed that an elderly traveller fell ill on account of the delay. In spite of arrangements for breakfast, most, especially diabetic passengers, refused to eat food prepared elsewhere.

“My daughter was travelling from Kochi and she reached Kochi airport at 4 pm on Monday afternoon. She took the connecting the flight at 5 am from Bengaluru and then upon reaching, was stranded for more than seven hours. Passengers who boarded from Bengaluru were also exhausted as they reached the airport before 3 am as reporting two hours prior to the departure time is now mandatory,” said Altaf Babjan, who was at the airport and then at the Kalyana Mandapam to receive his daughter Khushi.

“Around 12.30 pm we noticed an ambulance with health officials and testing kits arriving at the centre. For the next half-an-hour the health officials put the name and details of passengers on the test kits and finally the process of collecting samples started,” added Babjan.


