Alphonso mango loses its crown due to pandemic, demand dips to zero
2020-04-03
PUNE: For the first time in years, even as the mango season has hit its peak, the king of fruits isn’t finding buyers, said cultivators and sellers involved in the trade since decades. 

A few months ago, mango cultivators were anticipating a severe demand-supply gap due to 50% less production this year. Now, when India and the rest of the world is battling Covid-19, export orders, demand from Gulf, European nations, US as well as the local market has reduced to zero.

Mandar Desai, director of Desai Bandhu Ambewale, said, “Minimal mango exports did manage to get through before March 30 but there has been complete shut down in cargo movement thereafter. UK, Europe and UAE are completely disturbed due to the Covid-19 situation and have thus not placed any orders. Gulf countries and Europe are major Alphonso mango buyers. We have been in this business for 89 years, but we have never seen such low demand for the fruit,” he said.

In Ratnagiri, farmers have been given a directive to let only two labourers pluck mangoes from orchards, as against 40-50 men needed for the job, including for sorting and packing, Desai said. 

An official from the Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board (MSAMB) said, “No mangoes have been exported from our facility so far. No inspectors have come from countries like Japan, South Korea and US to check the consignments due to lockdowns and flight suspensions,” he said. 

Nathsaheb Parashram Khaire, mango and fruit commission agent at Gultekdi Market Yard, said, “Restrictions imposed on undertaking business in Market Yard is also one of the reasons why mango sales are suffering. The police only allow vegetable shops (with essential service passes) to remain open in the market, while fruit stalls have to mandatorily stay closed. We were left with almost 2,000 boxes of unsold mangoes on Wednesday as we could only sell around 300 to 350 boxes. Usually, we sell the entire stock in a single day.”


