Alternative medical systems too rely on social distancing as protection against Covid-19
2020-04-04
NAGPUR: With more positive cases of Covid-19 getting detected every day and modern medicine is still to discover vaccine or drug on novel coronavirus, people are now searching whether alternative systems of medicine like ayurveda, homeopathy, Unani, and naturopathy have any cure to offer.


While speaking to TOI, doctors of these alternate systems have it clear that their focus is still on preventive medicines only. No medicine to treat Covid-19 has yet proved/demonstrated its success in any of these systems, so people have no option but to follow social distancing practices.

“Popular immunity boosters in ayurveda can certainly be beneficial for immune system, but that does not mean it will provide 100% immunity to current epidemic,” said Vaidya Swanand Joshi.

“Till date, there is no such proven drug from ayurveda or any other system for coronavirus. Therefore, for current scenario, maintaining hygiene, sanitizing hands/feet/clothes, maintaining isolation along with these immunity boosting measures can be best precaution,” he added.

Senior homeopathic practitioner and president of Orange City Homeopaths Association (OCHA) Dr Manish Patil said that homeopathy also believes that prevention is better than cure.

The AYUSH Ministry had issued an advisory for Covid-19 infection back in January in which it has given a list of medicines in Unani system effective for symptomatic treatment of fever, throat infections due to the virus. 

“As symptoms of infection are quite similar to common cough, cold, fever and bodyache, Unani practitioners may try some of our proven remedies,” said Dr Ajmal Khan, who represents Unani faculty in MUHS academic council.

Naturopath Sameedha Deshpande said that some simple tips can safeguard people from getting infected.

“First and foremost, follow social distancing and personal hygiene. Keep yourself fit in changing weather by having seasonal fruits, ample water and fresh food,” she said.

Yoga trainer Praful Hatgaonkar suggested sarvangasana, vajrasana, dhanurasana for maintaining digestive system. “For mental peace, you can sit in sidhhasana, padmasana, yogamudra, gomukhasana, and meditation. Pranayama options include kapalbhati and anulom vilom. Half an hour of yoga daily will can keep you fit, especially during the 21 days of lockdown,” he added. 

