Amanmani Tripathi, aides granted bail by Bijnor court, quarantined for 14 days
2020-05-06
BIJNOR/DEHRADUN: In a case involving arrest of independent UP MLA Amanmani Tripathi and six of his aides for violating lockdown and trying to travel to Badrinath and Kedarnath on a false pretext, a court in UP’s BIjnor granted them bail, following which, they were quarantined in the district for 14 days.


Bijnor superintendent of police Sanjeev Tyagi said, “Their samples will be collected and sent for tests. If they test negative for novel coronavirus, they will be released.”

The MLA’s lawyer, SK Babli, said, "The CJM’s court on Tuesday granted bail to Tripathi and his friends on a personal bond of Rs 20,000. He had a pass for Uttrakhand but did not have one for travelling in UP.”

The MLA had claimed that he was crossing the border to perform post-cremation rites of UP CM Yogi Adityanath's father, Anand Singh Bisht, who had passed away recently. The UP CM’s family, however, refuted the claim.

Yogi Adityanath’s younger brother Mahendra Singh Bisht told TOI, “We do not know him. We are also not aware who gave him the permission to travel. The family members are carrying out the post-cremation rituals of our father at our native Panchur village in Pauri district.”

The UP government had earlier issued a clarification saying that neither had the CM authorised Tripathi to go to Uttarakhand on his behalf nor had the state government given him permission to do so.

Meanwhile, the Uttarakhand government on Tuesday said it will wait for the police report before taking any action. 

Asked about a letter signed by Uttarakhand additional chief secretary Om Prakash to the Dehradun district magistrate (a copy of which is with TOI) asking him to grant Tripathi and his aides permission to travel to the shrine towns, chief secretary Utpal Kumar Singh said, “Law will take its course and we will wait for the police report. The matter is being probed by Uttarakhand police.”

According to sources, the legislator and his aides had started from Dehradun on May 2 and crossing two districts — Tehri and Pauri Garhwal—had on Sunday reached Gauchar in Chamoli district with the intention of proceeding towards Badrinath when a team of officials stopped them.

A police team at the Muni-ki-Reti checkpost in Rishikesh had intercepted the three vehicles and an FIR under the relevant sections of the Disaster Management Act was registered against the MLA and his aides for the violation of lockdown. UP Police was also informed. 

They were later arrested in Najibabad town of Bijnor district in UP and booked under sections 268 (public nuisance), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the Indian Penal Code, section 51 of Disaster Management Act and section 3 of the Epidemic Diseases Act.


