Pune: Ambegaon farmer hands over six row houses for quarantine facility
2020-05-24
PUNE: Madhukar Ganpat Hagawane, a resident of Ramwadi village in Ambegaon, on Friday gave his newly constructed row houses to the local tehsil administration to set up a quarantine facility.

The six row houses have been built for Hagawane and five of his siblings, who are yet to move into their new homes. 

The gesture is in stark contrast to instances where people have been opposing quarantine facilities set up near their housing societies in Pune. 

The 55-year-old, who is currently living in his old house, told TOI, “The administration is putting people in quarantine at the village school, which isn’t in a good condition. I asked the talathi to use our six houses to quarantine people so that they can feel like living at home.” Each row house has a living room, two bedrooms, a toilet and bathroom.

The family is yet to hold a housewarming ceremony of the houses but they have chosen to forgo tradition in a time of crisis. “Ensuring people are healthy is more important. All six of us unanimously took the decision and handed over our houses to the tehsil administration for as long as they want to use them,” Hagawane said. 

The village talathi Deepak Kadjure said, “About 400 families have returned to the village from Pune and Mumbai over the last two weeks. We don’t have adequate facilities to quarantine them in the village. Currently, we have kept 18 villagers, including six children, in two row houses. The remaining houses will be used as and when needed in the future.” 

The village sarpanch Santosh Saaid added that the Hagawane family is also providing food to the quarantined people. “This is a big help for us and sets an example for others,” shared Saaid. 

According to the tehsil administration, about 10, 000 people have returned to over 110 villages in the last two weeks. So far, two positive cases have been reported in the tehsil. “In one week, 6,000 people have been quarantined across Ambegaon tehsil. Like the Hagawane family, others have also handed over their homes to us to be used as a quarantine facility,” said Ruma Joshi, tehsildar of Ambegaon.


