Ambedkar University professor, resident doc test Covid-19 positive
2020-05-04
AGRA: A senior professor of Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar University and a resident doctor of SN Medical College tested Covid-19 positive in Agra on Sunday. At least 53 more cases were confirmed by the district administration till Sunday evening, taking the district tally to 603. 


On an average, two positive cases have surfaced in every 45 in the past three days. Besides, one person out of 10 is being tested positive. Meanwhile, nine more people recovered and discharged from hospital. 

Moreover, two constables of Kotwali police station and 12 vegetable sellers were also found positive. 

Besides the professor and resident doctor, a 27-year-old pregnant woman was tested positive. She was asked by a private hospital for Covid-19 test report before treatment. 

The localities from where new cases were reported on Sunday included Soron Katra, Durga Colony, Sadar Bhatti, Kotwali, Gobar Choki in Tajganj locality, Narayach, Kachahri Ghat, Chhipitola, Wazirpura, Mahaveer Nagar, Ajit Nagar, Kanchan garden colony, Shahganj, Bodla, Devri road, Telipara and Peer Kalyani.

Chief medical officer, Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." According to the health department, out of the 603 cases which have surfaced in Agra, at least 105 cases are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts while 100 are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway 2. Another, 28 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in the Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. Besides, 60 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts, while 26 cases are linked to people who had overseas travel history and their contacts. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 146 people have been cured of the infection and discharged." 

