Agra civic body launches fogging drive to control spread of coronavirus
2020-03-06
AGRA: The Agra Municipal Corporation on Thursday launched a city-wide fogging drive to check the growing menace of the coronavirus in the city. 

On Thursday afternoon, teams from the civic body hit the city roads and started fogging in Fatehabad road, Khandari and Lajpat Kunj area. The process continued till late evening. 


 
 
Municipal commissioner Arun Prakash has constituted a team of senior officials to monitor the fogging drive. Mayor Naveen Jain has also issued strict orders for maintenance of sanitation in the city.

The move comes after six Agra residents quarantined in Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital with suspected coronavirus infection have tested positive. They were in touch with the Covid-19 positive patient in Delhi. Also, 14 Italian tourists, who stayed at an Agra hotel in the last week of February and were moved to an ITBP isolation facility in Delhi on March 3, have tested positive.

Talking to TOI, AMC executive engineer Rajiv Rathi said, “A roster plan has been prepared for day and night fogging in 100 wards of the city. Over 60 workers have been deployed to carry out the exercise. All the main roads of the city have been covered on Thursday. The areas having schools, colleges, hospitals, hotels, marketplaces will be covered on a priority basis”.

The health department coordinated with the AMC to carry out fogging in areas where the six members of the shoe exporter family who were tested Covid-19 positive have their home and offices.

AMC chief health officer MM Agarwal said, “Intensive fogging and anti-larvae spraying has been initiated in the city as a precautionary measure against the spread of coronavirus. We are using organophosphate family chemical malathion for fogging purpose. Temephos, another chemical of the same family, is being used in the anti-larvae spray. Both the chemicals being used are recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) and meet the prescribed standards.”


