AMC imposes multi-pronged strategy against coronavirus
2020-03-20
Aurangabad: With screening for fresh arrivals in the city, launch of 24-hour helpline, designation of swab collection centres, quarantine centres and multiple treatment centres, the civic body has implemented a multi-level approach for prevention and control of coronavirus in the city.

The city witnessed its first positive case on Sunday. The patient is receiving treatment at a private hospital in the city. To ensure that the virus is contained from spreading, the civic body has announced closure of schools, colleges, malls, gardens, theatres and swimming pools in the city until March 31. Pandey has also issued orders to close malls, wedding halls and gardens in city. On Wednesday, he appealed to citizens to stay indoors as much as possible for the next seven days. 

Following the review and directives of municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey, screening centres have started operating at the airport, railway station, Cidco bus stand and Nagar Naka. Municipal officer of health Nita Padakalkar said that 1,816 people were screened at the said centres on Thursday.

Around 20 calls were received on the 24-hour helpline launched by the civic body by Thursday evening.

In coordination with the district public health department, the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) and private hospitals, the AMC health department has arranged for isolation beds at district civil hospital, GMCH and private hospitals for any Covid-19 positive patients and suspected patients showing symptoms.

To quarantine people coming from restricted countries, the AMC on Thursday opened a quarantine centre at Kalagram exhibition centre in Chikalthana MIDC. Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Associations of India (Credai) Aurangabad has made provision for beds, food and sanitation at the centre. 

The municipal corporation has also launched 14 rickshaws to raise awareness about prevention of coronavirus on Wednesday. 

Canpack India Pvt. Ltd. has facilitated the service through which localities in Aurangabad, Waluj and Shendra will witness jingles about prevention of Covid 19 for the next 10 days. 


