Amid lockdown, laity, clergy team up to feed the needy
2020-04-27
Panaji: Parishes and Catholic communities have stepped up in the fight against Covid-19, with the laity and clergy teaming up to reach out to those vulnerable in their areas. 

In Orlim, for instance, parishioners made 1,600 masks and distributed them to houses in the vicinity to protect them from the novel coronavirus.

“They were made in three days and distributed freely,” said parish priest Fr Roger Godinho. In addition, his flock also distributed vegetables and helped 36 families — locals, construction workers, rag-pickers, daily-wage labourers and domestic workers.

In Margao, devotees who attend St Joaquim chapel in Borda continue to cook and serve food to 300 people in the town. In nearby Navelim, Catholic lay people have distributed rations to 400 families, as well as serve tea to those at the indoor stadium. Chaplain Fr Simon D’Cunha told TOI that 15 volunteers conduct field research, looking out for the needy, and serve them food, which is cooked in the kitchen of the Carmel Seva Mandir convent.

Across the state, churches and chapels have been in the forefront of charity after Caritas’ appeal to reach out to the needy. In Panaji, the St Inez outreach group was formed to provide groceries to families living on daily wages as well as the elderly, said parish priest Fr Albano Fernandes. Similar activities were conducted by the Colvale and Guirim parishes, where Fr Januario Da Costa and Fr Anand da Gama Pais respectively got nurses to distribute medicines to the needy. 

The small Christian community at Stella Maris Chapel, Miramar, also got into the act, with ward leaders ordering and delivering supplies to home-bound, elderly, poor and those living alone, said chaplain Fr Barry Cardozo.

Some parishes are working in close coordination with their local panchayat. In Siridao, for instance, Fr Valerian Vaz has been closely working with elected representatives to distribute food packets. A similar exercise was undertaken at St. Francis Xavier church, Chicalim, where Fr Bolmax Pereira, inspired by the slogan ‘No one goes hungry’ coordinated with panchayat members and other well-wishers to distribute daily essentials.

In nearby Vasco, at the Our Lady of Desterro church, Fr Anthony Rodrigues said groceries were distributed to over 200 families with the help of local councillors and social workers. In Sanvordem, parish priest Fr Vital Miranda monitored the distribution of groceries to 18 families.

While most parishes dealt in food and other essentials, some, like the St John the Baptist church in Benaulim, also dispensed monetary aid to individuals (Rs 500) and families (Rs 2,000) in addition to essentials. Parishes also reached out to migrants in their localities. Agonda parish priest Fr Romeo D’Silva supervised the distribution of supplies to 16 migrant families for a week, while at Chaudi-Canacona, parish priest Fr Isidore Dias said that essential commodities were given to 10 migrant families living under the flyovers. 


