Amid lockdown gloom, hails bring smile on faces
2020-04-24
Thiruvananthapuram: People stuck in houses due to lockdown had a pleasant surprise on Thursday in the form of rainfall accompanied by hailstorm.

Hails known as ‘alippazham’ in local parlance was witnessed in several places including Vattiyoorkavu, Venganoor, Malayinkeezhu. People celebrated hailstorm by sharing pictures of those tiny ice pieces on social media.

According to India Meteorological Department, thunderstorm accompanied by moderate rainfall is likely in several places, including Thiruvananthapuram, in the coming days. 

The pre-monsoon rainfall is characterized by afternoon thundershowers. IMD has observed 4.3mm rainfall in the city on Thursday.

Hailstones are formed by layers of water attaching and freezing in a large cloud, mostly cumulonimbus cloud. Recently, Wayanad and Kasaragod had witnessed hailstorm along with the pre-monsoon rainfall.

The summer rainfall is bringing relief to the district which has been experiencing a deficient rainfall this season. The district was experiencing around 50% deficiency until a few weeks ago. 

Climate researcher Rajeevan Erikulam said rainfall activity is likely to increase in the coming days due to the movement of Madden–Julian oscillation (MJO) to the west Indian ocean. The MJO is characterised as an eastward moving pulse of cloud and rainfall near the equator. 

“It is likely to move towards Bay of Bengal in the coming days. Under its influence, most south Indian states will experience summer rainfall for the next two weeks,” he said.

Rajeevan said the district which was getting deficient rainfall will compensate in the coming days. 

“Last year, the deficiency of pre-monsoon rainfall in the district was 52% on April 23. This year the deficiency is 29%. The deficiency will be reduced in the coming days,” he said.

With monsoon just a month away, the district will not have to be concerned over water shortage in the coming days. 

Last year, the rainfall was 53% deficient during the pre-monsoon period from March 1 to May 31. This was followed by a 20% excess monsoon rainfall.


