Amid Covid threat, Kanwar Yatra to be suspended?
2020-05-22
Haridwar: Kanwar Yatra, one of the biggest religious fairs in north India, which sees lakhs of devotees converging in Haridwar, is likely to be suspended this year or would be converted in another form due to the Covid-19 threat.

Haridwar district administration officials said that no preparations have been undertaken for the yatra which usually begins in July every year. They added that they are waiting for guidelines from the state government although it seemed likely that the yatra may be suspended this year.

Haridwar district magistrate C Ravishankar told TOI, "Our priority is Covid-19 now and no preparation has been started for the Kanwar Yatra. We also haven’t received any direction from the government. As religious gathering is banned during lockdown, we cannot say anything at this stage."

SSP Haridwar Senthil Avoodai Krishna Raj S also spoke in a similar vein. "We are yet to get any order from the government on the preparation of the yatra. Our teams are busy implementing the lockdown and making arrangements for stranded migrant workers."

Kanwar Yatra is a big challenge for the administration and heavy police force, including several units of PAC, are deployed in Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana —-from where most of the pilgrims come —- besides Haridwar for the duration of the yatra.

Meanwhile, Ganga Sabha, the priests’ body responsible for upkeep of the Har-ki-Pauri ghat in Haridwar, added that the yatra may not be possible this year in its original form.

Tanmay Vashisht, Ganga Sabha general secretary, said, "Either the yatra would be suspended or permitted in some other form. The government should take a call in the matter as soon as possible." 

A source in the chief minister’s office when queried on the matter, said, "Presently, the focus is on handling the Covid outbreak and all departments are involved in the process. The state government will look into the matter of organising the yatra and take action according to the Centre’s directives."

 

