Amid coronavirus scare, Bihar health department steps up surveillance
2020-03-03
PATNA: Amid the fears of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) epidemic, the state health department has stepped up surveillance to trace those who returned from countries exposed to the deadly virus. From linking all 38 districts to the medical colleges and hospitals for isolation and sample collection to appointing nodal officer for each district, the department is taking preventive measures against the deadly disease.


The department is also providing personal protection equipment (PPE) and n95 masks to civil surgeons in all 38 districts and setting up medical camps along the Nepal border. 

According to health officials, altogether 17,187 passengers have been screened at Patna and Gaya airports till now. Besides, over one lakh people have been screened at the transit points. “Health workers at the medical camps set up in bordering areas of Jogbani, Forbesganj and Raxaul have been actively screening people,” state surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra said.

Medical teams have also been instructed to keep a check on toll plazas near Uttar Pradesh border. “Medical workers have set up checkpoints in Araria, Motihari, Kaimur, Raxaul and Buxar to keep a vigil on people entering the state from UP. Earlier, the focus was only on airports and Nepal border. Now, we have noticed that several people from UP enter the state by road. Therefore, medical workers were asked to check every person entering the state from UP via road,” she said.

Health officials also claimed that the number of medical workers has been increased. District magistrates are also organizing special awareness camps on a regular basis. “Altogether 4,775 panchayati raj institution (PRI) members appointed for the purpose held 3,123 gram sabha meetings in different villages in the border areas. Besides, at least 47,088 health workers are working regularly across the state to keep a vigil on any coronavirus suspect,” Mishra said.

Meanwhile, 32 out of the 108 people kept under observation at their homes in different parts of the state have completed the 14 days of quarantine.

