Amid lockdown, poachers on the prowl
2020-04-23
Jaipur: With sparse public movement during lockdown, the state forest department has reported a surge in the movement of armed poachers inside national parks and sanctuaries. A fresh incident was reported from Keoladeo National Park in Bharatpur where four poachers were caught on a camera trap with weapons in their hands.

Bharatpur DFO (wildlife) Mohit Gupta said, “After movement of poachers was reported inside the park, we arrested two of them who hail from Azad Nagar village, 16km from the park. While they were produced in court, two more still remain at large.”

Following the incident, the forest department has increased patrolling in Keoladeo. Reportedly, these poachers entered the park to hunt wild boars and peacocks. “As movement of villagers and authorities is restricted, poachers are trying to take advantage of the lockdown. Killing peacocks at night is easier and hence poachers in nearby villages have become active,” the official added.

On April 1, a father-son duo was nabbed with a gun at Kala Devi Sanctuary in Karauli district.

Besides poaching, forest officials are facing another problem of indiscriminate felling of Khair as the tree is in high demand due to its medicinal values and for making ‘kattha’, the main ingredient of paan.

Cases of illegal felling are also being reported from Chittorgarh during the lockdown, which were earlier prominent in Kota, Baran and Jhalawar. Chittorgarh DFO (wildlife) Savita Dahiya said, “A total of 31 forest and wildlife related offences have been registered. The felling incidents have increased here after the lockdown. So far, we have imposed fine of Rs 1.68 lakh in Sitamata wildlife sanctuary and Rs 59,200 in Bassi wildlife sanctuary on the offenders for cutting trees.”

Another official said, the cost of a Khair tree is four times than usual ones. At present, its wood is sold between Rs 5,000 and Rs 50,000 as per market demand. The tree also has medicinal value and is used for making drugs for treating ailments like skin, neck, tooth, diarrhoea and lung infections.


