Amid deferred weddings, lockdown drives business of matrimony sites
2020-04-14
PATNA: Even as weddings planned for this month in the state are being postponed due to the lockdown, matrimonial sites are doing brisk business, drawing large number of visitors.

While Sumit Kumar, a 28-year-old resident of Gopalganj, is disappointed that the nationwide lockdown has forced him to postpone his wedding, there are others who are spending their time cooped up at home browsing profiles of prospective partners.

“My wedding was scheduled for May 1, but it has now been postponed owing to the lockdown. It may now happen in December or maybe next year,” said Sumit, adding, no preparations could be made due to the lockdown.

However, for eligible bachelors like Anuj Bhardwaj (31), who works in an IT firm in Bengaluru, the lockdown period has been a godsend allowing him to spend time on the matrimonial sites.

“Now that I’m staying with my parents, so I created an account on matrimonial site. I have shortlisted some profiles based on my preference and similarities,” said Anuj, a resident of Rajendra Path in the city. 

Like Anuj, Priyam (24) and Vinita Prakash (26) are also spending time on matrimonial websites. “Since my parents are asking me to find a soulmate, I thought why not try matrimony sites,” said Vinita, a resident of Jagganpura.

Confined to their homes and spending a lot of time on computer or mobile phones due to the lockdown, youngsters are spending more and more time on dating apps and matrimonial sites.

Matrimonial sites are claiming that lockdown has increased the number of visitors and members are increasing as well as time spent on the site has surged. These sites are handing out discounts for paid memberships and even arranging online ‘Milan Samaroh’ between the families of the prospective partners through video-chats.

Akansha Singh, an executive of an online matrimony site, said on an average, 15 to 18 new profiles are registering as members. “Now paying only basic Rs 836, members can attend the get together ceremony that we are organising three times a week. For the online video chat between groom and bride family members, we are not charging any additional fees,” she told this newspaper.

Besides leading matrimonial sites, some local marriage bureaus are also taking the help of technology. Jyoti Priya, executive of Shubh Labh Marriage at Boring road said, “Amid the lockdown, our bureau has fixed around 22 marriages while 106 profiles have been sent to the members as per their requirement.”

Akash Saini, executive of another marriage bureau near Patna Market said, “Once, the members are satisfied with the bio-data and pictures, we send the contact numbers to initiate talk between the bride and groom’s families.”


