Amid Covid, NMC desilts & widens 47km of 3 rivers
2020-06-15
Nagpur: While battling on many fronts to curb spread of the coronavirus, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has completed desilting and widening of three rivers — Nag, Pili and Pora — in the first week of June itself even before monsoon becomes fully active.

The timely completion of the works will certainly result in reduced flooding and waterlogging in several areas of the city. Moreover, the civic body reportedly cleared 47km-long stretches of these rivers by spending even less than Rs5 lakh.

This year, the NMC has also ensured not to dump the removed silt and garbage on the banks. Over 80,000 cubic metre silt and garbage has been removed from Nag, Pili and Pora rivers and disposed off in other places.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and superintending engineer Shweta Banerjee roped in four government agencies —Nagpur Improvement Trust, MahaMetro, National Highways Authority of India and state’s public works department — apart from using NMC’s machineries to finish the task in time.

Claiming it was a rejuvenation of all three rivers, Mundhe told TOI, “We did not restrict works to only cleaning garbage and shrubs. We widened the rivers up to its original area. We desilted the rivers in such a manner that water will flow with gradient. Now, the rivers are not just neat and clean, but also wider.”

Mundhe also said, “Process to demarcate red line (high flood level) of the rivers has started. All encroachments within the red line area will have to be razed. Thereafter, NMC will mark buffer zone of 15metre from red line for development as green and recreational zone. Plantation work has already been started in some places.”

Banerjee and her team has identified red line areas of Nag river and submitted the plan to water resources department, which will approve it after going through data of high flood levels in the last 100 years. Exact markings will be done thereafter. Similar process for Pili and Pora will kick-off soon.

The works were pending for decades and the rivers were marred by encroachments.

Mundhe said, “NMC has done its part. Now, public participation is required. People should avoid throwing garbage and waste in the rivers. We have to preserve the rivers which are our heritage.”

For the first time in 18 years, encroachments on Nag river in Krazy Castle water-cum-amusement park have been removed after Mundhe’s orders.

In 2013, TOI-MT had launched a mass awareness campaign with title ‘Save Nag River — My City, My River’ which was followed by NMC’s activities. Since then, barring couple of years, the civic body has been desilting these rivers.

The central and state governments had approved Nag River Pollution Abatement Project which is likely to kick-off in a couple of months. Process to get approval for Nag River Beautification Project is also on.

Preserving Heritage

47km-long stretches of Nag, Pili and Pora rivers desilted and widened

Civic body spent less than Rs5 lakh on works

80,000 cubic metre silt and garbage removed, disposed off

Process to demarcate red line (high flood level) of Nag river on

All encroachments within red line area will be razed

Encroachments on Nag river in Krazy Castle removed after 18 years


