Amid Covid pandemic, Odisha begins to prepare for possible cyclone
2020-05-16
BHUBANESWAR: In the middle of Covid-19 pandemic and efforts to contain it, the state government has a new task in hand, that of protecting its people from a possible cyclone developing in the Bay of Bengal. Even as the India Meteorological Department (IMD) keeps a close watch on the situation, the state government has started preparations in case the cyclone strikes.

On Friday, the government asked collectors of 12 coastal and northern Odisha districts to arrange for concrete shelters to evacuate people if such a situation arises. Odisha has around 900 cyclone shelters but most of these are currently being used as quarantine centres for people returning from other states.

A special bulletin of the IMD said a well-marked low pressure area over southeast Bay of Bengal is very likely to intensify into a cyclonic storm over central parts of south Bay of Bengal by Saturday evening. After moving north-westward on May 17, the cyclone may re-curve north north-west during May 18-20.

If the cyclone strikes, it will be the second time in two consecutive years that a cyclone will hit the state in the month of May, the previous one being Fani last year.

While chief secretary Asit Tripathy reviewed preparations for the impending cyclone, special relief commissioner (SRC) Pradeep Jena said though the speed, possible path and probable place of landfall is still not known, the preliminary IMD assessment reveals it will have an impact in northern Odisha.

“Keeping in mind the need for possible evacuation of people, the coastal districts have been asked to identify alterative concrete structures which can be used as cyclone shelters since the existing ones are being used as quarantine facilities,” Jena said.

Similarly, cyclone shelters where very few people have been kept for quarantine may be made available in case of cyclone. “The health department will test quarantined people in cyclone shelters in northern districts on priority basis so that those testing negative can shift to home quarantine and those places can hold cyclone evacuees depending on how the situation evolves,” Jena added.

Amid fear that social distancing could be compromised in the cyclone shelters, Jena said the government would be readying enough centres to ensure social distancing among evacuees.

Jena said personnel of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF) and fire service personnel have been asked to be ready for pre-positioning in areas likely to be affected. Currently, many government employees are not coming to work to ensure social distancing during the lockdown. However, all employees in the coastal districts have been asked to report to work in view of the cyclone, he said.

