Bhopal: Amid lockdown, transport of goods stuck in a limbo
2020-04-02
BHOPAL: Eight days after the lockdown, trucks loaded with grocery items and medicines are waiting to be unloaded at the parking lots of different transport companies. Many trucks reached their destination while many are still stranded in the absence of any transport policy. 


There are also instances when drivers have parked loaded trucks and left for their homes in different parts of the country. 

This is hampering the supply of medicines, grocery items and even fast moving consumer goods. A large number of trucks, which have already reached Bhopal after the countrywide lockdown was declared, are parked at the offices of transport companies.

Each truck carries various commodities booked by the traders of Bhopal. But they could not be unloaded because the administration has not been able to come out with a clear transport policy. 

However, many trucks — exclusively carrying rice and pulses — from nearby places like Piparia (a big supplier of dal) and Hoshangabad and Raisen for rice were allowed to be unloaded from 8 pm to 1 am. 

“This is happening because the supply chain of the transportation of goods is broken. Labourers are not available as they need curfew passes to reach godowns from their houses. Autorickshaws are also not plying because of the same reason,” said Thakur Lal Rajput, president of the transport companies’ association of the state. 

He said, “We have had many meetings with the administration, but they (officials) are too busy with other works related to the corona crisis.”

Meanwhile, a spokesman of the district administration reiterated, “there are no orders for stopping the movement of trucks”.

BOX

Jumerati opens for one hour only

The wholesale market of Jumerati could be opened only for one hour on Wednesday.

“On Monday, the police had misbehaved with one of traders in the market. On Wednesday, there was strict cordoning of the area and hardly any retailer could reach Jumerati,” one wholesaler said, adding, “this was happening because the city was divided into different zones and retailers were not able to reach.”

Wholesalers said that there was “enough grocery” available in the city markets due to regular supply of commodities in the past few days.

