Nashik: Amid lockdown some schools start admitting students online
2020-04-13
NASHIK: The extension of lockdown from April 14 to April 30 has affected the admission process of different English-medium schools across the city.


While some schools have decided to wait until the lockdown is lifted to complete the admissions for the upcoming academic year, some have taken the entire process online.

“We start admitting students from Std I. Since the parents are unable to visit the school due to the lockdown, we have started accepting the applications online. The parents just need to log on to our website or doing our social media platforms to get the admission details. We are also confirming admissions to students after all the necessary documents and information are place,” principal of a private English-medium school said, adding that in this way they will be able to begin the academic session on time.

Before admitting theirs wards to any school the parents also like to visit the school and check the infrastructure. This is also one of the reasons why many schools are waiting for the district administration to lift the lockdown.

“Our management is brainstorming about how to go about the admissions this year. We had completed the admission of 25 students in one division before the lockdown was imposed. Admission for the second division is still pending,” an official of a private school said.

“Admissions are a tedious process as many English-medium schools not only interview the children, but also their parents. Hence, we will have to wait” he added.

Some English-medium schools had registered themselves under the Right to Education Act (RTE) which has also deferred the process of verification of documents till the lockdown is lifted.

“We need to wait for the 25% students who will be admitted under the RTE Act before finalising our admission process. For the rest of the students, our online link is open where the parents can register themselves. We will communicate with them once the school reopens,” principal of another English-medium school said.

The joint secretary of one of the city-based schools said, “We admit 150 students every year in the entry level grads in the three centres of our school. Normally, the process is complete by May 15.”

The admission process begins as early as December and most of the schools freeze the process by March and April. Now, owing to the lockdown due to the Covid-19, parents are also worried about the admission of their wards and are calling the schools to check about the seats available and other formalities.

“We have started noting down the contact details of the parents and the details of their children. We are also assuring them that once the lockdown is lifted, we will start contacting them on our own,” he added.


