Amid crisis due to pandemic, NMC hikes water tariff by 5%
2020-04-17
Nagpur: Taking serious cognisance of the crisis due to the pandemic, the central and state governments had announced various types of relief for the people. At the same time, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has increased water tariff by 5% for the 10th consecutive year.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe reportedly approved the hike a couple of days ago. The revised water tariff will be applicable from April 1 onwards. For residential consumers, tariff will increase to Rs8.13 per unit for consumption between 1-20 units. The tariff will increase to a great extent if one utilizes water over 20 units. Rate will be Rs13.03 per unit for 21-30 units, Rs17.93 per unit for 31-80 units and Rs24.43 per unit for above 80 units.

Similarly, the tariff of remaining six categories of consumers also increased, including slums, commercial and institutional.

The civic chiefs have increased the water tariff every year since 2011-12 as general body had given permission for hike of 5% before commencement of new fiscal. It is being done as NMC had fixed the rate of private operator Orange City Water Private Limited (OCW) higher than water tariff at the time of its appointment in 2010-11. The water tariff was Rs5 per unit whereas OCW rate was finalized at Rs7.90 per unit. Also, NMC is bound to increase rate of OCW as per revision in wholesale price index and consumer price index, which are revised by the central government every year.

Till now, the minimum water tariff for residential category was Rs7.75 per unit while OCW is being paid Rs12.01 per unit.

NMC is incurring huge financial loss by paying higher rate to OCW and also not sending water bills against over 45% water distributed. NMC’s recovery is also very poor.

Due to the pandemic, many people are facing various types of problems. Two days ago, energy minister Nitin Raut had extended due date of power bills of March and April. Raut is even exploring possibility of waiver to some select categories.

Chairman of NMC standing committee and water works consultative committee Vijay Zalke said, “I think the administration should have avoided revision in water tariff in prevailing situation. Increase in water tariff by 5% every year is need of the hour but could have been avoided this time. I had also suggested some sort of relief to people in water bills. I stopped water disconnection drive against defaulters as such steps are not right in the prevailing situation,” he said.

NMC officials said, “The hike is as per the resolution passed by the general body.”

Condemning the move, Congress corporator Sanjay Mahakalkar said, “NMC should give waiver in paying property tax and water bills. Many from middle class and lower middle class are not earning currently. They will not be able to pay regular bills and hike in water tariff is like rubbing salt on their wounds.”


