Amid rising Covid-19 cases in Agra, UP govt shunts out CMO
2020-05-12
Agra: With Agra district witnessing a continuous rise in Covid-19 cases, the Uttar Pradesh government has shunted out Agra chief medical officer (CMO) Mukesh Kumar Vats and additional director (health), Agra division, AK Mittal. A senior official admitted that "there has been a lack of proper coordination, and healthcare services are directly affected, and so the entire Covid-19 containment plan is now being revised". 

RC Pandey took charge of CMO, while Avinash Kumar Singh joined as AD (health) on Monday. Vats and Mittal have been attached with the offices of the Agra district magistrate and the divisional commissioner, respectively. 

Also, a five-member team constituted by the state government to review the Covid-19 prevention and management protocols reached Agra on Monday morning. The team included principal secretary (industrial development) Alok Kumar, principal secretary (medical education) Rajneesh Dubey, inspector general of police Vijay Prakash, an officer on special duty Dr Avanish Kumar Singh and professor Alok Nath of Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow. 

The team held a marathon meeting with officials of the district administration, health department and police at the circuit house. The officials also conducted an inspection at the SN Medical College and Covid-19 hotspot areas in the city. The hospital administration was directed for installation of CCTV cameras at the Covid-19 facility and increase the number of beds at isolation ward. Chief development officer J Reebha was tasked to ensure availability of required staff, oxygen supply and maintenance of sanitation and hygiene at the hospital. 

Principal secretary Alok Kumar who has been appointed as nodal officer for Agra said, “There is a lack of proper coordination. Healthcare services in Agra remain affected. The contact tracing of people tested with Covid-19 was not taking place properly. All these problems are being sorted out. To better manage the situation, the state government has appointed new CMO and AD health. We have directed for strict enforcement of lockdown. The entire Covid-19 containment plan in Agra is being revised."


