Amidst the lockdown, men on the wagon swap stories online, raise toast to sobriety
2020-05-11
MUMBAI: Every day at 7 pm, when a spiritually-inclined retired RBI manager in Panvel sits on his bed and connects to an audio conferencing app on his smartphone, his wife knows better than to disturb him. As a woman who contemplated divorce once, she understands her 68-year-old husband's urge to connect with men who have all been retrieved from gutters at some point. 

Years ago, the banker had sat week after week with these regretful men in the nooks of hospitals, churches and classrooms in Mumbai, gradually turning from an insufferable alcoholic into a grateful pensioner. In 24 years of sobriety, he has formed enduring friendships with this underground fellowship of men.

Amid the lockdown, they find themselves repeating the story they have iterated many times over in empty classrooms, from the comfort of their bedrooms.

Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), the non-profit fellowship that helps its members achieve sobriety, has shifted the address of its meetings from church basements to online conferences ever since Covid-19 forced a national lockdown in March. "Since schools and churches are shut now, we meet online daily," says a senior member, adding that while 180 clusters of eight to ten AA members would meet physically twice or thrice a week in various parts of the city, the online circle tends to be wider as AA members from any part of the country are free to enter an ongoing conference.

While the online meetings in states such as Maharashtra, Delhi and Punjab tend to be heavily populated as they are conducted in Hindi, the groups in the four states of South India--that conduct their meetings in the respective regional language--are seeing many newcomers.

The format and the agenda of the meetings remain same except they wear headsets and a moderator mutes other members while a person speaks. Stories could include those of men like the retired RBI manager, for instance, who would talk about beginning life in Mumbai as a shy boy from Kolhapur whose inhibitions melted every time his brother-in-law, a chief marine engineer, handed him the bottle. Soon, liquor would enslave him and almost drown his marriage till his sister, a doctor, led him to AA. Despite the sameness of format, a Mumbai member says he misses the offline interface. "In the physical meetings, we get to speak to people one-to-one. Online, around 40 to 50 from all over the country may join in at once,'" he says.

In Tamil Nadu, 16-17 meetings happen in a day in which newcomers silently listen to members share personal triumphs with a sense of cautious restraint. "We avoid video calls as we want to remain as anonymous as possible. We also don't encourage audio recording unless it is a 'speaker meeting' where one person speaks on a particular subject," says a senior member.

