Gujarat: Amid lockdown, Alavi Bohras take to virtual worship
2020-04-26
VADODARA: As the clocked ticked towards midnight on the first night of Ramzan on Friday, they gathered in their homes and picked up their mobile phones. At midnight, thousands of Alavi Bohra community members in Gujarat and other states offered the Ramzan namaz while watching their spiritual leader online.


Amid clarion calls from maulivs and community leaders to observe Ramzan prayers at home to maintain social distancing, they have stayed away from gatherings at mosques and taken to virtual worship during the holy month.

This is the first time the community is observing Ramzan through this virtual mode. The community members have downloaded a video application that helps them connect with their spiritual leaders and each other. “Every year during Ramzan, we offered namaz in mosques. But it won’t be possible this time. Namaz is very important and it has to be offered properly. So we decided to use technology,” said Dr Zulkarnain Bhaisaheb, an Alvi Bohra community leader.

The initiative has been taken by Alavi Bohra community in Vadodara who have connected members in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Delhi and other states.

“We have a WhatsApp group that has members of our community from Gujarat and other states. Before starting our online discourse, we post a link of the app in the group and whoever clicks on the link can see live images of our spiritual leader who, sitting at his home in front of a camera and mike, imparts a message for a few minutes before performing namaz,” Bhaisaheb told TOI.

Saiyedna Saheb, the spiritual head of Alavi Bohras, says, “Ramzan is the month of spiritual bliss and everyone should be connected with spiritual teachings during this time. Technology has come to our rescue and we are connected with the Almighty in the same way as before." The video reaches everyone who joins the online session.

Apart from Saiyedna Haatim Zakiyuddin Saheb, who is spiritual head of the community in Vadodara, Mukaasir Nuruddin Saheb, Saeed Ul Khayr Bhaisaheb and Zulkarnain Bhaisaheb conduct namaz online and address Alavi Bohra muslims in several states across the country. The namaz is offered in morning, evening and at midnight.

“Due to lockdown, we have to refrain from gathering at mosque. But we are able to connect with our spiritual leaders and other community members through the virtual spiritual discourse and namaz during the holy month of Ramzan,” said Qasim Barodawala, who teaches at a private university on the outskirts of the city.
