Amid cancellation rumours, CBSE clarifies it will hold boards after lockdown is lifted
2020-04-30
BHUBANESWAR: With the CBSE board examinations postponed owing to the nationwide lockdown, students of Classes X and XII are stuck in between waiting to move on to the next level. Neither do they have online classes to attend nor can they keep on doing revisions. Meanwhile, rumours about the exams being cancelled are increasing their anxiety levels. 

On Wednesday, the CBSE, however, clarified that the board will conduct the exam after the lockdown is lifted. Many Class X and XII students in the city said they too want to appear for the pending board examinations. 

“With regard to conducting the Class X exam, several queries are being received by the CBSE. In this context, it is once again reiterated that the remaining examinations of the Class X students as stated in the press release dated April 1, 2020 will be conducted by the CBSE. It is once again clarified that adequate time of 10 days will be given to all stakeholders before starting the examinations. Therefore, there is no change in the position of holding the board examinations and the position continues as per the information given earlier,” the board circular said. It is also informed that examinations of all the subjects of Classes X and XII will be conducted after assessing the situation once the lockdown is lifted, it added. 

With no dates announced for the exams, students of Class XII are busy learning new skills While Class X students are continuing with their Class XI courses. “We don’t have any examinations left and we have already got promoted and the school has started online classes for class XI. I am also practicing for the NEET entrance examination from the books of my elder brother, said Satyam Parida, a class X student. 

OM Abhisek, a class XII student is passing his free time at home by practicing computer programming, said he want the examinations to occur. Preparation for the exam was almost over and with not much to do I am trying to use my time. I dont want the CBSE to cancel the examination. But the examination must be done by May-end or it will affect the consequent events like entrance examinations and college admissions, he added. 

Ananya Nayak, another class XII student said he is spending the free time with family during the lockdown. Last few months were very hectic due to the exam preparations after exams got postponed I am getting lots of free time and spending quality time with family. I am playing ludo and uno with my younger siblings, and also learning cooking from my mother. But I want the examination to be held, said Ananya. 

Some students said they are getting more time for preparing for the entrance examinations. Online classes are being held by the coaching centre. I got more time for preparing for the entrance though dates are yet to be announced. I hope CBSE will conduct the exam after the lockdown is over, said Pratik Mohanty, another class XII student. 


