Amid lockdown, anxiety, panic grip Kota coaching students
2020-04-18
Kota: Following the lockdown extension on Tuesday, anxiety and panic have gripped thousands of students studying in Kota, who are staying in PGs and hostels. 

Nearly 35,000 students, including 12,000-15,000 girls, were stuck in Kota after the first phase of lockdown was declared. However, some of them managed to get passes to travel by personal vehicles to their homes, but they were stopped at the borders of their home states and were put under quarantine. Kota district administration, after the reports of the students being stopped at the borders, stopped issuing passes, but the move has left thousands of students disappointed. 

“I am trying to get a pass to travel to my home in Katihaar district in Bihar but I have not been able to obtain the same and the reports of putting the students under quarantine at state borders have further disappointed me,” Mohammad Shahbaz Hussain, a NEET aspirant who stays in a PG in Talwandi area of the city told TOI on Wednesday. 

“The mess has been again closed for a few days and I have to live on Maggi or some fast food cooked in the room,” he further said, demanding the state government to find some way to send the students in Kota to their homes, as their parents back home are concerned and worried about their well-being, while the number of corona-positive cases rise in Kota city. 

Disappointed, the students have started a Twitter campaign - #helpkotastudents and #sendusbackhome where they have been tagging Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla who is an MP from Kota, chief Minster Ashok Gehlot, UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath among others. 

Coming from different states including Uttar Pradesh, Odisha and Bihar among others, these students take the coaching to crack competitive exams including IIT-JEE and medical entrances, have tweeted over 70000 messages on Twitter sharing their worries, challenges and threats they face due to epidemic outbreak. 

L K Soni, Divisional commissioner, Kota said, "We have issued a helpline number which addresses their complaints on issues like food, residence and medical. In fact, students have been approaching us on this helpline number and we are sending our teams to the said location without delay. However, surprisingly, in 40 per cent of cases, our officials are finding that they have food but they want them to be allowed to go back home. They are panicking because of movement barrier," he said, adding that the real reason for drawing attention is that they are getting emotional here, he added.

Nidhi, a NEET aspirant from Kolkata who stays at a hostel in Kota, has decided not to seek a travel pass and to stay put in her hostel room after one of her friends, who had left by personal vehicle for her home in UP, had to return from the border. “I get the food either from the mess or from online food delivery options and the food packet delivered at the room is fully sanitised,” she said, adding that the delivery boy sanitises the food packet before dropping it at the room’s door and a message on its sanitisation status is also delivered on her mobile, she said. (with agency inputs)


