Amid lockdown, farmers face harvesting woes
2020-04-15
BHOPAL: As the government prepares for procurement of wheat amid the lockdown due to Coronavirus, farmers across many regions of Madhya Pradesh continue to struggle to harvest their crops. The lockdown not only leads to delay in harvesting but could also make the operations costlier.


The crisis has deepened in the regions like Gwalior, Chambal, Bundelkhand, and in pockets of Jabalpur and Bhopal divisions.

In Bundelkhand region, farmers complained of overcharging by harvester owners. Arvind Tiwari, a farmer, said, “For the last two days, we have been seeing overcast skies. Harvester owners have increased the hiring charges from Rs1,000 an hour as decided by the administration to Rs3,000-4,000. Even the thrashers are costlier.”

He added,” If I complaint I need to have five witnesses to confirm my complaint. At the same time, this results in delay in crop cutting. The administration has failed to protect the interests of the farmers.”

However, a spokesperson of the administration said, “Around 2,700 labourers who had returned from outside and had completed their quarantine period were given employment for cutting the crops. Besides, it was also ensured that the owners of the harvesters do not take advantage of the situation and charge more.”

Then there are issues in harvesting as a result of non-availability of labourers.

In Chambal region’s Morena, several farmers are now cutting their crops with the help of family members.

Ramprasad Gurjar, a farmer, said, “Though we are farmers and experts in cultivating land, cutting crops ourselves is a new experience. I have both wheat and mustard in different fields and these are required to be harvested urgently.”

But in several villages of Vindhya region, the crisis has come as a new opportunity for labourers who have gone jobless because of shutting down of number of cement factories in view of the Coronavirus crisis.

“These labourers have got a new job of crop cutting in their own villages,” Laxman Tiwari, a farmer said.

But the farmers in Bhopal district seem to be worst hit as number of Coronavirus cases continue to rise. Farmers have not been able to cut their crops in large number of villages around Bhopal city. On the other hand, a spokesperson of the district administration denied any problems faced by the farmers in Bhopal.


