Amid lockdown, a heart transplant
2020-04-19
KOTTAYAM: The first heart transplant in the state during the lockdown period was successfully conducted at the government medical college hospital (MCH) here on Saturday. 

The transplant was done on K C Jose, 62, a local resident who was under treatment for heart disease in the MCH. Post-surgery, Jose has been put on ventilator for 24 hours due to the possibility of heart rejection and infection. Jose will be under observation for the next two weeks. 

It is the sixth heart transplant surgery in the government sector in the state and all the six heart transplants were held at Kottayam MCH. The current superintendent of the MCH Dr T K Jayakumar, who is also the head of the cardio thoracic and vascular surgery department had lead the medical teams on all the six occasions.

The hospital had created a record by becoming the first government-run hospital to conduct such a surgery in 2015. State health minister K K Shailaja lauded the medical team lead by Dr Jayakumar for achieving the rare feat. A couple of days earlier, the oldest persons so far in India to have contracted the coronavirus had recovered and left this hospital.

The heart of Thiruvananthapuram native Sreekumar, 50, was harvested by the medical team lead by Jayakumar at a private hospital in Thiruvananthapuram. Sreekumar, who was under treatment there following a road accident was declared brain dead after which the relatives consented for organ donation. Four individuals got new lives following this. ‘Mritasanjeevani’, Kerala government’s deceased donor organ transplantation programme coordinated the organ donation process. According to the state health department, the organ donation process had come to a halt across the globe following the outbreak of Covid-19. However, Kerala was able to conduct the process as Covid-19 has been under control in the state, said the office of the minister.

The medical team from Kottayam under Dr Jayakumar had reached Thiruvananthapuram on Friday night. The heart was harvested by around 3.15am and brought to Kottayam by 5.15am. By 5am, another team had begun surgery on Jose. Jayakumar and the other members of the team joined them around 5.15am and the procedure got over by 8am. The fire and rescue unit from here brought medicines required for the surgery from Ernakulam within 40 minutes.

One kidney was donated to a patient under treatment at Thiruvananthapuram MCH while the other kidney and liver were donated to patients under treatment at a private hospital in the state capital.

Minister Shailaja also lauded the relatives of Sreekumar who showed willingness to donate the organs.


