Telangana: Amid coronavirus gloom, 732 NIT-Warangal students bag plum jobs
2020-04-28
HYDERABAD: The Covid-19 pandemic may have triggered an economic downturn, but it has not stopped 732 students of the National Institute of Technology (NIT), Warangal, from securing offers from leading recruiters, with 14 receiving Rs 43 lakh pay packets each, the highest this season.


NIT-Warangal’s training and placement section (TAPS) announced that these 732 students (over 80%) have been hired by 177 companies with an average compensation of Rs 12.15 lakh per annum (LPA), which is more when compared with last year’s 9.93 LPA.

“As of now, none of the 177 companies have revoked any offers. In fact, many are asking how soon we can conduct final examinations so that students can join them immediately,” NIT director NV Ramana Rao told TOI.

Majority of these firms belong to the IT sector and have an option of work from home (WFH) and cited it as a possible reason for firms not withdrawing any offers. Unlike IITs, the majority of campus recruiters visiting the institute were from within the country, he added.

Thirty-three students received offers from the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and Indian Telephone Industries (ITI) and publicsector units (PSUs) — Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL). Of the 33 students, six were hired by ISRO, and 16 students received offered from ITI.

Altogether, 551 under-graduate students (B Tech) and 181post-graduate students have received full-time employment offers, including preplacement offers (PPOs) and the recruitment process would continue till July 31, 2020.

289 students receive offers of packages above Rs 10L

In all, 289 students have received offers with an annual salary of over Rs 10 LPA. Among B Tech students, the highest percentage of placements, 93.22%, were received from computer science & engineering branch. Students from the bio-technology were at the bottom with only 52.63% of them getting placed.

Some of the firms that visited NIT-Warangal for campus recruitment this year include Microsoft India Private Limited, DE Shaw Group, Arcesium India Private Limited, Sprinklr, Adobe Ltd., Oracle India Private Limited, SAP Labs, Citrix R&D India Private Limited, Qualcomm, Goldman Sachs, Salesforce, Uber, Service Now, F5 Networks, VMware India, Black Buck, Texas Instruments, Morgan Stanley, Samsung R&D Institute, Citi Bank among others.

Apart from job offers, 243 pre-final year students from the institute have also received internship offers with one student securing the highest stipend of Rs 1.6 lakh per month.

Several educational institutes are planning on how they can run classes once lockdown is eased and academic work resumes across the state.

