Amid coronavirus war, viral holiday rumour in Gujarat
2020-03-14
AHMEDABAD/GANDHINAGAR: Deputy chief minister Nitin Patel on Friday advised against organizing large gatherings as the world continues to battle with the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19). Patel told reporters in Gandhinagar that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s scheduled visit to Gujarat on March 21 and 22 has been postponed.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

 A supposed office memorandum made the rounds on Friday on social media in which Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, and Sikkim were ‘advised that mass gatherings may be avoided or possibly be postponed till the disease spread is contained.’

The memo even declared a holiday from March 14 to 21 terming it “mandatory for all schools, colleges, educational institutes, workplaces having more than 10 employees, and all statutory and local bodies of the state.” The memo said that those not adhering to the rule would be fined Rs 5,000 daily.

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health and family welfare), said that the communiqué was fake. A clarification from the Press Information Bureau on Friday evening also called the letter fake.

However, before the clarifications were issued, the letter had been circulated widely on social media platforms as citizens were happy about the possible week-long break. Scores of people contacted state government officials, health officials, and media to check whether the message was factual.

As for Modi’s visit, Patel said: “The Prime Minister’s office has informed us that following the Government of India’s recent advisory, the PM’s Gujarat visit for a series of events has been postponed. New dates will be finalized later,” He went on to say: “Because of the current coronavirus situation and the recent central government advisory, we advise citizens to avoid organizing large gatherings.”

Patel said that the state government is taking all necessary steps to avoid the spread of the virus as positive cases are reported from across India, including the neigbhouring Maharashtra.

When questioned whether Gujarat will follow Delhi and Maharashtra in restricting the functioning of schools and theatres and in regulating crowds, Patel said that no such step has been taken because not a single positive case has been registered in Gujarat. “There is no need for such drastic steps yet. We are strictly following the Government of India’s directives to control the spread of the virus,” he said.

Modi was to visit the Statue of Unity to inaugurate a clutch of new tourist attractions and also visit Ahmedabad to inaugurate the 800-bed UN Mehta Institute of Cardiology and Research Centre on the Civil Hospital campus.

