Posta: Amid lockdown 3.0, a third round of spike in prices of essentials
2020-05-09
KOLKATA: Prices of grocery items across retail markets have increased for the third time in the last one-and-a-half months, making life difficult for many already struggling to make ends meet. Sources in the wholesale market said the latest inflation was on account of Posta being turned into a containment zone. Supply has also been hit with several items disappearing from the market. 


The first time price had increased was at the very outset when the lockdown was announced. Panic buying had triggered a shortage of commodities in the market, triggering the price hike. Even though wholesale prices had cooled after the initial spurt caused by supply discrepancies, retail prices remained 10%-15% higher than the pre-lockdown level. 


TimesViewEveryone in the chain — from the producer to the consumer — should be protected as much as possible from the shocks caused by the massive disruption. Some amount of volatility may be inevitable in such times but government agencies should keep monitoring the situation to preempt profiteering.
On April 22, the price again shot up after the containment zones were earmarked and goods movement suffered a jolt. The price of staples across the board increased by 15%-20%. However, prices of select commodities dipped this time following further easing of inter-state goods movement. Prices of wheat flour (atta), sugar and edible oil had dipped marginally, said Posta Merchants’ Association general secretary Biswanath Agarwal.



“Retail prices of pulses (daal), posto (poppy seeds) and rice increased steadily because of disruption in the supply line after a part of Posta wholesale market was shut down following the report of Covid-19 cases from the belt. However, the situation will ease if the market’s operation is shifted elsewhere as proposed by the government,” Arun Baidya, a retailer at Bhowanipore market.

Apart from the rise of prices of few essential commodities, some items have completely disappeared from the market. Suji, besan, dhoka, sattu and candles are nowhere to be found. “Those, who have old stocks, are selling them at a premium,” recounted a shopper. 

Those who do not buy loose grocery may face trying times ahead with supplies of branded products drying up at superstores and local kirana stores hiking up price steeply. Price of loose grocery items — rice, atta, pulses, edible oil and sugar — have also gone up. Shop owners say it is reflection of the rise in prices in the wholesale markets due to irregular truck movement.

Wholesale market traders though countered that retail prices were not commensurate with wholesale prices. There will be a difference as retailers have to pay for transporting the goods to their store. But that does not justify a markup of Rs 10-20 per kg. The government must act against such unethical practices,” said Agarwal. 

