Amit Shah reviews lockdown situation, tells officials to allow relaxation in genuine cases
2020-04-20
NEW DELHI: Home minister Amit Shah, who reviewed the situation arising out of Covid-19 pandemic in the country with senior ministry officials on Saturday, has called for due caution to be exercised so that only genuine exemptions and relaxations are given while allowing certain economic and industrial activities to be undertaken in areas not falling within hot-spots/clusters/containment zones.


It was decided at the review meeting — also attended by ministers of state G Kishan Reddy and Nityanand Rai — that district administrations, in collaboration with industries, should make arrangements to transfer labourers to their place of work within the state. “Modi government believes that on one hand, this will give a fillip to economic activity and on the other, provide employment to the labourers,” a home ministry spokesperson said on Sunday. 

States have been asked to give attention to operationalize big industrial units, industrial estates and industrial complexes, especially where the labourers can be accommodated within the complex. Such activities can help triggering economic revival, while ensuring that the labourers are provided gainful employment, the ministry stated. 

District magistrates should also explore the possibility of providing labourers employment through agriculture as well as MGNREGA activities, the home minister suggested during that review meeting.

In respect of the labourers who continue to stay in relief camps, greater attention should be paid to the their welfare, including quality of meals being provided to them. While it is understandable that the situation is challenging, the issue can be addressed.

Shah said with community-based testing to be taken up by medical teams, stat s should take special care to ensure that each medical team is provided security. Before the team goes for testing in the community, the ground work in the community can be done by activating the peace committee and involving responsible community leaders, who can assuage the fear and confusion amongst the people with respect to testing, treatment and other aspects of Covid-19.

Patrolling in rural areas should be increased to monitor compliance with national directives to fight Covid-19. DMs/DCs can draw upon police, panchayat officials, revenue officials etc. to help monitor the compliance.

