‘Amma, you are in that (Covid-19) duty, so don’t come near us’
2020-05-05
Madurai: M Devadha, a 108 ambulance service technician in Madurai, has transported more than 30 Covid-19 positive cases in and around Madurai. The woman who lost her husband two years ago cannot control her tears when her two daughters say “Amma, you are in that (Covid-19) duty, so don’t come near us,” but takes comfort that they, aged 8 and 5, are aware of social distancing.

“It’s been a month since I touched and embraced my daughters,” she told TOI after shifting a Covid-19 positive patient from Sellur to the Government Rajaji Hospital here on Saturday. By handling 46 Covid-19 suspects and positive cases so far, this technician has handled the most number of cases in the southern districts.

Devadha, who joined the 108 ambulance service as a technician four years ago, had to convince her mother as she was strongly against her daughter handling Covid-19 patients. “I explained that someone has to do it and asked her what if everyone refused to handle the patients,” the technician said.

Her typical 12 hour shift starts around 8am, and at times she does 24 hour shift which is followed by rest for 24 hours. She has to take two glasses of ‘kabasura kudineer’ prepared by her mother before she steps into the house after duty. Her daughters talk to her from the next room.

Initially, she was afraid to handle Covid-19 patients, but she got confidence from when her ambulance pilot K Karthik Kumar, 29, who is little more experienced, and guided her to wear the personal protective equipment kit. It takes about 10 minutes to wear the kit and five minutes to properly dispose it.

Handling a positive patient takes about one hour when he or she is in the city. When they are from the outskirts of the city it takes about two to three hours. After handling the patient, it takes about half an hour for the technician and pilot to fumigate the van and be prepared to handle the next emergency call.

The most number of positive cases Devadha and Karthik handled in a day is seven when they shifted them from Dindigul to Karur on April 4. “Usually near and dear ones too are hesitant to come close to the patient when the individual tests positive. It is only us who accompany anxious patient in the ambulance till we reach the hospital,” Karthik said.

Having handled over 40 positive patients, he said that they wish that all those whom they handled recover. “We are happy when the hospital staff tell us that the patient we brought had recovered and returned home,” he said. On reaching home after a 12-hour shift he takes a bath before stepping into his house as his seven-month-old waits for his father.


