Among states, Kerala benefited most from lockdown
2020-04-09
KOCHI: Kerala, which reported 109 Covid-19 cases before restrictions were imposed, benefited the most from the 21-day lockdown. After lockdown, it flattened the curve and brought down its daily new growth rate (percentage growth of cases on a daily basis) post the 100th case to just 10% by the end of first week of lockdown and since April 3, it’s between 3% and 4%.

In contrast, in 11 other states – where total the cases were over 100 (most states reporting their hundredth case during the lockdown period) –the daily new growth rate post the 100th case/day by April 1 was highest in TN (89%), followed by Delhi (27%), UP (10%) and Karnataka (9%). Maharashtra that touched 100 along with Kerala on March 24, saw a sudden percentage increase of 37% on March 31. PM Narendra Modi announced a national lockdown on March 25.





After the first week of lockdown, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, MP, Gujarat and Jammu and Kashmir reported over 100 Covid-19 cases. Since then, many states have been on a sharper growth path.

On March 7, while Kerala and Andhra Pradesh reported daily new growth rate of 3% (lowest), in other places it remained high, with Maharashtra (17%) topping the list, followed by Rajasthan (14%) and TN (11%)

Explaining the Kerala scenario, professor of community medicine at the medical college in Kannur Dr AK Jayasree said, "Most Covid-19 cases were those who returned from the Gulf. With total lockdown, these numbers fell. A committed and coordinated effort to identify and track people who arrived from abroad, their primary contacts and then ensuring strict home quarantine for them helped flatten the curve."

"Kerala was better prepared to handle lockdown. Government ensured that people didn’t wander outside for food and medicine by ensuring doorstep delivery. This holistic approach helped us. Also, our surveillance system was strong at grassroots level," said Bindu MV, assistant professor of community medicine that analysed data from March 25 to April 7 to show how states have fared after lockdown.

The sharp rise in cases, in recent days, in several states has been linked to Tablighi Jamaat congregation meet in Nizamuddin and increased testing. Almost 35% of the confirmed cases in India are linked to the meet. Also, there was no clustering due to migration in Kerala.

"Containment measures in Kerala were extremely good compared with other states. Contact tracing was excellent and people are participating in the right manner. Other states were a little bit late to respond," said Dr Prabhakaran, epidemiologist and vice-president, research and policy, Public Health Foundation of India, Delhi. 

