Amreli Covid-free despite huge influx
2020-04-19
Rajkot: Following the nation-wide lockdown, Amreli district administration got a major scare as thousands from Surat returned to their natives in local villages. The biggest fear was outbreak of Covid-19 many from Surat could have been carriers of the deadly virus.

But much to the relief of the adminsitration, the district so far has not registered a single positive case despite such a huge influx.

Officials attribute this to the massive mandatory quarantining measures, door-to-door survey and campaign to sensitize people taken up on warfooting along with stringent police actions against lockdown violators.

On Friday too, 73 people who were caught entering the district from different checkposts were immediately sent to the government quarantine facilities irrespective of whether they had symptoms or not. This has been the practice since day one.

In one month alone, 80,000 people have poured in the district from Surat. A huge population of Amreli natives are settled in Surat, mostly in diamond cutting and polishing,

Talking to TOI, district collector Aayush Oak said, “It’s fortunate that not a single case has been registered in the district. We have maintained strict vigil. Though no system is full proof, our policy to sensitize the village leaders, door-to-door survey and putting maximum people in quarantine as soon as they enter in the district have played a major role.” 

Oak said the guideline requires to quarantine those who have travel history aboard or other coronavirus-affected cities with symptoms. But in Amreli all those people who came from other districts were put under quarantine even if they had no symptoms. 

Dr. Bharat Kanabar, a surgeon engaged in examining suspected patients said, “District police has been very strict in enforcing lockdown and they have made Amreli and impervious fort. Vigilant villagers also helped us in identifying outsiders that resulted in screening maximum people.” 

Amreli district superintendent of police (SP) Nirlipt Rai said, “Among all districts, we have registered maximum number of offences against lockdown violators. Our focus was to ensure social distancing which we started by registering offences under Disaster Management Act and other sections of IPC. “Rai said the local Tabhigi Jamaat leaders have also been very forthcoming in urging the community to go for tests.


