AMU alumnus develops COVID-19 testing kit, approved by ICMR
2020-04-20
Agra: An alumnus of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) has developed the first indigenous Covid-19 testing kit in response to the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) call to all the countries to ramp up coronavirus testing. 

The testing kits have been approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), AMU officials said. 

According to AMU administration, AMU alumnus from the department of biochemistry Nadeem Rahman, director of NuLife Consultants and Distributors Pvt Ltd, New Delhi, has developed India's first antibody-based testing kit which takes less than 15 minutes to yield accurate results.

Rahman was permitted by the government to reopen NuLife Consultants and Distributors Pvt Ltd lab during the nationwide lockdown where he developed India’s first ‘Antibody-based Testing Kit’ to conduct finger-prick tests. The test takes only about fifteen minutes to yield accurate results. 

“The testing kits were launched in just a span of two weeks. Regular production will start soon,” Rahman said and added that they are confident of making one lakh kits per day to yield faster and suitable solution to large-scale screenings.

Rahman pointed out that a set of this testing kit will cost around Rs 500-600 and the price is likely to lessen further. “The best part about this rapid and less time-taking kit is that it is economical to produce unlike the expensive RT-PCR testing kits,” he said.

Rahman added that the antibody-based kit will ease the pressure on the pathology services struggling with COVID-19 detection in the country.

“We are proud that an AMU alumnus has developed the much needed affordable testing kit in times when the country is witnessing a surge in the number of coronavirus cases despite stringent measures being implemented in the country. It is a major cause of worry,” AMU vice-chancellor professor Tariq Mansoor said. He also praised Rahman for his invaluable contribution to India’s fight to curb COVID-19. 

Dean, faculty of Life Sciences, Prof Qayyum Husain who taught Rahman when he was pursuing BSc and MSc in Biochemistry at AMU said that the launch of first antibody-based testing kit in India is an extra-ordinary achievement.

AMU and its alumni are at the forefront of India’s fight against coronavirus. The Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College of the University has already conducted 2,500 free-of-cost tests.


