AMU converts two of its hostels into quarantine facilities
2020-06-13
Agra: Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) has converted two of its hostels - Moniuddin and UGC HRD Centre - into quarantine facilities, exclusively for its staff and students, in order to be ready for any Covid-19 cases.

This decision was taken on the recommendations of a committee constituted by the vice-chancellor, Professor Tariq Mansoor. While Moniuddin hostel, an annexe of S N Hall has been declared a quarantine facility for female students, the hostel of UGC HRD Centre will be used for isolating male students.

The registrar Abdul Hamid informed that Bibi Fatima Hall and Annexe of Dr B R Ambedkar Hall will also be converted into quarantine centres for girls and boys, respectively, when the University reopens. However, these facilities will only be used when there is no space left for patients in the Moniuddin hostel and UGC HRD Centre quarantine facilities.

He further said that students residing in the Bibi Fatima Hall will be shifted to Begum Azeezun Nisa Hall, while residents of the Annexe of Dr B R Ambedkar Hall will be shifted to Dr B R Ambedkar Hall. Dean Students' Welfare will be responsible for taking necessary steps for shifting the students, he added.

The committee has also recommended to immediately admit Covid-19 positive students residing in University hostels to JNMC and initiate the process of shifting the roommates of infected students to a quarantine centre. It has also been decided to declare the hostel wing as a containment zone, if any student is found Covid positive, as per the Government of India guidelines.

Spokesperson of the varsity, Shafey Kidwai, said that at present 31 patients are admitted at JNMC’s Covid ward.

Meanwhile, University employees, diagnosed with coronavirus have been asked to self-quarantine after undergoing treatment. They shall be quarantined at the University Health Service in case they show reluctance to self-isolate at their home for valid reasons. University Health Officer, director of Medical Attendance Scheme (MAS) and principal, A K Tibbiya College will conduct regular health checks of employees, officials said.


