An entomologist explores & explains coronavirus family
2020-04-17
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: At a time when experts and experimentalists in fields even far connected with science are contributing their mite to create awareness about Covid-19 pandemic, a seasoned agricultural entomologist, C A Jayaprakas, is on a mission to spread scientific awareness about fundamentals of virus family in general and one of its youngest progenies Sars coronavirus-2 in particular.

“It all started with a very simple realisation that since the outbreak of Covid-19, discussions in media and other social platforms are more or less focused on the impact and spread of the disease. Not much is spoken about what sort of virus is causing the Covid-19 disease and how different is this virus from other members in its family. Many doesn’t even know what a virus means and many believe that coronavirus was detected only recently. My focus is mainly on students, especially youngsters between the age group of 15 and 17 years who by understanding the science behind the virus might develop an interest in scientific research. Along with the precaution they take, let people also know what this virus is all about,” says Jayaprakas who is the head and principal scientist with Central Tuber Crops Research Institute in the state capital.

He avoids science jargons as much as possible during his lecture series and simplifies his explanation in such a way that secrets of science trickles down to every strata of the society. He chooses Malayalam as medium of lecture to target maximum number of common people. 

In his first virtual class voice clip, Jayaprakas explained how Russian botanist Dimitri Ivanovsky, in 1892, experimentally discovered presence of a microscopic particle smaller than bacteria while treating tobacco plant for mosaic infection. 

Later, explaining that the literal meaning of the Latin word virus, which means ‘venom’, he briefed how by 1898 another microbiologist and botanist Martinus Willem Beijerinck, father of virology, identified the venom and called it ‘contagium vivum fluidum’, meaning contagious living fluid. 

The speciality about Jayaprakas’ lecture series is that whoever listens to it would feel like he/she is sitting inside a classroom. During recoding, he imagines presence of his students, school and college mates and colleagues who are really interested to explore the nature and character of coronavirus.

To break the monotony, Jayaprakas, at times, calls out his students by name while explaining about virus. In his later lectures, most of which are around 20 to 25 minutes, he has explained why soap lather is best for dissolving lipid outer sheath of coronavirus, which has comparatively more length and more weight than others in the virus family.

Before explaining how the virus functions inside human lungs, he always makes sure that he tells his students about types of coronaviruses. “I am not an expert in virology. I depend on information I receive from reputed international journals. Let all benefit from such knowledge,” he says.


