Anbazhagan passes away on his birthday, 1st MLA to die of coronavirus
2020-06-11
CHENNAI: DMK MLA J Anbazhagan, who passed away on his 62nd birthday at a hospital here on Wednesday, became the first legislator in the country to die of Covid-19. The Chepauk constituency member was admitted to a private hospital on June 2 after he complained of breathing difficulties. He later tested positive for Covid-19. His mortal remains were laid to rest at Kannammapet burial ground in the city.

A three-time MLA, Anbazhagan was DMK’s Chennai west district secretary. A bold loyalist of the party and its leadership, Anbazhagan always spoke his mind. If his speeches within the party forum reflected the thoughts of party workers, his oration in the state assembly rattled ruling benches.

 “His condition deteriorated rapidly on Tuesday night. We could not bring him back,” said a senior doctor of Dr Rela Institute and Medical Centre in Chromepet. Doctors said his condition remained critical throughout his stay.

“He was on ventilator. At one point, he required lesser oxygen, and we thought he was responding well. But he had too many comorbidities,” said a doctor. “

During the first phase of lockdown, for 20 days he remained at home and even advised others to stay in their homes,” said J Karunanidhi, Anbazhagan’s brother and a former DMK councillor of Chennai Corporation.

 “As lockdown continued and desperate calls started coming from people, he became busy in personally distributing aid to people in Chepauk and Triplicane, which had a few Covid-19 affected streets,” his brother said. 

“Around 10 days before he got admitted to hospital, he had dysentery. He consulted his doctor over a video call and took medicines. He later developed cold and fever but kept running around, organizing relief. On May 29/30, he addressed a meeting of zonal secretaries in his district over ‘zoom’ and directed us to celebrate Kalaignar’s birthday (June 3) as ‘food distribution day’. He was not able to speak freely even then. Still, he continued with his work and as his condition worsened he decided to visit the hospital and the delay eventually cost him his life ,” recalls Karunanidhi, a DMK zonal secretary for T Nagar. He said Anbazhagan had lung-related problems over the past six months and had frequent bouts of cold.

Anbazhagan, who even dabbled in film distribution for some time and produced a Tamil film, had friends cutting across parties. 

The condolences that poured in through the day just went to prove that. Governor Banwarilal Purohit and Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami led the people in expressing their condolences to the legislator’s family member.

 Deputy chief minister O Panneerselvam and MNM president Kamal Haasan called DMK president M K Stalin to share the grief. MDMK general secretary Vaiko, TNCC president K S Alagiri and AMMK general secretary T T V Dhinakaran were among others, who offered their condolences.

(With inputs from Pushpa Narayan)

