Andhra Pradesh records two deaths, 35 new Covid-19 cases as positive tally rises to 757
2020-04-22
VIJAYAWADA: Two more persons died from coronavirus in Andhra Pradesh on Tuesday, raising the toll to 22, even as 35 new Covid-19 cases were reported from the southern state.


Among the 35 new cases, 10 cases were reported from Kurnool, nine from Guntur, six from Kadapa, four from West Godavari, and three each from Anantapur and Krishna districts. The overall positive tally stood at 757.

Health officials on Tuesday said four Covid-19 patients tested negative and they were discharged from various hospitals in the state since Monday night. So far, 96 persons have been discharged in the state, including 19 in Kadapa, 18 in Visakhapatnam, 15 in Guntur, 14 in Krishna, nine in West Godavari, eight in East Godavari district. Guntur recorded two more deaths on Tuesday taking the Covid-19 death roll in Andhra Pradesh to 22.

Covid-19 cases continued to increase in Kurnool, which has already registered 184 cases. Kurnool is followed by Guntur with 158 positive cases, and Krishna 83, accounting for nearly 56 percent caseload of the state.

Guntur emerged as the disease hotbed as it alone contributed 101 cases. After Guntur, Narasaraopet in Guntur district recorded 29 Covid-19 cases. Krishna district officials are on their toes with ever increasing cases, particularly in Vijayawada and suburbs. Kurnool continued to lead the state’s disease burden registering 10 more cases on Tuesday. People without any travel or contact history are falling prey to the pandemic in the last few days and it has become a cause for concern for Kurnool district officials.

There has been a steady increase in the number of cases in West Godavari, Anantapur, Kadapa and Prakasam districts. Srikakulam and Vizianagaram districts continued to remain Covid-free.

Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy directed officials during a review meeting to take effective steps to restrict the spread by increasing the number of tests. Officials told the CM that distribution of protection masks has gained momentum in the red and orange zones and that tests are being carried out resolutely.

