Andhra Pradesh readies infrastructure to counter Covid spurt
2020-04-26
VIJAYAWADA: The state health department has decided to activate the second line of hospitals in anticipation of a spurt in Covid-19 cases in the next few weeks. All hospitals, including the five state hospitals and first and second line district Covid hospitals will handle only Covid-19 cases.



Some time back, the government had identified six lines of hospitals including state-level Covid hospitals, district hospitals, private medical colleges, private hospitals and government medical colleges. 

While the first of the line of hospitals are currently operational, the state government has now decided to rope in the second line.

District collectors have been asked to shift and divert patients with other ailments from the second line of hospitals to other nearby treatment facilities. 

Directions have been issued to ensure that such patients are not referred to the hospitals identified in the six lines of hospitals earmarked for Covid treatment.

Before referring patients to other hospitals, those displaying symptoms of Covid-19 as well as those who have come in contact with Covid-19 patients will be tested. 

The directive states that if certain critical units such as dialysis and child delivery can function in hospitals earmarked for Covid treatment by segregating the units, the units can continue functions. In such cases, hospitals will have to prevent movement from one segregated space to another.

KS Jawahar Reddy, special chief secretary (medical, health and family welfare) asked officials to shift expectant mothers who have been hospitalised to nearby government-run maternity hospitals.

“If there is no such treating facility, patients should be shifted to not-for-profit maternity specialised trusts or missionary hospitals, if they have Arogyasri facility. Otherwise, they shall be shifted to other Arogyasri network hospitals,” Reddy said.

He added that patients requiring treatment at other such specialised units would have to be shifted in a similar manner.

Meanwhile, owing to reports of Covid-19 patients dying in transit, it has been decided that patients who have been found Covid-19 positive through Truenat tests in other hospitals would be shifted to Covid hospitals only after they are stabilised and will be transferred only in dedicated advanced life support (ALS) ambulances.

If the hospital a Covid-19 patient approaches does not have testing facilities, even then, the patient should be stabilised and then referred to a Covid-19 treatment facility on an ALS ambulance.

According to health officials, breathlessness is an ominous manifestation among Covid-19 patients and therefore extra care must be taken while referring patients.


