Anganwadis to track lockdown’s psychological impact
2020-04-10
Hyderabad: The state government has given detailed instructions to anganwadi workers and asked them to track psychological difficulties faced by workers during lockdown.

The guidelines instruct ground staff to observe the psychological impact of lockdown on women, children, the aged and differently abled in particular. They have also been given special training to give suggestions to those who approach them. Sources in the government said a helpline would soon be launched to deal with these kinds of problems.

Anganwadi workers were asked to tell pregnant women not to listen to Covid-19 news and that hospitals where they would be admitted will not have coronavirus patients.

If there are any malnutrition problems among children, they need to be taken to hospital. If their condition is not serious, the anganwadi worker can suggest healthy diets. If there are any preschool level children at home, parents should be taught about storytelling and workbooks for children in the age group. Anganwadi staff have been asked to stay in touch with parents regularly. Since the children will not be allowed to go outside during lockdown, behavioural changes should be observed, they have been told. While taking all these measures, the ground staff should also take precautionary measures. While doing the survey they are not supposed to enter houses. While talking to people, they should wear masks and after finishing the survey, they should put to wash clothes worn during the day.

In addition to this, workers have been asked to drink warm water regularly and follow certain Ayurvedic remedies as suggested by the Centre if they have cold and cough. If they still show symptoms, they should meet a doctor.

The anganwadi staff hasve also been sentised on how they need to take utmost care in ensuring that they do not contract the infection as they will be interacting with a lot of people, including small children, throughout the lockdown period. They have also been instructed to inform people about good hygiene practices.


