Nagpur: Animal lovers step forward to feed strays during lockdown
2020-03-29
NAGPUR: In a letter written by NMC to police commissioner, the civic body states that it is now allowed to feed stray dogs from 6-7am and 7-10 pm. More than two people are not allowed to feed the animals. “It is mandatory to take prior permission from the police station of your area for feeding," said Smita Mire, founder of Save Speechless Organization.


A businessman, a police head constable, a medical shop owner, a hotelier and among the animal lovers who have joined hands with Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) to feed the stray dogs during the lockdown following Prime Minister Narendra Modi's appeal.

This newly-formed group in the city has hired cooks who are making over 2,000 chapatis everyday for the street dogs. The initiative began in the city on Saturday when the group members fed hundreds of strays in Gandhibagh, Itwari, Wardhaman Nagar, Maskasath, Railway station, Sitabuldi and others areas.

According to animal activist Karishma Galani, who is sponsoring the payment of cooks, the group is focusing more on commercial areas of Nagpur. “Stray dogs in these areas were mostly dependent on shopkeepers or leftover food from restaurants. With all of it shut down now, these dogs have no source of food,” she said.

Extending its support to the group, NMC has allotted them a vehicle and driver for transporting the food to different areas. The food is being prepared at Ghate restaurant near Ambazari. The owner Vinod Ghate, who has been working for animal welfare since years, has provided his premises and cooking facilities. “He is also sponsoring milk and sugar. We are preparing special sweet chapatis to ensure the dogs eat them,” said Galani.

Founder of Spacewood Kirit Joshi, who is sponsoring nearly 30 kilograms of wheat flour daily, stressed strays were suffering a lot during the lockdown. “Residents who would feed them regularly are not stepping out now. Hence it is very important to ensure that they get a regular supply of food. We will keep doing this till the lockdown continues,” Joshi said.

He added that individual animal lovers and NGOs should come together to cover most areas in the city. “Working in isolation won’t work now,” he added.

It’s been four years since head constable at Lakadganj police station Ishwar Potdar has been feeding 7-8 stray dogs in the station’s premises. However, since the lockdown, the 56-year-old cop took upon himself to feed street dogs of as many areas as possible. “Every day, I stuff my vehicle with different food items and feed them to stray dogs I see on my way. The dogs are in a very poor condition as they are dying of hunger. They can’t even leave their territory and go to other areas in search of food,” said Potdar.

On Day 1 of the initiative itself, many animal lovers in the city came forward to help. Carpenter Yogesh Hanwate accompanied the members and fed dogs the entire day. Animal lover Sudha Agrawal offered 100 chapatis and 5kg rice.

The group has appealed to the citizens to come under one platform and carry out stray feeding in a systematic manner. “This is the time to show kindness and compassion,” they said. 


