Another ‘Happy Hypoxia’ death in Lucknow due to Covid-19
2020-06-08
LUCKNOW: Two days after an Aishbagh resident died of ‘hypoxaemia’ or dramatic fall in oxygen levels after being admitted to Balrampur hospital, health authorities on Sunday confirmed he was infected with coronavirus, making him the second victim of ‘silent hypoxia or happy hypoxia’ in the city due to Covid-19. It was also the second corona casualty from Aishbagh and sixth in the city since March 11, of which four died within a week. When brought to the hospital, the 60-year-old man from Habibnagar in Aishbagh was unconscious with respiratory distress and extremely low blood oxygen levels — a case of hypoxaemia. This triggered suspicion of Covid infection and he was taken to the isolation wing and his sample sent for lab test. He died just hours after arrival. The report later confirmed coronavirus infection,” said hospital chief medical superintendent Dr R K Gupta.

Doctors said when blood oxygen levels drop below normal level of 95-100%, people are breathless. They breathe faster to get more oxygen and cannot work. The condition is called hypoxaemia. Medical intervention on time can save lives.

However, Covid-19 patients continue to work despite low oxygen level and collapse when it drops critically. Such a condition is called silent hypoxia or happy hypoxia as people become critically ill without significant symptoms. Oxygen levels drop because the virus affects the lungs most. In the Habibnagar case, family members told doctors he was working normally before losing consciousness.

On Friday, 78-year-old neurosurgeon Dr Shyam Swaroop, also an Aishbagh resident, died of kidney ailment. His test report found him positive for Covid-19. 

CMO, Lucknow, Dr Narendra Agarwal, said, “Around 15 family members and contacts of the deceased have been home quarantined and samples sent for testing. The locality will be declared containment zone.” In-charge of vector borne disease unit, Dr KP Tripathi, said, an audit of deaths in which patients were found to be Covid positive is being done to zero in on the cause of death.

