Another health worker tests Covid-19 positive in Kerala
2020-03-30
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: One more person involved in Covid-19 prevention activities tested positive in the state on Sunday. Earlier, a nurse with Kottayam Medical College Hospital had tested positive. 

As many as 20 new cases were reported, taking the total number of cases reported in the state to 202. Of this, 20 people have been discharged while one person died on Saturday. At present, 181 patients are admitted at different hospitals of the state.

Of the persons who tested positive on Sunday, 18 had travelled from different foreign countries. The health worker was with a government hospital in Ernakulam.

Eight cases were reported in Kannur, seven in Kasaragod and one each in Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, Palakkad, Thrissur and Malappuram. Kasaragod district has the highest number of positive cases reported, with 80. The one positive case reported in Thiruvananthapuram is learned to have no travel history. Authorities are looking at the possibility of direct contact with an infected person.

Meanwhile, health authorities are yet to trace the source of the infection in the case of the Congress leader who tested positive in Idukki. In Kollam, the district administration released a list of 101 people in the high-risk category who had come in direct contact with the positive case reported in the district.

At present, 1,41,211 persons are under observation in the state, of which 593 are admitted in designated hospitals. In Pathanamthitta, four persons tested negative in repeated tests and are being readied for discharge.

Since the new cases were persons who had come from abroad, the health department is sticking to its line that there is no community spread in the state. Even though more cases were reported from Kasaragod, authorities are of the view that all the cases are either those travelling from abroad or direct contacts.

Till date, 6,690 samples have been sent for testing, of which 5,518 have returned negative. On Sunday, 105 people were admitted to various hospitals with suspected symptoms.

After Kasaragod with 80 positive cases, Kannur has 38 cases and Ernakulam 14 positive cases. The other districts with Covid-19 cases are: Thiruvananthapuram (8), Kollam (1), Pathanamthitta (5), Alappuzha (1), Kottayam (3), Idukki (2), Thrissur (5), Palakkad (5), Malappuram (9), Kozhikode (9), Wayand (1).

Palakkad has the most number of people under observation, at 18,837, followed by Thiruvananthapuram (18,145) and Kollam (17,040). 


