Another Covid woman embraces safe motherhood
2020-05-14
Rajkot: The air around the gynaecology department of Sir T hospital in Bhavnagar was thick with suspense in the wee hours on Wednesday at 2.20 am, when the light turned green and the doctors announced, “All’s well. It’s a girl!” 

While the good news was a double treat for the worried family members and the doctors as the baby tested Covid negative, the woman is yet to experience the joy of motherhood with doctors not allowing the child near her.

The drama started with the 27-year-old mother-to-be, Samaben Nayani, who was rushed in to the hospital in labour pains from a Covid hotspot, was detected to be a Covid-19 positive. The health teams of Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation (BMC) had sent her samples for testing after knowing that she is a resident of containment area. 

Doctors were at a loss looking at the nature of the case, as on one hand the woman was infected and on the other, she needed a C-section for her delivery. “The woman had full-term pregnancy and was in labour pain at midnight. She also tested positive and hence we admitted her in isolation. It was a challenging situation and our doctors were concerned for two lives,” said Hardik Gathani, Sir T hospital administrator.

Dr Kanaklatta Nakum, head of gyneacology department, said, “Our main apprehension was that the woman had cephalopelvic disproportion, a medical complication where normal delivery was possible under no circumstances and surgery was required for delivering the baby. A team of gynaecologists, anaesthetists and physicians assessed the challenging situation and decided to proceed for immediate surgery as any delay may asphyxiate the baby.”

“Surgery was conducted taking all necessary precautions and following the guidelines of Covid-19. The patient delivered a healthy female child at 2.19am,” Nakum added. 

Dr Gathani said “It was a big relief that doctors completed the surgery without jeopardising the safety of mother. It’s a more relief and cherishable movement for the parents that baby tested negative of Covid-19.”


