Another Covid patient dies on day of hospitalization
2020-05-22
Ahmedabad: Late hospitalization of Covid-19 patients possibly due to the fear of stigma, the severity of viral infection and a higher prevalence of co-morbid conditions is proving to be the death knell for Amdavadis. On Thursday, a 45-year old woman from Kanchar-Golvad village of Dholka taluka in Ahmedabad district barely spent a day at the hospital before she succumbed to the disease.On Tuesday a one-year-old from Hudco-Indira Awas on Ahmedabad’s outskirts spent a few hours at the hospital before being pronounced dead. On Wednesday a 65-year-old woman from Narayani Park-II in Bopal had died on the same day of her hospitalisation. In all Ahmedabad’s rural areas have reported 147 Covid-19 cases and nine deaths because of the disease since the outbreak began.On May 9, director of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi (AIIMS-D), Dr Randeep Guleria had pointed out that the biggest causes of Ahmedabad’s high death rates were late hospitalization and higher prevalence of diabetes, hypertension, heart and kidney disease. He had also urged the state government to work out a strategy to identify such vulnerable persons. On Thursday, there were 17 deaths reported from Ahmedabad municipal limits of which 12 were of patients who were diabetic and suffering from hypertension. There was one patient with kidney disease. All those who died were above 40 years of age, the eldest being an 87-year-old man. In the West Zone a 75-year-old woman died in Ranip area after three days at the hospital. A 60-year-old-man from Sarkhej spent four days in treatment. In Ahmedabad city, there were six deaths in the age group of 51 to 60 years, two deaths in the 60 to 70 years age group and four in the 40 to 50 years age bracket. Meanwhile, two more cases have been reported from Bopal, taking the areas total number to 20 , while two deaths were also reported. On Thursday a resident of Diamond Flats at Bhavya Park tested positive, while in another case, a city crime branch sub-inspector from Radha Krishna Society in Bopal also tested positive for Covid-19. Two male migrant labourers, 43 and 19, who were on their way home, also tested positive.According to the Bopal-Ghuma nagaralika president Jigisha Shah, “A 30-year-old resident was arrested by Vastrapur police and as it was mandated a Covid-19 test was performed. The accused tested positive for the virus.” 