Anti-CAA protests ‘take a break’ in western UP, to resume after Covid-19 is defeated
2020-03-25
Meerut/Agra/Bareilly: After Delhi and Lucknow, women protesters staging round-the-clock sit-in against CAA and NRC withdrew their stir in all cities of western UP, but with a rider that they will resume it once the novel coronavirus is wiped out. The “conditional break” was achieved after a lot of persuasion by police, authorities and religious leaders who termed large-scale gathering as unsafe amid the threat posed by novel coronavirus.

In Deoband, a town in UP’s Saharanpur district housing one of the world’s largest Islamic seminaries, a protest was going on for the last 57 days. On Tuesday, it was discontinued. However, the protesting women left their bangles and ‘burqas’ at the protest site, Eidgah ground, under the “guard of CCTV cameras”.

“We will resume the stir from April 5. Until then, no one will touch these burqas and bangles or else we would resume our agitation, then and there,” one of the protesters said. Over 500 women were at the sit-in site at any given time for the last almost two months in Deoband’s Eidgah, making it the largest protest site in UP.

According to Vidyasagar Mishra, Saharanpur superintendent of police (rural), “We had been talking to the representatives of this agitation for some time. On the day of janata curfew, the attendance became thin. And on late Monday night, they finally agreed with some conditions.”

Fozia Usmani, a member of Mutahida Khawatin Committee (MKC), the organising committee of the ‘dharna’, said, “We are leaving our bangles and burqas behind as our symbolic presence. We are only leaving the place for time being to mitigate chances of community spread of novel coronavirus.”

In Aligarh’s Shahjamal area, another major protest site in the state, the agitation was called off on Tuesday. The protesters were staging the sit-in for the last 57 days. They vacated the protest site after getting a “written” assurance from police that their tents and other items will not be removed from ‘dharna’ site, as they will resume the sit-in after spread of the virus is controlled. 

City magistrate Vineet Kumar Singh, who was present at the site, said, “The protesters were told about the health issues and they agreed to vacate the site.” When asked about any kind of assurance given to the protesters, Singh refused to comment.

“Our priority is to check the spread of Covid-19,” the officer said.

“This is only temporary, and we will be back once the situation is under control,” said one of the protesters, adding that the protest against the government will continue till they accept their demand to withdraw Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA).

In Moradabad also, Eidgah was cleared of protesters. Additional superintendent of police (city) said that tents and other things have been removed from the sit-in site. Similarly, superintendent of police in Sambhal said that all protesting women have gone back to their homes calling off the protest there.

“Today, we reached among the protesters and interacted with them after which, except a few, everyone was ready to go back to their homes. Later, rest of them also vacated the spot and we cleared the ground after uprooting tents. An FIR was lodged against 12 named and 160 unknown people for their stubborn attitude,” ASP Amit Kumar Anand said. Earlier in the morning, the DM also gave the example of Shaheen Bagh of Delhi where anti-CAA protesters called off their protest on Tuesday morning. 


