Anti-CAA protest in Madurai suspended due to Covid-19
2020-03-21
MADURAI: Considering the intensity of Covid-19 outbreak, the indefinite protest against CAA, NRC and NPR was suspended on the 36th day on Friday. One of the organisers and Madurai district president of the Tamilnadu Muslim Munnetra Kazhagam (TMMK), S Sheik Ibrahim said the protest will resume after Covid-19 is brought under control.

Organisers refuted that ending the protest had anything to do with the Madras high court order against such protests on Friday. A division bench of justice M M Sundresh and justice Krishnan Ramaswamy in their interim order while hearing a batch of pleas to stall protests in the state had said that no protests and mass gatherings, including anti-CAA agitations, can be permitted across Tamil Nadu till Covid-19 outbreak is contained.

“Decision to suspend the protest was taken on Thursday night considering the Covid-19 situation as others should not be affected by us. We also took into consideration the role we have to play to prevent the virus and have decided to extend full support to the governments to curb the deadly virus,” Ibrahim said.

The protest ended with a rally in which nearly 4,000 women and representatives of various Muslim bodies and political parties participated. The rally that began at ‘Shaheen Bagh’ in Mahaboopalayam created awareness on Covid-19 apart from sloganeering against CAA, NRC and NPR.

“There was no pressure from the police as the protest was organised with permission. We withdrew voluntarily,” Ibrahim said. 

Representatives of Manithaneya Makkal Katchi, Social Democratic Party of India, Communist Part of India (Marxist) and Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi participated in the rally on Friday.

Most protests across the state concluded on Monday following the state government’s order on social distancing due to Covid-19. 

On Wednesday, the Tamil Nadu Thowheed Jamath (TNTJ) organised a prison filling protest against CAA, NPR and NRC. A case was registered against nearly 2,100 of them who took part in the protest at Kadayanallur in Tenkasi district on Wednesday.


