Anxiety, anger, depression grip many in the time of coronavirus
2020-04-11
555, can be trimmed according to requirements

Pune: The fear of getting infected with the novel coronavirus COVID-19 led a 75-year-old Law College Road resident to commit suicide in his house on Thursday. The suicide note stating ‘Corona Fear’ found by the police at his residence made it evident that the rapidly spreading virus was the cause of the suicide. 

Psychiatrists and psychologists said while the suicide was an extreme case, thousands from the city were suffering from anxiety issues, irritability, anger and even depression in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak and the ensuing lockdown . Doctors said many people were so stressed and anxious that they were scared to even step out into the balconies of their houses. 

City-based psychotherapist and counsellor Vidyadhar Bapat said he has been providing telephonic counseling to several people suffering from coronavirus-related anxiety. “There is an uncertainty about when all this will end and a heavy fear of infection. The constant fear is causing biological changes in people’s brain and leading to secretion of stress hormones. This, in turn, is causing anxiety, irritability, friction with family members, loneliness, unnecessary suspicions, anger and sleeplessness. I have seen cases of friction arising between newly-married couples,” he said. 

Bapat said the continuous stress was also affecting people’s immunity and increasing physical ailments such as acidity, blood pressure and even chances of catching infection. “These issues have aggravated in people already suffering from anxiety disorders or depression. The otherwise mentally healthy people have also started facing anxiety issues,” he added.

K K Aggarwal, president of the Confederation of Medical Associations of Asia and Oceania (CMAAO) and national past president of Indian Medical Association (IMA), while assessing the situation in early March, had mentioned a term — Coranxiety. 

“It is anxiety about falling ill and dying, fear of getting infected while visiting doctors, fear of losing livelihood, fear of not being able to work during isolation and fear of being dismissed from work if infected. It is the fear of being social excluded, of being put into isolation or being separated from loved ones and caregivers due to quarantine. Coranxiety includes refusal to take care of unaccompanied or separated minors or people with disabilities or elderly because of their high-risk nature. It further includes feeling of helplessness, boredom, depression due to being isolated, stigmatization of being positive and possible anger,” he said.

Amruta Kashikar, a city-based clinical psychologist running a mental health helpline with five of her colleagues to help people cope with anxiety related to coronavirus, said, “For the first few days after the lockdown was imposed, we got frequent calls from people about increased anxiety, panic attacks and other issues. People are scared about getting infected or worried about family members living in other cities or about the need for a lockdown and spread of the virus. One person called me saying that he drove much faster as compared to his usual driving speed when out to purchase groceries as he thought the environment is polluted with coronavirus.”

Senior psychiatrist Vidyadhar Watve said, “Anxiety is a common psychiatric disorder and the continuous hammering of information about coronavirus is leading to increased anxiousness among people. I have seen patients who have never suffered from any issues but are complaining of sleeplessness, anxiety and depression. The situation is unusual and so the people suffering from anxiety has increased.”


