AP cop croons ‘corona song’ to spread awareness on Covid-19
2020-04-15
After coming up with various initiatives, including dressing up as Lord Yama, the God of Death, or wearing ‘corona’ helmets, the Andhra Pradesh Police have now come up with a corona song to spread awareness about the virus and urge people to stay indoors. 

KGV Saritha, Additional SP, Women’s Wing, AP Police lent her voice to a four-minute-20-second ‘corona song’, which has gone viral on social media. Speaking to Hyderabad Times, Saritha says, “We noticed that a lot of youngsters are still coming out on the streets and violating lockdown norms. Many still feel that coronavirus only affects people who have travelled abroad. Today, we have over 400 active cases of Covid-19 in Andhra Pradesh and I realised that we need to send a strong message to the masses. That’s when I decided to come up with this Corona song.”



Saritha, who wrote the song herself, recorded it in an in-house studio at the Police Headquarters in Vijayawada. “Although I’m not a professional singer, I used to sing a lot during my school days. I used that experience to sing this song in local dialect to make sure people understand the gravity of the situation. This is the biggest fight of our lives and the only weapon we have is social distancing. People should take this lockdown seriously and make lives easier for us,” she adds. 

Cops feel that friendly policing is the need of the hour at a time when tensions are high due to the ongoing pandemic. “Such initiatives are much-needed to spread awareness and it is good to see people in our department coming up with such ideas. Our duty is not just to enforce the law during a crisis situation but also to spread awareness through our artistic skills. Police department is putting in all the necessary efforts and all we expect is cooperation from citizens, especially from youngsters. Together we can beat this deadly pandemic and get back to our normal lives,” says Dwaraka Tirumala Rao, Commissioner of Police, Vijayawada.



