Andhra Pradesh fixes testing fee for five private diagnostic centres approved by ICMR
2020-06-14
VISAKHAPATNAM: As Andhra Pradesh continues to witness a surge in Covid-19 cases, private diagnostic centres have entered the fray to test Covid-19 samples. 


The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has till date given its approval to five private laboratories in the state.

The private labs include Manipal Hospital, Tadepalli; PathGene Health Care Private Limited, Tirupati; Apollo Health and Lifestyle Limited, Vijayawada; Vijaya Diagnostic Centre, Kurnool and Maharaja Institute of Medical Sciences, Vizianagaram. 

However, the viral diagnostic and research laboratory (VRDL) at the Maharaja Institute of Medical Sciences, Vizianagaram, has been set up by the state government under the public-private partnership (PPP) mode to address the absence of a government medical college in Vizianagaram district.

The state government on Friday fixed Rs 2,900 as the Covid-19 testing fee for individuals approaching the ICMR-approved private labs, while the fee will be Rs 2,400 for samples sent by the state government, including pooled samples. 

Even after getting the approval of the ICMR, private labs may only start testing after obtaining permission from the state government. The state has close to 65 RT-PCR and Truenat testing labs set up by the government, and which conduct tests free of cost.

According to ICMR guidelines, only National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL)-accredited private labs can apply for approval. To be eligible, the lab should have a calibrated and functional real time RT-PCR machine and biosafety level 2 cabinet, cold centrifuge, autoclave for sterilising the waste, staff having hands-on experience in using the RT-PCR machine, among other requirements.

A representative of the private laboratory in Vijayawada said the lab will also deploy technicians to collect swab samples from the homes of suspected Covid-19 cases. “As per the state government’s order, Rs 2,900 will be collected for testing a sample. However, additional charges will be applicable for at-home testing,” he added.

Andhra Pradesh, which collected its first sample on February 1, had to send it to Pune as the state did not have any Covid-19 testing centre. At present, Andhra Pradesh has the highest number of Covid-19 testing centres set up by the state government in the country. The state has conducted more than 5.36 lakh tests as of Saturday morning, or, at least one in every 100 persons has been tested.


