AP records 1,191 Covid-19 cases during fourth stage of lockdown
2020-06-01
VIJAYAWADA: Lockdown 4.0, which ended on Sunday, saw the state register the highest number of Covid-19 cases among all four phases of the lockdown— 1,191 cases. Andhra Pradesh, which recorded its first Covid-19 cases on March 12, had only five cases till the day of the Janata Curfew on March 22.

Subsequently, even before the Union government declared the first lockdown, Andhra Pradesh voluntarily initiated a lockdown from March 23 to March 31. Then, the nationwide lockdown was imposed which allowed only essential services to function.




During the first phase of the lockdown, the administration was primarily focussed on augmenting healthcare capacities and testing footprint. The augmentations were happening through new modalities validated by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).

The Markaz-related outbreak in the first phase had kept state officials on their toes. The administration was busy tracing attendees, testing them, then tracing their primary and secondary contacts and putting them in quarantine. Between March 22 and April 14, lockdown phase one, Andhra Pradesh registered 478 cases.

Then, the focus shifted from detection of Covid-19 cases to containment. The second phase of the lockdown saw the state register 1,100 Covid-19 cases and 24 deaths. The sudden spike in cases made the administration rethink its strategy, especially for patients with comorbidities.

In order to address the spike, beds got oxygen lines and pulse oximeters were supplied to every dedicated Covid-19 hospital. The state government also came out with new guidelines with regard to more vulnerable sections of the populace.

These new guidelines included shifting both confirmed and unconfirmed cases to Covid-19 hospitals after stabilising them and then transferring them on dedicated advanced life support (ALS) ambulances.

Further, the government decided to treat patients above 60 years of age and those with comorbidities only at government-run Covid-19 hospitals which are believed to have advanced facilities. This move seemed to bear results and the death rate went down in subsequent phases.

During lockdown phase three, testing was ramped up further. More viral research and diagnostic laboratories were set up. The state also lined up a second rung of Covid-19 hospitals in districts and recruited specialists in anticipation of a spike.

The third and fourth phases of the lockdown opened the doors for migrant workers from other states and foreign returnees. This led to a spurt in cases. Of migrants coming in from other states, 418 tested positive for Covid-19. Among foreign returnees, 111 tested positive.

Nearly 220 cases linked to Chennai’s Koyambedu market added to the state’s tally. The magnitude of the spurt in cases among people from the aforementioned groups can be gauged from the fact that in earlier phases, only 42 people from other states and 21 foreign returnees had tested positive for Covid-19.


