Andhra Pradesh to follow Centre call on lockdown
2020-04-29
AMARAVATI: Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Monday left the decision to extend the lockdown or go for a graded exit after May 3 to the Centre. The state will follow the Centre’s decision on the lockdown, he told the PM at Monday’s video conference.


Jagan made a detailed presentation on the containment measures undertaken by the government in the state. “Strict lockdown has been enforced in the red zones and containment areas. The number of positive cases in the state are less than the national average. We are granting permissions to certain industries and firms located in green zones by following the Centre’s guidelines. We will not relax conditions in red zones and containment areas,” he asserted.

The CM further said that the test, trace and treatment plans were yielding results as they were confining the positive cases to isolation wards. “The state has been providing food and shelter to migrant labourers without allowing them to move out of their present locations. AP has also improved its health infrastructure by setting up nine VRDL labs and five dedicated Covid-19 hospitals along with a large number of quarantine homes,” he said.

Later, in a televised public address, the chief minister told people there is no stigma about being tested positive for Covid-19. He urged people not to treat Covid patients as untouchables as it could affect anyone in future and is fully curable if detected early.

The CM said nearly 98% of Covid-19 patients are recovering from the illness across the globe. “Only 14% need hospitalization and 4% ICU treatment. Over 80 per cent people have recovered at their homes,” he said.

He said the situation has reached such a level that Covid-19 may become “a part of our lives for a long time”. “One could beat the virus with hygienic practices and by maintaining social distance,” he added, and appealed to people to come forward and get tested so that the spread can be contained.

The CM further said that over 80% of the state is in green zone and they need to protect it from getting infected. “Some 63 out of 676 mandals are classified as red zones and 54 as orange zones. As many as 559 mandals are in green zone, which can help us revive economic activity and normal life if protected properly,” he said.


