Apartment owners’ association act tough as number of home quarantine cases increase
2020-05-31
Kochi: As the number of people under home quarantine increases in many apartment complexes in Kochi city, flat owners are putting stringent regulations to check the movement of residents and visitors. Owners’ associations are confused about disposing waste generated from flats where people are quarantined.

V K Shankarankutty, president, All Kerala Apartment Owners’ Apex Association, said when owners return to their homes, the association cannot stop them from entering the buildings. It’s mostly NRIs and NRKs who have bought apartments in the city.

While measures are taken to safely dispose waste collected from apartments where people are quarantined, office-bearers of some owners’ associations said they are worried about people flushing disposable gloves and masks into toilets. This leads to leakage and troubles in pumping of sewage.

Regarding precautions taken at apartment complexes, Shankarankutty said restrictions have been placed on the entry of visitors. “Instead of being alert, people are scared and anxious. There are problems associated with this fear factor. There are also issues related to waste disposal,” he said.

When people arrive from abroad or other states, they are directly taken from the vehicle to their flats. Nobody else is allowed to use the lift at this time. It’s after sanitizing the lifts that other residents are allowed to use them. Some apartment complexes block family members of those quarantined for coming out of their spaces. All arrangements are made to supply them provisions and other requirements.

Hawkins George, president of Skyline Riverdale Association, said senior citizens confined to their homes are the most worried lot. “Elderly people are used to walking in the park and attend programmes at the club house inside the apartment complex. As these places are closed and people being confined to their homes, they feel isolated. Then the association decided to place chairs at lawns and encourage senior citizens to sit and chat by maintaining social distancing and other Covid-19 protocols,” he said.

Tenants at apartment complexes have a tough time. Abhishek K Sasi, a student of Rajagiri College of Applied Sciences and Management, recounted his experience after returning to the city from his hometown at Pathanamthitta. “I have three more exams left and I wanted to get back to my apartment at Kakkanad. When I came back, the apartment owners’ association did not allow me to stay there. They insisted on getting a health certificate and wanted me to report at police station. However, I was allowed to pick up my belongings and leave,” he said, adding that he is staying at friend’s house. “The exams are in June. Once it gets over, I will go back to my native place,” he said.

There are also people who want to check out flats available for rentals. Obtaining permission from apartment owner’s association to enter flat complexes has become a trouble for both owners and tenants. “Many owners are abroad or are residing in other states. The conversation between the broker, tenant and owner happens over the phone. But tenants are unable to finalise the deal as permissions are often denied permission to enter the apartment complex and check the property. It has become a time consuming and tedious process,” said Francis Johnson, a real-estate broker.


