Kolkata: Apartments draw up fresh relaxation list in last weekend before Unlock 1
2020-06-01
KOLKATA: During the last weekend before Unlock 1, residents of most housing complexes in Kolkata held meetings regarding the nitty-gritties of Centre and state guidelines to finalize the entry of outsiders, including maids and drivers, and relaxation on movements of residents inside the complex to ensure normalcy with all precautions.

A south Kolkata residential complex, Genexx Valley, meanwhile, is dealing with a complex issue where the family members of a resident, who was recently tested positive for Covid-19 and is under treatment now, is allegedly roaming inside the complex without maintaining home quarantine protocols. “We have even approached the officers of Haridevpur police station for help. The family members, especially the son, refuses to stay home,” said a resident.

At Urbana, where part-time maids were banned during lockdown, the authorities held a poll following which they are finally allowing them inside.

“We held a poll between May 28 and May 30 seeking residents’ opinion on entry of part-time maids and 60% voted in favour of it. So, we checked MHA and state guidelines and are following all protocols before allowing entry of maids. We are also allowing drivers inside but are asking the employers to call them inside only when they are ready to leave so that they spend minimum time inside our complex,” said Debjani Mukherjee, senior VP of Urbana residential project.

Entry of maids has also been allowed inside Panache residential complex in Sector V, where most of residents were against it earlier.

South City Residential Complex has allowed entry of outsiders. In fact, post Amphan, they even had to allow a number of outsiders to clear the fallen trees inside the complex. “We restored one such tree — the huge banyan tree — that has been there even before the complex was constructed. As for maids and drivers, we are allowing them inside the complex with adequate precautions,” said Sunil Agarwal, a senior resident of the complex.

At Silver Spring Housing, residents had a meeting on Sunday on fresh list of relaxations. “We have allowed maids and drivers. Milk vendors and e-commerce delivery men can also enter till certain levels. But we are not allowing guests and friends, beauticians, hairdressers, gardeners and car washers,” said Ashok Baid, senior member of residents’ association.


