Lockdown: April fuel sales in Gujarat set to fall by 85%
2020-04-17
AHMEDABAD: With restrictions on vehicle movements, petrol and diesel sales have unsurprisingly fallen across the state. According to estimates by the Federation of Gujarat State Petroleum Dealers’ Associations (FGSPDA), petrol and diesel sales fell by 85% drop in Gujarat in April. 


Petroleum dealers are staring at massively lower revenue due owing to the lockdown. According to FGSPDA estimates, usually, 23 crore litres of petrol and 55 crore litres of diesel is sold in the state every month.

“With restrictions on vehicle movements since the day the ‘janata curfew’ was imposed, there was barely any business for 10-11 days in March and sales declined by 30%. The entire month of April will be under the lockdown and therefore, a decline of at least 85% decline is expected,” said Arvind Thakkar, president, FGSPDA.

Currently, transport vehicles are almost the only ones moving but due to the manpower crisis, less than 5% of transport vehicles are currently plying the roads in Gujarat and thus, fuel sales, particularly that of diesel has drastically come down.

Industry estimates show that diesel sales are driven by commercial vehicles.

For the first fortnight of April, 1.5 crore litres of petrol and 4.1 crore litres of diesel were sold. Several dealers have retailed less than 10% of normal sales. Dealers are raising concerns about the health of their businesses.

“There has been a greater than 90% decline in sales due to the restrictions. Our overheads including paying staffers, electricity bills and other charges remain the same while sales are massively down, thus putting a question mark on the business. We are currently operating with 50% staff because there is less work but those who are working are at risk despite all precautions and we thus pay them extra,” said Padmajay Rathod, the owner of a fuel station in the city.

Thakkar said that while no fuel stations have shut, the losses are tremendous. FGSPDA has made representations to oil companies, seeking financial assistance. “We are awaiting their response and hope some help is extended,” said Thakkar.

