Andhra Pradesh’s Covid-19 recovery rate stands at 41%
2020-05-07
VIJAYAWADA: In what comes as a relief amid the growing spate of positive cases in the state over the past two weeks, the recovery rate of Covid-19 patients has shown a gradual rise. As of Wednesday, 729 patients were declared successfully treated, a recovery rate of 41%, ahead of the national recovery rate of 28%.


The surge of new infections over the last two weeks had placed a burden on the state’s healthcare system. The improving recovery rate will avoid overcrowding of hospitals, lower death rate, decrease dependence on ventilators and the need to monitor patients and do away with the need of medical personnel working overtime.

In terms of district-wise performance, Kurnool comes out top in terms of numbers, with 153 patients cured, followed by Guntur (129) and Krishna (117). Prakasam district performs best in terms of overall recovery rate. 

Of the 61 cases recorded in the district, 52 have been discharged so far. Chittoor district also has a recovery rate of above 80%.

In Krishna, Guntur and Kurnool districts — classified as red zone districts following the large number of cases reported — the recovery rate is below 50%. 

Altogether, 36 patients have succumbed to the disease, a mortality rate of 2%.

Srikakulam district, which reported its first three cases on April 25, has not discharged any patient till date. Vizianagaram, the last remaining green zone district in the state, recorded its first case on Wednesday. An official announcement is expected on Thursday.

Several patients above the age of 60 and with comorbidities have also been successfully treated. The oldest patient to recover is an 85-year-old woman from Anantapur district. According to health officials, nearly 70% of cases in the state are asymptomatic, leading to the need for aggressive testing.

Meanwhile, the state government permitted blood banks at Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati and Government General Hospital, Kurnool to collect and store convalescent plasma from Covid-19 patients who have been successfully treated. 

As part of the therapy, the plasma, containing antibodies of a recovered patient will be administered to those undergoing treatment. 

According to state health officials, short clinical trials in some countries have shown that plasma therapy can be effective in treating moderate to severely ill Covid-19 patients. 

The lgG antibody titres are at high level after the 14th day of infection, which gradually comes down, reducing the effectiveness of convalescent plasma in treatment. The plasma can be stored at -40 °C and has a shelf life of one year.

