AQI number drops below 100 as good air quality is unlocked
2020-04-02
AHMEDABAD: The long lockdown due to the Covid-19 pandemic has brought down the Air Quality Index (AQI) of Ahmedabad city to below 100. Barring Lekhawada in Gandhinagar ,which had an AQI of 162, all parts of the city, including Pirana, showed an AQI below 100 on April 1.


On February 28, nearly a month ago, the AQI of Ahmedabad city was 302. On Wednesday, the AQI of Ahmedabad city was just 72, while the areas which usually show high AQI like Pirana and Bopal also had AQI below 100.




Officials in the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation said that following the lockdown vehicular movement in the city was less than 10% of normal, while the movement of trucks and heavy vehicles including Ahmedabad Municipal Transport Service, GSRTC and BRT buses were almost non-existent. 

A traffic official said that the number of rickshaws on the road was negligible and hence the level of pollution in the city has come down drastically. His thoughts were that the large number of rickshaws contributed significantly to the pollution in ordinary times.

Dharmesh Shah, a resident of Satellite said, “I had to go to Narol for someone’s funeral rites and I found there was less burning sensation in the eyes, despite the fact that I drove down through the Walled City areas. He said, “I even realized that road dust was significantly low due to less vehicular traffic.”

“We would not wish that the lockdown continues just for the improvement of the AQI in city, but now it has been established as a fact that the AMC has to do something to ensure that less vehicles, including rickshaws, ply on the road. The AMC will have to strengthen the public transport system and ensure that connectivity also improves,” said a senior AMC official.

He added, “It is expected the metro rail might reduce congestion on the road as it did in Delhi, but with just North-South and East-West corridors, I don’t expect the Metro to bring down vehicular traffic significantly in the city.”

