Are you ready with mobile labs for Covid-19 tests, HC asks Telangana
2020-05-19
HYDERABAD: Stating that Telangana is conducting fewer tests compared to other states in the country, the high court on Monday sought to know by May 26 whether the administration will make available mobile testing labs for citizens as was done in Kerala. 

 


A bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice B Vijaysen Reddy said this while hearing a PIL filed by S Varun of Suryapet, who wanted tests to be carried out even on asymptomatic because people with no symptoms were also turning out to be Covid-19 patients. The petitioner’s counsel Pujitha Gorantla raised questions over officials declaring Suryapet, which had high number of infections till recently, as Covid free. The bench wanted the details of tests conducted in Suryapet district after April 24. “Suryapet is close to Hyderabad and to declare it Covid-free without adequate testing is a cause for concern,” the bench said. 

As majority of labs were in Hyderabad, mobile labs might take testing to rural areas in a more effective manner, the bench said. It also sought to know from the state whether it would allow those who could afford testing charges to get themselves tested. The bench told advocate general BS Prasad to inform the court details of testing done in the state, with district-wise particulars, by May 26.

Seeks Nirmal test details

While dealing with another PIL filed by advocate Chinnolla Naresh Reddy, who expressed concern over the state of affairs in Nirmal where officials have turned liberal on the ground that it is in the green zone, the bench sought to know from the district collector the ground realities prevailing in the district. “Tell us the number of tests you have conducted from April 22 till now,” the bench said. 

Even migrants coming from Covid-hit Maharashtra were not being tested or quarantined, the advocate claimed. “You have to ensure that people in Nirmal maintain social distance,” the bench said. Monitor the movement of migrant labour, more particularly those who have come from Maharashtra, into Nirmal. Submit details of tests conducted on them (migrant workers), any positives among them, and the particulars of how many such people were quarantined, the bench directed the collector.


