Army steps up coronavirus vigil along China, Nepal entry points
2020-02-07
PUNE: The Indian armed forces have strengthened vigil at all the entry points along the China and Nepal borders in view of the coronavirus outbreak, director general Armed Forces Medical Service (DG-AFMS) Lieutenant General Anup Banerji said on Thursday.


“There is tight vigil on the border posts so that nobody can cross by road without a medical check,” Banerji told reporters on the second day of the 58th conference of the armed forces medical research committee at the Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC). 

“The army has set up a quarantine facility at Manesar in Haryana and has examined 250 people evacuated from China last month. They are safe. The AFMS has responded to the call to check coronavirus,” he added.

If required, more quarantine facilities will be set up in other parts of the country. The government has recently sanctioned 10 laboratories for carrying out research on viruses, he said.

The Nepal government confirmed two cases of coronavirus in January. A sizeable population from Nepal comes to India via border posts every day and thorough medical examinations are needed. Currently, the army and para military forces manning the border posts, are wearing surgical mask as precautionary measure, a senior army officer, who did not wish to be named, told TOI. 

A senior AFMS official, who did not wish to be named, told TOI, “Currently, the coronavirus samples are being tested only at National Institute of Virology in Pune and All India Institute of Medical Science in New Delhi. The AFMS laboratories and the newly sanctioned facilities, one of which would be in AFMC, can also be utilised for testing the samples.” 

On suicides in the armed forces, Banerji said they were concerned and doctors and psychiatrists are identifying such tendencies early and treating them.

The armed forces hospitals will be equipped to provide quality healthcare across the country. The AFMS has entered a Memorandum of Understanding with institutions like AIIMS to share knowledge, training and exchanging faculties, he said.

“The army has deployed enough troops along the areas bordering China and Nepal. Providing medical care in these areas in a priority for the AFMS. There is a high possibility of setting up more quarantine facilities,” the officer added.


