Chennai: Army, air force personnel defend the poor & needy from Covid double blow
2020-04-09
CHENNAI: The air force and Army have risen to the occasion and are helping people cope up with coronavirus pandemic and the nationwide lockdown. Personnel from Air Force Station in Avadi distributed rice to the needy while army personnel provided water and cooked food to the poor and homeless in the city. 


The Indian Air Force has set up a 100-bed quarantine facility in its camp in Avadi and is planning to set up another 100-bed facility in the air force school and a Kendriya Vidyalaya. The quarantine centre will have indoor games, television sets, magazines, internet facility and a disinfectant facility, said an official.

The move comes as the air force station is surrounded by densely poplated villages — Mittanamalli and Muthpudupet. The air force is also spraying chemical disinfectants using fire tenders on streets and buildings. As part of its efforts to help the needy, the station has so far distributed 2,500kg rice to women who had been involved in housekeeping before the lockdown.

The official added that the Air Force Wives Welfare Association has taken up door delivery of provisions to all houses and has also launched a special vegetable market. Cloth masks are also being prepared for distribution. The air force is also- mulling manufacturing low-cost ventilators at its Avadi R&D facility.

Meanwhile, Army personnel distributed cooked food, water, groceries, sanitation material through the week to daily wagers, guest workers and the homeless at Wallajah Road, Rajaji Salai, Broadway, Anna Salai and areas adjacent to Fort railway station. Government representatives helped the Army in identifying those in need and the material they required. The Army also provided groceries to the NGO Food Bank Chennai, for further distribution to the needy, said a press release. The initiative was coordinated by Army Wives Welfare Association (AWWA). Food and provisions were distributed among the poor at Coonoor, Wellington, Kotagiri and Ooty in the Nilgiris. 


