Around 20 CPR staffers fear Covid-19 exposure
2020-04-17
Kolhapur: Around 20 staff members of the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya (CPR) have expressed concerns that they may have been exposed to the coronavirus. Though these staffers, including doctors, nurses and ward boys, were using protective gear while handling Covid-19-related cases, the hospital took cognisance of their concerns and admitted them to the isolation ward as a precautionary measure.

On Thursday morning, CPR dean Minakshi Gajbhiye said their throat swab samples will be collected on a later date, as at present, they are all asymptomatic and even if their samples are sent to the laboratory now, they might test negative.

However, later in the evening, while speaking to TOI, state minister for public health Rajendra Patil-Yadravkar said that the swab samples of around 19 staff members have been collected and sent for testing.

When asked about the dean’s comment on sending the throat swab samples for testing on a later date, the minister said that the staff members were exposed to four patients from many days. “So we have collected their swab samples. Even if they test negative now, we can always collect their samples later as well,” he said. “We just want to make sure that they don’t suffer any health issues,” he added.

On the level of CPR’s preparedness, he said that at present, the hospital has a stock of 353 PPEs, 1,250 N-95 masks and around 2,212 disposable masks. He added that there is a stock of around 4,894 hydroxychloroquine tablets and more can be procured as and when required.

Earlier in the day, the dean had said that the CPR has 12 wards and has already been designated as a Covid-19 treatment hospital by the district administration.

“Every ward has at least nine staff members including doctors, nurses and ward boys, who work in three different shifts. They require personal protective equipment. Some PPEs have been ordered, but as the demand is high, we might require more in the future,” she said.


