Arrival of migrants pushes up Covid-19 cases in Puri
2020-05-22
BHUBANESWAR: Puri has seen a sudden spurt in Covid-19 positive cases in quick time. This is a matter of concern as Puri is gearing up for the Rath Yatra on June 23. Of the total 45 positive cases detected till date, 44 were reported between May 10 and May 21. Three patients have recovered and Puri’s active cases stand at 42.

Puri’s first Covid-19 positive case was detected in Pipili on April 3. At a time when other places, especially Khurda, had been recording a rise in positive cases almost every day, Puri witnessed a long period of zero cases till May 9. Even the Centre appreciated the Puri administration’s Covid-19 management plan.

Asked about the reason for the rapid growth of Covid cases, the district administration attributed it to the mass return of migrant labourers from other states in the past one week. An official source said more than 7,000 migrant workers from different states had reached Puri in the past one week. They have been put up in institutional quarantine centres or temporary medical centres (TMCs).

Puri collector Balwant Singh ruled out the possibility of community transmission. “There is no worry of community transmission as 40 of the 42 active cases were reported from institutional quarantine centres or TMCs. While one case was detected from a particular locality, the other one (an undertrial prisoner) was detected in Puri jail. We are strictly following the standard operating procures (SOPs) to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus,” Singh said.

The district collector said awareness is being conducted at the community level to keep Covid-19 at bay. “We have increased the testing capacity and kept a close watch on communities. We appeal to people to adopt precautions at an individual level. Our responsibilities have increased following relaxation of several restrictions imposed during different phases of the lockdown,” Singh said.

While the state government will take the final call on the conduct of the Rath Yatra, the district administration has started conducting Covid-19 test on Maharanas and Bhoi sevaks (carpenters) engaged in chariot work. “Those reports that reached us have returned negative. The test is being conducted in a phased manner,” Singh said.


