Artists make their paintings talk on Covid-19 awareness
2020-04-13
MADURAI: While Madurai Corporation is taking several steps to create awareness about Covid-19, the artists in Madurai are also using their drawings and paintings that depict Coronavirus to attract the attention of the people, create awareness on the dangers of the virus and the importance of social distancing and personal protection.


S Pandian, secretary of the Madurai painters association and his friends were found depicting the Coronavirus in a painting on the roads in Sellur on Sunday. “People never fail to stop and pay attention to a drawing, so we thought that we could do our part in the Covid-19 crisis and create awareness through our drawings,” he said. Armed with their brushes, the painters took to the streets on Sunday. They have also sought permission from the Madurai district collector, Dr T G Vinay, to draw in important parts of the city like Goripalayam, Tamukkam and Periyar bus stand.

Each drawing would be about 20 feet x 20 feet in size and when the writings are included, it could be extended up to 30 feet. “We have about 500 members and all of us are ready to work for the cause, without taking any money, till we have the emulsion paint for our drawings,” he said.

Among those who appreciated their efforts, was the local inspector Kottaisamy, who came forward to sponsor a meal for the men, who were drawing on the Sellur roads. Gurusamy of Bose Street said that they had asked for a drawing to be done in their street and it was done. Meanwhile, a woman in Athikulam, a member G Pothilakshmi, who is an expert in drawing kolams, is writing messages on her doorstep instead of kolams. “I start with a mask and my message is usually about immunity boosters, which we find in our kitchen, like dry ginger, pepper and thippili and how to consume it,” she said. Now, people from various parts of Athikulam have started crossing her house to read her messages. “It is, however, sad to see many people not wearing masks. I insist that they wear a protective covering before reading the message,” she said.


