Artists across the globe raise awareness about COVID-19
2020-03-27
In the midst of these gloomy times, art has been a voice of reassurance for many. And artists around the world are finding different ways to create more awareness about hygiene as well as spread cheer and positivity among the young and old. We bring you a string of artworks that are both quirky and informative…


Hygiene tips on a comic strip 
US-based illustrator Nivya Kuriakose’s comic strip reflects on the current situation. “As an artist, I think, this is the least I could do to spread some awareness. So, I decided to present the basic tips to prevent the spreading of COVID-19 in a fun manner, which will attract people’s attention. So far, a lot of people have responded to it, saying it’s both useful and funny,” says Nivya


Ways to stay less distracted while working from home
The work-from-home scenario amid the pandemic serves as the inspiration for Bengaluru-based illustrator Alicia Souza latest artworks. Interestingly, she has been working from home for almost a decade now. “There are so many people I know who are struggling to work from home amid the lockdown, because they are not used to this regime. Since I have been doing this for a while, over time I have developed habits that help you become less distracted and more productive. My latest illustration focuses on those easy-to-acquire habits,” explains Alicia.


Visual arts and chat session to spread awareness about COVID-19
Artist-activist Baadal Nanjundaswamy, who is known for his pothole art, recently took to social media to spread awareness about COVID-19. “My art talks concentrates on the fact that the coronavirus recognises no border, and that it can affect anyone. As an artist, I feel, it is easier to spread awareness through visual art, since the message gets across more quickly and convincingly. It is one of the best ways to educate people, especially kids, who are more attracted to visuals.”


Government of India releases comic book to educate children
Even the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has found a way to educate kids through comics. They have released a book, titled Kids, Vaayu & Corona. The narrative follows the life of a superhero, named Vaayu, who helps kids to understand what coronavirus is and how it can be kept away. In the book, Vaayu repeatedly tells youngsters not to panic and educates them about social distancing and maintaining hygiene. This book has been conceptualised and written by Dr Ravindra Khaiwal, Additional Professor of Environmental Health — PGIMER — Chandigarh, and Dr Suman Mor, Associate Professor and Chairperson, Department of Environment Studies, Panjab University, while the illustrations are by Sonali Verma and Shruti Govil from Panjab University.


