Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal to hunt for temporary Covid-19 facilities
2020-06-11
NEW DELHI: Come Friday, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal will go out and look for facilities — hotels, stadiums and banquet halls — that can be converted into temporary hospitals to deal with the rising number of Covid-19 cases in the city. 


A day after testing negative for Covid-19, Kejriwal on Wednesday sought to put up a united front in fighting the pandemic and said the lieutenant-governor’s directives would be implemented in letter and spirit. “I want to give the message to everyone that this is not the time for a standoff between the Delhi government and the Centre,” he said when asked about the rift between the AAP government and the L-G after his announcement that only city residents could avail treatment at Delhi hospitals and Anil Baijal turning it down. 

“It is not the time for political differences. If we keep fighting, then the coronavirus will win,” Kejriwal said at a press conference.

In the Delhi Disaster Management Authority meeting, aprojection of Covid-19 cases was submitted. It noted that there will be 44,000 cases and 6,600 beds will be required by June 15. We will have one lakh cases and need 15,000 beds by June 30. By July 15, there will be 2.25 lakh cases and 33,000 beds will be required. By July 31, 5.5 lakh cases are expected and 80,000 beds will be required,” Kejriwal said. 

An estimated 80,000 people from outside the city would come to Delhi hospitals for treatment and the government will need 1.5 lakh beds to handle the crisis, he said. “We do not know how many patients might come from outside the city. However, before the pandemic, nearly 50% of patients in Delhi hospitals used to come from outside the city. We will need around 1.5 lakh beds if patients from outside come to the city for treatment by July 31,” he added. 

Kejriwal urged neighbouring states to create facilities to lessen burden on Delhi hospitals. “This is not to blame anyone, and I am confident that all the states are trying their best.” When asked about his health, Kejriwal said: “I was suffering from mild sore throat and fever. Doctors suggested that I should go for a Covid-19 test. I isolated myself at home.” 

Meanwhile, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal called upon Union home minister Amit Shah on Wednesday and discussed the Covid-19 situation in the capital. The home minister assured all cooperation to the state government in its fight against the coronavirus pandemic. “Met home minister Amit Shah. Discussed the situation on coronavirus in Delhi in detail. He has assured of all cooperation (sic),” Kejriwal tweeted after the meeting. 

It was the first meeting between the two since the virus outbreak in the city. According to sources, the CM also raised the demand for central assistance for the capital, as the finances of the state government has been severely hampered by the viral outbreak.


