Covid-19 precautions in Goa: Churches keep stoups dry, use sanitisers
2020-03-09
PANAJI: Many Catholics across Goa who went for Sunday Mass noticed that the usual holy water stoups (fonts) at the entrance of the church were kept dry. As coronavirus spreads across the globe, churches and priests are doing their bit to keep it at bay, advising parishioners about safe practices during religious services.


Although the state hasn’t reported anyone testing positive for coronavirus, and the archdiocese of Goa hasn’t issued any letter in this regard, priests are gearing up to combat any potential threat from the virus, given the thousands who attend Sunday Mass. Many churches across Goa saw their priests advise parishoners to receive Holy Communion in the hand rather than on the tongue, as is traditionally practiced.

The priests’ move came after Archbishop of Bombay Oswald Cardinal Gracias issued a communication with suggested precautions regarding the virus. The letter, which was widely circulated on social media, was only addressed to institutions in Mumbai. However, owing to Gracias’ position as president of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India (CBCI), many priests outside Mumbai also decided to follow his advice. 

Even though the archdiocese of Goa hasn’t issued any communication yet, Se Cathedral, the seat of the Archbishop and the mother church of the archdiocese of Goa, kept its holy water fonts dry on Sunday. Parish priest Fr Alfred Vaz said the precaution was taken following a government circular. 

“We decided to keep the fonts dry as there are many foreigners who frequent the place considering it is a world heritage site,” he told TOI. 

At Porvorim’s Holy Family church, priests and ministers used sanitisers, and advised the faithful to receive Holy Communion in the hand. “We haven’t forced people to receive Holy Communion in the hand as we haven’t received any directions yet,” parish priest Fr Caetano Fernandes told TOI. “We merely kept both options open, and told people that it would be preferable to receive communion in the hand.” 

He said that his parish took these precautionary measures as the church usually attracts a lot of people. “There are also many doctors among the faithful who are open to the idea. We have been following the news and read Cardinal Gracias’ circular. Parishioners are ready to accept what’s good,” Fernandes said.

Meanwhile, at Our Lady of Help church in Ribandar and Carmelite Monastery, Margao, holy water fonts were kept dry. In many churches, the virus also found mention in the prayers of the faithful. Attendees were also advised to greet each other with a namaste, instead of shaking hands. The shrine of Our Lady of Fatima at Don Bosco, Panaji, was among the first to follow Gracias’ letter, with its in-charge, Fr Loddy Pires, reading out the letter in full on Friday itself. On Sunday, many churches mentioned Gracias’ letter.

Meanwhile, Gracias’ advice on the traditional veneration of the cross on Good Friday is also set to be followed in Goa. The superior at Carmelite Monastery, Fr Archibald Gonsalves, said that the traditional kissing of the cross will not be done this year. Gracias, in his letter, had recommended that a blessing with a raised cross be adequate, where those who desire could queue up only to make reverence with a bow and go back. 

At Don Bosco, Pires too announced that the tradition of kissing of the cross would not be followed at the shrine’s hugely-popular Good Friday service. 

The new norms are temporary, Gracias said, and will only be valid till Easter. 

