As cases spike in Goa, housing societies draft their own SOPs to curb virus spread
2020-06-12
PANAJI: As the state grapples with the rising Covid-19 cases, housing societies across the state are drafting their own standard operating procedures (SOP) to protect residents and restrict the entry of outsiders into the complex.


From restricting delivery boys to stopping the entry of domestic helps, many housing societies are reimposing rules that were brought in during the initial lockdown period. In some extreme cases, friction between residents and those who have returned from other states has led to Goa Police being called to intervene.

Worried about the safety of their residents, especially senior citizens and children, many housing societies have issued lists of ‘dos and don’ts’ which have to be followed by residents as well as visitors.

“Residents have been requested not to call the domestic help for seven days and even residents who have travelled from out and got tested have been requested to stay indoors for seven days, if not 15 days,” said treasurer of Milroc Kadamba Cooperative Housing society, Silverio Dias.

The approach towards domestic helps remains the most contentious for residents given that many of the workers come from economically weaker localities where social distancing is difficult to maintain. The moment news reports came in that three Covid-19 cases were detected at Chimbel, many housing socities put in place a basic SOP for domestic helps.

“Around 8am, we stopped maids who come from that area. The security enquires at the gate and if the person has a Chimbel connection then they are stopped,” said Milroc Retreat Ribandar chairman Amit Chopra.

Milroc Retreat has also purchased hand-held temperature readers and has kept hand sanitizers at the entrance of the colony.

Models Legacy Co-op Maintenance Society at Taleigao informed its society members to verify the details of all workers such as drivers, housemaids, helpers and to take “precautions necessary” to prevent contamination or the spread of infection.

In some cases, the residents have objected to the arrival of individuals from other states, as it happened at Colvale on Wednesday. The residents of a housing society called the police after a lady from Aurangabad returned to her flat in Colvale.

 Goa Police PRO and SP Special Branch Shobhit Saksena confirmed that authorities have received several calls to intervene in housing societies. “We have on and off got calls where housing societies have reported that people have come and stayed in their societies. In such cases, it is quite natural that people would want to report it because of the crisis. In such cases, we go and verify if the proper SOP is followed or not,” said Saksena.

The total number of Covid-19 cases in Goa have hit 350, with new cases being detected in the hinterland and in urban pockets as well. Individuals with links to the outbreak in Mangor Hill have led to infections mushrooming up in several parts of the state.

“Now that again there is a scare and fear of rising cases, we may consider measures to stop the maids and reimposing the restrictions which we had imposed during the earlier lockdown,” said Julian D’Cruz, a resident of a housing society at Fatorda.

