As Covid-19 cases rise sharply, Agra admin shifts 20 to neighbouring districts to manage capacity
2020-04-14
Agra: In the wake of the rising number of Covid-19 cases in Agra, the district administration has shifted 20 patients to similar facilities in the neighbouring districts to manage capacity. While 10 patients were earlier shifted to Vrindavan community health centre (CHC), another 10 were shifted to Mainpuri’s Bhogaon CHC on Monday due to spurt in cases in Agra. 

Agra district magistrate Prabhu N Singh said that the patients with mild infection, who were admitted in the CHC in Barauli, had to be shifted out as the CHC was full to capacity. He added that this was done to manage the existing facilities. “All protocols are being strictly maintained in the wards, where the patients are being treated,” he added. 

Barauli CHC, which is considered a level 1 treatment facility, has 26 beds. Besides, there are 18 beds at Agra district hospital, which is level 2, and 58 beds in SN Medical College, a level 3 treatment facility, with six ventilators. The government has classified hospitals into three categories – Covid care centres to treat mild infections, Covid health centres for clinically moderate-level serious patients and dedicated Covid hospitals to provide comprehensive care to severe and critical patients.

Meanwhile, Mainpuri and Mathura district authorities have been provided a list of people, who recently received treatment at a private hospital in Agra, which was declared a major epicentre of the novel Coronavirus. The hospital was sealed on April 6 after a woman, who was admitted there earlier and later referred to another private hospital in Mathura, tested positive for coronavirus. So far, 22 persons, including six health workers of the hospital, have tested positive for Covid-19. 

Mainpuri DM Mahendra Bahadur Singh told TOI that 17 such people, who either took treatment at the private hospital in Agra or visited it along with the patient or died due to some other disease, have been identified so far. 

“Their samples are being taken for testing and till then all of them will be quarantined at their houses,” he said, adding that all precautions are being taken by the authorities. In Mathura, three such people have been identified and their samples will be taken on Tuesday, said additional CMO Rajiv Gupta. 

Till now, 138 patients tested positive for Coronavirus in Agra followed by Firozabad (18), Mathura (5), Hathras (4), Mainpuri and Kasganj (3 each) and Aligarh (1).


