As coronavirus spreads, Kochi and Delhi return fares dip to Rs 5,000
2020-03-11
MUMBAI: With a rise in Covid-19 positive cases in India, domestic travel by air and rail is being hit.


Aircraft are flying with fewer passengers, train journeys are being cancelled. A sure indicator of low demand for air travel was low airfares, especially last-minute airfares or those on flights scheduled to depart in 24 hours. On Tuesday, the cheapest Mumbai-Delhi return ticket for travel on Wednesday and return later in the week, started at Rs 5,000, that is, an average of Rs 2,500 one-way. “Mumbai-Delhi flights are always in high demand and even off-season, last-minute fares don’t drop so low,’’ said a travel agent, adding that he has only been handling cancellations since two weeks. Last weekend, the cheapest, 24-hour advance purchase Mumbai-Delhi return tickets began at Rs 8,000. “Over the weekend, as cases of coronavirus went up in the country, demand seems to have plummeted,’’ said the agent.

 
 
Another route that witnesses high demand throughout the year is Mumbai-Kochi. But this week, you could fly to Kochi and back for only Rs 5,000. “A last-minute flight to Kochi generally costs Rs 6,000-7,000 one-way,’’ said the agent. Return airfares on Delhi-Kochi route began at Rs 7,200. Flights to Trivandrum were comparatively higher in demand with return airfares from Mumbai beginning at Rs 9,000. But other destinations like Bengaluru and Hyderabad were cheaper, with Rs 3,800 return airfares for travel from Mumbai. From Delhi, cheapest airfares began at Rs 5,800 for Hyderabad and Rs 6,700 for Bengaluru return.

Coronavirus-linked travel plan cancellations have gone beyond airlines to include trains. Dinesh Kotha, co-founder, Confirmtkt, an online train ticket booking engine, said, “Since the past week we have seen a rise in train ticket cancellations due to coronavirus. Trains going towards Delhi have been impacted the most, with 25% higher cancellations, compared to last month.’’ He added that main routes affected were from Delhi, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai. “Routes with more impact are Patna-New Delhi, Mumbai-Nagpur, Mumbai-Pune, Tirupati-Secunderabad, Ahmedabad-Mumbai, Bangalore-Chennai, Chandigarh-New Delhi and New Delhi-Varanasi. Due to the outbreak, new bookings have gone down by more than 20%. In fact, we recently launched a free cancellation policy, which allows users to get a free cancellation on train bookings,’’ he added.

