Bihar: As coronavirus threat looms, 114 more put under home isolation
2020-03-21
PATNA: Altogether 114 people, who came to the state from other places, were placed under home isolation on Friday to prevent spread of coronavirus. This is the largest number of home isolation cases in the state in a day.


With this, the number of people put under home isolation in the state has jumped to 504. Altogether 116 people, however, completed their 14-day isolation period on Friday.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Patna civil surgeon Dr Raj Kishore Chaudhary said even domestic passengers who reached the state capital were put under home isolation as a precautionary measure. “Anyone reaching the state from other places should remain inside home for 14 days,” Dr Chaudhary added.

He said no positive case was so far detected in the state. “The quarantine facility at Patliputra Ashoka Hotel has zero occupant so far. The facility will be used to quarantine people reaching the state from six coronavirus-affected countries,” Dr Chaudhary added.

According to the State Health Society, 2,53,089 passengers have so far been screened at 49 transit points at Indo-Nepal border and 20,385 people at Patna and Gaya airports.

Meanwhile, the Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) has added 50 more beds to its isolation ward. “The erstwhile skin department building of the hospital is being used to accommodate 50 more coronavirus suspects. The existing 20-bed isolation ward was not sufficient to meet the rush,” PMCH principal Dr V P Choudhary said. As this building is now part of Patna University, PMCH had to take permission from the university vice-chancellor to use it as isolation ward.

Health department and PMCH officials visited the building on Friday and assessed the infrastructure and instruments required for keeping the suspected patients in isolation. 

Dr Choudhary said those tested negative for coronavirus would be discharged soon and asked to follow the instructions of the doctors. 


