As environment heals in lockdown, Punjab orders survey to check pollution
2020-04-06
PATIALA: With the prolonged lockdown having an unprecedented positive impact on the environment, the state department for science and technology has asked Punjab Pollution Control Board (PPCB) to conduct a survey to devise future strategies and set new parametres.

During the lockdown, the environment in the state has rejuvenated and pollution load of effluents in drains like Buddha Nullah, Kala Sanghian Drain, Tung Dhab Drain and Lasara Drain, among others has reduced substantially.

Ever since eight continuous ambient air quality monitoring stations (QAAQMS) were installed in the state, air quality index has improved. The basal level of air pollution in the state has been discovered only during this lockdown, said K S Pannu, director, environment and climate change, Punjab. He also said that the load of plastic and other non-biodegradable waste has reduced to a great extent. Same is the case with bio-medical and electronic waste.

Pannu said even though the lockdown has grounded economic activities in the country to control the spread of Covid-19, it has given environmentalists the opportunity to study how nature repairs itself from both air and water pollution. Because of the curfew imposed in the state since March 22, all industrial, transport, human movement and economic activities have been at a standstill. 

Pannu said this has given the state a chance to conduct a detailed survey of all environmental parametres including air, water and soil pollution. The survey to be conducted by PPCB will go a long way in devising future strategies to keep pollution in control, he said. 

During the survey, PPCB will bring on record the status of various pollutants and study their impact on the environment. The study will also bring on record measures that can be taken to reduce the pollution load in the state even after the lockdown is withdrawn. Pannu said all this data will be used in planning and executing actions to combat pollution load in the state.


