Nagpur: As humans are caged in amid coronavirus outbreak, birds reclaim the city skies
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: People may be locked into their homes due to coronavirus threat, but birds are definitely feeling freer. Many expert and amateur birdwatchers, though confirned at home for the past eight days owing to lockdown, have observed a spurt in bird activity within the city.


They attribute this to lowered human activity. Some have even suggested an ‘eco curfew’ every month to encourage bird activity in city.

“I stay near Sonegaon Lake and daily watch about 25-30 cattle egrets roost on a tree. Today, they came near our homes and were about 100 plus in number,” said avid bird watcher Nitin Marathe.

He added, “The egrets were accompanied by a purple heron which is a big bird and prefers calm, away from the hustle-bustle of the city. Three river terns were also spotted in the skies above Sonegaon Lake and were very vocal. This may be due to sparse traffic and noise pollution going down.”

“There is more chirping of house sparrows and mynas calling each other loudly. Further a brown rock chat was also noticed,” he adds.

Several bird watchers like Surendra Agnihotri from Laxmi Nagar echoed the same feeling. “There was an eerie calm during the last few days owing to Janata Curfew and lockdown. The birds made most of the reduced human activities and — importantly — less sound pollution to make merry, making home birding from terrace more enjoyable,” he said.

Agnihotri, who regularly watches birds from his balcony, said, “For the first time, I sighted a common sandpiper. It flew around the canal and vanished through the rain tree. Though common, the bird was never seen in city.”

“Similarly, I heard unmistakable calls of tickel’s blue flycatcher after three years. I also recorded a white-breasted waterhen. This is very shy bird. Though the species is not new but they are emboldened by the serenity caused by lesser traffic,” said Agnihotri.

Avid bird watcher and mining engineer with IBM Shirish Gajralwar, a resident of Sonegaon, recorded orange headed thrush in house garden. “During morning walk, I recorded a pied kingfisher and a pair of white-breasted kingfisher, besides golden oriole, common iora, shikra, and asian koel. This is something new. Since last week there is an increase in bird activity.”

“I was surprised to get a prize catch, an Indian paradise flycatcher, at my residence,” says Ameya Marathe from Kolhapur.

The bird watchers are so overjoyed by the spurt in bird sightings that bird and nature lover Ketaki Ghate from Pune has appealed over the social media through her post — “Let’s support Janata Curfew and continue it as eco-curfew. It is high time we all observe eco-curfew on first Sunday of every month to restore and improve status of natural resources, processes and biodiversity,” said Ghate.

Bird expert from BNHS Raju Kasambe, Mumbai, has some similar observation. “When I walked on Monday to buy milk, I recorded 10 bird species in hardly 300 metres in a city like Mumbai.” 


