Maharashtra: As lockdown wears on, anxiety brings more visitors to doctors
2020-04-14
PUNE: Doctors are reporting cases of panic, anxiety or phobia said these can manifest in different ways, with some panicking over mild cold and assuming that they have contracted the coronavirus, while others may not seek help even if they have the symptoms. 

ENT surgeon Virendra Ghaisas said, “For the last few days, people are coming to us even if they experience a slight itch in their throats or ears. When people call, we assure them over the phone, but others insist on visiting us. Our OPD is functional and we have seen that 80% are panic cases while the remaining do have ear infections or other problems.”

General practitioner Avinash Bhondwe said anxiety neurosis is commonly visible among people these days. “I am getting patients suffering from respiratory infections and having cold, cough and fever. They are extremely worried and we have to explain patiently that such infections are on the rise due to the changing weather.”

He said a good number of people are seeing coronavirus in everything and this is worrisome. “I know people who have not stepped out of the home and into their own balcony since the lockdown started,” he added.

Bhondwe said they spoke to him over the phone due to the fear of coming out. Those already suffering from mental health issues are in more trouble. 

There is also a large section waiting for problems to become acute before being forced to visit a doctor. 

Radiologist Satish Pande said a patient was suffering from severe pain and blood in his urine for two days. “When the pain grew unbearable, he decided sought help. Some people are wearing masks at home. Most are not coming out until compelled by acute pain, bleeding, vomiting or fracture,” he said.

A lot of knowledge gaps is leading to anxiety among people, he added. “A lady came to me with abdominal pain and dyspepsia. After sonography, diagnosis and advise, she shared that her son has been stopped by the police for roaming around. which had made her amxious,” Pande said.


