As lockdown extension looms large, food insecurity haunts Bengaluru’s poor
2020-04-14
BENGALURU: With the lockdown most likely to be extended till month-end, a growing food insecurity haunts Bengaluru’s underprivileged, thousands of whom are already going to bed hungry despite government efforts.


From domestic helps to construction workers, carpenters, slum-dwellers and other daily wagers in the city, all have been struggling to make ends meet.

 
TimesViewWhile NGOs and individuals chipping in to help the needy are welcome, there is no way they can compensate for the infrastructure and organisational strength the government can bring. And while some measure of confusion is to be expected, given the suddenness of the Covid-19 pandemic, the government should have got its act together by now. But, better late than never. It should come up with a distribution system that can function for a significant length of time and achieve the maximum geographical coverage required to feed the hungry in troubled times.

Issac Amruthraj, convenor, Karnataka Slum Janara Sanghatane, which works with about 35 slums spread across different areas — Gandhinagar, Shantinagar, Mahadevapura, Pulakeshinagar, KR Puram — says severe shortage of food has forced them to even request private firms like Swiggy and Zomato and NGOs, who are helping them in limited capacity.

 

“The demand and supply don’t add up. There are hundreds of people who are not getting cooked food or material which the government had promised. We are seeing so-called local leaders taking responsibility of supplying dry ration kits. They are giving the same under their name, which is okay, but this means it’s not reaching the people the government envisaged it must reach,” he said, adding that there are at least 50,000 people living in these slums, almost all of whom are daily wagers. 

 

Both the labour department and the BBMP, which are handling cooked food and dry ration kit deliveries, respectively, admit to shortage.

Labour secretary P Manivannan said: “When we started distributing food about nine days ago, the demand in Bengaluru was about 10,000 food packets. It has now crossed a lakh. While we are doing everything we can, we do understand that there is a shortfall. Also, as of now, we are considering all demands made through the helpline, we are streamlining this with a software-driven process.”

A senior BBMP official said the Palike’s focus is on migrant workers and that other people will be taken care of once the dry ration kits are distributed to these 76,000-odd people. However, there is a shortage of that too.

C Chandramma, convenor, Savitribai Phule Mahila Sanghatane, said: “When the government stopped free food at Indira Canteen, it said all poor would be taken care of. But most people we work with, including nomads, domestic helps and other daily wagers, are going without food. Even milk isn’t reaching everybody,” she said.

About 17 different organisations representing the poor, in a joint statement said: “The lockdown has destroyed the lives of people who have no food to eat, no money and will be further engulfed in the vicious cycle of loan. The measures announced by the state and central governments to address the grave damage caused to people’s lives and livelihood are inadequate to overcome the impact of the lockdown. The government is unable to deliver on food security and people are forced to stand in long queues for one packet of food.”

Chaluve Gowda, director, Hombale Constructions, had told TOI last week of the over 1,000 migrants housed in different camps run by his firm, only 300 got government food. Manivannan said the government had made it clear that contractors not providing food and shelter will be penalised. “Right now we are dealing with so many people who don’t have listed contractors, we expect contractors to take care of their labour force, or face action.”

On Monday, Gowda told TOI that most of the workers in his camps are now getting groceries. “...As instructed by the high court, district magistrate and labour officer visited our sites and now, BBMP is giving groceries to most of the sites,” he said.


