As more non-Covid patients trickle in, private hospitals take safety measures
2020-05-18
Madurai: Private hospitals across the state have been strengthening measures to prevent crowding at outpatient departments after non-emergency and non-Covid patients started turning up at OPDs in a slow but steady trickle.

Amid the growing cases of Covid-19, these hospitals are preliminarily triaging and screening all patients, including outpatients, for the disease before they enter the hospital premises. Hospital managements agree that the process is time-consuming and they may not be able to handle it if there is crowding. Indian Medical Association (IMA) state secretary Dr A K Ravikumar said the IMA has given guidelines to all its members. "Most private hospitals are fully-functional now for outpatients. Though crowding is a concern, we cannot turn patients away either. We have given guidelines for triaging at front desks," he said. 

Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai has asked all non-emergency outpatients to first make advance appointments at a particular time before visiting. "Keeping in mind how many can ideally be in the hospital at a time, we fixed the number of patients who can come in every hour. We have also taken measures to ensure all testing equipment are regularly sanitised after every use," said Dr R Kim, chief medical officer.

In Trichy, a section of private clinics including paediatric, has resumed OP service, particularly, to vaccinate children less than five years. While only one person as attender was permitted inside consultation room, staff found it difficult to insist on social distancing among other visitors accompanying the patients. Watchmen and support staff in private clinics were instructing patients and attenders to wear a facemask. 

K Govindaraj, chairman, Dr G Viswanathan group of hospitals, said they have used the outdoor parking area to erect a shamiana to accommodate at least 50 out-patients. It will be challenging for small clinics to manage the crowd especially the dental clinics and ENT hospitals to follow lockdown norms with limited space, said another doctor from the city. 


