As public defy lockdown in Tamil Nadu districts, officials warn them to stay indoors
2020-03-26
MADURAI: Officials from the southern districts have adopted different approaches to keep people from coming outside their homes on the first day of the 21-day lockdown to prevent the outbreak of Covid-19.


Though the central government had announced a nationwide lockdown for 21 days, people were seen on the streets on Wednesday. District administration officials and police personnel had to warn them at many places.

In Srivilliputhur taluk in Virudhunagar district, people were seen crowding the market area. Municipality employees started spraying disinfectant on those gathered on the road. While some of them left, a few others picked up a quarrel.

In Tirunelveli, police officials stopped two-wheeler riders and are told them about the seriousness of the curfew and asked them to stay indoors.

Similarly, a police official from Uthirakosamangai police station in Ramanathapuram district played recorded messages from a speaker mounted on his two-wheeler about the importance of staying indoors.

Tuticorin Collector Sandeep Nanduri said that following complaints received by the public about shortage of masks and sanitizers, shops have been set up at 14 places in the district where masks, sanitizers and liquid soaps manufactured by members of self help groups are being sold. He said that strict action would be taken against those who are found on the streets unnecessarily.

Information and publicity minister Kadambur Raju who inspected Tuticorin district said that though the government is taking all precautionary measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19, people should understand the seriousness and should stay indoors.

Theni district collector Pallavi Baldev said the district administration had taken steps to provide food during the morning and afternoon for the abandoned people and for government employees who are on duty at the community halls.

Ramanathapuram district collector K Veera Raghava Rao who inspected medical shops open in the district advised the public to follow social distancing while going purchasing essential commodities.


