As rumours fly, Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray and health minister deny plans to reimpose lockdown
2020-06-13
MUMBAI/PUNE: CM Uddhav Thackeray said on Friday there was no plan to re-impose a hard lockdown and withdraw the relaxations given under ‘Mission Begin Again’. But he urged people to maintain social distancing. 


Earlier, the CMO tweeted an appeal against believing rumours after social media saw a flurry of messages about a total lockdown following increasing Covid cases. “News such as these create confusion in society, forwarding and posting these kinds of false reports on social media is a crime,” the CM said. 

Health minister Rajesh Tope, too, said he was against clamping down again.

“The state is easing the lockdown restrictions in a phase-wise manner to restart the economy. It does not mean there is a need for unnecessary crowding and violating the social distance norms and hygiene rules. Wearing a mask, washing hands with soap or using sanitisers should be made a part of life and each one has to adopt it as self-discipline,” said Thackeray.

On May 31, the Maharashtra government had extended the lockdown till June 30 but announced significant relaxations like lifting of some curbs on the movement of people and allowing shops to remain open with conditions as part of Mission Begin Again.

Making it clear he was against a hard lockdown again, Tope said it is time people learnt to live with Covid-19 by abiding by government instructions. With the state touching 1 lakh cases on Thursday, the health minister told TOI that almost half of that number represents patients who have been cured and discharged and that needs to be highlighted too.

In Mumbai, 500 more ICU beds will be added soon and every private hospital will have a help desk to deal with refusal of admission or increased charges. District administrations and the health department have been asked to address the issues.

The minister, who held a three-hour meeting with Union health ministry officials, said the Centre had given a verbal approval to reduce containment period to 14 days instead of 28 days and the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) will issue guidelines soon. “Once these rules are in place, it will reduce the burden on the police force,” he told TOI. The Centre has asked the state to carry out vulnerability mapping of densely populated areas as part of an effective containment strategy. An eye should be kept on the case fatality rate and tests done per million population.

The main challenge was to bring down the mortality rate, and death audit reports across the state have indicated that comorbidity is a major hurdle. “As of now, our death rate is 3%; less than 1% mortality is of people who are dying of Covid-19 and the remaining are cases of comorbidity,” said the minister.

(With inputs by Sujit Mahamulkar)

