As restrictions ease, rural Andhra Pradesh no longer unscathed by coronavirus
2020-06-09
VIJAYAWADA: In a departure from the trend of urban areas reporting the majority of Covid-19 cases in the state, rural Andhra Pradesh has in the last few weeks seen a surge in number of infected persons. The spread to rural areas is partly attributed to easing of lockdown restrictions and the subsequent increased movement of people, as well as the influx of migrants from the third phase of the lockdown. Interior tribal pockets of Sileru and Rampachodavaram have also reported a number of cases.


Positive cases are being reported from several mandals in East Godavari district that had not had any Covid-19 case till recently. These include Gollaprolu, Ainavaili, Anaparti, Rayavaram, Bikkavolu, Pedapudi, Ramachandrapuram, Kakinada rural and Gandepalli, Mummidivaram, Ambajipeta, Jaggampeta and Eleswaram mandals.

In Guntur district, cases have surfaced in villages under Duggirala, Prathipadu, Vinukonda, Rompicharla, Machavaram, Repalle and Rajupalem mandals.

In Visakhapatnam district, 23 cases have been reported in Anakapalle town while cases have also been reported in S Rayavaram, Atchutapuram, Nakkapalli, Kotauratla, and Sabbavaram mandals. 

Even though nearly 400 of 550 cases in Krishna district are from Vijayawada and its suburbs, rural Machilipatnam and Nuzvid have reported several Covid-19 cases.

In Vizianagaram district, the virus has made inroads into Denkada, Cheepurpalli, Ramabhadrapuram, Dattirajeru and Garugubilli mandals, while West Godavari district is witnessing a wave of infections in mandals previously untouched by the disease. 

With the influx of foreign returnees and migrants, Srikakulam district crossed the 200 positive cases mark. Srikakulam district collector J Nivas said that of the 206 cases reported so far in the district, only eight persons are locals. “As many as 75 Covid-19 patients were already declared cured and discharged from the hospitals. The district has been conducting a higher number of Covid-19 tests on a daily basis. We need to be more alert in the coming days,” said Nivas.

