As ‘remedies’ for novel coronavirus emerge, officials call for caution
2020-02-05
A 14-year-old boy walked into the Tirupur collectorate on Monday to meet the collector, claiming that he has found a herbal cure for novel coronavirus (nCoV). Displaying a bottle with a dark green liquid, he said the concoction was made from 11 herbs. The Class IX boy attributed his herbal knowledge to his grandmother and insisted that his concoction could be sent for lab tests to ascertain its efficacy. The officials received a petition by him in this regard and sent him off. 

On Tuesday, the boy visited the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital demanding to meet the dean. He was given a liberal dose of advice and sent away by the hospital authorities. If the boy was innocent enough to approach health authorities with such a claim, there may be others who are not so naïve coming up with similar claims.

An alternative medicine practitioner from Chennai made a similar claim that he has a cure for nCoV. The man said the herbal extract he has formulated would cure all sorts of viral infections and would be effective in treating multi-organ failure caused by nCoV. 

Quite similar to claims made by several people during the outbreak of infections right from chikungunya to dengue in the past, this time too dozens have sprung up offering ready remedies for nCoV. Social media has been abuzz with people claiming to be practitioners of alternative medicine offering solutions ranging from garlic rasam to thulasi syrup. There were customised yoga sessions for nCoV too.

Health officials have warned that in general it was not safe to try any unproven methods of treatment for any viral infection. “People should understand that none of these treatments has actually been proven to be effective simply because we don’t have even one case in our state to test,” said deputy director of public health G Ramesh Kumar. 

Health minister C Vijayabaskar said, “We don't have much information about the virus yet. Scientists, agencies such as WHO are working to find more information. We don't have a vaccine yet. We don’t have a list of standard drugs. So, it is better not to go with anything that is unscientific as of now.” 

He also said there is no official information about preventive medicines in AYUSH. 


