As Tamil Nadu awaits lockdown exit, cases hit 161 in one day; 138 in Chennai
2020-05-01
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu and Chennai recorded their highest daily increase in Covid-19 positive cases on Thursday and, as demand for hospital beds in the city went up, pressure mounted on public health authorities to move asymptomatic patients out of them.


The state recorded 161 fresh cases, the count crossing three digits for the third day in a row, and Chennai accounted for 138 of them. Several other districts too reported cases after a gap of several days.



By evening, all four city government hospitals had more than 150 patients, and deans were pushing the state health administration to move asymptomatic patients and those with mild symptoms out of hospitals to Covid care centres for isolation and treatment, with enough nurses and doctors. “It is a protocol suggested by the ICMR. We are examining it,” a senior official said. Increase in cases is expected in an epidemic, said health minister C Vijayabaskar. “We are testing at least 7,000 people statewide daily, including 2,000 in Chennai. We are looking for cases and getting them.” However, the state has high recovery rates and low mortality , the minister said. 

Health officials said Chennai’s expanding clusters were now impacting the neighbouring districts of Chengalpet, Tiruvallur and Kancheepuram. For instance, a cancer patient discharged from the Adyar Cancer Institute a week ago tested positive with four family members in Chengalpet.

“We are seeing similar trends in Tiruvallur and Kancheepuram as well. Most of them had visited hotspots such as markets in Chennai,” said a senior official at the directorate of public health. While Chengalpet recorded five cases, Kancheepuram recorded three and Tiruvallur had one case on Thursday.

Vegetable and fruit vendors in Koyambedu and markets and grocers across Chennai are feeding the clusters. On Thursday, even as a large section of the Koyambedu market complex closed for disinfection, 10 vendors tested positive. Less than 3km away, seven family members of a vendor residing at Ayyappa Nagar near Chinmaya Nagar in Virugambakkam tested positive.

 “We are telling people not to visit markets and grocers every day. The elderly and vulnerable should take help from neighbours,” said Greater Chennai Corporation joint commissioner, health, Madhusudan Reddy.

Health workers fanned out into crowded areas of Teeds Garden in Perambur, Thattankulam in Choolai and Adam Street in Triplicane. One the largest clusters was in one lane in Thattankulam – 11 people who caught the virus from a fever surveillance officer, who was infected in the line of duty.

On Thursday, 48 people were discharged from various hospitals across TN taking the total number of people discharged to 1,258. However, the number of active cases – people in hospital with Covid-19 infection -- has been steadily increasing. From 809 on Monday, it touched 1,035 on Thursday.

 Several districts reported cases on Thursday after a lull. A person from Salem tested positive after a gap of five days. Madurai reported five new cases after two days. Ramanathapuram recorded three cases after a gap of three days.


