As toll coronavirus case count keep rising, Tamil Nadu targets high-risk population
2020-06-03
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu’s public health authorities have begun to reach out to people with comorbidities as part of the fight against Covid-19 as fresh cases touched 1,091on Tuesday, taking the state tally to 24,586. The toll rose to 197 with 13 more deaths reported.


The state planned to protect vulnerable sections of the population — people with diabetes, hypertension, cardiac and kidney ailments — by ensuring they kept their conditions under control. Medical records in private and government hospitals were being used to trace and monitor people at risk. The government had earlier announced it was planning a medical registry to keep track of vulnerable people. “We are planning massive public awareness campaigns on hand hygiene, respiratory etiquette, the importance of maintaining social distance and wearing a mask,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh. “We will also advise people with diabetes and hypertension to keep their diseases under control. Pharmacies attached to government hospitals are dispensing drugs for two months at one go instead of asking patients to make hospital visits once every 15 days.”

CM Edappadi K Palaniswami, who briefed governor Banwarilal Purohit on the situation in the state, has again appealed to people to wear masks and follow social distancing.


Chennai gets 809 new cases of Covid-19

He said the number of cases in the state was high because TN was testing more people. . On Tuesday, the infection positivity rate – the number of cases tested positive over total number of people tested (10,558 ) that day-- crossed 10%.

On Tuesday, Chennai had 809 new cases , a doubling rate a day less than TN’s two weeks, and a total tally of 16,585. “With its high viral load, it has dragged down districts such as Tiruvallur and Chengalpet. Most people from these areas, particularly the vulnerable and the critically ill, are treated in Chennai,” said the health secretary. “We are ensuring we keep critical care beds for these patients as well,” she said. Chengalpet, which logged 82 fresh cases on Tuesday, has a case tally of 1,308, next only to Chennai. In the north, Tiruvallur, which logged 43 fresh cases on Tuesday has 1,025. Kancheepuram, which had 15 new cases , has 433.

Four of the 13 patients who died were in their 50s, one was 62 years old and eight others were in their 70s. A 78-year old man from Chengalpet died within 48 hours of admission due to multi-organ failure. Meanwhile, several patients will mild or no symptoms were shifted to covid care centres and peripheral hospitals. “Soon, triaging of patients will be done before the patient is moved into the hospital,” the health secretary said.

As the number of cases in Chennai increased, officials strengthened containment measures, without compromising on basic necessities and economic activities. They distributed free masks, disinfectants and herbal drinks that boost immunity.

The state also had a steady inflow of migrants testing positive. On Tuesday, two passengers who flew in from Delhi tested positive. In addition there were 40 passengers from Maharashtra, eight from Karnataka, three from AP and two from Kerala who tested positive after reaching Tamil Nadu by road and train. In tuticorin, 51 including 20 migrants tested positive and Tirunelveli had 11migrants and one person from within the district testing positive.


TN death rate of 0.8% lowest: CM
Denying the opposition’s charge on shortage of PCR test kits in the state, the CM asked people not to panic over the spread of the virus. “About 184 persons have died. Our death rate of just 0.8% is the lowest in the country; the treatment success rate is 56%,” the chief minister said indicating that the approach and treatment modalities adopted by the state government at its medical institutions was in the right direction.

