Bihar: As Unlock 1.0 unfolds, universities told to hold pending exams in September
2020-06-12
PATNA: Governor-cum-chancellor Phagu Chauhan on Thursday directed the vice-chancellors (VCs) of different universities to hold all pending examinations and declare the results in September and October.


While interacting with the VCs of Patliputra University, Magadh University, Jai Prakash University and Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Bihar University through videoconferencing, Chauhan said all admissions should be done online in order to start the next academic session on time. 

“It should be ensured that no college admits students beyond its sanctioned strength, failing which strict disciplinary action will be initiated against the defaulters,” the chancellor added. 

He further pointed out that steps should be initiated for getting all the colleges serving as quarantine and isolation centres for the Covid-19 suspects thoroughly sanitized with the help of the district administration so that there is no difficulty in conducting classes or exams when the institutions reopen.

The chancellor may also extend the academic hours with a view to completing the courses of studies. He directed his principal secretary to constitute a three-member committee to render some concrete suggestions in this regard. He also pleaded for sending a team of academics to some premier institutions outside the state and study the process of imparting an effective and meaningful online education. 

“After getting the report of the team, both classroom teaching and online teaching will be made available for students,” Chauhan said.

He pleaded for bringing uniformity in the conduct of examinations, setting of questions and evaluation of answer sheets in different universities of the state. For this purpose, he directed the principal secretary to form a committee of VCs to recommend suitable steps. He also asked the VCs to furnish to the state education department the details of vacancies of assistant professors in different subjects after getting clearance of roster from the office of the commissioner concerned.

