As virus spreads, district officials struggle to track source of infection
2020-04-24
Amaravati: District administrations in Guntur and Kurnool are puzzled as they are yet to ascertain the source of virus in good number of positive cases. They are worried that an unknown source is crippling their efforts to contain the spread of Covid-19. 

Identification of the exact source of the virus is very crucial for containment as it helps officials bring all primary and secondary contacts to quarantine facilities and screen them. Officials are grappling with multiple new cases coming from unknown and unidentified sources, making it very difficult to break the chain. This is believed to be the prime reason for both Kurnool and Guntur are reporting a high number of positive cases.

According to a document presented to the chief minister on Wednesday, officials noted that source of virus in about 34 positive cases in Kurnool district is yet to be ascertained. Similarly, Guntur district has around 18 such cases where officials could not establish the source of the virus in the positive cases. Officials are worried that unknown carriers are spreading Covid-19 without actually knowing that they have already contracted the virus.

Initially, officials thought that quarantining of all the Delhi returnees, their first and secondary contacts and suspected cases in foreign returnees would automatically help them contain the virus. While they succeeded in a majority of the cases, a few cases from unknown carriers are making their job very difficult. Officials are on their toes as more and more people are needed to be shifted to quarantines in Guntur and Kurnool districts as and when the new positive cases are reported.

For instance a 23-year old pregnant woman from Nakirekallu village near Narasaraopet in Guntur district died of Covid-19 at Covid-19 dedicated hospital near Mangalagiri. None from her family are found to be in contact with either Delhi returnees or foreign returnees. Expecting the baby next month, the woman had been staying with her parents for past few months. Now, police are investigating whether her father—a mason—had met any of the positive patients. This unknown source has prompted the authorities to shift nearly 30 people from the village to quarantine as a precautionary measure. Even before the police zero-in on the source, the chain is spreading to new areas and people.


