Asha workers on Covid-19 duty ask for protective gear, better wages
2020-04-23
Aurangabad & Kolhapur: Assigned as frontline workers in the fight against Covid-19 in the state, Asha workers are conducting door-to-door surveys despite poor wages and lack of proper protective gear. For every 50 houses they survey on each day, they are paid a paltry-fee of Rs 33 . Solapur-based state general secretary of Asha workers’ union, Salim Patel said, “The central government has announced the payment of Rs 1,000 per month to each of the Asha workers, against which they have to mandatorily carry out a survey of 50 houses each day.”There are serious concerns about the health risks these workers are facing each day without proper protective gear. “At least the doctors, who are treating the positive cases, are aware of what they are dealing with. But our Asha workers, knowingly or unknowingly, are getting in touch with suspected Covid-19 patients,” Patel told TOI. In Kolhapur, the workers had to take to the streets demanding proper treatment from the citizens, proper protective gear, and hike in the travel allowance from Rs 50 to Rs 200. “At many places, residents do not allow us to enter the societies and localities stating they have not moved out of their homes and, therefore, none of their family members requires checking. At the same time, we are not allowed inside our houses without taking bath after our day's work ends,” said a Kolhapur-based Asha worker. Another worker said that even after several complaints, the administration provided them with just sun coats, masks and gloves. However after the day’s work, the masks and gloves get damaged. “We are provided with just one set of so-called protective gear. We have to wash them, again and again, to use then the next day. We are not provided with the sanitisers. All doctors, nurses get themselves sanitised before they go back home. We have no such facility," said another Asha worker.Aurangabad-based Asha Aarogya karmachari union official Mangal Thombre said, “Asha workers get a fixed remuneration of Rs 1,500 each month for different projects, in addition to this, there are some other perks, paid for the surveys and registrations. Now they have been assured ofan additional Rs 1,000 per month for carrying out Covid-19 survey.”Some workers alleged that the authorities are exploiting their situation. Despite assurance from the government, the long-pending demands of being recognized as regular employees and fixed remuneration, they are made to work for daily wages. 