Asha worker on Covid-19 survey abused, heckled
2020-04-13
Nagpur: A woman Asha worker on door-to-door Covid-19 survey for Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) was allegedly heckled and abused on Sunday in Kamgar Nagar area.Shalu (name changed) was tasked with the survey in Kamgar Nagar area along with her team when the incident happened. She has given a written report about the incident at Kapil Nagar police station, however, cops have not registered any case in the matter yet.“The woman was doing the survey and asking questions when she went to this man’s house. The man started asking her why she was asking him questions, over which the incident happened. No offence can be registered in the matter, so we have taken the note of the incident. We have also directed Asha workers to inform us while going to survey in some specific areas. From now on we will send a policeman with them so no such incident will occur again,” said senior PI of Kapil Nagar police station Prabhakar Matte.“We will also send police vehicles with the Asha workers so that they will feel safe. The workers ask regular questions like the people in the house and about their health,” added Matte.Speaking to TOI, Shalu claimed that she was doing the survey in a lane in Kamgar Nagar while her other colleagues were in other lanes. “I went to a house and was asking the regular questions to a woman. She gave me all the information, but when I asked her mobile contact number, suddenly her husband came out and started yelling at her for sharing the contact number,” Shalu said.Shalu told the man that she was doing a survey, following which the man started abusing her. “The man was hurling abuses so I got scared and tried to contact my other colleagues who were nearby. He also kept asking me about my identity card, even after I showed it, he kept touching it. He also snatched my survey forms and threw it on the ground. I was crying when my colleagues came and I told them about the incident,” she added.The incident has raised fears among Asha workers who are doing the door-to-door survey.