50 attack Asha worker on Covid-19 duty in Bengaluru; five arrested
2020-04-03
BENGALURU: A 45-year-old Asha worker has alleged she was heckled and manhandled by a group of over 50 people while she was conducting a Covid-19 related health survey at Sadiq Nagar, near RK Hegde Nagar, northeast Bengaluru, on Wednesday evening. 


Ashas (Accredited Social Health Activists) are frontline public health workers toiling on the field. A group 14 officials from the health department and ASHA workers, including Krishnaveni, had been assigned to conduct a survey on a daily basis in the area as a domestic help residing in nearby Saraipalya had tested positive for Covid-19 12 days ago. 



“Wednesday was the 11th day of the survey. But a group comprising 50 to 60 locals declined to provide the details the Asha workers sought. A few miscreants also stole the mobile and handbag of one of the workers, identified as Krishnaveni. They also snatched the survey papers from her,” a police officer said. 

DCP SD Sharanappa (east) on Thursday said they’ve arrested five suspects: Mohammed Mustafa, 25, Suhail Basha, 30, Ansar Jabbar, 35, SH Jabbar, 38, and Sageer Sharif, 40. Acting on a complaint filed by Muniraju, senior health inspector, BBMP, later on Thursday, Hennur police registered a case under IPC sections 353 (obstructing public servant from discharging their duty), 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace), 143 (punishment for unlawful assembly), 149 (every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object). 

Earlier in the day, Krishnaveni told deputy chief minister CN Ashwath Narayan, who visited her residence in Hegde Nagar on Thursday, that an announcement was made from a prayer hall not to provide any details to her as it was suspected that the government was secretly collecting data for National Register of Citizens (NRC).

“The crowd surrounded me and other Asha workers soon after the announcement. They snatched my bag and mobile. They pushed me around and dragged me,” she told the DCM. Ashwath Narayan assured Krishnaveni that strict action would be initiated against those who manhandled her. Jurisdictional Hennur police said a Hoysala patrol van dispersed the crowd.

Chief minister BS Yediyurappa, however, downplayed the alleged assault on the Asha worker, saying: “It was a minor incident.” But health minister B Sriramulu, however, tweeted: “Caste, religion or personal interests are not important. Public health is paramount. Attacking nurses/ASHA workers is a cowardly act. We will take strict action against those miscreants.” 

Home minister Basavaraj Bommai said the incident occurred when the Asha worker had gone to check those who had come in contact with Tablighi Jamaat workers. 

Box: ‘We are pained; why did they doubt us?’

“We have issued Thaayi cards to pregnant women and have ensured that their children have a healthy growth. What made them think we were doing something bad that would impact their lives? What if medical staff and Asha workers stop their work?” wondered Krishnaveni.

A diabetic, she was on additional deputation at Hegde Nagar on the day of the alleged attack. “In the absence of bus services, my daughter dropped me to the locality. Trouble began when we asked for the contact number of a man from the local masjid as part of our survey. But Wednesday’s incident has hurt many of us because even our work was looked at with a communal lens,” she told TOI.

Another Asha worker, Vijay, 30, a resident of Thanisandra, said she too was attacked by the mob. “We were only asking them about their family head’s name, age, members in the family and if anyone is suffering from cough, fever or respiratory issues. We don’t understand why they misbehaved with us.”


