ASHA worker dies at work, kin demand Covid-19 insurance cover
2020-05-13
Ballari/Bengaluru: Bheemakka, 50, an Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) worker, died on Sunday en route to the district hospital in Ballari. The health worker had collapsed during her data collection work at Badanakatte village the previous evening. 

Demanding that she be paid the insurance amount promised for Covid-19 frontline workers, her family members and other ASHA workers are staging a protest in front of the district hospital in Ballari. Her body is yet to be moved out of the the hospital premises. 

Bheemakka is the mother of three and a resident of Badanahatti village in Kurugode taluk of Ballari district

"She is a frontline worker who collapsed when she was at work. She died the next day en route to the hospital. She was working as an ASHA worker earning a meagre amount, but working for community health. The state government and the district administration has ignored the issue and her body is yet to be taken for post mortem," said Varalakshmi S, president, ASHA Workers union. 

Dr B. Devanand, sirector, VIMS said her results for the coronavirus were negative. "We have requested her family to conduct her last rites with dignity and recalling her good service. If they refuse to take the body, we will report to the deputy commissioner and act as per their order," he added.

When TOI contacted Karnataka’s Covid-19 spokesperson S Suresh Kumar, he said that the woman died due to cardiac issues and she was not at work when she died. "She was brought dead to the hospital. She had tesed negative for Covid-19," he said. 

However, the minister’s reply disappointed ASHA workers who are demanding that the state government consider Bheemakka’s case for Covid-19 insurance benefits as she had died at work. "The minister has ignored the fact that she collapsed while at work. The state government should not ignore the death of a health worker who has worked since 2012 taking all risks. Chief minister B S Yedyurappa must look into the matter and help the bereaved family with chief minsiter’s compensation fund," said Varalakshmi. 


