Asha workers face opposition while conducting survey for pandemic
2020-04-08
JAIPUR: Asha Sahyogini Kiran Sharma (name changed), who has been assigned to conduct survey for possible coronavirus suspects, had to face stiff opposition in Kalyan ji ka Rasta area here. 

On Monday, a crowd of around 100 people surrounded her and accused her of trying to gather information for the National Register of Citizens (NRC). 

Standing alone in the midst of the mob, Kiran was taking photos and videos of people as per instructions given by the government, but someone snatched her phone. Scared of the crowd, Kiran sought police help. 

Kiran said, “We have been asked to take photographs of people who refuse to cooperate. Small mistakes can be dangerous for hundreds. But these people refuse to listen. They keep alleging that we were there to conduct NRC survey.”

Similar experiences were faced by many other Asha workers in several parts of Walled City. On Tuesday, Asha workers declined to go for the survey in those areas where they faced opposition. 

Asha workers have been assigned to get information on people suffering from cold, cough or fever. They have been asked to check each and every person in the Walled City for an exhaustive data. 

Shivani Verma (name change), another Asha worker, said she tried tired to reason with people in Tokhana and Jalupura areas on several occasions. “I showed them my reports of the survey what we were doing. I tried to assure them that we are not here for NRC, but they tore off the documents and shouted at me saying they won’t [rovide any information nor will they let me continue with the survey. This has been going on since many days and we have written to authorities, but no action has been taken against them,” said Shivani.

Police were present at the scene, but they did not act, sources claimed. Sources in the police department told TOI that they were aware of the incidents and if anyone was found positive in these areas where they refused to cooperate, than those people would be dealt legally. 

Another Asha worker Rashmi Maheswari (name changed) said they did not inform authorities earlier because they didn’t want to give it a communal angle. “The government is already busy dealing with the pandemic and we didn’t want to stretch the issue. But Monday’s incident forced us to think about our safety as well. We are conducting survey in other parts of Walled City without any problems, except a few pockets,” said Rashmi. 


