Ashes pile up at cremation ground as lockdown delays immersion
2020-04-16
Bareilly: “That’s my mother right there,” says Avnish Jhingran, pointing to a yellow bag that holds her ashes. The name ‘Rajkumari’ is scribbled on it. At the City Cremation Ground in Bareilly, the bag is placed in a room lined with several other earthen pots or ‘asthi kalash', all waiting to be immersed in a holy river when the lockdown lifts.Travel curbs due to the ongoing lockdown and fear of infection mean many bereaved families are not able to complete the last step in the final rites of their loved ones — consign their ashes to a river. In Bareilly alone, nearly 200 families have deposited the ashes of the deceased with one of the oldest cremation ground in the city. Supervisor of City Cremation Ground Triloki Nath Sharma told TOI that since borders are sealed, most families who want to immerse ashes in rivers outside the state are waiting for the right time. Jhingran, who lost his mother to chronic asthma on April 6, said, “We have no option but to wait. We have to perform the rituals according to our faith. But right now it’s risky to travel, so we will wait until the lockdown is over and then immerse our mother’s ashes in Ganga in Haridwar.”Similarly, Vijay Kumar’s family is also awaiting the end of lockdown to consign his ashes to Falgu river in Bihar’s Gaya according to family tradition. Babli Yadav, his niece, told TOI, “We will not get a train or bus for Gaya, so we deposited his ashes here until the family can travel.”But it’s not just Bareilly where the lockdown has added to woes of those who have lost their dear ones. Reports of ashes piling up at crematoriums — as people are unable to complete post-cremation rituals — have come from other states like Punjab and Haryana as well. Superintendent of police (Bareilly) Ravindra Kumar said families are being advised to cremate the body but carry out immersion of ashes only later. “Traveling can put people at risk of contracting Covid-19. So we are advising against it.”Vijay Kumar Agarwal, secretary of the Hindu Social Service Trust which manages the cremation ground, said in case people don’t turn up to claim ashes of their near ones even after several months, they are consigned to rivers. “We do this twice a year,” he said.