Assam's Covid-19 cases rising rapidly, growth rate will be more: Himanta
2020-05-21
GUWAHATI: Assam government has instructed all districts to demarcate cremation and burial grounds at isolated areas in their areas as Covid-19 cases, increasing at an accelerated rate took just a week to almost double from 79 on May 13 to 157 on May 19. On the contrary, it had taken 44 days for the number cases to reach 79 from one on March 31.

Assam health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said, “Number of patients will increase with more and more people coming in…there is no way out. But today we have discharged seven patients, including the PG students at GMCH, who have recovered from Guwahati and Silchar.”

Apart from total 157 positive cases, four have died, 48 have been discharged, another three have migrated to other states, which leaves 102 active cases as on Wednesday.

“Today we have asked all deputy commissioners to set up cremation and burial grounds at isolated areas in their districts to prepare ourselves, in case there are any unfortunate deaths,” he said.

During the 33 days period before the inter-state movement was allowed from March 31 when the first case was reported till May 2 there were 42 positive cases, which averages to 1.27 positive cases every day. In the subsequent period after inter-state movement was allowed from May 3, the number of cases have risen faster at an average of 7.18 cases per day.

Sarma said, “The count will keep rising, at least for the next months. Our estimate is that there are 12 to 13 lakh Assam citizens outside the region and so far only about 1.5 lakh of them have returned by own or hired cars, cycles, buses and trains and even walked. Therefore, we are expecting at least 10 lakh people.”

“The challenges will grow day by day as railways will run trains for one month and from May 25 airlines will start. We have to face the challenges,” Sarma added. He said that number of people coming by road are declining and is expected to end in next few days.

“The norms for train travel have changed and now the sending state can requisition trains and send the people to the home state and do not need any approval for the receiving state. Railway ministry has informed that daily 5 five to six trains are likely to enter the state,” he said.

Sarma in a tweet said, “In view of rapidly rising number of #COVID19 cases in Assam, govt has decided to keep Sonapur Civil Hospital & Kalapahar Hospital on a standby to accommodate more #COVID + patients. Visited both places with officials & asked administration to ramp up preparations.”


