Assam to spend up to Rs 20,000 per incoming person in mandatory quarantine
2020-05-22
GUWAHATI: Assam government has allocated up to Rs 20,000 towards the expenditure in quarantining each person arriving from outside the state under its new slogan of “Ruthless Quarantine with Human Heart” to arrest Covid-19 from spreading out in the community.


State health minister Himanta Bisawa Sarma said, “The government will not compromise on the mandatory 14 days quarantine period and we are saying ruthless because any person, however influential or powerful he may be, has to stay in quarantine. We will take care of them with a human heart and provide them food and bed to the best of our capabilities. Criminal cases will be initiated against anyone found jumping quarantine.”

People will have to spend seven days in institutional quarantine, either in temporary facilities or in hotels depending upon vacancies and will be allowed to go home after seven days provided the person tests negative. From the institutional facility, the person has to spend another seven days in home quarantine along with his family members at home.

The government will provide three meals with tea in between along with packaged water costing Rs 500 per day for each person in the temporary facilities, which amounts to Rs 3500 per head for seven days. Those put up in hotels will get the same meals for the same amount and the hoteliers will be paid Rs 2000 for each room per day, which amounts to Rs 17500 per head for seven days.

For the next seven days in home quarantine, the government will provide a one-time assistance of Rs 2000 to the family for ration as the entire family will have to go into quarantine. Those in home quarantine will also get an additional Rs 500 for purchase of toiletries and medicines.

Apart from this, Assam is the only state to give a second installment of Rs 2000 to each of its 3.61 lakh citizens, who are still stranded outside the state and have registered their names with the government. “We released Rs 72.23 crore for providing Rs 2000 to each of these people as the first installment last month. Today we are sending the second installment and we are the only state to do so. The third installment will be sent next month,” Sarma said.

