Assembly may go under CoVID shield
2020-03-15
Bhopal: Amid the political crisis confronting Kamal Nath government, ‘prevention is better than cure’ got a whole new meaning when health and finance minister Tarun Bhanot used the proverb in context of CoVID-19 on Saturday and hinted at a possible postponement of the make-or-break session of the assembly.

The budget session is scheduled to start on March 16. Neighbouring Chhattisgarh has already extended the Holi vacation of assembly till March 26 and will take a call later on whether it can reconvene on that day. 

“Prevention is better than cure. Safety of all MP residents is paramount. It is not a political issue for us. We are seeking advice from our top health experts,” said Bhanot, who was given the health portfolio on Friday after Tulsi Silawat was removed from the cabinet by the Governor on the recommendation of CM Kamal Nath. 

To add to it, general administration department minister Dr Govind Singh said, “All those coming from CoVID-19-impacted locations should be tested.” The 22 breakaway Congress MLAs are in Bengaluru, where six CoVID-19 cases have been detected, one of whom has died. It’s likely that the rebel Congress MLAs would have to undergo screening and tests for Coronavirus as and when they return to Bhopal.

The health department would be mandated to screen everyone before they enter Vidhan Sabha. Restriction on public gatherings came into force in MP on Saturday. Schools, colleges and cinemas are closed and CM Nath has ordered that any event where a large gathering is expected should be rescheduled.

“So far, MP has not reported any CoVID-19 cases. We want to keep it that way. We are taking measures to keep our citizens safe. I was to ask BJP if they support the measures to keep MP residents healthy and safe,” Bhanot said.

Health department’s principal secretary, Pallavi Jain Govil, held a press meet on Saturday to outline the safety and preventive measures being taken. A team of doctors will be deployed at Vidha Sabha, with respiratory masks and other equipment. Ambulances will be parked outside.

On March 5, The Madhya Pradesh Public Health Act, 1949 was invoked in the state. Chief medical and health officers and civil surgeons of districts are vested with all authority to ensure control of CoVID outbreak under Public Health ACT 1949. It vests magistrate-like powers with health officers, whereby they can quarantine and lock down identified areas to prevent an outbreak.


