Asymptomatic Covid patients to be lodged at Adlux from Tue
2020-06-08
Kochi: Health officials will start admitting asymptomatic Covid-19 positive patients at Adlux Convention Centre in Angamaly from Tuesday. Initially, asymptomatic patients undergoing treatment at government medical college hospital (MCH) in Kalamassery will be shifted to the convention centre. Later, patients with mild symptoms will also be shifted from the MCH depending on the number of cases admitted to the hospital.

The health department decided to shift asymptomatic and mild symptoms cases to Adlux once the number of Covid positive cases undergoing treatment at MCH touches 50. Currently, 44 people are undergoing treatment at MCH.

The move is to reduce the burden on doctors and nurses at MCH, and helping provide treatment to patients with serious cases. “Of this 45, only less than five people have serious symptoms and10 have mild symptoms. Rest are asymptomatic patients. Decision on whether all asymptomatic patients should be shifted from MCH will be taken later. People testing positive in sentinel surveillance will be lodged at Adlux. New cases in the district that are reported from Tuesday will be lodged here. Lodging of mild symptomatic cases at Adlux will be in the second stage after examining the number of cases being reported,” said a medical official.

Two doctors and eight nurses will be posted at the centre initially. The number of medical staff will be increased in proportion to the number of patients admitted. Doctor-on-call facility will be available. Each doctor will do rounds every day. Two ambulances will also be parked outside to transport patients from the centre to the hospital, if needed. The centre house 200 patients, and it has 51 toilets.

Patients should clean their own bed and a worker will clean the hall. There will be four volunteers to support the medical team.

About 200 cubicles have been arranged at the exhibition centre spread over 50,000 sqft. Four television sets and Wi-Fi facility will be arranged. Accommodation facility for health officials have been arranged at a nearby hotel.

“Medicine, wheelchairs, trolley and PPE kits for health workers have brought to the centre. There is separate donning and douffing area for health workers to wear PPE kits and take them off, besides separate entry and exit points. These places will be disinfected frequently. Food waste will be treated in Thumburmuzhy model aerobic composting technic and IMAGE will treat medical waste. A discussion in this regard is going on,” said Dr Naseema Najeeb, Angamaly government taluk hospital superintendent.

KSEB has installed a transformer at the centre. The arrangements are for 125 male patients and the rest for females. Fire and rescue officials will disinfect the compound.


