‘Asymptomatic patients spread Covid-19, home isolate them’
2020-05-22
Dr Prashant P Joshi, a specialist of clinical epidemiology, is professor of general medicine at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Nagpur. He is former temporary adviser to World Health Organization (WHO). According to him, a large number of asymptomatic cases are responsible for rapid spread of Covid-19 and such patients must observe strict home isolation. Otherwise, Covid-19 cases are expected to increase exponentially when the lockdown is lifted.

Who are asymptomatic Covid-19 cases?

Asymptomatic Covid-19 positive cases are people who have been infected but have no complaints or symptoms. Such people themselves don’t know that they are infected and hence they mix with other people and roam freely in society. Secondly, infected persons may be asymptomatic when they are in incubation period. This is the period from time of infection to the development of symptoms. During this period, a person can unknowingly infect other persons. This is also called the ‘Pre-symptomatic period’. Thirdly, people who have tested positive but showing no symptoms after 10-12 days can be asymptomatic carriers. 

How many of all Covid-19 cases are asymptomatic?

About 80% of Covid-19 cases may either have no symptoms or have minor complaints like mild fever, cough or sore throat, which do not need hospitalization. Out of them, about 30% cases may have absolutely no complaint and 50% may have mild complaints. These patients who are otherwise healthy without co-morbid conditions may be treated on outdoor basis at home, but require isolation. They usually recover on their own. 

How important is it for asymptomatic patients to follow home isolation? 

Asymptomatic infection of Covid-19 seems to be common. As told earlier, 80% cases can be treated at home. This means, the disease is fought more efficiently at the community level than in the hospital. Hence, home isolation should be followed properly. If not, it can become difficult to control the pandemic. 

What is the spectrum of clinical features of Covid-19 cases?

Spectrum of clinical manifestations of Covid-19 cases may range widely from being asymptomatic, to mild uncomplicated illness, uncomplicated mild pneumonia, complicated severe pneumonia, development of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) requiring ventilatory therapy to septic shock to multi-organ failure. Recent research has shown that coronavirus can cause blood clots and thrombosis which may precipitate heart attacks and paralytic strokes. 

Is there any relationship between Vitamin D deficiency and Covid-19?

Two studies based on data from more than 20 countries found that Vitamin D deficiency may be linked to more severe disease. Researchers from both studies found that countries where people had lower levels of Vitamin D had a higher rate of severe Covid-19 than countries where people had higher levels of the vitamin. 


