Kerala: Asymptomatic to be shifted out of GMC if Covid-19 cases shoot up
2020-05-31
KOCHI: Anticipating an increase in Covid-19 cases in Ernakulam district in the coming days, asymptomatic people and those with mild symptoms will be shifted to independent institutions such as Adlux Convention Centre in Angamaly to bring down the burden on health workers at Government Medical College (GMC), Kalamassery.


The shifting will start once the number of Covid patients at GMC, which is a tertiary-care centre that is now attending to only Covid patients, touches 50. Health officials said of the 22 cases (as on Friday) undergoing treatment at GMC, only five to six have symptoms and the rest are asymptomatic or with mild symptoms.

 “Institutions such as Adlux Convention Centre, which has 200 to 250 bed capacity, will keep a watch on such patients. Centres with 20 to 25 bed capacity each have been identified in each taluk in the district for it. As these patients need only observation, doctors will check them every four days. The GMC will then treat only serious cases. We will not overburden any hospital in the district,” said a district health official.

District medical officer N K Kuttappan said the district administration has prepared an action plan regarding this. “We have discussed the plan with district administration,” Kuttappan said.

On less number of patients in Ernakulam despite people coming from abroad and other states, Kuttappan said caseload may increase in coming days. “People reaching the district by air, train or road have been placed under quarantine. They do not come in contact with others. People coming to Ernakulam from outside Kerala are less compared to those from other districts in the state. Now, we are able to manage the caseload in Ernakulam. But we cannot say how many days the existing situation will continue. Less number of cases does not mean that the district will not report more cases,” he said.

Eight doctors, including house surgeons, and 20 to 30 nurses have been engaged in treating Covid-19 patients at the GMC. “The health workers have been working on shifts of four hours. The district administration will take the call on the patients. But a decision will be there definitely since Kalamassery GMC is a tertiary centre for treating serious Covid-19 patients. We can accommodate around 250-300 patients with serious cases at the GMC,” said Dr Ganesh Mohan, regional medical officer, GMC.

