At 14,500, Delhi is now second only to Maharashtra in terms of active Covid-19 cases
2020-06-05
NEW DELHI: After Maharashtra, Delhi has maximum active cases of Covid-19.


According to the data shared by states, while Maharashtra has 39,935 active cases, the corresponding figure for Delhi is 14,456. It is much higher than the number of active cases in Tamil Nadu (12,135) and Gujarat (4,779), two other states that are most affected by the Covid-19 crisis.



The spike in active cases in the national capital, officials said, has been caused due to sudden increase in new cases.

Delhi’s daily count of Covid-19 crossed the 1,000 mark for the first time on May 28 when 1,024 new cases were reported. Since then, the numbers have been going up daily – except on June 1 when only 990 new cases were reported.

On Thursday, the city reported 1,359 new cases of Covid-19 taking the state’s total tally to above 25,000 mark to reach 25,004.

Authorities also confirmed 44 deaths due to the disease, 22 of which were reported over the last two days, taking the death toll to 650.

Of all active cases in the state, officials added, only 3,307 (23%) are requiring hospitalisation. “Majority of people are under home isolation (65%). Some others have been kept under isolation at the Covid health centres and Covid care centres,” a senior official said.


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Unlock 1.0: What's open & from when in MHA's phase-wise reopening plan
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news

Epidemiologists say chances of cases coming down anytime soon are less because the infection is spreading. “We need to be prepared to deal with more patients by arranging more hospital beds, in government as well as private facilities,” said a senior doctor. Delhi government has asked all private hospitals with more than 50 beds to either dedicate 20% of beds for Covid-19 patients or, if mixing of Covid and non-Covid patients was a problem, turn themselves into complete Covid facility.

To deal with the critically ill, the government has directed state-run hospitals that have been designated for Covid management – Rajiv Gandhi Super Specialty Hospital, GTB, Lok Nayak, Deep Chand Bandhu and Shri Raja Harish Chandra Hospital – to upgrade their facilities in three weeks. It would include adding more ventilator beds, beds equipped with oxygen support and recovery or observation beds. The government order also states that if bed is not available in a hospital, it will be sole responsibility of the hospital to transfer the patient to other hospital and till that happens, the hospital will provide available medical facilities.

Another crisis is lack of testing facilities. With as many as eight labs being barred from testing pending investigation into certain complaints raised against them, many people said they were finding it difficult to get tests done. “The government should tell hospitals which private labs are authorised to do the testing. There is lot of confusion and patients are being refused testing by labs,” Dr Harish Gupta, coordinator of the Covid task force set up by Delhi Medical Association, said.

