At 2.6%, Karnataka’s Covid-19 fatality rate lower than national average
2020-04-13
BENGALURU: Of the 232 Covid-19 patients reported in Karnataka so far, six have died, translating into a case fatality rate (CFR) of 2.6%, against the national figure of 3.5%. While any death is one casualty too much, the figure has come as a relief given the virulence of the disease in states like Maharashtra, where the CFR is 7.1%.

CFR is the percentage of deaths among patients who have tested positive.


Alongside CFR, the state’s CGR (compound growth rate) of coronavirus infections is also much less than the national figure — 6.05% against 12.9% in India — indicating the spread is relatively manageable so far.

Karnataka had reported India’s first Covid-19 fatality, with the death of a 76-yearold man from Kalaburagi on March 10, sending alarm bells ringing, but the trajectory has changed since.

Three of the six patients who died in Karnataka were suffering from Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI) — increasingly emerging as a high-risk group — and two were late referrals. One of the victims — a 75-year-old man from Bagalkot — was a SARI patient who was not detected by the alternative therapist he first went to. A 57-year-old man from Kalaburagi died after a delayed referral from a private hospital.

The youngest Covid-19 patient to die in the state is the 57-year-old while the oldest is an 80-year-old woman from Gadag. A senior doctor in Bengaluru said the state has managed so far to protect elderly patients, who are particularly vulnerable, with efficient clinical management on a case-by-case basis.

“In fact, we have had success stories among senior citizens. A 67-year-old woman with chronic kidney disorder is recovering well and getting discharged. Another 62-yearold woman who was on ventilaor for more than a week has stabilised and been shifted to the ward. A 78-year-old man who has returned from abroad is being treated in a private hospital and is doing well. The stage at which the case is diagnosed, the underlying health condition of the patient and clinical management of the case each play a vital role in curbing mortality rate,” the doctor said.

“Early admission of the cases and preparedness in management of critical cases is the way to curb deaths,” said Dr Giridhar Babu, professor and head of lifecourse epidemiology in Public Health Foundation of India, Bengaluru. “For which, testing more cases among the contacts of the positive patients, testing all SARI cases and all cases of influenza-like illnesses across the state is necessary.”

The Covid-19 death audit committee is, in fact, getting into the details of each of the deaths to understand the underlying factors. “We call each of these deaths a Covid-19 fatality as the patient was found to be infected with the virus at the time of death. But the viral infection need not necessarily have been the cause of death. We need to look into the comorbidities (concurrent health conditions) that may have triggered the virus infection,” said Dr Prakash Kumar, joint director of communicable diseases in the health and family welfare department. By protocol, deaths due to communicable diseases are closely investigated.

For instance, Prakash said, the first death occurred on the Karnataka-Telangana border when the Kalaburagi man was being brought back home from a Hyderabad hosptial. “However, we have not got his medical records and details of what led to his mortality as the death occurred outside Karnataka and he was last treated at a Hyderabad hospital,” he said. “All the deaths have to be investigated further.” No postmortem was done in any of the cases and the final rites were conducted as per WHO guidelines.

