At 30%, pvt Covid labs lag govt units, test just 17% of samples
2020-05-25
NEW DELHI: Even as almost one-third of total Covid testing labs are in the private sector, merely 12-18% of the samples are tested in such labs, raising concerns over participation of the private sector in efforts to combat the pandemic. 


 Private labs in states like Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and West Bengal are testing fewer samples as compared to government labs. The lower testing in private labs can be explained in part by costs, even if capped, as compared to the government set-up. In cities where private labs have a better presence, like Mumbai and Delhi, the testing is higher. 

 According to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), of the total 607 labs allowed to carry out Covid-19 testing, 180 labs are in the private sector - accounting for almost 30% of approved labs across the country. But when it comes to testing samples, less than five lakh have been tested in private sector so far against more than 25 lakh in government labs, said an official. 




 In Tamil Nadu, 27 private labs, the second highest after Maharashtra with 31, tested 48,457 samples which is merely 13% of the total 3.47 lakh samples tested in the state. Similarly, in Telangana, private labs tested only 3,835 samples so far, against 27,750 tested by public sector labs. In Karnataka, which has 23 private and 34 government labs, 24,570 samples have been tested in the private sector as against 1.9 lakh by public labs. 

 The low testing by private sector labs has raised concern as the country is now gradually exiting the lockdown. The movement of migrant workers to smaller cities and villages along with government's plans to gradually open up domestic and international travel is likely to result in an increase in testing. 

 "The idea behind allowing the private sector was to increase access and availability of testing facility and capacity. Private sector participation is crucial to tackle such crisis. Some of these labs have wide network, mainly that of collection centres. But we are disappointed with their response so far," an official said, pointing out that many of the approved labs did not have the wherewithal to collect samples or logistics to transfer them to labs. Moreover, private labs were expecting the government ones to divert samples to them. 

 However, testing by the private sector is seen on a much larger scale in Maharashtra and Delhi. Till Sunday, over 29.43 lakh samples were tested for Covid across the country. 


