At 79, Vid sees highest single-day surge, Covid cases cross 1,000
2020-05-21
Nagpur: Total 79 Covid-19 positive cases were reported from eight out of the 11 districts of Vidarbha on Wednesday, which is highest single-day surge so far. With this, the number of cases in Vidarbha has crossed 1,000-mark. 

Akola recorded 29 cases in a day, followed by 19 from Amravati — which is the highest single-day jump for the city. Nagpur reported 13 cases, including 5 SRPF jawans while nine samples from remote villages in Yavatmal district tested positive late in the evening. 

Wardha and Gadchiroli recorded three new cases each for the second consecutive day. New cases were also reported from Buldhana (2) and Chandrapur (1) — after almost eight days of no new cases in both the districts. 

In all, 79 cases were added into Vidarbha’s tally. On the other hand, 23 patients recovered from Akola and 11 from Nagpur. One each from Chandrapur and Buldhana also recovered taking day’s tally of recoveries to 36. Now, Vidarbha has total 1,012 cases, with 655 recoveries and 43 deaths. The recovery rate of the region is almost 65%, which is higher than state and national recovery rate.

In a matter of grave concern for citizens and the administration in Amravati, the city posted highest number of 19 positive cases to take the Covid toll of the district to 135. Masanganj, the veritable hotspot of the city, contributed seven of the 19 cases today with five coming from a single family, all in institutional quarantine as contacts of a youth who had tested positive three days ago.

The 19 positive cases include 11 women and eight men. While the youngest is a 10-year-old girl from Patipura locality, the oldest is 84-year-old woman from Masanganj, which has uptil now reported 20 cases to its credit to date, highest from any of the 32 localities in the city with positive cases.

Chandrapur: While one of the positive patients from Chandrapur was declared cured, another person was detected Covid-19 positive on Wednesday. Thus, the Covid-19 tally still stands at two in Chandrapur.

Civil surgeon Dr CS Rathod said a family of five had returned to neighbouring Durgapur village from Hyderabad on May 12. They all were placed under institutional quarantine on the following day. Their swab samples were collected on May 18 and three of their test reports came on Wednesday. Dr Rathod claimed that a 55-year-old male has been found Covid positive, while two others — a 20-year-old girl and a two-and-a-half-year-old — have tested negative. Reports of two other family members are awaited, he added. 

First of the two positive patients from Chandrapur, a security guard, was declared cured of Covid-19 infection after his two consecutive swab samples taken after 14 days tested negative. He belonged to Krishna Nagar and was found positive on May 1.

Yavatmal: The possibility of the district coming out of red zone on Friday has dimmed after nine new Covid-19 cases were reported on Wednesday, taking the number of active positive cases in Yavatmal to 16.

According to sources, the new cases have been reported from Digras (4) (Isapur 3 and Rui Talav 1), Pusad (4) and Malkini village in Mahagaon (1). 

All those tested positive are Mumbai returnees. All these persons had travelled together from Vasai in Palghar district near Mumbai in a Matador. Two of them, from Hudi village in Pusad tehsil, had already tested positive and are in the isolation ward of GMCH.

Of the 17 swab samples taken from the high risk contacts, nine (seven males and two females) have tested Covid positive while six came negative and two reports are awaited.

Gadchiroli: Another three Mumbai-returnee migrant labourers tested positive in Gadchiroli taking the total number of cases to nine. Two of them are in their mid-20s while one is 45-year-old man. All are admitted in the isolation ward of general hospital. 

Wardha: Three reports of close contacts of a 21-year-old girl from Dhamangaon, who is undergoing treatment at Acharya Vinoba Bhave Rural Hospital, Sawangi hospital, tested positive. All three are women and undergoing treatment at the same hospital. Wardha now has nine cases, including 1 death.

Hudi village in panic: Meanwhile, reports of the 52-year-old man from Hudi village, stamped Home Quarantined in Ahmednagar two weeks ago, who died on road while returning from Pusad hospital came negative for Covid infection. The man was reported to be suffering from cough, fever and breathing difficulties. His body was lying on the roadside for over three hours unattended.

The man along with his wife had returned from Ahmednagar two weeks ago. However, they were forced to stay in a farm as local police patil allegedly prevented them from entering the village.

The man’s death, however, raises question as to how home quarantined persons were allowed to move on their own without any monitoring by the authorities.

A 25-year-old woman from Hudi had died late on Tuesday night. Health workers have taken her body into their custody and kept it in the mortuary. Her sample was sent for testing and the report is awaited, informed district collector MD Singh.

Residents are in a panic now after detection of coronavirus patients in their villages. Moreover, those who returned from Mumbai and other places are seen flouting the home quarantine rules and often move in the villages. The villagers are demanding strictest action against those violating the quarantine rules. Now, Yavatmal has containment areas in the city and also in Ner, Digras, Pusad and Umarkhed tehsils.

… 

At 79, Vid records highest single day surge, surpass 1000 Covid-19 cases 


