Senior citizens at greater risk of coronavirus infection, must take these preventive measures
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: If you have an elderly person at home, make sure they are kept away from crowded places and encourage them to practice hand hygiene more vigorously than before. For they are the ones who are at a maximum risk to develop serious complications such as pneumonia and respiratory failure on getting infected with Covid-19 – the novel coronavirus infection – that has affected at least 30 Indians, as on Thursday. 


According to a study published in the American Medical Association journal, which analysed the epidemiology data of Covid-19 outbreak in China, the overall case-fatality rate (CFR) was 2.3% (1,023 deaths among 44,672 confirmed cases). 

“No deaths occurred in the group of nine years and younger, but cases in the 70-79 years had an 8% CFR, while those in the 80 years bracket and older had a 14.8% CFR,” found the study conducted by Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.

The mortality rate or CFR was higher among those with pre-existing comorbid conditions — 10.5% for cardiovascular disease, 7.3% for diabetes, 6.3% for chronic respiratory disease, 6% for hypertension, and 5.6% for cancer, the study stated.

In view of this, the doctors said that it was most important to keep the elders safe. “If they develop a breathing difficulty or pneumonia, they must be hospitalised immediately. With timely medical support, chances of recovery are higher,” said Dr Suranjit Chatterjee, senior consultant, internal medicine, Apollo Hospital.

Dr G C Khilnani, chairman, PSRI Institute of Pulmonary, Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, PSRI Hospital, said severe symptoms of Covid-19 were respiratory failure, pneumonia and organ failure. “The Spanish flu, which led to a global pandemic in 1918, claimed 50 million lives. The death rate due to Covid-19 is much lower. This is because of an improved public health infrastructure and timely response. Our government has been very swift in arranging for the screening of persons coming from affected nations. We have enough facilities for isolation and treatment,” he said.

He, however, stressed on the need for implementing preventive measures. “We have to improve our hand hygiene and coughing etiquettes. If someone has cough, he or she must wear mask to ensure the virus isn’t transmitted to others,” he said.

The doctors advised that the senior citizens should avoid visiting friends or family if they feel sick. “The family should check on them regularly so they don’t feel isolated,” said a doctor, adding that if there was any symptom that could signal Covid-19, doctor and hospital should be contacted immediately.


