Coronavirus in Delhi: At NCDC control room, phones ringing non-stop
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: Nearly a century old single-storey building with turrets and a stony exterior is buzzing with activity in Civil Lines. Once the residence of the commander-in-chief of the British army in India, it is now home to the control room of National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) from where the country’s central helpline for coronavirus — 011-23978046 — is operated 24X7.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

As you cross the arched gateway and verandah, you enter a large hall, which is the NCDC control room. At the centre of the hall is a large and oval wooden table where close to 25 officials are quietly and patiently answering to all kind of queries coming in from not only all parts of the country, but also foreign countries. The only sound is that of the phones ringing as the NCDC officials go about their work efficiently.

“This room is usually used for coordinating with our other state branches of NCDC and as control room during outbreaks. However, the last time we received so many calls was perhaps during the SARS outbreak in 2009,” said a senior NCDC official.

“Majority of the calls are from people who have fever, cough and sneezing. Many appear anxious and we try to reassure them that these are also the symptoms for flu and other bacterial infections, which is caused during this time due to changing season,” he said.

“We tell them that only if they have travelled abroad recently or have contact history with those who have coronavirus, they should call the helpline and ask for an ambulance to get tested,” he said.

The NCDC control room is operational 24X7 and while NCDC officials man 30 phone lines between 8am and 8pm, 20 phone lines are operational between 8pm and 8am.

“Those answering the phones are research officers and other officials, who have been trained about coronavirus. In case they are unable to address any particular query, the calls are handled by NCDC’s public health officers, who are doctors,” the official said.

“There are also many who want to know if they can go ahead with plans of foreign travel. A gentleman, who got married recently, called to ask if he should carry on with his honeymoon in Thailand, which was planned months ago,” he added. “People call from other countries to know if they would be detained the moment they land in India.”

“Many doctors from hospitals across the country also call us to find out about the treatment protocols,” the official said.

The officials, almost half of them women, said that doing 12-hour shifts is taking a toll on their health too. “Yesterday a colleague fell sick and had to be taken to a hospital. She had extremely high blood pressure,” said another official.

“We not only have to patiently answer all queries but also write down all details in the register,” he added.

“Though we have been trained to be courteous and patient with the callers, many of them are not. Yesterday a gentleman used the choicest of abuses after I took a call. He claimed he had to wait for a long time. He stopped only after I told him I would lodge a police complaint,” he said.


