At Pothencode, containment & community testing are key
2020-04-02
Thiruvananthapuram: The health team and district administration are executing regional containment strategy coupled with community testing at Pothencode, which is similar to what an Italian town did to reduce cases substantially within a brief time period. 

The district administration has formed five teams to collect samples from the community in the areas put under quarantine at Pothencode using mobile labs mainly to flush out ‘submerged’ infections ; positive cases which may not show any signs. Usually epidemiological team go for TTT method; trace, test and treat once a case gets confirmed. Here the methodology has to be tweaked a bit because source remains unknown. Now testing and treating strategy holds the key in cutting down a spike in cases. 

The strategy of putting a region under quarantine and going for community testing yielded great results in the Italian town of Vo where the first Covid death occurred in the country. Testing was done for every inhabitant in that town including asymptomatic people as part of a study by University of Padua. According to a report published by The Guardian, the study meant to identify natural history of the virus, transmission dynamics and categories at risk. The inhabitants were tested twice and silent infections were traced out and they were isolated. The study was done based on the principle that all citizens have to be tested irrespective of them having symptoms and it provided a crucial way of controlling the spread of the disease.

The health team is pinning hopes on having the same result at Pothencode where 18 wards and neighbouring wards of around 10 local bodies have been put under quarantine for three weeks with special stress given on first two weeks. The Italian town was also put under quarantine for two weeks and testing was completed for the inhabitants facilitating isolation of the infected and preventing further transmission. 

The health team opted mobile labs to avoid any kind of exposure of asymptomatic persons within the community to hospital institutions. Even the choice of having community health centres was ignored to eliminate all possible chances of exposure. Community screening using mobile labs is being executed firstly in areas where infected persons resided and moved around mostly. Gradually the screening will be extended to other areas and the nationwide lockdown as well as regional quarantine provide the perfect platform for executing the strategy. Persons are picked from homes, taken to labs for collecting swabs and then asked to return. Those with symptoms are directed to isolation ward.

The team had to go for this strategy based on a realization that those with foreign travel history alone shouldn’t be screened. Even if someone among them had been infected, the incubation period could be long over and chances are slim of detecting infection. Broadening the screening could pluck out undetected infections within the community which could expose a larger section to infection especially putting aged people and immunosuppressed persons at high risk of fatality. The teams are expected to complete first round of sample collection in three days.


