At some hospitals, cancer patients feel the pinch of Covid test before each session
2020-04-29
MUMBAI: Cancer care has gotten expensive with some city hospitals insisting that patients undergo a Covid-19 test before every chemotherapy or radiotherapy session. Even as the central guidelines advise testing for these patients only when they have symptoms, the practice on ground varies between hospitals.

A 52-year-old ovarian cancer patient from Malad said that she has been asked by PD Hinduja Hospital to get tested every week. She has already undergone eleven sessions of chemotherapy and has a few more to go. She said that the requirement for negative reports was communicated to them a couple of weeks ago. “We understand it’s for everyone safety, but paying Rs 4,500 for the test every week is too much when chemotherapy itself is expensive. The government must make it free if testing is so essential,” she said.

A 62-year-old man’s radiotherapy session too was put on hold on Tuesday at the Mahim hospital. As the man and his wife queued up to undergo a covid-19 test outside a cabin erected in the hospital’s compound, he said, “It was supposed to be my first session today. When I reached here, they said I would have to undergo a test and the next course of action would be decided once the reports arrive after 24-48 hours”. The man said he didn’t have any symptoms of fever, cough or breathlessness. A hospital staffer said they are asking for the a covid test report before every indoor admission. In another hospital, a woman’s radiotherapy treatment has been halted so that she could get a covid test done before going ahead with the remaining sessions.

Joy Chakraborty, COO of Hinduja, however, denied that they were insisting on test reports before every session. “We have put a triaging system in place. A patient is evaluated by a team of doctors and nurses and if they feel the patient needs to be tested, they advise for one,” he said. A medical oncologist said if any of the doctors catch the infection and go into quarantine for 14 days, the cancer treatment of scored of patients would suffer, even as the particular unit may have to shut down. 

The approach at the country’s largest cancer hospital, Tata Memorial Centre, is quite the opposite though. “A detailed history-keeping is done following which patients coming for chemotherapy or radiotherapy sessions are screened thoroughly for symptoms of fever, cough and breathlessness. If someone has symptoms, we immediately take the swabs and send for testing. However, for patients undergoing surgery, particularly of oral cancers, we do the testing. The surgery usually happens in a room filled with 6-7 people and an infected patient could put everyone at risk,” said Dr Shripad Banavali, who heads the hospital’s oncology department.

Reiterating that cancer patients and those undergoing dialysis needn’t undergo testing, a civic officer said: “Our circular clearly states that they should be tested only if they have symptoms. Else they should be screened before any treatment session.”

A 55-year-old man undergoing treatment for oral cancer at Lilavati Hospital said he has been tested once about two weeks ago and there have been no subsequent demands for a negative report. “I am screened every time I come for a consultation,” he said. Dr V Ravishankar, COO of Lilavati Hospital, said they tested all their regular patients at one go. “That way the patients knew they weren’t infected and the medical professionals were confident to treat them,” he said. 


