At six, Delhi reports most Covid-19 cases in a day
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: The nationwide increase in the number of patients testing positive for Covid-19, the infection caused by the novel coronavirus, reflected in the Delhi numbers as well.


Coronavirus in India latest updates

On Friday, the capital reported six new Covid-19 cases, the highest in a single day, taking the total number of patients who have tested positive in Delhi hospitals to 20. Two of the six latest patients are residents of Jahangirpuri and relatives of a person under treatment at Safdarjung hospital for Covid-19.

Two others, aged 58 and 32, both men, are from North Delhi and West Delhi. They had returned from the UK and France recently, officials said. Details of the other two were awaited at the time of writing this report. “All six have been admitted in hospitals and their contacts are being tracked by the surveillance teams,” an official said.

The case of a 38-year-old woman who had tested positive on March 17 is emerging as a cause for concern. A resident of Shahdara, she had, along with her 19-year-old son, travelled to Saudi Arabia on February 19 and returned to India on March 10. On March 12, she developed fever and cough and consulted a private doctor in Old Seemapuri. Three days later, she was taken to the emergency section of Guru Tegh Bahadur hospital, which referred her to RML hospital. A cab took her there.

The woman was admitted at RML and shifted to Safdarjung hospital after she tested positive for Covid-19. The state surveillance team’s report, which is with TOI, says her son has been quarantined and her daughter, who has fever and cough since March 15, has been referred to RML. The doctor who treated the woman also has fever and cough and has been admitted at GTB hospital. “A total 74 contacts of the woman have been identified. Of this, 18 are close contacts and they are being monitored closely,” an official said.

In Gurgaon, where four people have tested positive for Covid-19 so far, samples of a businessman and his wife who had returned from London on March 17 have been sent for testing. The health department declined to comment on the status of the two reports. “We are waiting for the reports from NIV, Pune. At present, Gurgaon has four confirmed cases,” said JS Puniya, chief medical officer of Gurgaon.

Residents of the housing society in Sushant Lok Phase 1 where the couple live advised people to stay indoors and sanitised all common areas. The businessman and his wife are in isolation at home. “We received information on our society’s official group about two suspected cases. We have advised people to stay indoors,” said a resident.

Maintenance staff mopped floors and sprayed disinfectants in all towers. “Residents of many flats restricted themselves indoors after the message was circulated on WhatsApp. We found people stocking on groceries and vegetables. Many queued up outside groceries, fearing a lockdown. All entry and exits of the society will be monitored,” said another resident. 


(With inputs from Ipsita Pati in Gurgaon)


