ATC lockdown in Kolkata not an option, reserve team on standby for emergency
2020-03-24
KOLKATA: The air traffic control in Kolkata that is responsible for safe movement of nearly 1,300 flights daily in eastern India and over Bay of Bengal is adopting extraordinary measures in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak. 


With no lockdown option — as that could result in catastrophic mid-air collisions — ATC has prepared a reserve force that will be on standby at their home, ready to be deputed at short notice in an emergency. 

“Starting Monday, six controllers will be on reserve and available to report for duty 24×7. This contingency is to ensure that the ATC in Kolkata remains functional even if one member of the team on duty develops Covid-19 symptoms and requires everyone on the shift to be put in home isolation. The reserve force that will then take over the surveillance and navigation of flights from a sanitized and sealed contingency room on the third floor of the ATC building,” a senior ATC official revealed.

Though they have taken social separation measures, there is anxiety over DGCA continuing with breathalyzer tests before controllers report for duty. The Air Traffic Controllers’ Guild has written to both DGCA and the PMO, demanding immediate suspension of the practice that all law enforcement agencies have discontinued in the wake of Covid-19 pandemic as it increases the risk of transmission of the virus. “Even if one controller gets infected due to this, Kolkata ATC will have to shut down,” warned the guild’s Kolkata general secretary Kailash Pati Mandal.

There are 285 controllers in Kolkata. Around 50 are on duty in each shift. They are responsible for the safety of over 2 lakh flyers daily, making it a zero-error margin job that entails huge levels of stress. Together they used to handle around 1,600 flight movements daily till last month. But in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak, the number has come down to 1,250. From Wednesday, it is expected to reduce further to 650. 

The area control that guides flights heading into and out of the region as well as those passing Kolkata, either on domestic or international routes, currently operates from the fourth floor of the building. In addition, there is a tower control on the eighth floor that guides planes that land and take off from the city.

