ATM now at your doorsteps as lockdown likely to get longer
2020-04-25
Indore: Amidst ongoing lockdown, district administration has now allowed mobile ATM facility to reach out to people in their locality and provide services. Indore, which has reported over 1,000 corona cases, is all set to witness an extension in lockdown and thus, administration is planning steps to ensure minimum difficulties to people.

To check virus spread, people are urged not to come out from their houses but extension in lockdown condition has created many problems before them. Not having cash in hand is a big issue and to solve the issue, administration on Friday allowed one bank to run a mobile ATM vehicle.

As per order, HDFC Bank’s Manikbagh branch is given permission to reach out to the people in different areas through a mobile ATM vehicle and provide them services there. As per order, the bank will have to follow all set protocols related to Covid-19 control while bank’s employees in the vehicle will have to wear masks, sanitizer and gloves.

Besides, employees will have to sanitize ATM machine after every public transection.

The administration has issued a conditional permission to MP Rural Road Development Authority to start repairing work of damaged roads along with new projects, which are already sanctioned. Collector Manish Singh has instructed contractor to ensure that labourers working with him are not from containment areas along with other measures to check spread of the disease. All people working in permitted projects will have to follow social-distancing, wear masks, gloves and use sanitizer. No worker from IMC’s limit will be allowed in any project. The authority’s general manager Anupam Saxena has been assigned responsibility to ensure all conditions are followed and violation will invite action under Section 188 of IPC against contractors.

A day after district administration cancelled registration of five Ayush practitioners for allegedly denying services, collector on Friday appointed nine Ayush doctors to render their services in current situation.

The doctors have been appointed on temporary basis to help controlling spread of the disease.

In another order, Singh roped in 15 doctors and paramedical staff in ground survey of people’s health.

Exercising powers delegated under MP Public Health Act 1949, Epidemic Disease Act 1897 and essential services maintenance act (ESMA), the collector has ordered doctors and all other staff members to resume/continue services as absent from work without any valid reason will lead to strict actions.


