Aurangabad dist registers 104 Covid-19 cases in a day
2020-06-07
Aurangabad: The number of Covid-19 cases in Aurangabad district swelled to 1,942 with the addition of 96 cases on Saturday, officials said, adding that four deaths were reported between Friday and Saturday. With this, the district’s fatality count has reach 99.

The new cases were reported from different areas of the city, including 29 from Harsul jail. District administration officials said that a total of 1,184 patients were discharged from different facilities until Saturday morning. 

Arvind Gaikwad, media co-ordinator at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) said that a 50-year-old woman from Champa Chowk died at 3.15 pm on Friday due to bilateral pneumonia with acute respiratory distress syndrome caused due to Covid-19 with hypertension and ischemic heart disease with bronchial asthma. 

On the same day, at around 9.30 pm, a 70-year-old man from Savera Park of Harsul died while undergoing treatment at the GMCH. The cause of his death was acute respiratory distress syndrome with bilateral pneumonia caused due to Covid-19 in known case of ischemic heart disease and hypertension, Gaikwad said.

Meanwhile, on Saturday, a 50-year-old woman from Kiradpura died at the GMCH due to coagulopathy with bilateral pneumonia caused due to Covid-19 in known case of diabetes mellitus, hypertension and recurrent cerebrum-vascular accident. Another woman aged 63 from Harsul died at 2:25pm at GMCH on Saturday.

Of the total number of fatalities in the district, 77 deaths have occurred at the GMCH, 20 at three different private hospitals in the city and one at the district civil hospital. 

GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar said that of the total 129 Covid-19 patients currently undergoing treatment at the GMCH, 49 are in critical condition.

Meanwhile, the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) has started training its health workers on conducting door-to-door screening of people aged 55 and above for body temperature, blood oxygen levels and any co-morbidities like diabetes and hypertension. The health workers will record the collected information in AMC’s — Majhi Health Majha Haathi — mobile application and will counsel people on taking proper precautions. 


