Aurangabad’s doubling rate for Covid at about 4.5 days
2020-05-06
Aurangabad: Aurangabad, which has been witnessing a considerable surge in the number of Covid-19 positive cases, has got the doubling rate of 4.5 days, which is much higher than the state or national average, said Aurangabad Municipal Corporation administrator Astik Kumar Pandey on Tuesday.“Doubling rate in Aurangabad was 11 days when the lockdown started. It is 4.5 days now. During this period, we formulated a Covid task force for massive contact mapping tracing/tracking. We have mapped more than 4,200 suspects so far. We did large-scale testing and found 321 positive,” Pandey told TOI.He said that it is only due to the massive and intensive contact mapping and testing that Aurangabad is doing 2nd highest testing after Mumbai. Of all those who have been tested, approximately 7% have tested positive for Covid-19.With 15,525 cases so far, Maharashtra has the highest number of Covid positive cases in the country, and state’s average doubling rate stand at nine days. According to a statement by Union health minister Harsh Vardhan, issue on Tuesday evening, the country has improved its overall doubling rate to 12 days as against three days before March 25. Data available online shows that the country has so far reported 47,738 Covid-19 positive cases, of which 27.40% patients have recovered. As per the figures obtained from the authorities in Aurangabad, with about 321 positive cases reported till Tuesday evening, Aurangabad has 9% recovery rate and 3% death rate.Revenue divisional commissioner Sunil Kendrekar said the doubling rate should be attributed to one of the highest testing capacities per million being carried out in Aurangabad.“Though there is nothing to cherish about it, one thing should be appreciated that most of the high-risk contacts of positive patients were tracked down and isolated before their reports turned came positive,” he said.The authorities informed that they are expecting that the number of people, especially those from high- and low-risk contacts, those who have already tested positive, to add to the existing figures. Pushkal Shivam, deputy CEO of smart city project and member of the Covid task force, said, “Due to the increased contact mapping clubbed with analysis of the tower location of those testing positive, we are able to identify and track down more and more ‘silent’ careers.”