AU’s central library yet to hop on coronavirus safety wagon
2020-03-17
Prayagraj: Despite suspending classes and postponing the crucial meeting of its Executive Council to check the spread of novel coronavirus (Covid-19), Allahabad University (AU) is yet to do anything about the hundreds of students who are visiting the reading hall of the central library daily, while endangering their lives. 

AU’s executive council was slated to meet on Monday, but the meeting was cancelled as a precautionary measure.

Many students are visiting the library even though the university is closed till March 22, except for conducting exams and functioning of offices. 

Moreover, most students entering the library were found without masks. There are not being provided with hand sanitisers or face masks by the varsity. AU’s apathy is in stark comparison to the vigilant attitude of other educational institutions in the state like Banaras Hindu University and Indian Institute of Technology-Kanpur. 

On a visit to the various facilities like the central library and the computer room, TOI found the students sitting without wearing wearing masks and ignoring other preventive measures. In the computer room, mouse and keyboards being used by multiple users are not being sanitised by the authorities. 

At the baggage counter (Pigeon cell), located at the entrance of the library, the lone attendant was spotted sitting surrounded by bags of students who had entered the library. Neither the attendant nor the visitors were seen wearing masks or using sanitisers. 

“On one hand, authorities have suspended classes and postponed the EC meeting due to the coronavirus threat and on the other hand there is no one to stop these students from coming to the library,” said former head of the AU’s department of medieval and modern history Yogeshwar Tiwari. 

AU public relations officer (PRO) Shailendra Mishra said, “Indeed, students gathering in huge numbers at the reading hall and computer room is not advisable considering the present scenario. AU would soon take a call on it.”


