Authorities struggle to check home-quarantined deviants
2020-03-30
Panaji: There’s a fresh headache for authorities in the form of people who are in home quarantine but not following it in toto. Sources said that this deviance increases the risk of transmitting the disease should they test positive. Of the two who tested positive on Sunday, one is the brother of one of last week’s positive cases.

Authorities have noticed several incidents of persons defying home quarantine, particularly those with travel history. Over 700 persons are in home quarantine . Goa has five confirmed cases of Covid-19.

A senior official confirmed that they are facing problems with people in home quarantine. They have been instructed that those caught defying quarantine should be lodged in facility quarantine.

“We recently found that a person who was home-quarantined was manning a counter at his shop in the village a few days ago. He has been warned since,” an official said.

Another senior official said it has been emphasised to authorities that those defying home quarantine have to be dealt with strictly. “Even after warnings, if they do not listen, they need to be lodged in the facility quarantine with a clear warning that if they mingle with others in quarantine, they she will be locked inside a room,” he said.

Sources say it is not physically possible to check on each person in quarantine. The official said that in Sankhali itself, there are 388 persons plus 26 travellers in home quarantine. 

“Though calls are made to them every day, there is no way for us to know if any of them had stepped out unless someone brings it to our notice,” he said.

Goa has resorted to stamping persons who are in home quarantine. “We need to be strict with them if we want to keep the count of Covid-19 low,” an official said. It has been suggested that the quarantine period of 14 days be extended to 28 days, at least for persons having a travel history. 

“From the day of entry of virus to symptoms, it takes a maximum of 14 days. A 28-day quarantine is advisable,” a GMC doctor said. 


