Autistic kids given kits to beat lockdown inertia
2020-05-13
Trichy: To help children with autism spectrum disorder access therapeutic training, the district administration has issued kits to a few children, who were hit by the lockdown.

Trichy collector S Sivarasu distributed the kits to 24 children at the collector office on Tuesday. The kits were provided by the state government through district differently abled welfare office. The kits comprised flash cards, picture book, building blocks, stress ball, whistle, crayons, a health drink and chocolate.

District differently abled welfare officer R Ravichandran said that children with the autism spectrum disorder were unable to visit the early intervention centre for autism children during the lockdown. “Therapies for such special children are being provided in the centre. The lockdown crippled them. So, we are providing some kits that will make them engaged with the activities at home with the instructions from the teachers from the centre,” said Ravichandran.

Dolphin Special School has been running the only early intervention centre for autism with the financial support of the state government in Trichy district.

A total of 24 children have been attending the centre to get various therapies, which include occupational therapy, speech therapy and special education besides sensory integration therapies.

Director of Dolphin Special School G Praveena Carmel shared their experience of handling the autism children during the lockdown. “Autism children were attending classes for six days a week. They were used to the therapy. Since the centre was closed due to lockdown, parents could not convince them. Now, they are accepting the reality,” said Praveena.

Instead of leaving them uncared, Praveena and her team got in touch with the students through WhatsApp video calls providing them tasks to do at home. “Now, they are used to the training at home. The kits provided to them will be useful because most of the students are from below poverty line. It will attract their attention more,” she said.


