Covid-19: Auto drivers in Thiruvananthapuram hit as more people stay indoors
2020-03-19
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Autorickshaws plying without passengers is now common sight in the city. Long queues of parked autorickshaws are visible in every auto stand. As the spread of Covid-19 hits several sections, autorickshaw drivers too are finding it difficult to make both ends meet. 

Instead of the usual three or four autorickshaws, there was a long queue in the auto stand at Statue on Wednesday evening. Many of them were waiting for more than five hours for a single trip. 

Kunjappan, an auto driver at Statue stand, said that it was difficult to get even two or three trips per day. “Today I have waited for five hours and got a single trip of Rs 30,” he said.

Suresh, another driver, said that those who work with rented autos have stopped working. “They have to pay the owner Rs 250 per day irrespective of them getting a trip or not. Only people who own autos are working now,” he said. 

When asked whether they are concerned about spread of the disease, Kunjappan and Suresh said that they don’t discriminate the customers even if they show symptoms. Kunjappan said that frequent hand washing was not possible. “I wash before having food. We are not scared at all,” he said. 

Rajesh, a native of Karamana, said that the daily revenue has halved after the city reported Covid-19 cases. “I used to get Rs 800 daily. Now, it is not even half the amount. I also take trips for Uber auto. My Uber auto passengers were mostly north Indian families, who have left the place after Covid-19 cases were reported,” he said.

Ravi, another driver, said that he too was not getting enough even after working extra hours. “Usually we get around Rs 30 for each trip. So you can assume how many trips we need to make in order to get a decent revenue. Apart from fall in number of passengers, we are also worried about our safety.

Nalanchira Hari, state secretary of Kerala auto taxi light motor workers’ federation, said that the situation of auto and taxi drivers is miserable. “Apart from the poor revenue, the hike in fuel charges has become an added trouble for the workers. We have decided to request the government to provide some solatium for workers registered with the welfare board,” he said.

When asked about chances for imposition of more restrictions, Kunjappan said that if government would ask people not to go out, there is no option for the auto drivers but to end their own lives.


