Delhi: Autos, buses from outside to be disinfected to prevent spread of coronavirus
2020-03-12
NEW DELHI: After ensuring that all Delhi Metro coaches and Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) and cluster buses are thoroughly disinfected every day to prevent spread of coronavirus, Delhi government is now focusing on getting autorickshaws, e-rickshaws and the buses coming to the city from other states disinfected.


“We are coming out with an advisory for drivers of autos, e-rickshaws, mini-buses, etc., to create awareness about the necessity to keep their vehicles disinfected. They will be advised to thoroughly clean the vehicles and follow general dos and don’ts,” a Delhi government official said.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“This is not only important for the safety of their passengers, but also to protect themselves from any infection,” the official added.

The official further said that drivers and owners of smaller vehicles, such as autorickshaws, Phat Phat sewa, eco sewa, maxi cabs and e-rickshaws, might not have the financial means to ensure thorough cleaning of vehicles by the prescribed disinfectants.

“We are planning to disinfect these vehicles free of cost at DTC and Cluster depots. The owners will be able to visit the nearest bus depot and get their vehicles disinfected. This facility is expected to start within a couple of days,” he added.

While all DTC and Cluster scheme buses are being disinfected daily, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has also intensified the cleaning of its trains and common surfaces at stations. Inter-state buses coming from neighbouring states will be disinfected at the three inter-state bus terminals (ISBTs), starting Thursday.

“All ISBTs, including the platforms and the common surfaces, are being disinfected. Starting Thursday, all buses arriving at Delhi’s ISBTs will be thoroughly disinfected,” said KK Dahiya, special commissioner (transport). He is also managing director of Delhi Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation, which manages Delhi’s ISBTs.

“We are writing to the authorities concerned in the neighbouring states, urging them to ensure that all buses headed to Delhi are disinfected,” he added.

As many as 3,467 buses from other states arrive in Delhi every day and most of these operate from Kashmere Gate ISBT (1,636), followed by Anand Vihar ISBT (1,210) and Sarai Kale Khan ISBT (621). Most of the inter-state buses arrive from Uttar Pradesh (1,519), followed by Haryana (757) and Uttarakhand (313). DTC doesn’t operate any inter-state buses as its entire fleet runs on CNG, which is not easily available in other states.

