Bhopal: Autos, cabs run empty on Day 2 of Unlock 1.0
2020-06-03
BHOPAL: The barriers may have lifted but autos and taxis are in neutral gear. On Tuesday, when relaxations in public transport kicked in, there wasn’t much enthusiasm seen on the roads, from auto-wallahs, cabbies and commuters alike. Everyone seems to be in wait and watch mode.


There weren’t many hands waving at the few autos seen on the streets. Even fewer cabs were seen. It was a rerun of the first days of opening of markets, when shopkeepers and customers alike seemed to be wary of being the first one to open the shutters or show up for a purchase.

If anything, the salons had an even more dull day. With barber shops shut for over two months, selfies with wayward beards and all-over-the-place hair were among the social media staples of lockdown. When salons opened on Tuesday, there seemed to be no hurry to trim off the excess. 

The same goes for meat shops. Despite surviving on bhindi and the odd paneer all through the lockdown, non-veg lovers mostly kept their tastebuds under control and didn’t line up before meat and fish shops. Roads were busy all day and shops (which were empty in the first days of reopening) got a steady flow of customers. 

Like everything else, the rest too will pick up in time.

“I don't know if people are being cautious, adopting a wait and watch policy for a couple of days or what, but they are taking time before beginning to start doing what they want to do and can do after a particular restriction is relaxed. You must have noticed, there were no customers in shops for a couple of days, traders were complaining, but over the past few days, the situation has changed,” said Pankaj Sharma, who opened his office only on Monday though he could have done it a week ago. It is not only the clients, who didn't go to their favourite salon on the first day of opening or didn't hire a cab, which they often did in the pre-lockdown era. Barbers, too, seemed to be ill-prepared to open their shops with all the precautions that have been stipulated for them and cabs were also virtually off the road though autos were seen in patches where they expected to find passengers. Most of the salon owners went shopping for the essentials of their trade. Harinarayan Thakur, 49, who runs a small salon in Katara Hills, said, “I cleaned my shop as it was closed for more than two months.”

Apart from salons, the district administration also allowed chicken and meat sellers to open shops from Tuesday onwards. However, from May 26, they were allowed to make home delivery of chicken, meat and fish.

On the first day, when these shops opened, the prices had already gone up as there was shortage in supplies due to the lockdown of two months.

Ashish, a chicken seller in Bagsewania, said, “There is acute shortage of chicken and rates have gone up. On the first day, there were a few customers, but not as many as expected.” Dressed chicken now sells for Rs300-Rs350 per kg – twice what it went for before the lockdown. A chicken seller on Hoshangabad Road, Ahmed Shah, said, “There is no business. Prices are so high that customers are not willing to purchase”.

Apart from the price, one of the factors that could have led to the slump in demand for chicken on Day 1 is it was a Tuesday. Many people don’t have meat on this day. Plus, it was Nirjala Ekadasi, a festival observed in Hindu families.

Though there were less autos on the roads than the normal days, on Tuesday, it was pleasant sight to see decorated Bhopali autos back in action.

“Autos give you a trust more than anything else. A trust that if your vehicle conks out for some reason, you can still be sure to get an auto to reach your destination,” said Parag Saxena, an executive with a private firm, relishing his first auto ride in two months.

There are around 12,000 auto-rickshaws and close to 10,000 taxis in Bhopal. As per rough estimates, only 10% of them were seen on the first day.

“There is a persistent fear both among residents as well as auto owners and drivers. Several measures are to be taken, so it will take time and effort to bring things back on track,” said Praveen Dholpure, convener of MP Taxi Union.

“Any customer who now steps in into a cab will wish that the cab is sanitized after every ride. It will also depend on the alertness of the drivers. Moreover, since incomes have dipped, there may be fewer commuters, while running expenses will go up due to sanitization and other Covid precautions. Cab aggregators should provide sanitizer sprays and other such things. Around 10% of taxis were operational on the first day. I am hopeful it will increase in the near future,” Dholpure said.

