Auto companies delay launches, stall expansion due to Covid-19
2020-04-10
CHENNAI: Many of the gleaming new models that were showcased in the Auto Expo earlier this year will have their launches deferred as motown grapples with the supply, production and demand disruption caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and the resultant lockdown. 


Besides, companies are expecting severe demand contraction and hence holding back planned investments, in marketing, product launches and expansion. 

Already, car companies like PSA, Mahindra, Honda, Mercedes Benz and others are either delaying their car launches or reviewing their product strategy for the new financial year.

Earlier this week, PSA Groupe announced it would “re-time the launch of its debut vehicle the Citroën C5 Aircross SUV to Q1 2021, while ensuring industrial readiness. The re-timing is aimed to move the commercial launch to a potentially more positive economic activity period,” the company said in a statement.
 News in BriefExplore BriefsIndia not to budge from its stand of LAC being non-negotiable with ChinaIndia will continue to strongly press its demand for China to withdraw its troops and restore status quo ante along the LAC in eastern Ladakh, though it remains prepared for the long haul in the high-altitude region. With China adopting a rigid stand in its design to forcibly push the LAC westwards, the military confrontation is into its fourth month now.100 Cong leaders write to Sonia Gandhi urging leadership change: JhaSome 100 Congress leaders, including MPs, have written to Sonia Gandhi asking for a change in the political leadership and transparent elections in the party, suspended leader Sanjay Jha tweeted on Monday. Jha, who was suspended from the party in July this year, said that several leaders have been "distressed at the state of affairs within the party."
PSA isn’t the only one. Mahindra dealer sources say its three major upgrades for 2020 — Thar, XUV500 and Scorpio — will be delayed due to the Covid-19 situation. The immediate launch delay will likely be of the new Thar which was due for roll out in the first quarter of this fiscal. When contacted, the M&M spokesman refused to comment.

Similarly Honda’s new City launch and WR-V facelift have both been postponed due to the lockdown. The new City was scheduled in mid-April but has been deferred due to the lockdown. The WR-V facelift “was planned end-March and pre-booking had already opened for it,” said the Honda Cars India spokesperson. “We want to launch it as soon as production resumes and business activity at dealerships starts,” she added. 

Others are currently reviewing the situation and will take a call shortly. Dealer sources say Kia will take a call on reviewing the launch plans of their sub-4 metre SUV Sonet around August this year if the current lockdown gets extended. Even luxury car brands are not immune to the Covid-19 effect. Mercedes Benz India, which is scheduled to launch a series of new models including the new GLS, A Class limosine, new GLA among others, is talking of launch delays. “There may be some delays but we do not expect any change in the products we will launch in the coming months,” said Martin Schwenk, president & CEO, Mercedes Benz India.

Even deep pocket two wheeler companies are talking about cutting back expansion plans in an effort to reduce costs. Hero MotoCorp CFO Niranjan Gupta said last week, “We will defer some of the planned expenses such as capacity expansion.”

Truck companies though will be less impacted because with the BS6 shift many of them don’t have any new launches lined up immediately. “For us it was mainly upgradation of all products or new launches as per BS6 norms and that has mostly happened successfully,” said Vinod Aggarwal, MD & CEO, Volvo Eicher Commercial Vehicles.


