Hyderabad: Average blood sugar level on rise post lockdown
2020-05-17
HYDERABAD: The average blood glucose levels have gone up in the first quarter of the year across the city, in line with the warning by diabetologists at the beginning of the lockdown. 


Latest findings of the India Diabetes Care Index survey suggest that blood sugar levels (HbA1c) increased from 8.30% to 8.49% between January to March, as compared to the previous quarter in Hyderabad. HbA1c test indicates the average blood glucose level over a period of three months and is recommended for the control of diabetes. 



“People who were part of the assessment in Hyderabad on an average were of the age of 52 years, out of which, 52% were male and 48% female. The average postprandial glucose level in the group was 244 mg/dl in the quarter and the average fasting glucose level was 172 mg/dl,” said the study, conducted by Novo Nordisk Education Foundation.

Experts in the city second the findings of the survey and have said that the patients who previously had blood sugar under control, are now dealing with an imbalance. “At least 60% to 65% of the patients have seen a rise in their blood sugar levels. I see patients who earlier had controlled their HbA1c level around 7, but now have it around 9-10,” said Dr Sanjoy Paul, a diabetologist at Apollo Sugar Clinics.

“Apart from inactivity due to lockdown, stress and phobia of Covid-19, and not getting insulin is a major reason for increase in blood sugar levels,” added Paul.

The rise in HbA1C level comes at a time when medical studies are pointing towards an increased risk for severe complications arising from Covid-19 in people living with diabetes. “People living with diabetes are more likely to experience severe symptoms and complications if they get infected with the virus and this may even worsen if their diabetes is not managed well,” said Dr KD Modi, senior consultant endocrinologist at Care Hospital.

“It can also lead to more fatalities. Therefore, following a healthy regime, indoor physical exercises and taking prescribed medications, is important to maintain the blood glucose levels in the required range,” added Modi.

