‘Avoid pain. It can make some prone to Covid’
2020-05-01
Pain physician Dr Sunita Lawange shared how people can overcome lethargy due to inactivity during lockdown and how to cope with post-lockdown period. She also explained relation between pain and Covid-19 and how persistent pain can increase risk of getting infected 

Q. Why are pain patients more vulnerable to Covid-19?

A. Persistent pain increases the level of stress induced hormone Cortisol. This can impair the immune system. If this happens, patient’s ability to fight infections and ability to heal gets compromised. So, pain can make some patients vulnerable to corona infection.

Q: Are pain management clinics working during lockdown? 

A: Most pain management centres are closed as main focus of all healthcare providers has shifted towards Covid-19. All elective, non-emergency cases have been postponed. Only those needing emergency treatment are attended to, following all norms of social distancing. Telemedicine has become very important and we are using it. 

Q: What changes you have noticed in pain patients after lockdown?

When it comes to acute cases of pain, the number has gone down significantly due to reduction in number of accidents. Cases of post-surgical pain are also less because less number of elective surgeries. Workplace and domestic injuries and interpersonal violence too have come down. When it comes to chronic pain prevention, it becomes necessary for many of such patients to get treatment to avoid worsening their pain which may further cause anxiety and depression. We are making arrangements for such patients.

Q: How can common people stay pain-free?

A: Staying fit, positive and pain-free during lockdown is important. Dedicate at least 45-60 minutes for exercise daily so as to combat the long period of forced inactivity at home. Elderly people having multiple joint problems must do yoga, meditation, strengthening and mobility exercises daily. Reading books, playing indoor games, gardening, listening to music and reviving your hobbies will give more pleasure than watching TV and relentlessly staring at mobile screen. Overall a balanced diet, regular exercise, basic ergonomics and a positive mental attitude are must to come out with hope, happiness and health.

Q: Backpain is very common among those working from home. What can they do?

A: Those working from home in front of screen are prone for back and neck pain. To avoid this, maintain adequate distance from the screen, make your work place ergonomically friendly, the height of computer must be just below your eye line, your foot must rest completely on floor, avoid glare into eyes by proper orientation of screen, use a proper sized table top and interrupt long periods of sittings with some short walks and stretches.

Q: Lockdown may be relaxed soon. How to come out of its lethargy?

A: Lockdown or no lockdown – the situation is not going to be like before. We still have to maintain social distancing. So, be calm, patient. Continue daily exercises and routine. Wear masks, maintain hygiene, and stay positive. Visit doctors only after taking appointment. 


