Tamil Nadu: 'Avoiding ice creams may not save you from coronavirus, but washing hands will'
2020-01-30
CHENNAI: Avoiding ice creams and cool drinks or gulping down herbal concoctions may not prevent you from contracting coronavirus. And you don’t need to stock up on masks either, say infectious disease and public health experts.


 
 
As messages regarding the virus flood social media, health care experts say there is no need to panic, though spread of the disease may be inevitable. “More cases are likely to be identified in the coming days across the globe, including Tamil Nadu. It is also likely that person-to-person spread will occur,” said director of public health Dr K Kolandaiswamy. “But coronavirus isn’t new. It’s a family of viruses that are quite common. It’s the virus that causes the common cold. In severe forms, it can cause respiratory distress and death. The outbreak in China has kept health systems on alert because of the novel strain,” he said.

Prevention for this virus will be like any other flu. “Personal hygiene, particularly hand wash, is important,” he said. “Drinking a lots of water, using hand towels or flexed elbows while sneezing, staying at home when there are symptoms such as cold and fever will help. It’s also important to meet a doctor if fever persists,” he said.

The Union health ministry has asked people with travel history to consult a doctor if they have flu-like symptoms. “They should also avoid exposing themselves to the public,” Kolandaiswamy said. Hospitals have been asked to quarantine patients suspected to have the virus, he said. Else, they can be referred to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital.

Coronavirus is common in camels, cattle, cats and bats. In some cases, animal coronaviruses such as MERS and SARS have affected humans. The novel virus, scientists say, originated from bats. The novel coronavirus, which was first detected in Wuhan City, is now expanding. As the number of cases is going up across the globe and mortality is close to 2%, many health agencies such as the World Health Organisation and Centre for Disease Control, US, are monitoring the situation closely. Experts say, like most respiratory viruses, it has been spreading from person-to-person. Reported illnesses have ranged from infected people with little or no symptoms to those severely ill and dying. “The complete clinical picture is under study,” said Dr V Ramasubramanian, an infectious disease expert.

Health secretary Beela Rajesh said the state was closely working with the Centre, WHO and public health partners to respond to this emerging threat. “Since the infection can be imported, we are taking precautions to check health of air passengers. Everyone is screened for influenza-like ailments,” she said. 


