Covid-19: Avoid leaving home except in acute emergency, appeals Punjab CM Amarinder Singh
2020-03-23
CHANDIGARH: Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh has appealed to all residents of the state to observe health safeguards, especially frequently washing hands, and to avoid leaving their homes unless there was an acute emergency.


There will be no curfew during the lockdown imposed in the state till March 31 but restrictions under Section 144 of CrPC will be imposed, which would prevent more than 10 persons from getting together in a public space at any given time. The state government has made it clear that deputy commissioners will allow all ancillary activities for each item of essential services like delivery of newspapers by hawkers.

Capt Amarinder said restrictions on public transport imposed earlier by the state government will continue till March 31 and all essential services such as water supply, sanitation and electricity shall be maintained by the government.

The chief minister assured that his government was fully prepared to face the challenge. “However, we may be required to take more measures, including imposing tougher restrictions, to save our state and people from any major harm,” he added. Amarinder also appealed to trade and businesses not only to ensure adequate supplies of essential commodities but to avoid hoarding and profiteering.

Seeking the cooperation from the people, the chief minister pointed out that a state control room had already been established for ensuring a coordinated effort amongst different departments of the state and also at all district headquarters. He said that people could reach out to the government on helpline Nos. 181 and 104.

No public transport services, including taxis and autorickshaws, will be permitted, except transport of all kinds to and from hospitals, airports, railway stations and bus stands. Specific routes to be allowed in districts shall be decided by respective deputy commissioners. All inter-state commercial passenger transport (buses) shall be closed.

The health department has made it clear that strict home quarantine for 14 days, excluding the day of arrival in India, shall be observed by all foreign returnees who landed in India on or after March 7.


