Coronavirus scare: Avoid rain dance this Holi, appeals Nagpur collector
2020-03-07
NAGPUR: District collector Ravindra Thakre, on Friday, appealed citizens to avoid Holi celebrations using water and large community gatherings as a precautionary measure amid the novel coronavirus threat.

“As vaccine is yet to be discovered on Covid-19, prevention is the best policy we can follow. For this year, we should skip use of water during Holi. Avoiding Holi bash parties at public events can be a good safety measure,” he said. Thakre also appealed social organizations, event management companies to avoid organizing any such events or large public gatherings ahead of Holi.

Thakre took review of preparations in the city and the district in case more Covid-19 suspects come out in the region. He claimed that district administration is ready to handle any situation so far.

“There is no need to panic for Nagpurians, but we must keep vigil. Following the central and state government guidelines, we have started thermal scanning of commuters at city airport. Every commuter coming by international flight and every member of the cabin crew is being scanned,” he said. A medical team and ambulance will be ready at airport 24x7 in case someone gets identified as suspect during thermal scanning. Such commuters will be immediately moved to quarantine facility and will be tested for Covid-19.

Thakre informed that two government hospitals — government medical college and hospital (GMCH) and the Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) — are ready with quarantine wards with capacity over 90 beds together.

“GMCH has 32-bedded quarantine ward ready and they are planning to increase the capacity up to 72 within a week. IGGMCH has also started 25-bedded quarantine ward,” he said. Samples from Vidarbha, Chhattisgarh and parts of Madhya Pradesh will be checked at IGGMCH, he reasserted.

Domestic travellers returning from Rajasthan, Kerala, and other states, where more number of suspects/confirmed cases have found, will be separately screened, the collector said. “We are in touch with domestic tourism operators and railways to get details of tourists coming from states like Rajasthan. They will be screened accordingly,” he said. Sources have informed that more than 1,500 residents from Nagpur are presently in Rajasthan for the khatu sham pilgrimage. They will be back by Sunday. 

The collector said that traders involved in artificial shortage and black marketing of face masks will face action. “The FDA officials have received some complaints about black marketing of masks. They will raid these shops and take strict action on them,” he said.


CORONA SCARE

Not everyone needs to buy and use face masks, handkerchief is enough

Only those who are ill, aged, and medicos treating patients should use masks

Till date, 39 patients with travel history reported themselves to Nagpur GMCs

Out of them, 21 came from the 14-day quarantine of Govt of India and they are healthy

Samples of all others were taken in Nagpur and tested negative at NIV lab Pune

Till date, no patient has been found affected with Covid-19 in Nagpur district.


