Ayurveds step up efforts to fight Covid-19 better
2020-05-24
Surat: Alongside allopathy branch of medicine, doctors practising Ayurveda are putting their best efforts to treat Covid-19 positive patients. 

One of the oldest Ayurved college in the state, O H Nazar Ayurved College (OHNAC) in the city is leading the efforts in not only treating positive patients but also in trying to improve immunity of people from the containment zones.

Since the spread of the pandemic, the college, which is part of Swami Atmanand Sarawati Ayurved Hospital, started preparing and distributing special decoction. Till now the college has distributed 1,381 litres of decoction through Surat Municipal Corporation in the containment zones. The institute has also provided 600 litres decoction and tablets to the police staff that are performing their duties continuously.

“A seven-day course of the decoction along with tablets help improve immunity and we have started this since March 16, much before the spread of the virus in the city. Since there is no proven treatment available for Covid-19, the preventive therapy of Ayurved is helping patients fight better with the disease,” said Dr Sachin Khedikar, principal of OHNAC.

A team of eight doctors and four interns from the college is involved in the treatment of Covid-19 patients who have consented for Ayurvedic treatment. “Till now, 155 positive patients have been provided treatment with Ayurvedic medicines and the results are encouraging in most of them,” said Dr Khedikar.

A senior doctor from the college, Dr Manoj Upadhyay, has proposed a formula to the Ayush ministry for further research that can help fight the disease better. “Government had invited research proposal, and thus, I developed the medicine formula and proposed it for research. Ayurved doctors are creating awareness on various platforms about prevention of diseases,” he added.

Photo Quote

Dr Manoj Upadhyay, senior doctor at OHNAC

"3,000 years ago prevention was suggested as the best way for good health in Ayurveda. It takes time to improve immunity but it is the best way to fight against diseases like Covid-19."

Dr Sachin Khedikar, principal OHNAC

"In present situation strong immunity is the best way to fight the disease. Ayurved has specific medicines that helps improve immunity to fight viral infections and we are focusing on those areas."


