Kolkata: B R Singh Hospital doctor tests coronavirus positive, 10 quarantined
2020-04-23
KOLKATA: A doctor of BR Singh Hospital in Sealdah is the latest healthcare worker to test positive for Covid-19. She is undergoing treatment at a private facility. According to officials at the Eastern Railway’s primary hospital in Kolkata, the doctor had attended duty last on April 14 and after that, she had been at home for feeling unwell.


After the doctor’s positive test reports, the hospital has identified around 10 employees, who had come in contact with her. They have been sent on quarantine. 

“We are following all procedures and necessary steps like sanitization at the hospital,” said Nikhil Kumar Chakraborty, CPRO, Eastern Railway.

Meanwhile, around 10 healthcare workers of RG Kar Medical College have been sent on quarantine after a doctor at the cardiology department, a nurse and a Group-D worker tested positive for Covid-19. With a rise in the number of healthcare workers being infected with the virus, hospitals are taking a slew of measures to reduce the risks.

“We are taking more stringent measures in patient segregation and putting lesser number of healthcare professionals on duty to minimize the risks,” said a source at Medical College Kolkata Hospital, where 15 healthcare workers have already tested positive for the virus.

However, the challenge comes from asymptomatic patients, who visit the hospitals for treatment of other ailments and later test positive for Covid-19. 

“Those coming to our hospital have to maintain hand hygiene and wear masks. They are screened first at the emergency isolation by doctors, who are in full personal protective equipment (PPE). While healthcare staffers in fever ward are in full PPE those working in other wards have to take basic protections like masks and gloves,” said Arindam Banerjee, MD Columbia Asia Hospital. 

“We are conducting only emergency surgeries. Even if a patient is asymptomatic, we are not taking any risk,” said internal medicine specialist Harsh Vardhan Agarwal, director, All Asia Medical Institute, Ballygunge.

The state government has enough PPE, N95 masks, gloves, head covers, goggles, hand sanitisers for doctors and paramedical staff, diet boys and safai workers, said chief secretary Rajiva Sinha on Wednesday. Some junior doctors said that the city hospitals have a steady flow of PPEs, but it is still an issue with the hospitals on the outskirts. They also rued shortage of N 95 masks there.

