Babulal urges Hemant to lower Covid test cost at pvt labs
2020-05-08
Ranchi: Former chief minister and BJP’s leader of legislative party, Babulal Marandi on Thursday asked chief minister Hemant Soren to lower the price for blood and swab testing for the novel coronavirus in designated private pathological laboratories. 

In a letter to Soren, Marandi said the state department of health, medical education and family welfare’s decision to fix the price for Covid-19 sampling in private labs at Rs 4,500 was exorbitant. “The lockdown has hurt the finances of people. It is known to all that Jharkhand is a fairly backward state. Under these circumstances, charging such high amount is uncalled for,” Marandi wrote.

On May 1, principal health secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni issued a circular stating that four pathological —Dr Lal Pathlabs, SRL Limited, Pathkind Diagnostics Pvt Limited and Core Diagnostics – have been permitted to collect and test samples for Covid-19 under ICMR guidelines. 

In his letter, Kulkarni said the labs can charge up to Rs 4,500 for testing. “People can pay from their pockets to get tested at these labs. Private labs will work in tandem with the civil surgeons of various districts and the Integrated Disease Surveillance Program,” Kulkarni wrote. 

Marandi on Thursday attached a notification issued by Karnataka government to his letter to point out its decision of charging people of Rs 2,250 for testing at private facilities. “My suggestion would be that the government must provide subsidies to these private labs to speed up the process of testing. Once the crisis is over, it can fix a reasonable rate,” the former CM wrote. 

Speaking to TOI, health minister Banna Gupta said: “The matter has come to my notice. I will take a look at the rates and take a call soon.” 

Gupta, however, said erring private hospitals and laboratories will draw strict action, if they turn back patients on the pretext of the novel coronavirus. “The ICMR has issued clear guidelines on testing for Covid-19 in emergency cases. The facilities that refuse to patients will have their licence cancelled,” he added.


