Baby stillborn, mom in Kolkata's Covid hospital
2020-04-27
KOLKATA: The isolation and labour rooms at the state-run Chittaranjan Seva Sadan have been closed for sanitization after a woman who gave birth to a stillborn child tested positive for Covid-19. The hospital authority has also started tracing healthworkers at the hospital who had come in contact with the patient. It is unclear how many of them have been identified and quarantined so far.


The woman from a Beltola locality was admitted to the hospital in Hazra a few days ago. Hospital sources said the woman had fever and respiratory distress and was put in the isolation ward. Her samples were sent to IPGMER. Before the reports came in, she delivered a stillborn child. The report, which came late on Saturday night, confirmed the woman to be positive for Covid-19. She was shifted to MR Bangur Hospital on Sunday. 

“The labour room and the isolation ward will be disinfected over the next two days,” said a source at Chittaranjan Seva Sadan. 

This is the second case of a pregnant woman testing positive for Covid-19 in 48 hours. Another woman had tested positive at a private hospital for women and children on Saturday. The hospital has closed admission for sanitization and is planning to resume admissions from Monday.

Such cases have also been reported from Medical College Kolkata and NRS Medical College. In fact, several doctors and nurses of Medical College Hospital’s gynaecology unit had tested positive later. A few of them are still under quarantine.

Such instances have mounted the risk for healthworkers in the state. On Sunday, a nurse and an attendant of Marwari Relief Society tested positive. The hospital on Rabindra Sarani has been sealed for sanitization. A few other healthcare workers, including a doctor of the hospital, have been put under quarantine.

Sources in the health department said that at least 50 healthcare professionals in the state, majority of them doctors, were reported to have been infected by the novel coronavirus. Many doctors’ organizations have demanded that the government comes out with a regular bulletin on the status of healthcare workers who have tested positive for Covid-19.

Meanwhile, a cook at Belle Vue Clinic, who had tested positive last Friday, was admitted to Beliaghata ID Hospital. It has led to the quarantine of five other cooks at the hospital. Moreover, one of the kitchens at the hospital has been shut for sanitization.

