Back from Surat, Rajasthan labourer quarantines himself on a tree
2020-05-06
JAIPUR: An 18-year-old migrant worker in Daabkiya village of Udaipur district climbed a tree and stayed there for three days to socially distance himself from his family amid the corona pandemic. The village sarpanch and a few other villagers, however, persuaded him to climb down on Tuesday. They have assured the worker, Ishwar Lal Rawat, of all help and asked him to sleep on a cot outside his house.


Rawat arrived from Surat in a truck on May 2. For the safety of his family, he decided to quarantine himself on a tree near his house.

 

“There was no work left for us in Surat. Somehow, I managed to be back in my village. But it was difficult to quarantine myself in my house. We have only two rooms and seven members,” said Ishwar. 

Quarantine facility in school has no electricity

My one-year-old nephew is quite naughty and will not stay away. Hence, I decided to build a temporary structure on the neem tree in my house with wood, tin and put a mattress over it,” said Ishwar. He two brothers also arrived from Mumbai on May 4 after facing immense hardships to reach the village. They have decided to stay in separate rooms at their home, but showed their appreciation for their brother’s decision. Ishwar’s elder brother Pappu Lal Rawat said, “We did not force him to stay on a tree. But the house is small and we do not have enough space to isolate everyone. His sacrifice at the time of crisis for the sake of the family is commendable.”

Ishwar used to stay on the tree the entire day and also slept there. Except for eating and relieving himself, he had seldom come down. Village sarpanch Laxman Rawat, however, objected to it. “We have built a proper quarantine facility in the village school. But, he refused to stay there and decided to stay on a tree. This is absolutely not necessary,” Rawat said. Ishwar’s father Bhamru Lal Rawat said that there was no electricity in the school which forced his son to stay on the tree.

