Odisha: Back from China, youth in hospital over coronavirus scare
2020-02-01
BERHAMPUR: A 25-year-old youth from Phulbani in Kandhamal district, studying in a medical college in China, has voluntarily got himself admitted to the district headquarters hospital after complaining of fever and cold. 


Mrutunjay Muni, a medical student at Southwest Medical University in the Sichuan province of China, returned home to Phulbani on January 12. 

A few days ago he complained of fever and cough and cold, initial symptoms of the novel coronavirus (nCoV), which has resulted in more than 200 deaths in China and has forced the World Health Organisation to declare it a global emergency. 

“After returning from China, I started feeling feverish. I also had cough and cold. Given that coronavirus is spreading in China and the symptoms matched that of the deadly disease, I voluntarily went for a health check-up at the district headquarters hospital in Phulbani,” said Muni, who has been referred to SCB Hospital and Medical College in Cuttack. Muni said he stays in a town close to Wuhan, the epicentre of coronavirus. 

“The youth has been kept under observation in the isolation ward. Arrangements are being made to shift him to SCB,” said Rajashree Patnaik, chief district medical officer (CDMO), Kandhamal. The hospital in Phulbani has set up a three-bedded isolation ward to deal with coronavirus patients. 

The CDMO said there was no need to panic as Muni had returned to India much before the outbreak of the virus in China. “The blood samples of the patient will be sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune for tests,” she added. 

Santosh Mishra, superintendent of MKCG Medical College and Hospital in Berhampur, urged those who returned from China to report for a health check-up. 

“We request those who have returned from China to undergo a basic health check-up. They should voluntarily come to hospital,” said Mishra, adding that a 10-bedded isolation ward has been set up at MKCG.

Apart from Muni, several youths from Silk City have returned home from China given that this is the time of the Chinese New year celebrations. T Vijya Kumar Patra (25), who works as a junior scientist in a pharmaceutical company at Zibo in China, returned to Berhampur on January 25.

“The spread of the disease was not that severe when I returned home. I was screened at the Kolkata airport after landing there,” said Patra, adding that he would return to China only after the disease is brought under control. T Gopi, father of Kumar, said his son did not visit the hospital for a health check-up as he did not show symptoms of the deadly virus. 

Basudev Paul (31), a research scientist, associated with a company in Shanghai, China, was supposed to return this week and join work on Friday. But he was forced to cancel his flight owing to the spread of the virus. Radhakant Gouda (37), another research scientist, is supposed to return to Beijing on February 15 but has now put his trip on hold. 

