Back in biz, barbers take on lockdown locks, giant beards
2020-05-25
Trichy: It was nothing short of a reunion of long last friends on Sunday when the regular customers of saloons met their trusted barbers. Resuming business two months after the lockdown began, Trichy barbers used social media to avoid overcrowding on Sunday by using WhatsApp for customers to fix appointments. The cash-strapped hairdressers also hinted at a possible hike in tariff for services in the coming days, given the additional expenses incurred in disinfecting the salons.

There were many lighter moments too with people sharing anecdotes about botched self-administered haircuts and beard styling and the hair stylists being asked to fix it. There were also many who did not want to take such risks, who thronged the salons with giant beards and messy long hair. “Customers enquiring about the salons operating were added to a WhatsApp group. Each person was allotted a specific slot to avoid overcrowding,” T Thiruvaikumaran, a hairdresser from Melachinthamani, Trichy said. Barbers who did not have smartphones managed the enquiries through phone calls and fixed appointments. Chairs in the waiting rooms were reduced to ensure social distancing. A few customers brought their own towels to avoid using the apron used by other customers. However, the customers had to remove the face masks while getting a haircut and a shave. 

As the seats are supposed to be cleaned every time a customer vacates, barbers said their expenses had surged, particularly to buy sanitizers. “We may increase the tariffs by Rs 10 to Rs 20 as we have to frequently sanitize our gears,” P Dharmalingam, secretary of Trichy district hairdressers association, said. 

Water consumption has also significantly increased due to the need for frequent handwash. Though the government insisted that barbers wear hand gloves, it was rarely followed as hairdressers found it difficult to do their job with gloves on. On Sunday, some customers were seen tipping the barbers understanding their plight, having had no income in last couple of months. Meanwhile, the established beauty parlours insisted that customers sit on alternate chairs and maintain distance while availing the services.

Madurai: G Senthil, a resident of Anna Nagar, has been keenly waiting for barber shops to open so that he could get rid of his unkempt hair which had overgrown in two months as the shops closed just before the day he was planning to have a cut.

“My wife did offer to cut my hair, but I was not ready to take the risk. Shaving was not a problem as I have been doing it myself,” he said. A large number of people like Senthil hit salons in Madurai early on Sunday after the government relaxed restrictions for salons.

 The hairdressers disinfected the shops on Saturday itself and turned up in full strength on Sunday morning to make the most of it. 

M Velmurugan, human resource manager of Vinitas hair and makeup, said they are following all precautionary measures prescribed by the government. Customers are made to wait with mandatory social distancing, provided hand sanitizer and their temperature checked before being let inside. “We frequently disinfect the shop, ensure mask and gloves for hair stylists and customers are also made to wear mask. Disposable apron is provided to customers to ensure safety,” he said. N M Shanmugam, president of Madurai City Maruthuvar Association, said there are 2,000 barber shops in the corporation limits alone, employing more than 5,000 people. “I can tell you 99 % of barber shops in the city follow the government’s instructions and ensure safety of customers and hairstylists. It has been a tough two months with the shops shut. We had to provide salary and also pay rent without any income,” he said. 

He demanded that the state government expedite distribution of Rs 2,000 to every barber as lockdown relief. “We have been approaching various offices, but officials are clueless on the procedure to apply for it,” he said.


