Back from the dead, says Goan sailor who battled Covid in Italy
2020-05-30
Panaji: It was a near-death experience for Roosevelt Bosco Fernandes, a 43-year-old Goan seafarer who spent over a month in a Covid-19 hospital in Italy fighting for his life. 

Fernandes was in the ICU for weeks together and on ventilator support. He drifted in and out of consciousness while his friends and family in Goa prayed fervently for his recovery. 

It all began with a simple fever on March 17 on board the cruise vessel where he worked in the F&B section. The last guests on board had disembarked on March 15. 

“The doctor prescribed 1,000mg paracetamol four times a day. The fever would dip for two hours and then shoot up again. I was always healthy and never had diabetes or other sicknesses. The only symptom I had was fever, but I told the doctor and nurses that there was something strange about this fever,” Fernandes, who arrived in Goa on Friday morning, told TOI. 

Ten days later, on March 27, when a rapid test showed he was Covid-19 positive, he was taken in an ambulance to a hospital. Things only got worse there. 

“I didn’t have any problem breathing when I was admitted. But since there were so many Covid-19 patients in the hospital and the viral load was high, I got infected even further. I was put on ventilator support,” he said. 

Besides the regular updates from his company, MSC Cruises, and the Indian embassy, a priest and nun in Italy came to his family’s rescue and kept them informed about his progress in the ICU. 

When he would regain consciousness, he would see bodies of those who hadn’t made it, zipped up in bags and taken away.

Fernandes says he feels fortunate as a foreigner to have received a bed in the ICU and a ventilator at a time when the pandemic was at its worst and when the situation was overwhelming in Italy. 

“Only when I was out of the ICU did I realise how bad my situation was. I was brought back from the dead and I feel God gave me a second life. I pray that no one gets this kind of a disease and no one suffers the way I did. I hope a vaccine is found soon,” he told TOI. 

Although cured, the virus took a toll on him. Out of the ICU, he needed support to walk and was only discharged on April 30. He was put in quarantine for 14 days and then placed in a hotel while he waited to be brought back to India. 

Sailing for 20 years now, the experience certainly changed his life, he said. 

“I would be sailing for eight to nine months of the year and there was not much time for family. I would like to spend more time with my family now. I have realised that it is family and not friends and those on social media who will take care of you when calamities come your way. This has sunk deep into my mind after this experience,” Fernandes told TOI. 


