Badruddin Shaikh succumbs to Covid-19
2020-04-27
Ahmedabad: Senior Congress leader Badruddin Shaikh (67), corporator from Behrampura in Danilimda area of Ahmedabad, succumbed to Covid-19 late on Sunday evening. Danilimda is one of the Covid-19 hotspots in Ahmedabad. Shaikh, the former leader of opposition in the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC), had tested Covid-19 positive on April 15 and was admitted to SVP Hospital. SVP Hospital director Ramya Bhatt confirmed that Shaikh had succumbed to Covid-19 related complications. Sources said that Shaikh was suffering from multiple co-morbidities namely diabetes, hypertension and had even undergone open heart bypass surgery. As fate would have it, Shaikh’s death took place on the day when Imran Khedawala, Congress MLA from Jamalpur-Khadia, reportedly tested negative twice for the virus and was set to be discharged on Monday. Shaikh had tested positive a day after Khedawala tested positive and two were hospitalized for treatment.Gujarat Congress president Amit Chavda mourned the loss. “Our senior corporator Badrudin Sheikh has passed away at the hospital due to coronavirus. He died while doing his duty as a corporator, going from one area to another, encouraging people to stay at home and take measures to prevent the spread of Covd-19. He did his duty till his last breath,” Chavda said. Sources in the AMC said that Shaikh had been critical since the past five days, battling for life on the ventilator. “Around 10:35 pm, the hospital authorities made desperate attempts to revive Sheikh who was already sinking because of multiple organ failure. He was highly diabetic and had heart complications,” said a senior official.“The medical team tried for more half an hour, but could not revive Sheikh,” said a senior medical official at SVP hospital. Sheikh was previously the standing committee chairman. He headed the town planning committee, legal committee and was member of the VS Hospital management board. Sheikh was also appointed by ministry of minority affairs as the vice-president of Khawaja Saheb Dargah Committee — Ajmer Sharif.Locals said that Shaikh would always be remembered as a political leader who was available 24x7 for the people. He is reported to have widely moved in his area, helping people test for coronavirus and getting those testing positive hospitalized. “Such leaders who care and work for the community day and night are rare,” said a local resident.