Ballygunge condo disinfected, coronavirus test on helps
2020-03-24
KOLKATA: The Kolkata Municipal Corporation and the apartment owners’ association of the Ballygunge apartment where four persons, including the domestic help, of a family were found Covid-19 positive, launched a disinfection and fumigation drive at the domestic help quarters and the common area on Monday. They will also send all the domestic help, who have been asked to stay in isolation, for a Covid-19 test at Beleghata ID Hospital on Tuesday.


The condominium in south Kolkata is home to a 22-year-old who was the city’s second confirmed victim of Covid-19 who tested positive on Friday morning. On Sunday, his parents and a domestic help were diagnosed with the same disease, throwing the residents in panic, even though they issued lockdown strictures from Friday itself and took themselves into home isolation.

“What’s worrying is the fact that the domestic help used to stay at the quarters on the first floor and we have no clue with how many other people he had interacted. If some other domestic help gets in touch with him and then goes to work in another apartment, both he and his employers will be at risk. We have asked each member of our apartment, including the other domestic helps, to remain cautious and report if they come across any symptom of the disease,” said a member of the apartment owners’ association.

“We wanted a detailed test for all the domestic helps living in the apartment on Monday, but the health department said they would check them on Tuesday. Since none of them have any symptoms of the disease as yet, they have been advised to stay in home isolation for the time being,” said a member of the association.

Debasis Kumar, the member, mayor-in-council (parks and gardens), who is a resident of the same complex said the KMC sent a team of health workers on Monday to deep clean and disinfect the complex. “We have sprayed bleaching powder and chlorine throughout the common area and have disinfected the entire complex — including elevators, staircases and lobby. The process will be repeated at regular intervals,” he said.

The residents of the complex themselves had taken some proactive safety measures, including fumigating the elevators, from Friday. “We have been doing everything possible on our part to stay in home isolation. But there are some senior government officials in our complex who are flouting the norm and are criticizing our lockdown protocol,” a resident said. 

