BAMU hostels to turn into quarantine & isolation facility
2020-03-24
Aurangabad: The hostels of Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University (Bamu) will be soon used as quarantine and isolation facility if there is rise in suspected patients of Covid-19.

After the district administration approached the university with a plea for offering its hostels, Bamu has showed willingness to give its hostels to the district administration and health authorities for creating the desired medical facilities.

The university has 11 hostels having an intake capacity of over 500. Bamu public relations officer Sanjay Shinde said the university hostels have zero occupancy as students have already returned to their hometowns.

“The state government has already declared holidays for educational institution till March 31 following which students started going back home. The district administration has contacted us for using the university hostels as quarantine facility and isolation facility in the wake of coronavirus outbreak,” he said, adding that vice-chancellor Pramod Yeole has given go ahead for such plan.

Currently, the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), District Civil Hospital, (Kalagram) — managed by the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation (MTDC) — and a private educational institution are serving as quarantine and isolation facility in the city.

Located in the centre of the city, Bamu has over 400 acre sprawling campus with dense green-cover and could serve as good quarantine and isolation facility.

Bamu closed till Wednesday 

In the wake of state government imposing section 144 of the CrPC to contain the spread of Covi-19, BAMU has announced closure till Wednesday. In a notification issued on Monday, the university administration said that university departments, sub-center at Osmanabad and Model College at Ghansawangi in Jalna district would witness complete closure.

While financial year is nearing to an end, the university has asked heads of departments concerned to take necessary call on their own on functioning without violating the Section 144 that bans assembly of five or more people.

SRTMU offers ‘work from home’

Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University (SRTMU), Nanded, has offered the work from home option for its staff till March 31. Stating that 5% of its staff could come to execute essential work as allowed by the government, the university administration said it was committed to cause of protecting public health. 


