Ban travel to nations hit by coronavirus: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal
2020-03-09
NEW DELHI: As the threat of novel coronavirus grows, Delhi government has decided to get DTC and cluster buses, metro trains and hospitals disinfected every day as a precautionary measure. 


The decision was taken in a state-level taskforce meeting chaired by chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday.

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The CM said that he would meet Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday to request a ban on travel to countries badly affected by the virus. Addressing a press conference, Kejriwal said that the government had earmarked 168 beds in 25 hospitals — 19 government and six private — for Covid-19 patients.

“Three cases of novel coronavirus have been reported in the capital so far. One case is still under investigation. Delhi government is worried about it but we are fully prepared to tackle it. There is no need to panic and we need everyone’s cooperation,” the chief minister said after the taskforce meeting.

The taskforce was set up by the chief minister on March 4 to tackle the spread of novel coronavirus in the capital. It includes top officials of different departments concerned, the municipal corporations and Delhi Police.

Since most of the patients so far have a history of international travel, the chief minister has urged people to inform the state government if anybody in their neighbourhood has returned from abroad in the past fortnight.

The chief minister said that after examining the three cases, it was found that the first infected person came in contact with 105 people and the second with 168. The third person came in contact with 64 people in the last 14 days. “They are being isolated and checked for symptoms,” he added.

Delhi government has deployed 40 doctors at the airport to screen passengers. “So far, 1,40,603 air passengers have been screened and put on surveillance,” Kejriwal said.

He also appealed to employers to give paid leaves to all those quarantined so that their livelihood is not affected.

Kejriwal said that 25 hospitals have facilities where people can submit their samples if they develop the symptoms of coronavirus. “We are ensuring separate facilities for collection of samples and treatment in these hospitals so that if any patient arrives there, he/she doesn’t come in contact with others,” he said. 

Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain said those who have no symptoms of the disease need not panic. “Only people who have returned from abroad and have symptoms are required to give samples in the hospitals,” he added.

Following media reports that there is a huge rush of people to buy masks and hand sanitisers due to the scare, Kejriwal said that healthy people are not required to wear masks. He urged people to wash their hands frequently with soap and water. 

The state government has also announced a 24x7 state-level control room helpline. The numbers are 011-22307145, 011-22300012 and 22300036.

