Bihar lockdown: Ban on all private vehicles without passes
2020-04-14
PATNA: State transport department on Monday banned the movement of private vehicles plying without a pass issued by the administration. This will include ban on use of private vehicles for buying vegetables and groceries.


Passes will be issued to private vehicles for commuting to offices, bank, hospital and other urgent work and a log will be maintained about their movement. Not more than two persons, apart from the driver, will be allowed in a car with pass. Besides, everyone will be required to mandatorily wear masks.

Instructions have been issued to pump owners not to give fuel to any vehicle driver, who is not wearing a mask.

These decisions were taken at a meeting of the crisis management group chaired by chief secretary Deepak Kumar on Monday. A copy of the instructions were issued to district magistrates and senior police officials of all 38 districts.

Transport secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said the decisions were taken to ensure effective implementation of the lockdown and social distancing to fight the Covid-19 pandemic.

“It was observed that though movement of public transport vehicles has stopped but people are at times seen moving around on their private vehicles without any emergency purpose. Accordingly, it has now been decided that there will be complete ban on movement of private vehicles, except those issued passes by district administration,” Agarwal told TOI.

On using vehicles for buying vegetables, milk or groceries, Agarwal said: “It was seen that people used to go to distant markets as well for choice purchasing. However, we must understand that we are facing a pandemic and should curtail our movement as much as possible. Accordingly, there will be complete ban on movement of private vehicles for buying vegetable, milk or groceries, so that people buy such essential items from their nearest markets.”

Sources in the transport department claimed that passes for emergency movement of vehicles are being issued by a cell in administration in every district and people can also apply for the same through e-mail.

Meanwhile, altogether 15,818 vehicles have been seized or FIRs have been lodged against their owners across the state to date for violating the lockdown norms and around Rs3.5crores have been collected as penalty.

