Banana prices plummet as lockdown hits trade
2020-04-04
Vijayawada: Banana cultivators in Rayalaseema, Krishna, East and West Godavari and Vizianagaram districts are likely to suffer losses this season as prices fall and with lockdowns in place in importing countries in view of the Covid-19 panedemic.

The fruit is at the harvesting stage and transporting it to local markets has become a problem due to shortage of workers and closure of major markets. The Ravulapaleml banana market in East Godavari district, one of the biggest banana markets in the state, is operating below capacity at present. Banana cultivators are also worried as demand has fallen and storing the perishable commodity poses an additional problem.

The price of one tonne of banana was between Rs 10,000 and Rs 14,000 a month ago, which has now fallen to Rs 5,000 in local markets. The state government has started direct procurement and fixed the price at between Rs 6,000 and Rs 8,000 per tonne, and is supplying the produce to rythu bazaars and Covid-19 isolation wards.

“With the closure of the hospitality industry, functions, institutions and big retail outlets on account of the lockdown, the demand for banana declined and the price if the fruit also decrease,” said commissioner of horticulture department, Chiranjiv Choudhary.

“We harvested around two tonnes of bananas a couple of days ago. But due to lockdown, we failed to get remunerative prices for our produce. We sold a tonne at just Rs 5,600 against the normal price of Rs 12,000. If the situation continues, we will incur huge losses,” said B Trinath, a banana farmer in East Godavari district, adding, “We are waiting for buyers as the fruit is giving us bitter returns.”

Banana cultivation in the state is spread over 1.2 lakh hectares with a production of around 64 lakh metric tonnes (MT). Kadapa district stands first in the state with a production of around 24 lakh MT. A majority of farmers grow Karpura Chakkerakeli, Tella Chakkerakeli, Budida Chakkerakeli, Amruthapani, red banana, Sugandhalu (Karpura), Karpuravali (Budida Arti) and Rasthalu varieties.

The fruit is exported to Gulf countries, however, exports have fallen since the lockdown was announced. “No doubt banana farmers are not getting a remunerative price but we expect that exports will commence in the coming days,” said S Subbarayudu, deputy director of horticulture department, Rayalaseema region.

The state government is facilitating marketing through meetings with traders, buyers and transport agents and is in talks with other state governments to allow market access. “We have also involved online marketing platforms,” said Choudhary.


