Bangur super’s leap of faith from sealed-zone home to Covid hosp
2020-04-23
Kolkata: MR Bangur Hospital superintendent Sisir Naskar — in charge of the state’s largest Covid-19 hospital — found himself at the forefront of the battle against the pandemic in more ways than one. While his job forces him to spend more than 12 hours every day in close proximity to scores of Covid suspects and patients, his Garia home is now in a containment zone, which made him go through a check every time he boards his car for his office. Even though he is now exempt from the check, his neighbourhood has had a Covid-positive case and the local authorities are struggling to restrict entry of outsiders.

On Monday morning, Naskar’s car was halted and scanned by cops standing guard near his residence. The rigorous check was part of a containment plan by the police after the entire area was sealed to prevent people from sneaking in from adjoining Rajpur-Sonarpur municipality areas. A desperate Naskar had called up the divisional commissioner and the local OC, requesting special permission to drive to the hospital. He had to obtain a special approval from the police top brass to go back to his Garia residence at night.

“I was worried when I came to know that my home location was turned into a containment zone. Policemen had stopped me close to my home and prevented me from proceeding towards my hospital. So, I called up some senior officers who noted my registration number and communicated the same to officers at the naka near my home. From the next day, I was not stopped,” Naskar said.

However, this was not the first time that Naskar faced the Covid-threat so close to his home. A fortnight ago, a 52-year old businessman in the neighbourhood tested positive to Covid-19. He was admitted to MR Bangur, but later shifted to a private hospital off Bypass. Some of his family members are still in quarantine. 

Naskar lives with his 11-year-old son and wife. “On most days, my son stays awake till I return at 1am. I ask him to stay away. I change in the lobby and head to my room, isolated from the rest of my family. This has been the routine for the past few weeks,” he said.

Local councillor Chayan Bhattacharyya conceded that it was a trying time for the administration fighting Covid-19 cases in some areas of Garia which share a border with Rajpur-Sonarpur municipality. 


