Maharashtra: Bank orders transfer of 198 officials post lockdown period
2020-04-04
AURANGABAD: Maharashtra Gramin Bank (MGB) has issued a transfer list comprising names of 198 officers currently posted as branch managers or assistant manager in different parts of the rural areas. The order was issued on Thursday

A bank official said that transfer orders coming at a time when the country is battling against the spread of coronavirus has not gone down well with the bank officers posted across the state. 

“At a time when the bank staffers are risking their lives to cater to the customers, it was expected from the bank to be empathetic and avoid carrying out mass transfers,” said a bank officer.

Bank employees said that though they have been asked to act on the transfers on the next day of government relaxing the lockdown, they said they will be facing problems like finding accommodation.

A couple of staffers who have been transferred from Pune and Mumbai said that due to a higher number of cases reported from these cities, even their relatives are not keen on helping them with the accommodation. 

The order stated ‘All are hereby instructed to get themselves relieved from respective offices after the lockdown period is suspended by the Government of India and join immediately on the next working day to their new place of posting. Regional managers will monitor and see the relieving of the transferred officers as per this circular. Disobedience of the instructions will be viewed serious.’

When contacted, chief general manager Mahendra Kabra said, “I don’t think they should face any problem. With people following the social distancing and lockdown orders, we expect this Covid-19 chain to break in about a fortnight, following which things will return to normalcy.”

Banks associated with MGB informed that it is a scheduled bank established by the Government of India and sponsored by Bank of Maharashtra. Considering its presence in rural areas, it continues to remain one of the preferred banks in rural areas of the state.


