Banks seek RBI nod for relief to borrowers hit by Covid-19
2020-03-19
MUMBAI: Relief to coronavirus-hit borrowers from being classified as defaulters and additional funding to help businesses tackle a shutdown are measures that lenders want the regulator to allow to help tide over the pandemic-triggered economic shock. The Indian Banks Association (IBA) has also created a working group to study the economic fallout of the coronavirus pandemic.


According to an IBA official, every business is impacted either by supply disruptions or evaporating demand. An impact assessment is being done by the banks, which will be submitted to RBI by the IBA. “If a borrower depending on the tourism industry has availed home loans, he may fail to meet his EMIs for the month of March, which would cause stress. Any immediate dispensation will help the small borrower,” said Union Bank managing director & CEO Rajkiran Rai.

He added that while there was already a special dispensation for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), there was a restriction on the period when it was applicable and there was a requirement for being GST-registered. “This may have to be extended to other SME borrowers. In addition to dispensation, we may have to give more money to some borrowers,” he said.

 
 

Large corporate accounts may not slip into default in March, but the impact would be felt in the next quarter. “The sectors that will be immediately impacted are aviation, hospitality and tourism,” said Central Bank of India managing director & CEO Pallav Mohapatra.

“While everyone will be affected, right now there is a window available only for restructuring MSME loans. This is not available for retail, agriculture and corporates. As far as I know, no call for a special dispensation across all sectors has been given,” said Mahapatra. He added that the sooner a decision is taken, the better, else the damage would be done.

According to a report by ICICI Securities, the real impact of the Covid-19 crisis would come from the demand side due to the cascading impact of the slowdown. This can eventually lead to suppressed prices and, thereby, slow the financial growth of most companies. Further, a cash flow crunch can impact the debt-repayment schedule.Given the drop in demand, the chorus for a rate cut has got stronger. 

The RBI on Wednesday announced an additional Rs 10,000-crore liquidity infusion through bond buybacks. “Covid-19 is likely to exacerbate the spectre of slower growth domestically as clampdowns are increasing both within and outside India, which would curtail consumer mobility and lead to deferral of spending,” said Confederation of Indian Industry director general Chandrajit Banerjee.

He added that the RBI must act before its April policy to deliver growth-supportive measures. “We were buoyed by the bouquet of innovative measures introduced by the RBI in its last monetary policy. The need of the hour is to continue with more such innovative steps, apart from announcing a rate cut by at least 50 basis points (100bps = 1 percentage point),” he said.


