Pune: Girish Bapat roots for use of military hospitals to deal with pandemic
2020-06-06
PUNE: City MP Girish Bapat on Friday suggested that the services of military hospital, along with their medical experts and paramedics, should be utilised for treating Covid-19 patients from the cantonment areas in case of a surge in infections. 


Bapat said this while addressing the Pune Cantonment Board’s (PCB) general body speaking in his capacity as the Pune Lok Sabha constituency’s elected representative. He said, “The existing facilities of the cantonment have been doing an excellent job in this time of crisis. But we have to be prepared to face any adverse situation in coming days.”

The PCB has implemented a slew of measures, including converting three schools into Covid care centres of 85-bed capacity each, hiring medical professionals and paramedics and setting up an ICU at the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Cantonment General Hospital, which has a 400-bed Covid treatment facility.

Bapat said with the number of Covid-19 infections on the rise and the opening up of the lockdown, there might be a surge in the number of cases. “In such a situation, services of institutions such as the Armed Forces Medical College, Southern Command Hospital, Military Hospital, Kirkee and the Military Hospital-Cardio Thoracic Centre should be utilised,” he said.

Pune station commander Brigadier Kuljeet Singh, who is also the PCB president, later told TOI, “We haven’t got any official requisition from any authority so far seeking help from the military hospitals. Our hospitals are prepared and treating military patients, mainly ex-servicemen and their dependants, who have tested positive for Covid-19. If we get any request, we can take up the same with our top officers.”

He added, “The situation in the military areas of the Pune cantonment is better than the civilian localities. There are no active case in the military areas. All government guidelines are being followed strictly and this has helped us in containment.”


