Baraat stuck in Bihar back after 60 days, quarantined
2020-05-22
Kanpur: After spending nearly 60 days, the 11 member-marriage party along with the bride and the groom returned to their native place in Chaubeypur. 

All 12 members, including bride were sent for 14 days home quarantine. The marriage of the youth, Imtiyaz, hailing from Hakeem Nagar village of Chaubeypur area of the district was solemnised with Khushbu Khatoon of Begusarai in Bihar on March 21, but due to Janata Curfew on March 22 and further due to the nationwide lockdown, the baraat couldn’t move out and got stuck there along with the bride and the groom. 

“We contacted all helpline numbers but to no avail. Then, we contacted senior district officials who made available travel passes for us, Subsequently, locals arranged for a mini-bus, and it was dispatched to Begusarai Bihar on May 19 morning from Kanpur. The ordeal finally ended on May 20 evening when the baraat arrived at our native place,” said Mehboob, father of Imtiyaz. On their way back to Chaubeypur, volunteers on the highway provided marriage party cooked food and water while covering the over 800-km journey in about 20 hours. 

“It was an extraordinary marriage which we will never forget,” Mehboob told TOI. He further said, “Inspector Chaubeypur Vinay Tiwari received us and our samples were taken by a team of doctors from Billhaur Community Health Centre for testing for coronavirus, result of which will come in next few days. Till then we have been asked to stay home quarantine for 14 days.” 

Hakeem Nagar villagers, who accompanied the baraat, said none of them would ever forget this marriage. “We did not have the slightest idea the trouble we will find ourselves into when we left our hometown on March 19.”

“However, also we will never forget the love and hospitality of exhibited by the locals of Begusarai. They provided the girls parents with almost two months ration and other essentials. Thank you all for your kind help. We all have reached Kanpur safe and sound,” the marriage party members added. 


