Bareilly’s first Covid-19 patient, his wife 'recover'
2020-04-14
Bareilly: A 34-year-old man, who was Bareilly’s first Covid-19 patient, and his wife were discharged from district hospital on Monday evening after their fourth and third test reports, respectively, were found negative. 

Though their four other family members were tested negative for the first time on Monday, officials said they will be only discharged if their reports are found negative again, in future. 

The 34-year-old man, who works at a Noida-based firm which has reported several Covid-19 cases, told TOI, “I reached Bareilly on March 22 and it was only on March 26, I learnt that two of my colleagues were tested positive. So, I went to a district hospital to get myself tested. I felt extremely sad when I came to know that I have transmitted the virus to my parents, wife, brother and sister. I thought for days that if I had not returned home, this may not have happened. However, I was sharing the building with 12 other people in Noida and they could have got infected through me, if I had stayed back.”

After the man was tested positive on March 29, all family members, excluding two-year-old son, were found to have been infected. “Though my wife and I had tested negative in earlier test reports, it was for the first time on Monday when all six of us were found negative. Our happiness, however, was shortlived. We received a call from our uncle who informed us about a theft in our house,” the man said.

Though the couple reached home on Monday evening, they will again have to wait for days to reunite with their two-year-old son. His wife said, “After we were tested positive, our child has been living with my parents. We have been directed to follow a 14-day home quarantine and we would stay away from our child as a precautionary measure.”

Dr Vageesh Vaish who supervised the treatment said, “When the man came here, he had severe cough and difficulty in breathing. We are elated that he and his wife were tested negative and discharged from hospital.” 

Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “The condition of remaining four patients is improving. We have again collected samples of the four patients on Monday and sent them to laboratory for tests.” 

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “Apart from four patients at district hospital, two patients from Budaun and one from Shahjahanpur are undergoing treatment at Covid-19 level 1 hospital at CHC in Bithri Chainpur. We have sent samples of 25 members of a team involved in treatment of patients to Lucknow for tests.” 


