Bareilly SSP takes to streets to enforce lockdown
2020-04-14
Bareilly: A day after major city pockets witnessed significant footfall, Bareilly SSP Shailesh Pandey with his entire team took to the streets on Monday to ensure proper enforcement of Covid-19 lockdown in the city. A large number of people had hit the roads and assembled at marketplaces and grocery stores violating the lockdown on Sunday.

The SSP moved through several important places, including Shyamganj, and even the narrow lanes and appealed to the people to comply with the lockdown rules. He also warned them of putting up "penalty" notices at main gates of houses of those caught venturing out. SSP Pandey then distributed juice packets among police personnel on lockdown duty.

“Announcements were made through loudspeakers even as we marched through various prominent localities and city pockets, to appeal to people to strictly follow the lockdown norms. Special focus was on areas, like Shyamganj and its surroundings, which were thronged by a number of people on Sunday. People were warned of legal action as cops will put up notices stating penalty amount which will be recovered from the person caught wandering on streets. People were also asked to make use of numbers provided by district administration and civic bodies for doorstep delivery of grocery items,” SSP Pandey told TOI on Monday.

The SSP added, “During the day, locals were also informed that those stepping out unnecessarily will face arrest and there will be legal actions against them. Policemen will intercept people found loitering on the streets. Besides, the personnel have been asked to act promptly in dispersing gatherings.”

On Sunday, locals in Bareilly were spotted flouting lockdown norms by venturing on to the streets and loitering near vegetable markets in Shamganj and Dealpir areas of the city. The Bareilly police arrested 1,394 people and FIR has been registered against 322 for lockdown violation, so far. As many as 13,905 challans have been also issued while a sum of Rs 20.24 lakh has been recovered in fine.


