Bareilly man who tested Covid-19 +ve was under self-medication for 4 days
2020-03-31
Bareilly: A 34-year-old man, who tested positive for Covid-19, walked into a medical store in Subhash Nagar locality and purchased a cough syrup on March 23. He was under self-medication for four days and went to district hospital on Friday only after learning a day earlier that his colleagues at work in Noida tested positive.Confirming this on Monday, district epidemiologist Dr Meesam Abbas said, “The man who tested positive for Covid-19 was under self-medication from March 23 to 26. He went on his own to district hospital on March 27 where he was admitted and sample was collected. We have placed the medical store owner and his son under quarantine and their samples have been sent for testing. We are trying to trace if any other individual at the medical store or anywhere else came in contact with the man. Besides, the man was in contact with two of his relatives.”After testing positive on Sunday, the health department has shifted six members of his family who were all staying with him to a quarantine facility. Notably, the man is working at a Noida-based company and some of his colleagues have tested positive as well. He returned to Bareilly on March 22.Meanwhile, the health department has asked two private hospitals, situated within one km radius of the man’s house, to provide a daily list of those suffering from acute respiratory illness. “If no individual with this symptom turns up here, the hospitals will again have to notify us. We will collect sample of the people with acute respiratory illness at these two hospitals and test them for Covid-19,” Abbas added, as part of precautionary measure to prevent the spread of Covid-19 in the city.For conducting active case surveillance, the department has divided the area among nine teams on Monday. The teams will conduct surveillance for the next 14 days. “The teams will visit every house situated within a kilometre radius of the man’s house. They will ask people living here if they have any symptoms, did they come in contact with the patient or any other person who returned home from abroad or other state. If anyone in the area shows symptoms, he or she will be quarantined and sample will be collected,” chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said.