Barra emerges as new Covid hotspot
2020-06-06
Kanpur: After Quli Bazar and Anwargaj, the Barra area in South city has emerged as a new danger spot. Shiv Nagar Vidyut Colony, a locality of Kanpur south, is now the biggest hotspot where as many as 19 corona positive cases were found on Wednesday and six on Thursday.

As per the record, 22 out of 30 corona positive cases on Wednesday were from the Barra area. A corporator of this area and his men were found infected a few days ago. It is said that the 19 cases found on Wednesday are linked to the chain of the corporator and his representatives. The health personnel expressed apprehension that this chain might be longer.

According to police, one person of the colony, who was found positive had been in touch with the corporator who has infected 19 persons, including his family members and neighbours. The six cases reported on Thursday are stated to be the contacts of the infected persons, and of them three persons were found infected in Barra- 3. Thus 28 positive cases have surfaced in Barra in just two days.

According to sources, the colony has been declared a red zone and the entire area has been sealed by the police and health officers while KMC teams are sanitizing it. Meharban Singh ka Purwa isanother hotspot where one person was found infected on Wednesday.

Munnipurwa area of Bajaria, which was earlier in the list of hotspot, has now become a problem for the district administration as recently it was shifted to the green zone but has again been put in the hotspot zone after a positive case was found there.

 Divisional commissioner Sudhir M Bobde said that the cases were on rise due to flux of migrant workers. “We have to increase our testing capacity as enhance the number of beds in L-1 Covid-19 hospital.

The commissioner has asked the frontline workers such as police and employees of the health department and the municipal corporation to take extra precautions while performing their duties. According to the health department, there were 16 positive cases on June 2 and most of them were the contacts of migrant workers whereas the cases found on June 3 belong to the contacts of primary positive cases.


