Barring four districts, Covid-19 numbers under check in other areas of Andhra Pradesh
2020-04-16
AMARAVATI: Notwithstanding the rising number of positive coronavirus cases in the state, the government is confident that it would be able to contain its spread soon. 


The medical and health department says that the current numbers are within the anticipated bracket and hopes that they will be able to flatten the curve once they begin conducting more antibody tests in the next few days.

As per an analysis, conducted by the medical and health department, of all the samples collected since the operation against Covid-19 began about three weeks ago, shows that the number of positive cases were relatively higher only in four districts while it is well under control in a majority of the other districts.

While Guntur tops the list with the highest number of cases, Kurnool has the highest percentage of positive cases. According to official data (till Tuesday), Kurnool reported 91 positive cases, which is nearly 11% of the 826 samples tested in the district. Guntur, which crossed the century mark with nearly 114 positive cases, stands in the second place with 8% of the total number of the samples screened.

While the state average for positive cases stands at around 4.5%, Kadapa and Prakasam are the two other districts, which have surpassed the state average with 7.2% and 6.1%, respectively. In Krishna district it is 5.6% and in Nellore it is 5.2%.

While, in Ananthapuram, Chittoor and Visakhapatnam only around 2% of the total samples screened so far tested positive, it is around 3.4% in West Godavari district. 

Interestingly, East Godavari district, which was one of the first districts to report positive cases, seems to have managed the situation well as its average positive cases is 1.3%. East Godavari has also screened the highest number of suspected cases in the state. It has tested nearly 1,279 people of which 17 tested positive. 

The state, which has already screened over 11,000 people for Covid-19, is gearing up to test another 32,000 people in the coming week.


