Coronavirus in West Bengal: Bars, eateries, clubs asked to shut down till March 31
2020-03-22
KOLKATA: Restaurants, bars, pubs, clubs and nightclubs have been asked to shut down from Sunday till March 31 in order ‘to further check non-essential social gathering which leads to the spread of the virus’. A notification issued by the state home department on Sunday also included hookah bars, massage parlours, amusement parks, museums and zoos in the list of places that must remain closed till the end of the month.


While both the restaurants’ bodies in the city — National Restaurants Association of India (NRAI) and Hotel and Restaurants’ Association of Eastern India (HRAEI) — had asked members to stay shut on Sunday, they have now been forced to extend the closure. “We shall go by the state government directive and all our members will close down their respective bars and restaurants till March 31. Personally, I have closed my restaurants and bars from Saturday itself. Some of our members, too, have done that,” said Parnav Singh, president HRAEI. Singh has three restaurant-cum-bars in New Town and Sector V.

The NRAI, too, asked its members to down shutters till the end of the month. “All members will close their restaurants till March 31 as per direction of the state government. But our home delivery would be on considering that customers who depend on it might face problems. I have already spoken to the state administration in this regard,” said Sagar Daryani, president of NRAI’s Kolkata chapter.

The city’s entertainment hub, Park Street, is set to remain deserted from Sunday. The restaurants lining the road had hoped to reopen on Monday after a day’s lockdown. “This is straight out of a science-fiction movie and indeed very sad. But I guess this is the best option now and we must keep fingers crossed. I welcome the move and let’s hope things return to normal very quickly,” said Nitin Kothari, owner of Mocambo and Peter Cat on Park Street.

Several leading social clubs had announced a shutdown on Friday. Calcutta Club, for instance, was one of the first to declare a shutdown till March 31. Tolly Club had said on Saturday that it will be 75% shut for the same period. Dalhousie Institute, another premier club, had announced a closure from Sunday till further notice. Other clubs like the Calcutta Rowing Club (CRC) and Lake Club, had decided to remain open with restrictions on guests’ entry.

CRC secretary Chandan Roychoudhury said ‘in view of the coronavirus pandemic and keeping in line with government advisories’, all the club facilities including catering and bar will remain shut till further notice. “This decision has been taken keeping in mind the safety of our members to prevent further spread of COVID-19. We will keep out office open with skeletal staff from 11 am to 4.30 pm from March 24. Princeton Club in south Kolkata, too, said it will join the shutdown from Sunday. 

