Barwani, Burhanpur districts free of coronavirus for now
2020-05-13
Barwani/Ujjain: After reporting of 26 positive cases in Barwani, a ‘good news’ came from district as all patients been discharged after recovering.

According to official information, a 46-year-old Sendhwa resident, who was admitted to the isolation ward of Ashagram (Barwani), was discharged from hospital on Tuesday after receiving the second report negative. Currently, there is no Covid-19 positive in the district.

Chief medical and health officer (CMHO) Dr Anita Singare said that an infected person from Dhar district has also received a negative report and has been discharged from the isolation ward of Ashagram. “Now, there is no corona positive person under treatment in isolation ward of Barwani district,” she said.

Similar news came from Burhanpur during the day, when 13 patients were discharged. During the day, one death was reported in the district.

At the time of discharge from hospital, the patients expressed gratitude towards health department and local administration for taking good care of them and rendering treatment to help them recover and return home.

Outside the hospital, collector, SP, local MLA, public representatives and staff clapped for the cured patients.

Some relief from Covid-19 menace was also reported in Ujjain, where 16 patients got discharged from RD Gardi Hospital while a decline has also reported in death rate in the district.

According to senior health officials, total 132 patients have so far returned home after defeating the disease and 87 patients are currently admitted in hospital for treatment. In last four days, total 45 patients have tested positive while only one death has reported in last nine days.

So far, total 45 deaths among total 264 positive cases have reported in the district.

Meanwhile, Neemuch district, which had not reported any case during lockdown phase-I and II, has started reporting new cases daily. On Tuesday, total seven new cases were reported taking total patients to 34.

Under Indore division, Khandwa on Tuesday reported total 21 new cases including one death while three new cases were reported in Khargone district.

Besides, five new cases were reported in Mandsaur. “Ujjain division on Tuesday reported as many as 39 positive cases while no death reported in any of seven districts” the regional joint director (health) Dr Laxmi Baghel told TOI.


