Bathing in cow dung: Superstitions abound on how to tackle Covid-19
2020-04-06
DEHRADUN: The scourge of novel coronavirus has triggered the surge of several superstitions on how to fight the disease. From bathing in cow dung to putting a black mark on the small finger of a hand to ward off the effects of the disease, several people are trying every advice in circulation online to keep the virus at bay.


Self-styled godman Gopal Mani Maharaj for instance has released videos in which he can be seen bathing in a mixture of cow dung and cow urine. The godman, who is also involved in ‘cow protection’, can be seen addressing devotees while standing immersed inside a mound of cow dung. In another video, he can be seen claiming that Covid-19 is a venereal disease that requires a ‘hidden’ cure, which is cow dung.

The godman has many followers in the state and outside. His video appeared a fortnight after Hindu Mahasabha members organised a cow urine party in Uttar Pradesh, many of whom were later arrested for it.

“What if someone catches an infection by trying to copy the godman? People must understand the sensitivity of the matter and refrain from giving such advice,” said Dr N S Khatri, nodal officer of Covid-19 ward at Government Doon Medical College, who advised people not to follow any superstitions or ideas being shared on social media.

There are many who are also putting a black mark on their finger, an advice that has gone viral on several Whatsapp groups.

Another superstition that had caused much havoc a few days ago was that Covid-19 could kill people in their sleep, believing which many people in Bijnor and Rudrapur had come out of their houses at night, too terrified to sleep. 

Speaking to TOI, Haridwar-based Nikhil Jain said he has started switching off his phone at night nowadays, after his uncle in Bareilly began calling him to proffer superstitious advice on how to remain safe during the outbreak. “Twice he called and said I’ll die if I remain asleep. So now, I’m switching off my phone at night. Of course, I could end up missing an urgent call, but I can’t deal with superstitions and rumours any more,” he added. 

According to psychologist Dr Vipul Singh, superstitions are no less dangerous than any disease. 

“People feel they have done what is needed to fight the disease and then, they might become a victim because of carelessness. One must understand that it’s a pandemic, and while being positive could help them psychologically, superstitions definitely won’t.”

