Battered by lockdown, petha industry seeks relief from government
2020-06-04
AGRA: The traditional petha industry of Agra has joined the list of worst-affected sectors, whose functioning has been severely crippled due to lockdown.

With lockdown restrictions easing, the petha makers in Agra said they have started operations, but added that it will take them at least a year to recover their losses incurred during the three-month lockdown.

 


According to the industry estimates, there are around 600 cottage units in Agra.

The makers claimed that their business will continue to suffer until the tourists start visiting the city. They want the government to help them to tide over their losses.

Presently, the central government and the state government has not made any announcement regarding the opening of Taj Mahal and other archaeologicalsites in the district. 

“At least 50,000 people are associated with the petha industry in Agra. On an average, 800 metric tonne of petha is produced in the district on a daily basis. Following the sudden announcement of the lockdown, manufacturers and retailers had to distribute hundreds of tonnes of petha free of cost. It will take at least one year to overcome the impact of lockdown. The government should come forward to help the industry recover,” Rajesh Agarwal, secretary, Noori Darwaza Petha Union, said. 

According to the petha association leaders, manufacturing and sale of petha generates a business of Rs 500 crore annually.

From Agra, tonnes of petha is supplied to Haryana, Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Jaipur, Indore and Mumbai. A few of the makers also have tie-ups with e-commerce platforms to supply the sweet to other states.

“The entire industry is badly hit by the lockdown. Even after opening the markets in Agra, our business will largely remain affected. There are no orders for us to supply. Tourists are our major consumers. The business will start recovering only after the tourists start visiting the city,” said Amit Goyal, managing director of Panchhi food private limited, one of the largest petha brands of Agra.

“The government has so far not taken cognizance of the challenges being faced by the petha industry. For now, the government should at least declare the petha industry tax-free,” he added.


