Battle still on after 100 days of Covid
2020-04-10
Thiruvananthapuram: 100 days after the first Covid-19 case was reported in the state when a student who returned from Wuhan reported positive for the disease, as many as 357 people have been confirmed infected till date of which 258 persons are currently under treatment.

On Thursday, 12 new cases were reported, four from Kannur, four from Kasaragod, two from Malappuram, and one each from Kollam and Thiruvananthapuram. Of the 12 cases, all the 11 people contracted the disease after coming into contact with Covid-19 patients. One person who tested positive on Thursday for coronavirus had come from abroad. At the same time, as many as 13 persons tested negative for the virus-six from Ernakulam, three from Kannur, and two each from Idukki and Malappuram. 

The number of people who are under observation in the state have considerably come down. At present 1,36,195 persons are under surveillance, out of which 1,35,472 are under home isolation and 723 in designated isolation facilities. 

Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Idukki, Kottayam, Alappuzha and Ernakulam districts are witnessing considerable decline in the number of people under observation and in home quarantine. However, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Kannur, Wayanad and Kasaragod still have a considerable number of people under home quarantine.

Kasaragod has the highest number of positive cases till date with 155 cases, of which 136 are admitted to various hospitals in the district. 

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said though the number of those recovering is higher than those testing positive for the disease, it is not the time to let down one’s guard. 

“Careless attitude can create an emergency-like situation. Hence, we should continue social distancing and all the precautions followed all these days,” he said, adding that the risk of the disease spreading in the community still persists and hence people have to be very careful. The death of a person was reported in Kasaragod after he did not get timely treatment. The state government is now exploring the possibility of airlifting such critical patients to nearby hospitals in other districts to avoid such casualties. 

The chief minister said only those who test positive for the virus and health workers who are treating them need to wear N95 masks. Others can wear masks made of clothes, he said. 

The production of masks and sanitizers have picked up pace in the state. The Confederation of Indian Industry has been asked to support small scale units to begin their production, said the chief minister. 

To address the difficulties faced by patients who are not able to travel to the Regional Cancer Centre for treatment, the government has decided to provide basic treatment at local-level hospitals till the lockdown is over. Necessary instructions have been given to district and general hospitals.


