BBMP mulls winding up institutional quarantine
2020-04-29
Bengaluru: Institutional quarantine is likely to end in Bengaluru soon. Confirming such a possibility, BBMP officials attributed it to the dip in the number of positive cases and said home quarantine will be the only mode of isolation in the city to contain the virus.

The BBMP had identified several hotels across the city for quarantining primary and secondary contacts of Covid-19 patients. After the throat swab samples are collected, the contacts remain in institutional quarantine till the results are out. It usually takes two to three days for the results to come.

The BBMP had an inventory of 1,300 rooms at its disposal for public quarantine. These rooms did not have air-conditioning and food was provided to the inmates in disposable cutlery and crockery. 

The hotels were paid the boarding and lodging bill in accordance with rates prescribed by the Karnataka Disaster Management Authority. The bills were subject to occupancy. 

In Bengaluru, 450 primary contacts and 1,285 secondary contacts currently are put up in institutional quarantine in hotels.

“The number of positive cases in the city are slowly reducing and the ranks of primary and secondary contacts are also gradually decreasing,” BBMP commissioner BH Anil Kumar said.

Kumar said once the quarantine period of the current contacts in hotels ends, they will be sent home and the institutional quarantines would be wound up.

“In case, there is a sudden outbreak and the number of primary and secondary contacts increase, they’ll have to stay in self isolation in their homes and receive treatment,” he told TOI. 

A BBMP official said the contacts will have to remain in home isolation even when they await their test results. 

On questioning how the BBMP is planning to monitor home isolation of patients, he said: “There is already a lockdown in place. In case any fresh outbreak, the entire locality will be under lockdown. Resident groups will be kept in the loop about the contacts and police and health workers will closely monitor them.” 


