BDO faces axe for poor upkeep of Agra quarantine centre
2020-04-28
AGRA: A day after a video purportedly showing poor and unhygienic conditions at a quarantine centre in Agra went viral, the UP government on Monday recommended suspension of the block development officer (BDO), who was responsible for its maintenance and operations. 

Principal secretary (infrastructure and industrial development) Alok Kumar, who has been posted in Agra to implement the government’s containment measures, told TOI, “BDO Manish Verma was found responsible for the poor maintenance of the centre in an inquiry conducted by chief development officer (CDO) J Reebha. The report is being sent to the government recommending strict action against him.”

As reported in these columns on Monday, the video which went viral on social media on Sunday showed people in the quarantine centre collecting food and water bottles from under the locked gates of the quarantine facility at Sikandra. A man in protective gear was purportedly tossing biscuit packets and inmates inside the centre were picking them up.

He said, “I along with the ADG (Agra zone) visited the quarantine centre on Monday to streamline the facilities there.”

The official added that responsibilities have been fixed and Madhu Saxena, the director (medical care) of UP directorate of medical and health services, and Dr Sanjeev Yadav from Moradabad will look into quarantine protocol and other medical issues.

Additional director general (Agra zone) Ajay Anand said, “From now on, an administrative and a police official will visit quarantine centres across the city every day to check facilities; so that no such complaints are there in the future.”

“We have instructed all the field officers to enforce the lockdown, which is very much required to contain spread of infection. Our main focus is in the containment zones, from where the infection can spread,” he added.

According to the Agra administration, there are 21 active quarantine centres in the district, housing about 800 inmates. 


