Be careful, but don’t stop urgent treatment fearing Covid-19 spread
2020-04-12
Ever since Covid-19 made its presence felt in India, there has been a drastic decrease in the number of emergency cases coming to hospitals. On an average, there’s been a 40% to 50% drop in emergencies across large institutions in the world. 

What does this mean? Has Covid-19 reduced the incidence of acute conditions in the community? 

The answer is an emphatic no. 

On March 26, a nephew of mine called at 10 am to say his 45-year-old father was not able to speak properly and was experiencing weakness on his left arm and leg. I told him it appeared to be a stroke and that he must be rushed to hospital. While I waited for him at the emergency room for 60 minutes, they didn’t turn up. My nephew said his parents were not willing to travel to the hospital as they were worried about Coivd- 19. 

I decided to take charge and went to their house. My cousin had clear signs of stroke and needed immediate treatment. I did everything I could but the fear of Covid-19 defeated my efforts. He told me it was only weakness and he'd recover in a couple of hours. I returned to the hospital. 

Later that night around 11 pm, I got a call from my nephew saying his father was not able to speak and had lost complete power in his left arm and leg; they were on their way to the hospital. I called the emergency room and asked them to take care of the patient. But by then, he was well past the Golden period, that could have prevented permanent disability. 

Since then, my cousin is not able to speak or move his left arm and leg. All we can now do is physiotherapy and pray some power returns. 

Juxtaposed to this is the story of a little girl from Kerala. She had cancer in her right eye and came to Hyderabad for treatment three months ago. She received her first dose of chemotherapy and went back only to return for her second dose in the first week of April. Then the lockdown happened. 

But her father, an electrician by profession, did not give up. Through media he reached out to the Chief Minister of Kerala who, moved by his plight, spoke to his counterparts in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, AP and Telangana and facilitated the family’s travel to Hyderabad. The girl is currently undergoing chemotherapy. 

Heart attacks, strokes, infections, cancer -- there are numerous clinical conditions that need immediate treatment and delay can prove to be disastrous. Covid-19 or any other factor cannot stop the rapid progress of these conditions. Yes, we need to be careful, but at what cost? Hospitals across the country have taken precautions to prevent exposure to Covid- 19 and are going beyond their routine to be available for emergencies. Let fear not be the reason for unnecessary deaths or disability. 

(The author is president of Apollo Hospitals Group) 


