Be on guard, fraudsters may cash in on virus fear: Cops
2020-03-25
Kolkata: The cyber cell of Kolkata Police, CID and cyber experts have advised people that they should be careful while downloading information about the coronavirus. They have also warned people of opening any SMS that claimed to be sent by the Government of India, asking users to download “necessary documents”. The advisory came from the police on Tuesday when some people reportedly received texts from unknown numbers, which asked them to download mobile apps to get details of coronavirus. Cops said that fraudsters used this trick to get access to the mobiles of those whom they had sent the texts. 

Though no specific case has been registered yet in this regard, cops have come across such texts, where they found some fraudsters from Jharkhand tried to dupe people worried about the Covid-19 outbreak. 

“The fraudsters keep changing their modus operandi. Last year, they had used the World Cup frenzy while they had played the same trick in the name of a popular game show in 2018. Since everybody is on the tenterhooks for the coronavirus scare, the fraudsters are trying to make the most out of the situation,” said a police officer. According to cyber security experts, the spam texts include offers on masks, survival guides and even medically-unsupported Covid-19 treatments like CBD oil. Links within the spam SMS take people to other fake sites where they fall into the traps of the fraudsters and lose money. A CID officer said the risk of organized crime was most likely from the virtual world as the state had been in lockdown and people were not stepping out of their houses. 

Cops said that it is virtually impossible to trace the money once it is siphoned off. “The gangs use the details of their targets to hack into their accounts. They start recharging mobile numbers over the internet. Each of these mobile numbers used to send SMS is directly connected to different accounts of ‘mobile money’. These mobile money providers earmark one ‘wallet’ against each cell number. The gang transferred the victims’ money to such wallets over internet. This makes it difficult for cops to trace the money,” said a police officer. 

The recharge operators kept around 30% as commission. Police said no one should divulge personal details over phone. 

“We have been continuously telling people that banks don’t deal with customers over phone. No bank asks for PIN or CVV number over phone,” said joint CP (crime) Murlidhar Sharma.


