‘Be positive to quarantine’
2020-03-21
Thiruvananthapuram: While some people are worried about isolation at hospital or home, a person who recently left hospital following a week’s isolation says people should be positive about quarantine.

Vellanad-native Biju Soman, who worked as a physiotherapist at Munich in Germany, is continuing isolation at home after his tests showed negative for Covid-19.

Soman, who reached the international airport at the night of March 12, was directed to Medical College Hospital for isolation by a medical officer at the airport. Soman said that the mental support given by Razak, a nurse of a108 ambulance which took him to the hospital, was beyond words.

“The treatment I got from the hospital was really good. Kerala’s fight against Covid-19 is a model for the world,” he said.

Soman said that his confidence improved as his test results turned negative. “The health department, district administration, district medical office, mental health helpline, Vellanad primary health centre and ASHA workers were highly supportive. They ensured that I got the best care and food on time,” he said.

Though his test results are negative, Soman has been asked to continue home quarantine for 28 days.

Soman, who spends his time reading books, opined that people should be positive towards home quarantine. He said that he would continue at home for one more month after quarantine for necessary precautions.

Meanwhile, the psychological helpline launched by mental health centre, Peroorkada is providing needed psychological support for people who remain isolated as a preventive measure for Covid-19.

The service helpline 9846854844 is available from 9am to 4pm. Currently, the helpline is contacting people in quarantine and providing psychological support. Social stigma is a major issue faced by people in quarantine. In addition to this, depression, tension and stress are other issues faced by such people.

The mental health centre is providing support by dividing people into three categories. Counselling, exercise to reduce stress, etc., are provided by the helpline. Pregnant women are given special consideration.


