Be warrior, not enemy, in fight against Covid-19: Civic chief
2020-04-10
NAGPUR: With an appeal to all for becoming warriors and not enemies in the fight to control Covid-19, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe said Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) had no plans to install fumigation tunnels in city. 


Mundhe said Covid-19 could be controlled if everyone stayed at home as much as possible and wore masks and maintained social distancing when stepping out to procure essential goods.

Some medical institutions and corporations in the country had started to install sanitization tunnels in which disinfectant is sprayed on persons as a means to check coronavirus spread.

Mundhe told TOI it was serious that number of cases was on the rise in the state. He said cases in city as of now were low due to various measures and cooperation of the people. “For becoming warrior against Covid-19, one should stay at home and get all services there itself. If going out is essential, people should wear mask and maintain social distancing. They should also properly wash hands before entering home. Those who do not follow these rules are enemies of themselves, family and society,” he said.

Mundhe had issued a notification on Wednesday warning of an offence against the persons who do not wear mask when emerging out of homes. On Thursday, collector Ravindra Thakare issued similar notification for entire district.

Home minister Anil Deshmukh too made the same appeal on Thursday.

NMC had undertaken various steps to provide home delivery of vegetables, fruits, medicines etc. The civic body also allowed more medical shops to remain open round-the-clock to avoid rush. Vegetable markets where social distancing is practised have been developed on some playgrounds.

NMC even started door-to-door medical services. It has facilitated food to over 1.50 lakh people and accommodation for migrants. An app has also been launched to enable people to provide information if they have any symptom. Door-to-door survey of high-risk patients has been started which helped in detecting two positive patients. Close contacts of positive patients have been traced, examined and quarantined within 12 hours as part of containment drive. Slums like Takia Deewanshah and Satranjipura Badi Masjid area have been cordoned off after positive cases were found there.

A week ago, NMC had installed a wash basin at the head office and made washing hands compulsory before entering. 


