Beed police deliver groceries at home to curb virus spread
2020-04-08
Auranagabad: With an aim to ensure the families of the personnel do not violate the lockdown rules and also reduce their chances of getting infected by Covid-19, Beed police are home-delivering groceries to the family members. It was Beed superintendent of police Harssh Poddar’s idea to get the groceries delivered at the doorstep of the personnels’ families. He has given the responsibility to an inspector rank officer to look after the needs of the families.Several policemen have welcomed the initiative by the district police chief. A constable said that though the orders had been given to home deliver only groceries, policemen deployed for the purpose were going out of their way to meet the needs of the families. In some cases, the policemen have even brought and delivered medicines required by the members of the police families.When contacted, Poddar said, “In order to minimise the risk of infection among police families, we are home delivering groceries in all police lines of the district. Since the head of the family is on duty almost 24x7, this is a small endeavour on our part to make things easier for these families.”As per the initiative, the grocery store nearest to each of the police lines in the district have been shortlisted for getting the order from the families. The families will have to send the list of the items they need on the Whatsapp number of the store owner. If that cannot be done, they can hand over the list of items to the policemen deployed for the task. Once the parcel is ready, the officer in-charge is apprised that the articles have to be delivered to a personnel’s family. Once the bill is cleared by the family, the officer uses the police vehicle and delivers the groceries at the doorstep of the personnel’s house. Sources in the police said that while discussing the implementation of the idea, it was suggested that the order from the police families be given to a central provider to avoid any glitches. However, the idea had to be dropped given the vast size of the district and also the fact that many police families resided in areas more than 100km away from the police headquarters. 