Beed, Nanded too to get Covid-19 testing labs
2020-04-17
Aurangabad: A steady rise in the number of Covid-19 cases in Marathwada has spurred the state government to set up testing laboratories at two more places in the region — Ambejogai (Beed district) and Nanded. 

Aurangabad already has such a facility where tests are being conducted while work on another is under way in Latur.

In a letter issued on April 15, the medical education and drugs department of the Maharashtra government informed the Directorate of Medical Research and Education (DMER) director that Covid-19 testing labs have been approved for six government medical colleges across the state, including three in Marathwada. 

The six medical colleges which have received the nod for setting up Virus Research Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) are Swami Ramananda Teerth Gramin Government Medical College and Hospital, Ambejogai; Shankarrao Chavan Government Medical College and Hospital, Nanded; and the state-run medical colleges at Kolhapur, Baramati, Jalgaon and Gondia.

On April 12, state medical education minister Amit Deshmukh had instructed medical education secretary Sanjay Mukherjee to start Covid-19 testing facilities at these six medical colleges besides the Vilasrao Deshmukh Government Medical Science Institute (VDGMSI) in Latur. The work on setting up of VRDL at Latur is under way. 

Deshmukh had said that the chief minister gave the nod to establish Covid testing facilities at all the state-run medical colleges across Maharashtra.

Girish Thakur, the dean of VDGMSI, said the instrument required for the Covid-19 testing laboratory is on the way. “We are ready with our preparations. We can start the lab testing by April 22.”

Currently, Latur district is sending swab samples for Covid-19 testing to the Solapur-based government medical college.

The Aurangabad GMCH tests throat swabs from Aurangabad, Parbhani, Jalna and Hingoli districts. A total of 28 people have tested positive for Covid-19 in Aurangabad, eight in Latur, four in Osmanabad and one each in Hingoli, Beed, Parbhani and Jalna.

With the rising number of cases in Marathwada, it has become necessary to increase the number of testing facilities to prevent community transmission of the contagion. 

Maharashtra tested 50,882 samples, of which 2,684 tested positive till 10am on Thursday. 


