Beef supply hit as virus rumours spark shortage
2020-03-22
Panaji: The supply of beef to Goa has been hit as fears surrounding the coronavirus pandemic continue to intensify. The live cattle markets of Karnataka, which supply the meat to Goa, usually source the animals from Maharashtra. They are slaughtered from Belagavi itself before being transported to Goa. While the supply of essential commodities among the three states has not been discontinued, beef suppliers started facing problems owing to rumours about the potential spread of Covid-19 through cattle, thus impacting the supply of the meat. “Cattle traders are not able to transport sufficient animals from Maharashtra into Karnataka because purchase has reduced,” said Margao-based beef trader Shaikh Shabbir. “As a result, Goa, which gets its beef from Karnataka, is not able to get enough supply. This is a result of various rumours surrounding coronavirus.”The Margao market itself sees four mini-trucks transporting beef every day, with each truck carrying fresh meat of 10-12 animals. Now, traders said, only two trucks are coming in. The situation is no different in Mapusa and Panaji markets, wherein vendors have said that supply is half of what it was last week. Those affected say that maintaining business continuity in the face of the coronavirus pandemic is difficult.“We depend totally on Karnataka for beef supply. Since live animals are not easily available for sale, suppliers cannot provide enough beef to Goa. Until last week, we had a regular supply of beef, but supply is only 50% of that now,” said Mapusa-based beef trader A Bepari.However, the beef which does make it to the shelves disappears quickly enough. Goans continued to purchase beef for consumption, mostly locals panic-buying on Saturday for the curfew on Sunday. In fact, the demand for beef among domestic consumers is usually slightly lower during Lent, the Catholic season of penance and abstinence. Demand for the meat is set to rise after Easter on April 12.“Owing to the reduced quantity, our shops close soon after the beef is exhausted. Most often within the first half itself,” Bepari said. “There will not be respite from this situation anytime soon. The situation will prevail until March 31,” said Hussain Khatib, a trader from Panaji.