Before Sunday curfew, seven new coronavirus cases in Delhi
2020-03-22
Delhi-NCR saw most confirmations of positive cases in a single day since the novel coronavirus outbreak as seven persons in the national capital, two in Gurugram and two in Noida tested positive on Saturday.


The 11 new cases come on the back of six more that were confirmed in Delhi on Friday, and indicate the graph of people testing positive for Covid-19 could head sharply northward over the next few days as more people are tested and more results vetted by the National Institute of Virology, Pune.

Saturday’s confirmations have taken the total number of positive cases in Delhi so far to 27, in Gurugram six and in Noida six. 

Officials said of the seven new cases in Delhi, three are evacuees who were kept at the ITBP’s isolation facility. They are from Rajasthan, Jammu and Andhra Pradesh. Two are from East Delhi with travel history and the two others are daughters of a 38-year-old woman, a resident of Shahdara who had tested positive on March 17.

“The test reports of her son are awaited,” said an official.

The 38-year-old woman had, along with her 19-year-old son, travelled to Saudi Arabia on February 19 and returned to India on March 10. On March 12, she developed fever and cough and consulted a private doctor in Old Seemapuri. She had also visited her relatives in Jahangirpuri after returning from Saudi Arabia and two of her relatives residing there have been confirmed positive for Covid-19. Five contacts of the Shahdara resident are now Covid-19 positive.

In Noida, a Sector 74 housing society went into lockdown after a man in his late 30s who had travelled to Europe, including Italy, in the past few weeks, tested positive. His travel history was shared by RWA members and could not be independently confirmed. He returned on March 9 and informed the residents’ association and doctors only after he felt the symptoms last Monday. The other person to test positive was a man who returned from Switzerland via Dubai. He is a resident of Sector Alpha 2 in Greater Noida. 

In Gurugram, among the two who tested positive on Saturday was a 50-year-old woman who lives in Sushant Lok Phase 1 and had returned from London three days ago. A 16-year-old resident of Palam Vihar, whose 22-year-old sister had earlier tested positive, was also found to be infected with the novel coronavirus.

“We have collected 12 samples from the society where the 50-year-old woman lives. Her husband’s test came back negative. The 16-year-old boy’s sister, who had tested positive last week, had been a student in the UK for the past year and a half. She had approached the health department on March 16. We had collected samples from her parents, brother and a neighbour. Only her brother has been found positive,” said Gurugram chief medical officer JS Puniya. “We have six confirmed cases in Gurugram now.”

The MCG has been surveying Palam Vihar since the 22-year-old tested positive on Thursday. The woman’s society has been sanitised and residents have been asked to keep children and the elderly indoors.

While efforts to contain the spread of the virus continue, a member of the health department staff may have contracted the virus, health department sources said. The staff collecting samples at the centre have been tested and the samples sent to PGI Rohtak for tests.

