Covid-19 lockdown: Beggars preparing relief material for homeless
2020-04-20
PATNA: They are beggars with a difference. Instead of begging alms at road crossings, railway stations or temples they are helping the society to battle Covid-19 pandemic.


The inmates of ‘Sewa Kutir’, a home for the beggars, are engaged in making envelopes and packets and distributing relief materials to the homeless and poor during the current lockdown. The home, which is being run by an NGO—‘Nav Jagriti’, working under the Mukhyamantri Bhiksha Nivaran Yojana (MBNY), has 46 inmates brought from different places.

All the inmates of this home located at Sheopuri are apparently satisfied with their present assignment of making paper envelopes of varying sizes and making packets of relief materials, including foodgrains, sanitizers, masks and other essential items. They take all precautions while working and maintain basic norms of hygiene and sanitation. “Maintaining social distancing and wearing face masks they are rendering their services at the centre,” said Sewa Kutir superintendent Amresh Kumar.

The packets thus prepared here are distributed among the poor, especially the mahadalits, dalits, homeless men and women and daily wage earners who are on the verge of starvation due to loss of work.

Nav Jagriti secretary Jitendra Kumar Singh said, “The basic aim of Sewa Kutir is to motivate the beggars to come to this centre and we arrange all their basic necessities. The beggars are offered all help in their rehabilitation and encouraged to lead a dignified life.”

This centre has served more than 850 beggars since its inception six years ago and as many as 625 of them have been successfully rehabilitated. Nearly 300 of them have been reconnected with their families and 177 have got employment through skill enhancement training provided by the centre. “At least five of them have been employed in this organization,” Singh said.

Of the 46 occupants of this home, at present nine are elderly people, seven physically challenged and 18 mentally challenged. All the remaining beggars are normal and are receiving skill enhancement training like sewing, stiching and computer operation.

Amresh pointed out that one P Balakrishna from Andhra Pradesh was found begging in Muzaffarpur and brought to this centre in August 2018. After lot of persuasion, he was sent back to his native place in March 2019. Similarly, Vijay Singh, an aged person, who was found in a precarious condition with severe wounds in his head at Kankarbagh was brought to this centre a couple of years back. He was admitted to PMCH for his treatment and after being cured, he returned to this centre in April last year. “He does not want to go back home and prefers to serve this very organization,” Kumar added.

