Kolkata's Behala sees surge in Covid-19 cases
2020-06-07
KOLKATA: Considered a safer zone compared to the rest of the city in terms of number of Covid cases even a few days ago, the added areas of Behala — just like Bidhannagar — have seen a spurt in numbers after Amphan. 

 


Till Saturday evening, sources at KMC headquarters said that there are around 40 active cases in the areas. But, they also said that the numbers have stabilized in the past 48 hours.

Though KMC insists that Covid cases here are well within limits (Behala with a population of over 10 lakh still has reported fewer cases when compared to the rest of south Kolkata), the prevalence of positive cases in apartments located in densely populated pockets has led both KMC and police to devise micro-containment plans to stop the spread.

Pockets in Haridevpur, Purba Barisha, Parnasree, Satyen Roy Road and Roy Bahadur Road in Behala have reported multiple cases. Positive cases have also been reported from Taratala, Sarsuna and Thakurpukur. “There are reports from apartments where cases have surfaced in Behala. They are on Roy Bahadur Road and Purbapara Road. One affected apartment is located on the busy Diamond Harbour Road. While a couple of cases have been found in hospitals and nursing homes, the authorities have restricted market timings in several areas,” said a source.

KMC sources said that several residents have been distributed hydroxychloroquine tablets and Arsenicum Album homoeopathy drops. Random tests of patient’s neighbours are also being done. KMC has chalked out a comprehensive conservancy plans and it is working with cops to get sanitizing machines installed outside the prominent markets of the area.

“We had closed the Rail Line market and Lohapole market in Thakurpukur. But, in the past week, important markets like the one in Behala, are slowly re-opening. We are expecting a few eateries to open on James Long Sarani too from Monday. As a first step, we are ensuring that Behala Market does not get overcrowded. We are checking the industrial estates in Chowrasta and Taratala so that no one from the micro-containment zones report to work at these spots. In addition, we are also carrying out night checks,” said an IPS officer.

For specific micro containment zones, cops have arranged for a neighbourhood watch where grocers are being fixed and family members of Covid patients — presently in quarantine — are being delivered essentials through this fixed grocer.

Meanwhile, residents of some of the localities in Thakurpukur like Satyen Park and Green Park put up barricades at the entry-exit points of their neighbourhood to stop movement of vehicles and outsiders. 


