#BehindTheLockdown: Chennai Corp is fighting COVID-19, one tweet at a time
2020-04-23
A month ago, Greater Chennai Corporation’s (GCC) Twitter page had about 4,000 followers. 30 days, countless coronavirus-related notices and a re-energised social media strategy later, the page has over 41K followers and 10 million impressions. The aim of the page, which is being handled by a team of around 15-20 people, is to mediate health emergencies, apart from running campaigns and releasing daily case round-ups. 

The most heartening part of it all is that the reach is all organic, says a senior official from the team. “Chennai has the maximum amount of active internet users, compared to other cities in the country. So, it becomes important to use technology with brevity, especially in times like this pandemic,” he adds. 

So, how does the team work? For now, the coronavirus is utmost priority. “We work with a set of protocols where we design strategies and run campaigns. The core concentration is on COVID-19 related activities, until the situation becomes better,” the official adds. 

The page, which has its DMs open, helps people through its swift responses. But how challenging is it to filter and respond to over 400 messages a day? “90 per cent of the messages we receive are spam, where people ask us questions for which answers are already available in the public domain or on our page. We answer only important messages that have emergency concerns,” he notes. The team, which includes content writers and freelancers, work round the clock. 


Busting myths with innovationRumours and fear-mongering are quite common with any adverse situation and it is the same during the COVID-19 pandemic. GCC’s social media team, however, had the right way to bust these myths—through a hashtag. “Our hashtag #GCCMythBusters helped ease a few fears. When communicating with such a large number of people, it is important to stay relatable. That is why we work with a certain colour pattern and use a bilingual system of tweeting everything in Tamil and English,” the official observes. 


A Helping hand, in real timeThanks to this social media page, the GCC has come to the aid of several citizens in times of 
emergencies ever since the pandemic outbreak. An elderly woman suffering from arthritis recently ran out of her medicines that were sold out at pharmacies. But she got the medicines within 20 minutes of her daughter tweeting about it. “We forwarded the concern to our city medical officer, who swiftly acted and notified the zonal medical officer. Following that, a rapid response team landed at her location in about 20 minutes and took care of her,” says the official.


In the pipeline


 A Facebook and WhatsApp chat bot to address corona concerns
 Campaign to get people to wear masks

