Coronavirus outbreak: Being young may not save you, but precautions will
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: You are not invincible and are vulnerable to the novel coronavirus; the virus could put you in the hospital for weeks or even kill, World Health Organization (WHO) director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Friday in a message to young people.


Coronavirus in India live updates

His statement follows a significant US study that found 38% of the Covid-19 patients who required hospitalisation till March 16 were in the age group of 20 to 54 years. Some of them even required ICU care, the data shows. In France, more than 50% of the cases are under 60 years old. Even children can end up with severe infection, revealed another study published in the journal ‘Paediatrics’. The study, carried out by doctors in China where the Covid-19 outbreak started, found 11% of the infants who tested positive turned severe or critical. Their survival rates were better compared to the adults, and especially the elderly, but the study shows children, too, could be seriously ill.

“There is no scope for complacency in the fight against Covid-19 and younger people have to be equally cautious,” said Dr Vivek Nangia, director and head of pulmonology at Fortis Hospital, Vasant Kunj. 

The coronavirus that causes Covid-19 is new and people haven’t developed immune response to it, he pointed out. “It is difficult to predict how will it affect someone and, therefore, everyone needs to be extra cautious,” Dr Nangia said.

Another senior doctor from AIIMS said younger people would spread the disease faster if they didn’t follow the physical distancing rules. 

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has urged people for self-curfew on Sunday, unless it’s an emergency, to break the chain of transmission. Experts said while staying at home people could follow follow certain tips to reduce the risk of infection and related complications. These include eating a healthy and nutritious diet to boost the the immune system, limit alcohol consumption, and avoid sugary drinks and smoking. “Smoking can increase your risk of developing severe disease if you become infected with Covid-19,” according to WHO. It also recommends 30 minutes of physical activity daily for adults, and one hour a day for children. 

Previous reports of the Covid-19 spread in China suggested the elderly were at maximum risk to develop serious complications such as pneumonia and respiratory failure on getting infected.

According to a study published in the American Medical Association journal, which analysed the epidemiology data of China, the overall case-fatality rate (CFR) was 2.3% (1,023 deaths among 44,672 confirmed cases). “No death occurred in the group of 9 years and younger, but the cases in 70-79 years had an 8% CFR, while those in the 80-year-and-older bracket had a 14.8% CFR,” found the study conducted by Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 


