Bengaluru parents get creative to explain the pandemic to their kids
2020-05-02
Twenty three times an hour. That's how often the average adult touches his/her face. One of the tasks of the face mask we are relying on during the Coronavirus pandemic, is to eliminate this impulse as far as possible. So, if it takes a mask to get an adult to stop touching his/her face, what does it take to get kids to follow this, social distancing and safety protocols?
"Initially, it was difficult to explain to my eight-year-old daughter not to touch anything at the supermarket. We tried to explain the seriousness, although we are not talking about it the entire day," recalls Anushree Verma, principal analyst at a research and advisory company. Surbhi Gupta, mother of five-year-old Ivaan, agrees and adds, "It is tough to get kids to understand that they should not touch things while going outside for a walk or using the elevator, because there's always a series of questions after that."


Art and songs to talk about the coronavirus
The answer, is to go about the conversation creatively, to ensure that the child does not get anxious. Surbhi made Ivaan draw the virus and then explained the precautions and other measures one needs to take. ENT surgeon Dr Jagdish Chaturvedi has resorted to songs and comedy to achieve this. "My son now understands how the virus spreads, that one needs to wear a mask while going outside, cough/sneeze into ones elbow and wash hands for 20 seconds, etc.," he shares.

 

Using the right sources of information
Equally important is ensuring that children are not misinformed. To this end, Sumedha is getting her kids to read the newspaper. "It is a credible source of information and they need to know about these things and not fall prey to misinformation," she says. 
And to help children understand the importance of the lockdown, which iss keeping them away from their school and friends, parents like Surbhi and Anushree have been getting them to watch the prime minister's speeches. "I encourage my daughter to watch the PM’s speeches whenever he comes on TV. It helps her understand the seriousness," Anushree shares.

Common questions children ask and how to tackle them

1- Will this virus kill us all?
1. No, but this is a virus for which we don’t have a vaccine or cure yet, which is why it has resulted in a large number of people dying. Doctors say we should be strong, eat well and exercise to avoid getting infected. We should also follow guidelines to stay safe.

2 - When can we play in the park again?
As soon as authorities say it is safe to do so. 


3. Why do I need to keep washing my hands?
Washing hands for 20 seconds with soap lather will kill any viruses that we may have accidentally picked up.

4. Why can't doctors make medicines and kill the virus?
Doctors are working very hard to find a cure. Bu this is a new type of virus unknown to anyone, so it takes time to study its nature and find a cure. Till then, we must avoid getting infected.
(Source: Dr Sulata Shenoy)
