Bengaluru man beats Covid-19, set to be first plasma donor
2020-04-26
BENGALURU: A 40-year-old man, treated for Covid-19 in Bengaluru, is likely to be the first plasma donor in Karnataka. 

Praveen (name changed) who hails from Kerala and lives in Bengaluru has volunteered to donate convalescent plasma to help a patient in critical condition.

 


Clinical trials of plasma therapy, approved by the Drug Controller General of India, were launched at the Bengaluru Medical College and Research Institute on Saturday. The trials are in collaboration with city-based HCG Private Ltd.

About 55% of blood is plasma, the almost clear liquid part. The plasma of a person cured of an illness contains antibodies, protective proteins that fight disease and antigens like viruses. This convalescent plasma offers hope for Covid-19 patients.

“I read about plasma therapy and learnt that HCG was applying to conduct clinical trials. I connected with Dr Vishal Rao, principal investigator. I’ll do anything needed to help patients,” Praveen told STOI. He’ll undergo tests on Monday to confirm if he can be a donor.

This HR professional was working in Dubai and returned to India on March 20.

At Kempegowda International Airport, his hand was stamped to ensure 14 days of home quarantine.


Another person offers to donate plasma

On March 28, I developed a fever which did not subside even though I took paracetamol. My mother, a homeopath, and father, a retired Army personnel, suggested I get tested at RGICD. I tested positive after two days,” he said.

He was admitted to a private hospital and discharged on April 14. He is currently on home quarantine for 14 days. High fever was the only symptom. “It’s a baby step towards a big dream,” said Dr Vishal.

At the project launch on Saturday, Praveen spoke to health minister B Sriramulu and medical education minister K Sudhakar via video calls. Both ministers urged all recovered, eligible patients to donate plasma to help other patients.

On Saturday evening, another Covid-recovered person, Jimmy Xavier from Bengaluru, offered to donate plasma. As Xavier was recently discharged, he’ll be eligible to donate only after he completes 14 days of home quarantine.


