Bengal Inc lauds lockdown ease for select sectors
2020-04-10
Kolkata: Trade and industry bodies on Thursday promised to extend all sorts of assistance to the state government in the joint fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, as chief minister Mamata Banerjee promised some relaxation for a few industrial sectors.

Notable among them was the permission for commencing skiffing operations at north Bengal tea estates “with a maximum of 15% of the active workforce at any point of time ensuring all norms of social distancing and proper hygienic practices”.

The Tea Inc welcomed the initial relief, provided the government. Indian Tea Exporters’ Association (ITEA) chairman Anshuman Kanoria said the order to allow skiffing or pruning of tea bushes and leaf-cutting may be beneficial to Dooars gardens and few low-elevation Darjeeling gardens.

The Darjeeling Tea Association (DTA), the leading planters’ body in the Hills, has been seeking permission to reopen the gardens. DTA chairman Binod Mohan told TOI: “The government is making all efforts to restore normalcy step by step. The safety and health of our workers is above everything else.”

The ailing agri-based sector in the state has claimed that it has lost hundreds of crore rupees so far, amid the lockdown. The Tea Board of India advises garden owners to consult with the respective district magistrates before commencing operations.

“However, there is a pressing need to restore production at the higher Darjeeling gardens before they need skiffing,” added Kanoria.

Engineering Export Promotion Council (EEPC) may also get some relaxation for its exports from Bengal. The CM, during the interaction with industry captains, asked chief secretary Rajiva Sinha to look into the issue. “If it is possible without any harm, we can look at it,” she said.

EEPC India chairman Ravi Sehgal had appealed to chief minister for access of engineering export to Haldia and Kolkata port. “The engineering export from Bengal amounts to Rs 25,000 crore. It employs over two lakh people,” he said.

During the interaction, the president of Confederation of West Bengal Trade Association, Sushil Poddar, said its members are ready to help the state. “Our members are involved in every kind of business including spare parts. WE heard that rice mill owners and others are facing problems in procuring spare parts, we are ready to help,” he added.

Rudra Chatterjee, president of Ficci, eastern region said that one of his group (Luxmi) companies has started manufacturing PPE and can deliver the product soon. ICC president Mayank Jalan said his organisation would take care of two big markets in Barasat and Kolkata.


