Bengaluru’s art, music and showbiz frat discuss the challenges of content creation during lockdown
2020-05-15
Addressing the challenges and prospects of content creation during the lockdown, was our panel of artistes comprising filmmakers and actors Pawan Kumar, Pannaga Bharana, artiste Baadal Nanjundaswamy and musician Vasu Dixit. Excerpts from the discussion....


Pawan, you've organised podcasts, live chats with startups and even a marathon fundraising session during the lockdown. What keeps you innovating?
What motivated me was a newspaper article about the lockdown that read - Indians want the government to do everything, they don't want to do anything themselves. This made me sit up to do things and see how far can it go. It was all organic. I'd just do what I felt like doing, without any planning. It keeps me occupied, as well as connects me to newer audiences. 


Pannaga, you've put together a celebrity video and even done one of the first Instagram live theatrical performances. What were the challenges?
When the lockdown started, the first two weeks were all about relaxing. Then we woke up and realised that we should do something creative. We decided to do a song where wanted to show people that together even this shall pass. The major challenge was to get people to send us videos and content, as everyone was used to relaxing. Work that usually takes two hours, took two days under the current situations. 


Vasu, you made a lot of music, including a home series called Gyan Mandali...
For most artistes, necessity is the mother of invention. Artistes love constraints and challenges. Personally, I really wanted a time like this. It might sound selfish and greedy, but I really wanted to work on my stuff that I had procrastinated on. Even Gyan Mandali was a spontaneous thing. My wife and I would do such things when we would go to friends' houses. Since we were together for such a long time and not travelling - we decided that we should do something besides music. Since this was a common ground that we both enjoyed, we just wanted to have fun. 


And Baadal, you use the city as your canvas...
I first panicked when news of the pandemic broke out. It took a while for me to compose myself. When I wanted to do something there weren't any materials. I found a few sketch pens and pencils and charcoal. I tried to create something using those. It was hard, as I have enjoyed using walls or roads as I wanted the art to reach the common people too. So I used three walls in my house as the canvas. Many days later, I created some awareness artwork on the streets near my house. Commissioner of police Bhaskar Rao dropped by to see it. 


What has the lockdown taught all of you?
Vasu: This lockdown has been all about going deeper within myself - with or without my art. For my art, it is about what I can improve.
Pawan: I have looked at it as a process of reboot. It is about starting something fresh instead of going back to old practices. These days have taught me what I need and don't need. In terms of work, it has helped me connect to people through newer mediums, in a simple way.
Pannaga: We have a false idea of our needs. These days have taught me what is actually required. As a creative person, it has taught me self-motivation. It has also taught the importance of human connection - to work together and help one another. 
Baadal: As artistes, it has helped us connect and find inspiration with things that are closer home - quite literally. It has made us more mindful of our surroundings. This is a time for sharing and change.

 


