Bengal’s Covid aid: Free ration for 7.85cr people
2020-03-22
KOLKATA: Reaching out to people inconvenienced by the Covid-19 outbreak, the West Bengal government on Friday announced that people getting subsidised rice at Rs 2 a kg and wheat at Rs 3 a kg will now get them free (maximum of five kilos a month). The relief package will directly benefit about 7.85 crore people of the state.


The state also mandated a partial work-from-home system for its employees.

The two measures were part of a plan announced by chief minister Mamata Banerjee to tackle the spread of the novel coronavirus and mitigate the problems faced by a large section of people staring at a season of hardships because of reduced activity — economic and otherwise — induced by the outbreak of the disease. “The government will to give free rations to the poor till September,” Mamata said.


More on Covid-19

 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete coverage
  Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
  52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
  Helpline numbers for states and UTs
  Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
  How to stay safe
  How to quarantine yourself at home
 

The CM also asked government departments to introduce a duty roster that would enable 50% of their employees to work from home. The new roster will come into force from Monday and continue till March 31. “We have our e-offices ready. I would advise private employers, too, to take appropriate measures,” the CM said.

“I am not asking for a complete shutdown. Shops and markets will remain open. Restaurants can operate but with precautions. I will appeal to all of you to avoid gatherings, which should be a strict no-no,” she added.

Mamata said government hospitals had 800 beds ready and a new high-rise facility at Rajarhat could accommodate 8,000 people. “But we still we need more infrastructure. We have not got anything from the Centre till date. There is a dearth of testing kits and laboratories in the state. I told PM Narendra Modi about the problem during our video-conference,” she said.

“I proposed setting up of at least seven more laboratories. I have also asked for ECMO machines used for clearing patients’ lungs and expensive research equipment needed for laboratories. The PM said these points had been noted,” she added.

Mamata mentioned that het government has already set up a Rs-200 crore fund to fight the virus.

