West Bengal to start pool testing of samples in low-risk zones
2020-04-19
KOLKATA: Bengal government on Saturday decided to start pool testing samples in low-risk zones which have reported 2% or lesser Covid-19 positive cases according to the preliminary samples tested. This method will involve pooling in samples of five possible suspects, even though they are asymptomatic, and testing them together. A negative result will prove that all five samples in the pool are negative and a positive result will prompt further tests of all five samples individually. 

Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) director-general Balaram Bhargav had in a letter to all states, including Bengal, on April 14 proposed pool testing to ramp up surveillance. A feasibility study at the Virus Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) at King George’s Medical University, Lucknow, had clearly demonstrated that performing real time PCR tests (polymerase chain reaction tests which detects Covid-19 antigens in the body) by pooling five samples show desired results in places where the rate of incidences is low. 

The ICMR advisory said all five individual samples in a pool which had tested negative would be considered negative, and any positive pool would lead to individual samples being tested. The ICMR has, however, recommended not to pool more than five samples to prevent excessive dilution that may throw up false negative results.

In a circular on Saturday, the state said it has decided to adopt the pool-testing method. Pool tests in Bengal will be carried out only in those zones which have a low prevalence rate of infection as per the community survey and surveillance among asymptomatic individuals. Bengal will not conduct pool tests in zones where people may have come in contact with a known Covid-19 positive patient and where the rate of infections could be high. 

Pool tests, ICMR says, should not be done for healthcare workers who are in direct contact with Covid-19 patients. In zones, which have a prevalence rates of over 5%, pool tests have not been recommended.


