Bengal’s worst day so far: 3 more coronavirus deaths take toll to 5; total cases jump by 15 to 37
2020-04-01
KOLKATA: Three deaths — two in Howrah on Monday and another at NRS Hospital on Tuesday — were declared to be because of Covid-19. The three death pronouncements brought the number of fatalities over the last 48 hours to four and Bengal’s toll to five so far.

Tuesday also saw as many as 15 people testing positive — the highest single-day jump in cases — taking the total count of affected people to 37.

The Howrah woman’s positive report was released a day after her death, even as health workers at Howrah State General Hospital, where she was under treatment, sounded the alarm, alleging isolation protocols hadn’t been maintained. They alleged she had been admitted to a general ward before being moved into isolation at the ICU, exposing dozens of others. According to the nurses, none of them wore protective gear while attending to her. Cops have directed her family to be in home isolation. 

The person who died at NRS was later found to be Covid-positive. 

Three of Tuesday’s 15 fresh cases were relatives — the wife, daughter and son — of the Army doctor who had tested positive on Sunday. The fourth positive case is a woman who recently returned from Italy. She is being treated in isolation at a private hospital in Dum Dum. While a 51-year-old Salt Lake resident tested positive at AMRI Hospital, Salt Lake, a 52-year-old NGO worker from Tollygunge was detected with the virus at AMRI, Dhakuria. A 52-year-old man from Belgharia in North 24 Parganas — under treatment at a private hospital — also tested positive, along with a 30-year-old from Daspur in West Midnapore, who is now admitted at Midnapore Medical College Hospital. 

No details have yet emerged about the other five people who tested positive.

On the brighter side, Bengal’s first three who had tested positive — the 18-year-old student, the father of a Ballygu-nge youth and a woman student who had returned from Scotland — were declared cured and released from the Beliaghata ID Hospital. They will have to remain in home quarantine for two weeks. The Ballygunge youth is also well on the way to recovery, sources said.

It was later found out that the man admitted at AMRI Salt Lake had hosted a visitor from the US at his home on March 17. He had also attended a party on March 19, in which the US visitor was present. The NGO worker admitted at AMRI Dhakuria had visited Odisha recently. 

The 30-year-old from Das-pur had returned to Kharagpur from Mumbai by train on March 22. He had taken a suburban train to Panskura, from where he travelled back to his Daspur home by car with his father.

The 30-year-old has been admitted to Midnapore Medical College Hospital, while six members of the youth’s family have been quarantined. He was admitted to the hospital on March 28 and a swab sample tested positive. It was confirmed by NICED, whose report reached on Monday night. Three hundred have been put in isolation in West Midnapore on Tuesday.

At Belgharia’s Rathtala, a 57-year-old owner of a fast food outlet tested positive. A diabetic who has been on dialysis, he developed breathing trouble on March 23 and fever the next day. Since his breathing distress did not ease, he was admitted to a nursing home on March 26. His swab sample was sent for testing on Monday. It was revealed that his brother-in-law had recently returned from Mumbai and was put in isolation. Two doctors, three nurses and two health workers of the hospital are now in quarantine. The man’s breathing distress persists and his condition was stated to be serious.

