Bereaved, Valsad collector resumes duty in 24 hours to fight pandemic
2020-04-17
Surat: Valsad district collector C R Kharsan set an example of how frontline warriors are putting aside personal tragedy in the face of India’s fight against Covid. Kharsan’s 86-year-old mother, Revaben, passed away in Raiya village in Diyodar taluka of Banaskantha district late on April 14 night. Located around 500 km away from Valsad, Kharsan journeyes almost eight hours to reach his village, performed her last rites, and within a few hours was back in his seat.“I received a message about my mother’s passing away early on April 15 morning. I immediately left for my native and together with all family members performed her final rites on that day. My driver needed some rest as it was a long distance. So, we left for Valsad early on Thursday morning and resumed my work as we are passing through a very critical time. Valsad district borders Maharashtra as well as union territory where Covid-19 positive cases are on rise. So, I resumed my duty to ensure that we can stall the spread of Covid-19,” said Kharsan, while talking to TOI.The 2006 Batch IAS officer, said that his mother stayed with him, but had gone to her native to attend a family marriage function a week before the lockdown was imposed. “Though the marriage was cancelled due to the lockdown, my mother stayed back and told me that she would come to Valsad once the situation normalizes. But God had other plans. However, she had no age-related complications,'' said a son, bound by love for his mother and duty to his motherland. "We told our friends and family members to offer their condolences over phone,” he added. It is important to note that though Valsad district shares borders with Maharashtra and the Union territory of Silvassa, not a single Covid-19 positive case has been reported from the district so far. To his credit as a district collector, Kharsan had ranked first for 165 days, the highest number of days, in the newly launched CM Dashboard programme for speedy implementation of various developmental works in the district.