Besides virus, Tamil Nadu government battles fake news
2020-03-19
CHENNAI: Rumours spread faster than coronavirus on Wednesday forcing ministers, public health and civic officials to issue warnings and lodge police complaints, besides making press announcements to clarify facts.


An audio message circulated saying the Covid-19 outbreak was a conspiracy by the Illuminati to depopulate the country and that the health department was doing a door-to-door survey to isolate and eliminate people. Another message said government was planning to stop all public transport vehicles – trains and buses and closure of the vegetable and fruit markets in the city. None of these is true.

“We knew fighting the virus was tough, today we found fighting these rumour mongers tougher,” said J Radhakrishnan, commissioner of revenue administration, disaster management and mitigation. Radhakrishnan and corporation commissioner G Prakash gave television interviews dismissing rumours. They warned of criminal action against those spreading false information.

“We are closing down malls, theatres and large shopping complexes to discourage social gathering. Grocery stores, supermarkets and those selling essential items will remain open,” Prakash said. “Fish markets, meat, vegetable and fruit markets will remain open,” he said.

Later in the evening, Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority member secretary D Karthikeyan the Koyambedu vegetables and fruits market and bus terminus have been disinfected and will remain open.

The public health department filed complaint against ‘Healer’ Baskar, a self-proclaimed medical practitioner, for releasing an audio clip that said people tested positive will be isolated and eliminated later. “Such rumour mongering is a public health hazard. We filed a complaint against him with the collector and the police,” said director of public health Dr K Kolandaswamy.

The state has invoked the Epidemic Act and has declared the outbreak as a disaster. “Punishment will include up to seven year jail term for the guilty,” he said. Deputy director of health services G Ramesh Kumar said action will be taken under Tamil Nadu Public Health Act, 1939, and Section 54 (punishment for false warning) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005.

In Madurai, M Selvam, 40, was arrested for spreading rumours that 47 Covid-19 infected people were isolated in an unoccupied apartment building near Othakadai in Madurai. The message triggered a protest by the residents. He has been booked under IT act and Disaster Management Act, 2005 and remanded in judicial custody.


