Betim man tests +ve for Covid, critical, put on ventilator
2020-06-14
Panaji: A 56-year-old security guard who tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday is in critical condition and has been put on ventilator. The two men who rushed him to hospital couldn’t be traced for several hours, till one was found in the evening. The second is still at large. The security guard is the first Covid patient in Goa since the first cases reported in March to require ventilator support.

“The man was taken to Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital in critical condition after he suffered a heart attack,” health secretary Nila Mohanan said. 

“He is also a patient of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). He was then shifted to the ESI hospital after he tested positive for Covid-19. He is currently on ventilator.”

A health official said that one of the two men who took him to GMC was traced and tested negative for Covid-19. The other person, however, is yet to be found, and has also switched off his phone. Porvorim PI Ninad Deulkar said they were trying to find the missing man. 

A health official said that the security guard probably got the infection from another worker, who came to Goa from Mumbai on June 5, and stayed at the site with him. “He was tested on arrival, and after his report came positive, he was shifted to hospital,” the official said. “Luckily, there were just three persons on the site, with construction being almost complete.” 

Meanwhile, Goa’s active Covid-19 count shot up to 453 on Saturday, with the detection of 60 more cases, 26 of which were from the Mangor Hill containment zone. Vasco’s Sada area reported 13 cases and Baina eight, which are also considered linked to Mangor Hill. Apart from the Betim case, an isolated case was also found in Margao. 

Mohanan said that 60 swab samples were collected from Chimbel, which as of Saturday has ten cases. When asked whether it will be declared a containment zone, she said that the health department was watching the trend there. “We need to have sufficient epidemiological reasons to declare a containment zone. Let us observe the trend after we get results,” she said.

She also said that a survey is being conducted at Margao’s Moti Dongor, and samples are being tested. Regarding the Taleigao cases, she said that no more samples have tested positive. However, after a tea boy at the ESI/Covid hospital tested positive two days ago, three of his contacts also tested positive. 

In the southernmost taluka of Canacona, the count increased to five, after the three year-old daughter of a KTC driver tested positive. Her father had tested positive on Wednesday. “However, his pregnant wife has so far tested negative. The child has been shifted to the ESI hospital in Margao,” said Dr Vandana Desai, health officer, Canacona community health centre (CHC). Fifty other contacts of the driver all tested negative.

Desai said that since the driver’s wife had visited her relatives in Khola, CHC officials collected swabs of 30 people from there too. 

Apart from the cases within the state, five travellers also tested positive for the novel coronavirus. A teen who arrived with his family from Gujarat via Mumbai and was residing in a flat in Mapusa, and a woman who also came from Gujarat, tested positive.

“The teen’s family was strictly instructed not to step out of their residence,” said Mapusa councillor Sandeep Falari. “I even gave them my phone number, and told them to call me if they needed any help. I even shared the police inspector’s contact number.”

On Saturday, eight suspects were admitted to isolation wards. Out of the 2,808 samples tested, 1,852 returned negative. Reports of 956 samples were awaited.


