Beware, snakes don’t have any lockdown
2020-05-06
Kannur: A few days ago when a jewellery shop in Payyannur was opened for cleaning, after relaxation in Covid-19 lockdown, the owner spotted a python in a corner. Wildlife rescuers were called in to catch the snake, and they found that it had laid eggs and was hatching it.

“The python was hatching 27 eggs, so we rescued it and shifted to a safe place where it could continue hatching,” said rescuer Pavithran Annukkaran. It had entered via the tiled roof, he said.

In the last one month, he caught around 37 snakes from different parts of the district, and most of them were cobras, he said. “The lockdown has brought down people’s movements and so the presence of snakes is visible even in urban areas,” he said.

“Snakes come out in search of cool places during summer. This year, people are frequently spotting them near their houses, mainly because they are at home. Besides, the environment around is calm and so the reptiles come out,” said Nisheesh Chalode, another snake rescuer. He rescued around 100 snakes in the last one month or so. In a single day he got calls to rescue 16 snakes, he added.

“Ensure that you do not stock unwanted things and gunny bags outside your houses. Also, snakes prefer to enter toilets due to the dampness,” Chalode added.

However, there doesn’t seem to be an increase in snake population. According to Chandran Kuttikkol, another wildlife rescuer, the sighting of snakes has come down in recent times. “I got very few calls recently and I don’t think that more snakes are coming out because of the calm in the lockdown,” he said. He advises people not to release the snakes in faraway places because they are territorial creatures. “Normally snakes live within a 3km surrounding. If you catch and release them in faraway places they would not be able to survive,” he added.

Though we cannot assertively say more snakes are being spotted in human habitats now, the lockdown has provided them the freedom of movement, said Riyaz Mangad, an expert associated with Parassinikkadavu Snake Park. At least 300 snakes have been rescued in the recent days in the district, he said.

This means the human-snake encounter rate has increased, said Roshnath Ramesh, a wildlife biologist and researcher. “I feel the sightings have increased since people are at home and they observe the surroundings more closely. Since the surroundings are calm, there is possibility of natural foraging going high. However, it does not mean their population has gone up,” he said. We should study the environmental impact on the living organism during lockdown, he added.


