Beware, cyber cheats may cash in on virus fear
2020-03-30
Indore: Covid-19 has now given a new avenue for cybercriminals, who are trying to cash in on the fear that people have regarding the pandemic. 

Several fraudulent websites and e-commerce platforms have mushroomed on the internet, promising to sell medicines that could either prevent or cure Covid-19. Not only this, fraudsters are using this opportunity to dupe people by promising to send vegetable and grocery items at their doorsteps. 

Renuka Bundela, 40, a resident of Dhar district faced problems while donating funds to the website created by the PM. “I am glad that I checked before donating Rs 10,000 of my hard-earned money. Someone had created a fake link similar to the one where people are donating money for PM funds,” said Bundela. 

She said that the fake link was ‘PM care’ and had the name of the accused in the registered name column. However, the real one was PM cares with registered name also PM cares. 

Cyber cell SP Jitendra Singh said that such things are often not seen by the users and in the current scenario when almost everyone is working from home and using online means for all the transactions, it is must to be aware and safe. 

“Cybercriminals are also taking advantage of the current situation. Non technical staff while working from home should take care of the confidentiality of valuable transactions and sensitive financial documents,” he said. 

SP added that almost all the crimes like UPI fraud, frauds on e-commerce websites and insurance frauds have picked pace in the past few weeks. Online predators are active and are taking advantage of the increasing amount of time that people spend online due to new measures taken by government to stop the spread of the virus. 

SP said that the attackers are also using Covid-19-themed malware, social engineering and phishing messages that include links leading to malicious sites or have attached Microsoft Office documents with malicious macros designed to download and execute malware on a victim’s system. 

Some of these messages appear to come from the World Health Organization or US Center for Disease Control, exploiting individuals’ obvious need to know more about the pandemic. 


