Bhilwara fights coronavirus the way nation erased polio
2020-03-26
JAIPUR: The microplans that helped in eradicating polio from the country, are being followed in Bhilwara — where 16 persons have been found infected with Covid-19 — to contain the spread of the virus.


At least 300 teams of healthcare staff have been trained and they are conducting house-to-house survey based on polio microplans. The microplans are prepared in such a way as to ensure that not a single suspected Covid-19 person should remain untraced, just like in the polio eradication campaign, which ensured that every child should administer polio drops. 


 

The strategy had worked and the entire country had been declared polio-free by the World Health Organisation. The health authorities have adopted the same way in which they conduct acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance for eradicating polio from the country. 

According to WHO, polio eradication microplans had adopted the innovative strategy of house-to-house vaccination over time. The health services in countries in which polio had been endemic, did not reach everyone, and underserved communities had a greater burden of polio. Services were therefore brought to the community. 

Following the same microplan, the health department has constituted 300 teams of health workers to reach out to each and every person in the area around the private hospital, where 16 persons tested positive for Covid-19 so far. “The moment we realised that a doctor working at a hospital could be the epicentre for Covid-19 spread in Bhilwara, we immediately constituted 300 teams and drew up a three-layered containment plan to cover the entire district. It is just like what health agencies used to do when a case of polio was reported from a particular area. We conducted intense contact tracing. Then, our teams went house-to-house to cover the entire urban population for screening and surveillance. Now, we have fanned out into rural areas to identify suspected cases. The strategy seems to have worked for containment,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). 

The health department developed 24-hour screening centre of all the symptomatic and contacts of the hospital which is the epicentre of Covid-19-positive cases in Bhilwara. 

