Bhilwara collector ‘takes over’ five private hospitals, ‘books’ 1,500 hotel rooms for Covid-19 care
2020-03-27
JAIPUR: After 19 persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Rajasthan’s Bhilwara, the collector has now “taken over” five private hospitals to scale up the number of isolation facilities for coronavirus patients in the district.


As of now, 50 persons are in isolation — 35 in the district hospital and 15 in these five private hospitals.

The district administration has also “booked” 1,500 rooms in hotels across the city. At the moment nearly 600 people are kept in these hotels, district collector Rajendra Bhatt, told TOI.

The Covid situation in Bhilwara plunged into a crisis after the death of a 73-year-old person on Thursday and his son and granddaughter too testing positive for the infection. So far, 19 people in the district have been found infected with the virus. a huge team of 1,500 health workers and 2,400 police personnel undertaking the country’s largest screening exercise for the novel coronavirus after 13 cases of virus infection surfaced in Bhilwara, The magnitude of the task feels overwhelming. The textile town of 6 lakh people in Rajasthan is under curfew. Bhilwara’s borders have been sealed and the vast majority of the population is struggling for essential services.

“The five private hospitals taken over by the district administration are — Shrimati Kesar Bai Soni Hospital, Shri Siddhi Vinayak Hospital, Ramsnehi Hospital, Keshav Porwal Hospital and Arihant Hospital of Bhilwara,” Bhatt said.

Bhatt also said that the number of isolation beds in the district hospital has been increased to 200.

“We have taken control of the five hospitals along with their doctors, nurses, staff and equipment and the premises for Covid-19-related treatment after receiving orders from the district administration,” said a senior health department official, posted in Bhilwara.

The order further said that the hospitals will be completely sanitized before they are handed over yo the owners.

