Bhopal: Don’t let down guard in lockdown 4.0
2020-05-21
BHOPAL: Monday in the state capital seemed like from a time before March 23 — the first day of the lockdown. 


The streets were abuzz with activity and vehicles could be seen on the road since morning on the first day of lockdown 4.0 which came into effect with a few relaxations in Bhopal — which has seen over 1,000 coronavirus cases and 40 deaths so far. 

It appeared as if people, somehow, had got the impression that the lockdown restrictions have been lifted. As the traffic swelled on the roads, police and administration swung into action, additional police force was deployed, pickets were strengthened and residents were told to remain indoors and explained that the lockdown has not been lifted but extended. 

Collector Tarun Pithode has said many a times that people can only get an early “freedom” from lockdown restrictions if they follow the guidelines properly, practice social distancing and avoid going out unless absolutely necessary.“ Bhopal will shed its red zone status and get green only when new Coronavirus cases stop coming but as of now it’s not happening”, he said, while talking to TOI on the eve of the lockdown 4.0 

“Earlier we used to blame residents of Jehangirabad or Aishbagh for not listening to the administration and perpetuating the Coronavirus infection but it’s now happening everywhere. At times, you can see jam on the road particularly near the police pickets as the area for vehicles to pass get reduced”, said a policeman guarding one such picket on Kolar Road. 

Station house officer, Hanumanganj, Mahendra Singh Thakur, however, had a different take on the issue. “On the first day of the lockdown 4.0, there was indeed heavy traffic on the road initially but it was more because of confusion. People, somehow, got the message that all offices and shops can open in this phase of the lockdown but after they were persuaded and told that the restrictions were still in place, they returned home”, he said. 

People on the other hand, seem to suggest that except for early morning or for a brief period in the evening, some people may venture out of their houses for the sake of it but otherwise, they are largely sticking to the lockdown rules except when it’s necessary to go out for some urgent work. 

However, TOI spotted locals moving on the road at Bagh Sewaniya area at around 4pm. Most of them were either wearing masks or covering their faces with scarfs, but they were not only out on the roads but were also flouting the orders of administration allowing only one person on the two-wheelers. 

When one of them, Mukesh Pandit, was asked why he was roaming around despite the lockdown in the city, he said “I understand it is necessary to protect ourselves, so I have covered my face with this scarf. As far as use of motorcycle is concerned with a pillion rider, I was not aware that pillion riding on motorcycle is not allowed in the lockdown”. When asked why he had come out of his house, he replied “To buy vegetables”. 

There is also an “irony” in the whole situation as it unfolds during the lockdown 4, when the district administration has allowed opening of private offices with 33 % attendance, construction works both by the government agencies and the private builders and also the stand-alone shops and shops in residential complexes to operate. While those with no work are roaming around on the road giving “excuses” if stopped by the police at any point, those who have offices or construction work to carry out are either wary to open their offices or not getting wherewithal to start construction. 

Vicky, a contractor has sanctioned work of the BMC water works department, but no truck owner is prepared to unload building material at his site lest their truck is seized. “Sand and cement, you are getting everything in black. I am ready to purchase it on whatever rate it is available but they are asking me to hire a truck on my own because if their truck is seized by the police, they would have problems getting it back.” 

“Why don’t you wait for another 10 days, they ask me while the company I work for is after me to start work”, he said. 

Similarly, Pankaj Sharma, who has an office in GTB Complex, has not bothered to find out whether the office can be opened under relaxations offered under the lockdown 4.0. “I don’t know. I was reading in a local newspaper that SDM’s order would be required to open the office. Who would get into all this? It’s better to wait for some more days”, he said. 

When TOI tried to find out from the district administration whether a private office located at GTB complex can be opened, district administration spokesperson, Arun Rathore, said “Yes but with 33 % attendance”. 


