Bhopal gets 23 Covid-19 cases in a day, MP count 215
2020-04-06
BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh’s Covid-19 count shot up to 215 on Sunday with 23 testing positive in Bhopal and 22 in Indore. There were five deaths during the day, putting the state toll at 16. Three of Bhopal’s new cases are doctors, and four are senior health officials fighting the pandemic. Four of Bhopal’s fresh patients had attended the Delhi Tablighi jamaat.


It’s Bhopal’s highest singleday tally, taking the city’s count to 40. Indore has over three times as many – 135.

The four health department officials operating out of Satpura Bhawan include a joint director and three deputy directors. In all, 11 people linked to the health department have tested positive, including a scientist, a consultant and some contractual staff. They are all stable. An AIIMS-Bhopal official said that a businessman, who tested positive on Saturday, continues to in critical condition


22 new Covid-19 cases in Indore
 The 54-year-old ran a vegetable business in Karond Sabzi Mandi. His son has also tested positive. Among Sunday’s cases is a 15-year-old boy.

On the brighter side, six patients --three from Jabalpur, two in Indore and one in Gwalior -- were discharged from hospital after they recovered from Covid-19.

Indore, the hotspot of MP’s corona outbreak, got 22 new cases, along with four deaths. Indore now has 11 deaths, Ujjain three and Khargone one.

A 53-year-old resident of Snehlata Ganj died on Sunday at 12.15pm. She was admitted to MRTB Hospital on April 1 and had been suffering from shortness of breath and cough for 10 days, and fever for three days.

She didn’t have any travel or contact history. She had co-morbid conditions --including diabetes, ketoacidosis, sepsis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, bronchopneumonia, and shock, say officials.

The other death of the day was reported from SAIMS at 8.46am. A 50-yearold man was admitted on April 2 with complaints of shortness of breath, dry cough and fever for 10 days. He didn’t have any travel or contact history, but had hypertension, pneumonia and sepsis.

Late in the night, another death report came in – that of a 56-year-old man.

Eight of the new cases in Indore are women. The youngest patient is a sevenyear-old boy and the oldest 78. Six positive cases were found in Taat Patti Bakhal, where doctors were attacked a few days ago. 

