Bhopal women cops show mettle in Covid combat
2020-04-05
BHOPAL: A force of around 400 women cops are working shoulder to shoulder with their male colleagues to enforce the Covid-19 lockdown across the state capital and around 180 of them are deployed on field duty. 

While the senior women cops are busy working 12-16 hours on a regular basis to maintain law and order, the lower-ranked personnel are working for 8-12 hours on the field. TOI spoke to a few women cops and took details of the challenges faced by them. 

CSP (Kotwali) Bittu Sharma is posted in one of the most sensitive areas of the city. She told TOI that her working hours are not fixed. She leaves for work around 7.30am and does not even go home to take lunch. She returns home only after midnight after briefing the night duty staff at police stations in her division. 

Sharma said that seven Tablighi Jamaatis, including two foreign foreigners were found in her jurisdiction area and she has to keep a check on their health situation every minute. She also has to arrange for their medical screening and take them to the quarantine centre. Expectedly, she is exposed to many risks throughout the day. She said that she keeps a spare uniform in her vehicle and changes it at her office if the need arises. Speaking on the precautions being taken by her at home, she said that she goes home just for 4-5 hours to sleep. She added that she takes entry from the backside of the house and goes straight to the basement where she takes a bath and washes her uniform. She makes it a point to enter the house after proper sanitisation. 

Speaking on the challenges faced while enforcing the lockdown in Old City areas, Sharma said that people there are accustomed to stay outside their homes late till night. Although the situation is by and large under control, she spotted two youths loitering the streets and smoking cigarettes while she was night patrolling in the wee hours of Saturday. 

SI Akanksha Sharma, posted in the crime branch said, "I am deployed on duty to monitor checkposts in the city outskirts. I join duty around 10am and patrol in the checkposts to keep an eye on people coming from outside Bhopal. We have to send these people to quarantine centres and most of the time they create ruckus. I reach home around 10.30pm but have to remain active on the wireless." 

Woman constable Puja Malviya, who is posted at Govindpura police station said, "I was on Urja desk duty earlier. Since the lockdown, I have been deployed on field duty. I leave home around 10am and return around 9pm. The whole day I'm extremely busy at the checkpoints and patrol the areas." 

Speaking on the growing challenges, Malviya said, "Although my colleagues are very supportive, but we have to constantly make announcements and ask people to remain at their homes and not venture out without any valid reasons.." 

Inspector Renu Murab, who is posted at AJK police station said, "I visit various areas and distribute food packets, masks and sanitisers to the needy. Recently, we found that many migrant labourers, who are mostly daily-wagers, were finding it hard to use the public toilets as they have no money to pay for using them. It was creating a sanitation problem. I brought the issue to the knowledge of SP Sai Krishna S Thota and he resolved it . 


