Bhopalis stranded in other states count down to end of lockdown
2020-04-01
Bhopal: With the country-wide lockdown and suspension of trains, flights and inter-state buses, many Bhopalis are stranded all over the country and having a tough time fending for themselves in hostels, hotels and apartments. Komal Nagdavne, a private employee based in Mumbai, has been stuck in her apartment all by herself since March 24. With little supplies and nowhere to go, she fears what will happen to her if the lockdown extends further. “I was supposed to work from home so when I tried booking my train or flight tickets on March 21, the portals were jammed because of the rush. I could not get home and all the flights were cancelled after March 24. I only have supplies for two weeks, but I don't know what will I do if the lockdown continues after April 14. All the shops are closed and policemen are not letting people go out even to get groceries and medicines", said Komal. Snehlata Sharma Bharadwaj, mother of Ragini Gupta, a lawyer, told TOI that her daughter is stuck in her PG accommodation in Delhi and is unwell. Due to the lockdown, she is suffering all alone. “She is in a really bad state with stomachache and fever. The private hospital did not admit her and only gave her painkillers. Doctors say if her bleeding does not stop, she will not be able to have children in the future. I would have gone to Delhi and brought her back, but due to the lockdown I am not able to take care of my daughter", said Snehlata. Ragini Tiwari said her five-year-old daughter is in Raipur with her grandmother and aunt since March 12. Recently, she also had a flu, which has got her really worried. “I was out of town on an assignment when my mother-in-law had to leave for Raipur for treatment. She took my daughter. When her treatment was over and they were about to come on March 22, all trains got cancelled. Since then, my daughter and mother-in-law are at a relative's place. My daughter is suffering from cold, I just hope it is not coronavirus", she said. Saroj Kumar, a private employee based in Abu Dhabi also tried to make it home in Bhopal, but could not get flight tickets. "My wife and children are in Bhopal, while I am here at the mercy of my company. So far, we have not faced any problem, but my family is having trouble in the city as everything is shut down,", Kumar said. Himanshu Sharma, another private employee, is stuck in Goa and is living in the company-provided accommodation. "Initially it did not seem as serious, but now that everything is closed, here I am feeling lonely without my family. Though there has not been a problem of survival, the only things I am relying on is the stuff I have in store. Hope it lasts till the end of the lockdown," he said. Many other families are having to spend the lockdown time away from their loved ones as there is no means to come back. 