BHU lab to start pool testing to clear pending Covid-19 samples
2020-04-21
VARANASI: The Banaras Hindu University’s microbiology department laboratory will start pool testing of Covid-19 samples from Tuesday in view of the increasing number of pending samples reaching here from 13 districts of east UP region.


Talking to TOI on Monday, in-charge of BHU laboratory Prof Gopal Nath disclosed, “We are conducting over 350 tests every day against our capacity of 300 samples per day, for more than a week. But, the number of samples collected from all 13 districts connected with this lab is accumulating. Even after conducting tests of over 350 samples on Monday, over 400 samples are still left to be tested.”

Nath said that district magistrate Varanasi Kaushal Raj Sharma had asked him to start pool testing on the lines of Agra and other labs in the state to give early results. “In view of it we have decided to start pool testing of Covid-19 samples as it has also been approved by Indian Council of Medical Research. It will be started from Tuesday,” said Nath.

The DM said, “We asked BHU lab in-charge to start pool testing on the lines of Agra and other places in the state to clear the pending sample tests. Of over 400 samples 280 are from Varanasi only. We want early results as the number of sample will increase massively in coming three days due to large scale screening and sampling being conducted in six hot-spot areas and their buffer zones.”

With the confirmation of one more Covid-19 case in Pitarkundra locality the total number of infected people in district had reached to 15 till April 18 night. Total areas declared as hot-spots reached to six including Madanpura, Bajardiha, Lohta, Gangapur, Nakkhighat and Pitarkunda while one km area in their surrounding have been declared buffer zones. 

Population of over 13,000 in initially declared four hot-spot areas had already been screened. The DM said that the estimated population in two newly declared hot-spots and all six buffer zone is 23,000 and screening of all people in these areas are being carried out by dedicated teams. He said that 45 ward flu clinics, which were carrying out screening process in 90 wards, have been divided in six groups for screening in hot spots and buffer zones.

DM said that apart from collecting samples of symptomatic people and persons in direct or indirect contact of infected people, process of testing people randomly with rapid test kits in the same areas has also been started. 


