Bhujbal: Let’s banish virus before Ramzan
2020-04-14
Nashik: State food and civil supplies and Nashik district guardian minister Chhagan Bhujbal on Monday requested the residents of Malegaon to join hands to combat Covid-19 and get rid of the virus before Ramzan.

“Anyone who has any sign of respiratory ailment, or has cold and fever, should visit the health centres and get examined, even tested for Covid-19 if required. This will help stop the spread of the disease. I appeal to you all to come together and get rid of the infection before Ramzaan and Eid,” Bhujbal said.

Bhujbal conducted a health review meeting at the government rest house and held dialogues with all the government officials, including the elected representatives, MLA and agriculture minister Dada Bhuse, MLA Mufti Mohammad Ismail, mayor Tahera Shaikh, divisional commissioner Rajaram Mane, IG Nashik Range Cherring Dorje, collector Suraj Mandhare, superintendent of police Arti Singh, medical superintendent Kishor Dange and others.

Dada Bhuse also warned the citizens against non-cooperation. “No person is above the law. If there is a lockdown in the area, that means nobody should be moving about on the streets. The police would go to any length to ensure nobody is loitering about for fun,” Bhuse said. He said the government was procuring thermal scanners, which would be made available for Malegaon city as well.

Divisional commissioner Rajaram Mane brushed aside the misgivings about health surveys. “The surveys are for health conditions only. They have nothing to do with citizenship,” he said.

Two more test positive

Collector Suraj Mandhare pointed out that there were two more Covid-19 positive patients reported in the district. “The throat swab sample of a relative of a Covid-positive patient in Malegaon had tested positive. The the swab of a person admitted to Zakir Hussain three days ago, who hails from Sinnar, also tested positive in the Armed Forced Medical College laboratory. Both have been moved to isolation wards in sub-district hospital in Malegaon and Civil Hospital Nashik, respectively,” he said.

Pankaj Ashiya, assistant collector, who is the chief coordinator at Emergency Operation Centre, Malegaon city, said that administration would be using the services of 350 Unani doctors to treat patients with mild symptoms.

Central assistance sought

Bhujbal has sought central government’s assistance for food for the people in Maharashtra. In a video conference with cabinet minister of consumer affairs, food and public distribution Ram Vilas Paswan, Bhujbal said: “The state had sufficient food supplies for 7 crore beneficiaries of PDS for six months, but central government should support about 5 crore people across the state who do not fit in the category and their income is not enough to sustain them during the hard times.”


