Coronavirus scare: Bhutan shuts doors on foreigners, 1,200 tourists cross over to West Bengal
2020-03-07
KOLKATA/SILIGURI: Bhutan on Friday slammed its doors on foreign tourists, including Indians, to shield the Himalayan kingdom from the Covid-19 that has so far infiltrated 93 countries. Coming a day after Sikkim announced a ban on foreign tourists, including Bhutan nationals, the move has delved yet another blow to the tottering travel trade industry.


Around 150 tourists from Kolkata travel by flight daily to Bhutan. Another 350-odd enter through Phuentsholing, bordering Darjeeling. On Friday, around 1,200 tourists crossed over to Darjeeling across this border following the ban on foreigners. 

Bhutan said on Friday it had banned the entry of tourists for two weeks after it confirmed the first coronavirus case in a tourist who arrived from India. The 79-year-old American had flown in on March 2 and had thereafter tested positive for Covid-19. 

“The government will impose a two-week restriction on all incoming tourists with immediate effect,” the health ministry said in a statement on Friday morning.

However, by the time the order was made public, the Bhutan Airlines flight to Paro from Kolkata had taken off with 70 passengers. There were apprehensions that foreigners would be sent back in another flight. But the passengers were allowed in after thermal screening. 

While Bhutan Airlines is set to cancel daily flight operations, Druk Air, which also operates a daily flight, is yet to firm up its plan. A source said that while the Airbus A319 may be operated for a few days to evacuate tourists who are already in the country, it would make little sense to continue with it and Druk Air could fly the ATR that has a smaller capacity. 

Tour operators in the region have set up helpdesks and circulated emergency numbers for tourists stranded in Sikkim and Bhutan. State tourism minister Gautam Deb said the government would extend help if a tourist is stuck anywhere. “We had a word with tour operators and have instructed them to take proper care of tourists,” he said.

Himalayan Hospitality & Tourism Development general secretary Samrat Sanyal is hopeful the curbs will be lifted after a fortnight. “That will save the peak tourist season. Otherwise, there will be major cancellations,” he said.

On Friday, travel agents managed to stave off cancellation requests for holidays booked beyond two weeks. But they aren’t sure how long they can ask the customers to wait. “We are trying to tell tourists to travel within India as there are no curbs yet except for travel to Nathu La,” said Sanyal.

The peak tourist season begins in April and continues till June. 

