Big spike forces Ahmedabad into total lockdown till May 15
2020-05-07
AHMEDABAD: Desperate times call for desperate measures. The crack-team of IAS officers in-charge of Covid-control in Ahmedabad ordered a stringent lockdown in city where only milk and medicines will be sold from Thursday 6am to May 15. 

Sale of grocery, vegetables and fruits, which was allowed in lockdown 1 and 2, has also been suspended.

Soon after in-charge municipal commissioner Mukesh Kumar issued a notification, chaos broke out in most parts of the city as residents joined serpentine queues outside vegetable and grocery stores to stock up for eight days. 

The lockdown has been intensified to get a grip on the alarming Coronavirus spread in city which accounts for nearly 90% of total deaths and 77% of total Covid-19 cases recorded in Gujarat. In 24 hours ending 5pm on Wednesday, state recorded 380 positive cases and 28 deaths of the Covid-19 positive patients, taking state tally to 6,625 and death toll to 396. Ahmedabad led the tally with 291 cases and 25 deaths. 

The remainder three fatalities were recorded in Gandhinagar, Sabarkantha and Vadodara.

A notification issued by additional chief secretary Gupta, who is overseeing Covid-19 control in Ahmedabad, stated, “Suspected super spreaders like those working in shops like vegetables, fruits, grocery, provisions, supermarkets, ice-cream parlours and people engaged in home delivery of these items as well as app-based food delivery services, become a potent source of infection for many.”

There are about 2,000 suspected ‘super-spreaders’ in each zone. The civic authorities have decided to screen about 500 persons in a day in each ward and then test the suspected ones. Following the screening, health card will be provided to the suspected super-spreaders with the date of screening.

Intensifying the fight against Covid-19, a ward-wise Covid containment strategy will be prepared for all 48 wards in the city and presented in the meeting on May 7. The civic authorities have also ordered closure of all bank branches except ATMs in the red zones till further notice. 

Some 600 surveillance teams are currently engaged in Covid-19 screening and these teams would be assigned the task of distributing Covid-care kits in slums. 


