Large crowd at ‘Panguni’ fest despite Covid-19 warning
2020-03-22
MADURAI: While bigger temples have been closed as a precautionary measure against Covid-19, smaller temples managed by the HR & CE department and those in villages where thousands gather at a time are continuing to conduct their annual ‘Panguni’ festival, showing that people are still unaware of the lurking danger.


On Friday night, over 1,000 people participated in the Panguni festival of Veerakaliamman temple near Melur. The people took out a procession to the temple carrying idols in decorated palanquins. ``We are doing it for the good of the world and the health of the community,’’ said Selvam, a participant, saying that this was an annual festival that no family usually wanted to miss.

Pongal was also cooked on the premises and distributed to the people who came there. While the government’s directive to bar devotees is in place for bigger temples, the festivals in smaller temples are going to draw larger crowds. While the district administration and local body administrations are taking many steps to create awareness of hand hygiene in markets, bus stands, stations and other public places, no awareness was created at this specific temple festival.

Meanwhile, a small temple at Maravar Chavadi in Madurai conducted a ‘yaga’ seeking protection against the fast-spreading Covid-19 virus. ``A large number of people also gathered there and it was clear that they did not give much thought to social distancing while participating in this puja,’’ said Krishnan of Arapalayam. The Thayamangalam festival in Sivaganga is another temple that draws lakhs of people from various parts of the state for the Panguni festival and the culminating event is to be held on Sunday. Sivaganga district collector J Jayakanthan said that he would look into the issue.

Thousands gathered there on Saturday when a large number of goats and chickens were sacrificed. As there is a water scarcity in the temple, thousands entered the village tank simultaneously for bathing after tonsuring their heads. Though the temple is under the control of the HR & CE department, there was no effort to control the crowds on Saturday. If not closed, the temple could draw a larger crowd on Sunday during the Janta curfew and lead to the failure of the attempt to combat the deadly virus.


