Bihar reports 3 new Covid cases, total figure up to 7
2020-03-27
PATNA: Three Covid-19 positive cases, including a 12-year-old boy, were reported from Bihar on Thursday, taking the total number of cases to seven.

The state health department confirmed that the minor and a 35-year-old woman from Munger district have tested positive, while the third case, that of a 21-year-old man from Patna, was confirmed by Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences (RMRI), Patna, director Dr Pradeep Das.

All three persons who have tested positive had come in contact with the 38-year-old Munger resident who had died on Saturday and was found to be positive for Covid-19 on Sunday.

State nodal officer for Covid-19, Dr Ragini Mishra said, “The 12 year old boy, whose sample tested positive, is the deceased's nephew, while the 35-year-old woman is his neighbour.”

State health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar too confirmed the third coronavirus positive case. "He is a ward boy at a private hospital on Bypass Road in the city where the Munger deceased was taken. He has been kept in the isolation ward of NMCH. The child and the woman have been kept in Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College and Hospital in Bhagalpur," the principal secretary said.

Apart from the deceased Munger resident, two more people had tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, but sources said the samples of their close contacts have been found to be negative.

The fourth positive case of a man who had returned to Patna from Gujarat was reported on Wednesday. He is currently in the isolation ward at NMCH, which has been declared as a dedicated Covid-19 hospital in the state.

Samples of his 25 contacts have been collected and sent to RMRI, Patna. “The tests will take around eight hours for completion,” the RMRI director said on Thursday evening.

As per official data shared by the state health society on Thursday evening, a total of 469 samples have been collected, of which six have tested positive (three each from Patna and Munger) and 415 were negative. Result of 45 samples are awaited, while three got rejected.

So far, 1,456 passengers had been enrolled for observation, out of which 210 have completed their 14 days observation period.


