Biharsharif turns hotspot, under total lockdown
2020-04-23
BIHARSHARIF: The Nalanda district and police administration tightened the lockdown provisions in Biharsharif, especially Khasganj, Sheikhana and Sakunat localities, as 27 Covid-19 positive cases were reported from these areas since April 13.

These areas have been sealed and movement of residents and vehicles have been restricted. To assist with the lockdown measures, an additional superintendent of police and two deputy superintendents have been deputed in Nalanda district.

“No one is allowed to enter or exit without valid reasons. Grocery and vegetable shops are not being to open, even medicine shops are shut which is causing difficulty but it is for the good of everyone,” said Mohammad Guddu, a resident of Sheikhana over phone. A 26-year-old woman tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday from this area. Last week on Saturday and Sunday, four others had tested positive from this area.

Sonu Kumar of Sakunat said the entire locality has turned into a police camp soon after 16 positive cases were reported on Monday. “It’s a relief that policemen and other personnel deployed by the district administration have been delivering essential commodities, including food stuff here,” Kumar said.

With a new case reported on Wednesday, the number of Covid 19 cases in Biharsharif jumped to 27 and 29 across Nalanda district. Altogether 26 positive cases were contracted by a single carrier who had returned from Dubai on March 22.

The youngest person to be infected in Biharsharif is a 12-year-old boy of Sheikhana while the oldest are three 60-year-olds from Sakunat and the 60-year-old father of the carrier. The carrier is a resident of Khashanj locality who returned from Dubai on March 22. Among the 26 people he infected is his Patna based father-in-law.

At least 17 positive cases, including the Biharsharif hospital doctor who had taken the sample of the carrier, are from Sakunat in Biharsharif. Six of them are from Sheikhana, including his nephew. Three members of his family, including his father, wife and sister-in-law, were the first persons to test positive for coronavirus after him on April 14.

Nalanda district public relation officer Ravindra Kumar said samples of 1,554 people were sent for covid 19 test to Patna laboratory out of which 1,217 reports came negative, 28 reports were positive and rest 337 reports are awaited.

Meanwhile, police on Wednesday arrested Biharsharif sadar hospital data entry operator Shashikant Kumar, who allegedly disclosed the names of Covid-19 positive patients of Nalanda in his Facebook post.


