Coronavirus scare: Bihar government orders alternate duty roster for Class C, D staff
2020-03-15
PATNA: The state government has come up with an alternate duty plan for Group C and D staff—two of the largest groups of employees—in all its offices to avoid mass gathering as a precautionary measure against the global Covid-19 outbreak.


The order issued late on Friday stipulates the presence of only 50% employees in office on alternate work day basis, which draws on the principle that lesser the number of people, lesser the chances of infection spreading via physical contact.

“Adhering to the general advisory regarding Covid-19 to prevent mass gathering, the general administration department issued an order on Friday evening regarding alternate duty of Class C and D workers of the state government. All department heads, except health department, have been issued instructions to form rosters for this purpose and execute the practice on immediate basis,” chief secretary Deepak Kumar told TOI on Saturday.

The chief secretary added, “Officials will continue to report as usual and deliberations on any restriction for workplaces of private firms and commercial places will be held in a meeting slated to be held on Monday under the chairmanship of chief minister Nitish Kumar.”

Apart from this innovative step, the state government has suspended all passenger movement through the integrated check post on the India-Nepal border at Raxaul in East Champaran from Saturday midnight. Only exception is outward movement of Nepalese and Bhutanese national.

A formal office memorandum in this regard was issued by the immigration section of foreigners division of ministry of home affairs on Friday. The order states that there will be intensified health inspections at all entry points and any traveller whether Indian or Nepalese or Bhutanese or any other country showing history of travel to Covid-19 outbreak countries namely Italy, China, Spain, France, Germany and Republic or Korea shall be subjected to quarantine in the appropriate facility of state or central government.

Kumar Pankaj, incharge of immigration at Raxaul said the last foreign national allowed to cross the border was a Russian, who was allowed to enter India around 6pm on Friday after thorough screening for Covid-19.

Adhering to restriction on passenger movement on the India-Nepal border, Bihar State Road Transport Corporation has also suspended the operation of its six air-conditioned buses from Patna and Gaya to Janakpur and Kathmandu in Nepal from Sunday ill March 31.

“We will also thoroughly sanitise all inter-district and inter-city buses being run by BSRTC to prevent spread of Covid-19 as per the government advisory,” said Sanjay Kumar Agarwal, secretary, transport department.

Health department officials claimed that over 1.42 lakh passengers have been screened at transit points in the state to date. Altogether 19,105 people have been screened at Patna and Gaya airports for symptoms of Covid-19. State officials also said as many as 274 passengers, who have returned from Covid-19-affected countries since January 15, have been kept in home isolation, out of which 84 people have completed their 14-day quarantine. 

