Bihar govt to follow Centre’s ‘Unlock 1.0’ norms
2020-05-31
PATNA: The Bihar government is likely to follow most of the “Unlock 1.0” guidelines issued by the Centre on Saturday evening, allowing continued restrictions in containment zones till June 30 with a slew of relaxations in other areas.

Additional chief secretary (home) Amir Subhani said Bihar will follow the relaxation guidelines issued by the ministry of home affairs (MHA).

“It is mentioned in the guidelines that religious places, malls, hotels, restaurants and hospitality services would resume from June 8. For relaxation of these services outside the containment zone, the state will follow the standard operating procedure, which would be issued by the ministry of health and family welfare,” Subhani said.

Welcoming the Centre’s directive, deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi told TOI that the state government may come up with its own guidelines in line with the MHA orders.

JD(U) functionaries also welcomed Unlock 1.0. “We welcome Centre’s decision as it is aimed at bringing the country back on track. The decisions were taken after feedback from the states, hence Bihar government will ensure its strict implementation,” JD (U) spokesperson Rajeev Ranjan Prasad said.

Sources said most DMs in the video-conferencing with CM NItish Kumar on Friday had unanimously backed extension of lockdown till June 15 along with several relaxations, including opening up of block headquarters and allowing intra-state movement of buses as regular movement of trains is also slated to start from June 1. They were also in favour of allowing schools to open from July 1 and religious, cultural and social gatherings to be prohibited till at least June 15 and night curfew from 9pm.

However, there were mixed reactions from residents and experts from the city. “The fourth phase of lockdown already allowed several economic activities. With the new guidelines, people will get more freedom to move around, which will only result in an increase in Covid cases,” said Pritee Prasad, a Kadamkuan resident.

Indian Medical Association secretary Sunil Kumar too echoed a similar sentiment. “With relaxations in almost every activity, the government has itself invited threat for people. The rate at which the pandemic has spread in Bihar in the past 10 days following some relaxations shows allowing more activities will only lead to more trouble,” Kumar said.

Industries bodies, however, said the new guidelines will help in improving the state’s economy. Bihar Industries Association’s Subodh K Goel said this is a welcome step. “It’s high time that we started adapting to living with Covid-19 as a new normal. Giving relaxations to economic activities will help ease the falling economy of not just the state but the entire country,” Goel said.

Kishore Kunal, secretary of Mahavir Mandir, is grateful to the government for allowing religious activities. “We have a plan in place to restrict the number of visitors. An alphabetical system for devotees will be introduced if the temple reopens,” he said.


