Coronavirus scare: ‘Bihar government watchful, no need to panic’
2020-03-15
PATNA: Chief secretary Deepak Kumar talks to TOI’s Piyush Tripathi regarding various steps being taken by the government to prevent spread of coronavirus in the state. Excerpts:



Is the government thinking about invoking Section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 in the state?

Several important decisions were taken at a high level meeting chaired by CM Nitish Kumar on Friday to prevent spread of coronavirus in the state. The government is watchful and deliberations will be held on more measures required to be taken at another important meeting to be held on Monday.


What about screening of people coming to Bihar via India-Nepal border?
We have reviewed measures adopted at check posts at Nepal border. The review meeting was participated by senior officials of districts concerned and those from Sashastra Seema Bal. People are being screened at the integrated check post (ICP) and 49 other check posts at the border. Thermal scanners have also been installed at Raxaul ICP.


What measures are being taken to ensure that people in home quarantine adhere to the medical norms for prevention of the virus?
As there has been no positive case of Covid-19 in Bihar so far, we are not thinking about home isolation right now. Nevertheless, all required steps are being taken to spread awareness about advisory issued by the government for common people related to prevention of coronavirus.


Is shortage of doctors a challenge?
We cannot increase the number of doctors overnight. However, if situation demands, the state government will take help from all sources, including private and Army doctors.


Masks and sanitizers are readily not available in the state
The government has already clarified that face masks are required only for people showing symptoms of Covid-19 or even other influenza and viral diseases. However, the government will ensure availability of sufficient quantity of masks. 


Are suspected people being screened at bus stands and railway stations?
Screening of all passengers coming out of trains and buses is not possible. Nevertheless, we are taking all necessary steps to tackle any exigency.


Is the Centre supporting the state in tackling the situation?
The Centre has been fully supportive in providing all kinds of assistance. Interactions are being held regularly with officials in New Delhi through videoconferencing.

