Coronavirus outbreak: Bihar reports two more cases, tally rises to 24
2020-04-02
PATNA/BIHARSHARIF: A 35- year- old man from Nalanda and a 40 year old woman from Gaya—both with travel history to the UAE—tested positive on Wednesday, taking the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases to 24. The two had recently returned from Abu Dhabi and Dubai respectively.


In the past 48 hours, eight people, who recently returned from foreign countries, have tested positive in the state. Four of them from Siwan and one each from Gopalganj, Begusarai, Nalanda and Gaya. The last two being the latest ones to test positive for the virus.

The Begusarai case was reported late on Tuesday night. The 24-year-old man had recently returned from Dubai. Begusarai DM Arvind Kumar Verma said 19 samples of foreign returned people were collected for test and one came back positive. “This person was asymptomatic,” Verma said.

He added, “Now nineteen people of his family have been quarantined and their samples will be tested. We have started disinfection work around his home. Health workers are screening everyone in his neighbourhood."

The spurt in cases of people with travel history to foreign countries could be attributed to the state health department’s directive issued last Sunday to test all persons, who had recently arrived from foreign countries, irrespective of symptoms. “Around 1,600 samples of people, who have returned from foreign countries, have been collected for testing so far,” chief secretary Deepak Kumar said on Wednesday.

When asked about the 17 Kyrgyzstan nationals, who were earlier picked up from Kurji locality in Patna and subsequently quarantined in two mosques at Samanpura and Phulwarisharif on March 23, Subhani said, “We have to verify it.”

Sources said while some of them were staying in a flat at Samanpura near Raza Bazar, others were living in a mosque at Phulwarisharif. The state health department officials had collected samples of altogether 17 religious preachers in the aftermath of Nizamuddin incident.

DGP Gupteshwar Pandey said 37 out of the 86 people listed have been traced. Of them, 10 belonged to Madhubani, one to Sitamarhi and four each to East Champaran and West Champaran district, respectively. Altogether nine people from Gaya had visited the Delhi Markaz and three of them returned on March 11. Six were still in Delhi. Pandey said the Anti-terrorism squad (ATS) and the district police personnel have been roped in to trace the foreign nationals staying in Bihar and visiting one district after another. 

State health department wrote a letter to civil surgeons of all the district with names and contact numbers of the 86 people and asked to get all of them quarantined and collect their samples for test. 

Madhubani district administration has identified seven persons who participated in the Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi and came back on March 30. They were identified as Md Sahid of village Jamsam, Md Israfil and Md Jainul Haq of Jamsam under Pandaul block, Abdul Jaleel and Md Yunus of village Tirhuta under Baboobarhi block, Md Sadiq of village Ghormohna under Laukha block and Md Nazir of village Dostpur under Khajauli block. 

Meanwhile, seven people, who had visited the Delhi Markaz, had gone missing from Katihar. A senior official of the home department said the special branch has been asked to cooperate in tracing them at the earliest.

