Bihar: Two migrant workers coming from Maharashtra test Covid-19 positive
2020-05-11
GAYA: Two migrant workers have tested Covid-19 positive on Sunday afternoon. Both of them, residents of Barchatti block area of Gaya district, are presently lodged in a local quarantine centre. The two workers, tailor by profession, returned from Maharashtra to Patna on 7th May. 

The duo were promptly shifted to the isolation facility at Imperial Hotel in Bodh Gaya. With this, the total number of Covid-19 positive cases in the district has gone up to eight. 

All the six cases detected earlier in the district have recovered and there are only two active cases in the district. The test result of migrant workers has caused anxiety in the administrative circle. Apprehension for such an outcome was always there, said an official.

Confirming the Covid-19 positive cases, district magistrate Abhishek Singh said that health parameters of the workers were fine and both of them are asymptomatic. The DM said that Hotel Imperial is the designated place for asymptomatic Covid-19 positive cases. 

Earlier, such cases were referred for level two facility to Anugrah Narain Magadh Medical College Hospital. The two tested positive during random test. When asked about the testing criteria, the DM said that symptomatic cases are subjected to virological test besides random testing for statistical analysis.

As per the changed management protocol, only symptomatic cases are referred to the Covid-19 special hospital. The ANMMCH has been notified as the treatment centre for Covid-19 patients for seven south Bihar districts of the state, including five districts of Magadh division, Rohtas and Kaimur districts.

Meanwhile, all eyes are now fixed on the weekly review of the Covid-19 status of the district. The review by the Union home ministry is due on Monday. Earlier, much to the disappointment of Gaya residents, the district with just one active case was put in the red zone, thereby, causing avoidable inconvenience to the nearly 50 lakh strong population of the district. The red zone tag came for wide criticism from business organisations, political parties, IMA and the general public. 

Hope that the red tag is removed during the review of the Covid-19 status, said former president of the Central Bihar Chamber of Commerce DK Jain.


