Birders to take up isolation as ‘Lockdown Bird Challenge’
2020-03-28
Nagpur: With the country under Covid-19 lockdown, eBird, an online database of bird observations, has turned the compulsory quarantine into a positive contribution by organizing ‘Lockdown Birding Challenge’ by recording birds around homes.

The challenge begins from March 27 till the lockdown ends. Birders in the region are excited to be part of the event.

The count will be related to information about bird species sighted near homes, habitat and their behaviour. There may be several species that must not have been recorded before. Birders will record species by standing exactly 15 minutes at the same place in four slots every day.

At your home, from Friday until the lockdown ends, we need to look for birds in the time slots every day from 4am to 6am (optional), 6am to 9am, 4pm to 7pm and 7pm to 10pm (optional).

“The purpose of the pre-dawn and the night lists are to document early-rising birds and nocturnal species, respectively,” says Sarang Pimparkar, a city birdwatcher from Pannase Layout, who is excited about the event.

The complete lists with identity of birds have to be uploaded to the eBird platform (ebird.org/india). As with our other birding challenges, all those who manage to meet the target will be named on this website, and one among them will be chosen at random to receive a small gift in appreciation.

“The relative lack of noise is a good opportunity to try out some bird sound recordings using your smartphone. Alternatively, we will be able to record videos on our camera,” says Azra Taiyeb, who runs a school in Yavatmal and is into birding for past several years.

“We have sprawling residential premises with different tree species. Many birds are spotted on our premises and I maintain a diary about it. The lockdown challenge will help me upgrade my birding skills,” Taiyeb added.

“Due to road development, many trees have been cut in the last few months. I’m witnessing lot of bird activity at my place since then,” she said.

Ashwin Gharote, a birder from Sonegaon, said, “I will conduct the survey from my balcony. Due to the lockdown, people are not going for birding and this is the best way to record them. I will also record their calls.”

“If flocks of birds flying towards their roosting sites in the evening are seen, then this will be marked as ‘Flyover’. We also have to mention the direction of birds’ flight and those feeding on a flowering or fruiting tree nearby,” says Omkar Kekre, a birder from Ramdaspeth.

Kekre said, “Our house is old and has trees on the premises. This makes it a good habitat for house sparrows besides birds like robin and red vented bulbul. Many of our resident birds have already started their breeding activities.”

By gathering and storing bird sightings, eBird enables the gathering of baseline data on bird distribution and abundance, and disseminates this information for public and scientific use.

“Birders use eBird to upload and maintain their bird records. For each bird list, details of date and location are given, and ideally the ‘effort’ spent birding. Bird lists are useful to understand the distribution and seasonality of birds,” says bird expert Nitin Marathe.


