Birds come out chirping in lockdown silence
2020-03-28
Bhopal: “Three different birds wake me up every day. I am not skilled enough to identify them, but this new morning routine filled with the chirping of birds is absolutely delightful,” says Nirali Singh, a resident of Kolar.

With humans cooped inside amid the lockdown, the stillness on the streets is encouraging birds to step outside.

“There is a fallow patch of land next to our apartment building and I never noticed that there are atleast eight different types of birds there. I am trying to look them up on the internet to identify them. Bird watching is very therapeutic, especially in a time like this I think we all need it,” said Singh.

“You can hear so many different birds now. A ‘kee-kee’ here a ‘tch-tch-tch-tch-tch’ there. I do not know whether it is because the number of birds have increased or is it because we are noticing them more,” says Rita Shrivastav, a resident of Bagmugalia and an amateur birder.

“Birds have always been around. Because of the drop in noise levels, we can hear them more. On an average, we can spot 25-30 species of birds from out home only. Especially now that they are stepping out more,” says Mohammed Khalique of Bhopal Birds.

“Every where in social media, people are posting how birds are more visible and more active right now. Even the common birds can be seen playing about, their activity has increased,” said Shomi Gupta, a bird enthusiast.

“There are some birds which are shy and even when around us hide in bushes or leafy tree. But, now as there are no vehicles moving or people walking about, they do not mind coming out. Bagmugalia earlier had a lot of trees, but now a lot of houses and apartment complexes have come up. This is birds’ natural environment, now that we are inside, they are coming out again. This is the case in other locations as well. Nature resets itself when left untouched,” said Shrivastava.

Many ‘balcony birders’ of Bhopal have spotted common birds like house sparrow, common myna, red-vented bulbul, Asian koel, laughing dove, can be seen in groups of twos and threes hopping about. Other local species like black drongo, ashy prinia, purple sunbird can also be spotted from your balcony or backyard.

Pradeep Ghosh, a resident of Shakti Nagar, spotted a family of peacocks. “A few days ago, we heard a very different sound in the morning and we went to our backyard to check. There is a green belt of BHEL behind our house and there we spotted two peacocks and three peahens. They were there until afternoon. I have lived in this house for 40 years and have never seen this. It was amazing.”

This is also the spring season. Flowering trees in Bhopal like — jacaranda, mango tree, cassia, semal, jarul attract birds, specially song birds, said the expert.

“To encourage more people to start bird watching and also find a new hobby during the lockdown, we have asked residents to send us photos and videos of the birds and their calls that they can spot from the comfort of their homes. We are calling this the home bird count. Through this, families can come together and participate in this activity and also connect with nature while staying safe in their homes,” added Khalique.

Birders’ delight

Some local species of birds, you can spot from your balcony include sparrow, myna, red vented bulbul, laughing dove, spotted dove, collared dove, babbler, ashy prinia, purple sunbird, yellow sunbird, rose-ringed parakeet, Asian koel, hornbill, black drongo, magpie, red-wattled lapwing

Best Time: 7am-9am and 4pm-6pm


