Bird watchers take flight during lockdown
2020-04-04
Kochi: Even as they languish in lockdown, birders have found a way to keep themselves entertained and engaged. Birdwatching enthusiasts in Kerala have kicked off a challenge asking birders to upload information on avian population in their neighbourhoods.

“We have decided to use this lockdown period to our advantage. Since people are staying at home, we have developed a protocol to upload information directly on to the e-bird India website,” said Vishnu Priyan, one of the coordinators of Kerala Bird Count, which is organizing the birding challenge in association with Cornell Lab of Ornithology.

He said the aim is to encourage people explore their surroundings and record the birds seen near their homes.

“Do you see species you haven’t recorded before? Which are the species that are found in your city? What is the behaviour of the birds you see,” these are some of the questions the birders can ask themselves and they can upload the relevant information on to the website.

The challenge was announced on March 27 and is expected to continue till the end of the lockdown. Bird enthusiasts have been asked to ‘look for birds for exactly 15 minutes, standing at the same spot (i.e ‘stationary protocol’) at fixed time slots every day (as in, early morning hours from 4-6am (optional) as well as 6-9 am, 4-7pm and 7-10pm (optional)

“The purpose of watching them during pre-dawn hours and at night is to document early-rising birds and nocturnal species,” Vishnu said.

Among the other instructions are that if one sees flocks of birds flying over (for example, towards their roosting sites in the evening) they need to mention the direction of flight in the comments.

If they see birds feeding on a flowering or fruit tree nearby, the birders have to mention it also (including the species of the tree) in the comments.

The relative lack of noise is a good opportunity to try recording some bird sound using a smartphone. Alternatively, one can record videos on camera and then send the audio separately.

“Many of the resident birds have already started their breeding activities. Also, this will be the first time that we could probably get some information on night birds, especially in urban areas, as there is a dip in noise pollution in the cities. We will get to note if the lockdown is encouraging birds to be more relaxed and free, Vishnu said.

Among the recognitions promised are that all those who manage to meet the specified targets will be named on this website, and one among them will be chosen at random to receive a small gift in appreciation.


