Birlas donate Rs 500 crore to fight virus
2020-04-04
Mumbai: Aditya Birla Group has contributed Rs 500 crore towards Covid-19 relief measures, of which Rs 400 crore will be towards the PM CARES Fund. SBI also said it will donate Rs 100 crore to the PM’s fund. The bank’s employees will contribute two days’ salary. 

Of the balance of the Birla group’s relief initiative, a grant of Rs 50 crore has been made to Ficci-Aditya Birla CSR Centre for Excellence, while another Rs 50 crore is going towards supply of 1 million N95 masks, 2.8 lakh personal protective equipment (PPE) as well as ventilators.

Rajashree Birla, chairperson of the Aditya Birla Centre for Community Initiatives and Rural Development, said, “Given the severity of the disruption, there is a compelling need for a multi-pronged response that includes financial and material support, healthcare assistance and community responsibility.”

Crop protection products manufacturer UPL too has pledged Rs 75 crore to the PM CARES Fund, in addition to providing PPE units to help with the safety of the frontline healthcare and sanitisation personnel. UPL said it is also supplementing the government efforts by engaging 200 modern mechanical spraying machines (Falcons) and 225 staff members to assist local administrations in spraying disinfectant at various public and private spaces like hospitals, streets, police stations and railway stations. Employees of defence PSU Bharat Electronics (BEL) have contributed one day’s salary amounting to Rs 2.7 crore to the PM’s fund. The company itself has contributed Rs 10 crore. Siemens India has committed Rs 20 crore towards providing critical medical care equipment such as ventilators & analysers to several healthcare facilities across India, and 40,000 PCR test kits to be delivered to Indian Council of Medical Research. The money will also be used to set up a test lab at the National Cancer Institute in Jhajjar, Haryana, which is converting an 800-bed hospital into a Covid-19 critical care centre, create isolation units at select Siemens’ facilities, and support migrant and temporary workers.

Palo Alto Networks CEO Nikesh Arora tweeted about setting up a Covid relief fund. He said the company’s management and board would contribute $4 million. He also said the company would give four times the amount employees contribute. “Foregoing salary to contribute,” he tweeted.

Aditya Birla Group said, given that Covid-19 presents an unprecedented challenge to the nation, this crisis calls for an even stronger and concerted action from corporate citizens to join the national effort and help the government in the fight against the pandemic. The group is also activating a 100-bed Covid-19 facility at Seven Hills Hospital in Mumbai, in partnership with BMC. This initiative is being spearheaded by Neerja Birla. It has also earmarked more than 200 beds for Covid-19 patients across locations including Ujjain, Pune, Hazaribagh, Rayagada, Solapur and Kharach.

The group has also commenced production of 1 million triple-layer surgical masks and 1 lakh coverall garments with the support of the textiles ministry. Besides, it is involved in community and self-help groups in home production of lakhs of masks across several locations.

UPL said it has kept on standby the premises of its educational institutions like Gyan Dham School and Sandra Shroff Rofel College of Nursing, in Vapi, with necessary arrangements to operate them as quarantine centres when required.


