Covid-19: Births and deaths registry faces deluge of applications
2020-06-10
AHMEDABAD: The civic body’s births and deaths registry is staring at a deluge of applications for death certificates, mainly from families in Covid-19 containment areas, after movement restrictions are eased.


 These applications will be well past the mandatory 21-day period within which a family has to apply for a death certificate. Civic officials now claim that families of those who died 30 days ago, will now have to file affidavits about the delay, which will mean extra costs. 

Owing to the lockdown and movement restrictions within containment areas since March 23, many families of Covid-19 victims have not been able to approach civic centres or the department. What has compounded the worries of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) is that a large number of victims are the elderly, most of whose birth records are in tatters or are missing from the central registry at the Danapith office. 

“Usually the registry is staffed to solve 20-odd queries a day but it will now see hundreds and even a couple of thousands of applications with mounting deaths,” said a senior AMC official. He added that the state government may have to ease the 30-day window for filing for applications. 

On the complexity of municipal record keeping, the AMC official said, “Ward boundaries have changed with each election delimitation, which is at the core of this complexity.” For instance, prior to 1953, the registers for Dariapur and Madhupura were one, then in the 1960s they were separated and later a new ward, Kazipur-Dariapur, came into existence. Many of the records from between 1932 and 1979, which are stacked together are in tatters, with pieces of paper strewn on the department’s floor, as they are repeatedly pulled out for verification purposes. The official explained that panchayat records of newly inducted areas such as Vastrapur, Jodhpur, Bodakdev, Mithakali, Sola and others have made ample mistakes in surnames and parents’ names. 

