Biryani, rosogollas and phuchkas rule lockdown kitchens
2020-04-22
 
Nothing can keep Kolkatans away from biryani, phuchka and rosogollas. Not even a nation-wide lockdown. As they don’t have access to restaurants and the para phuchkawallas, they are making their own.
Going by trends visible on a few city-based social media food groups, the lockdown has led to a nearly 50% rise in posts by members. And among these, the chart-toppers are biryani and rosogolla, followed closely by phuchkas. “We usually filter posts to keep the group interesting. Posts with good photographs or videos get more preference. Since all posts are moderated, we know the exact number of people posting on the group,” said Avinav Saha, the creator of the group, Soulful Appetite, which has 7,000 followers. The same process is followed by more popular groups like Foodzpah (357K followers), Calcutta Foodies Club (227K followers) and Bhoj Adda (140K followers).
Shahbaaz Zaman, the creator of Foodzpah, said they have been receiving between 500 and 600 posts every day during the lockdown. Of these, 10% are on homemade biryani and phuchkas and 9% on rosogollas. “Even after moderation, we post two-three biryani and phuchka updates every day,” he said. Biswajit Bhattacharjee, the creator and admin on Bhoj Adda, said he comes across about 20% posts on biryani and phuchkas, along with quite a few on gulab jamun. Chandan Gupta, an admin of Calcutta Foodies Club said out of their regular 900 odd posts, 10% to 15% are related to biryani, phuchka and rosogolla. 
Anushmita Ghosh, who recently made biryani at home and posted it on a group, said she had been planning to do it for months now. “The lockdown gave me the time to finally do it. It was a confidence booster because so many people praised me on the group,” she said. On the other hand, Anneha Sarkar recently made phuchka. “I was missing it for nearly a month now, so finally went ahead and made it at home,” she told us.
And the trend doesn’t end there. Many members are experimenting big time with the recipes, microwave and prawn biryani and phuchka shots being a few of these. “Since they are making these dishes for family members, they are not afraid to experiment,” Avinav said. To this Chandan added, "People are trying to make something different with regular food items. That's a very positive thing.”
