Bithri CHC becomes level 1 isolation ward, govt building & hotel converted into quarantine centres
2020-03-28
Bareilly: With the cases of novel coronavirus increasing across the country, the local health department has started expanding the isolation and quarantine wards across Bareilly district. 

The community health centre in Bithri Chainpur has been made an isolation ward, while a block meeting hall and a hotel near the CHC has been converted into a quarantine centre. Besides, the health department has reserved beds at three private medical colleges for both isolation and quarantine. 

Additional director (health), Bareilly division, Dr Rakesh Dubey said, “The state government has directed us to create isolation and quarantine wards at level 1 and 2. We have set up a 30-bed isolation ward at the CHC in Bithri for level 1 and the block meeting hall and a private hotel in the area have been converted into mass quarantine centres. For level 2, we have reserved beds at three private medical colleges in Bareilly.” 

“Although Bareilly district has not reported a covid-19 positive case, so far, we are expanding the isolation and quarantine wards as we don’t know how many wards we will require in the future. We are planning to use the CHC in Kyara, too, for the purpose.” 

Apart from the CHC in Bithri Chainpur, two isolation wards of 10 beds each have been set up at the district hospital. According to officials, a total of 500 beds have been reserved at the three private medical colleges for isolating suspected cases, while quarantine wards with 980 additional beds have also been set up at these colleges. Besides, another 100-bed quarantine ward is almost ready at the building of new government hospital in Khuram Gotiya locality. 

Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “Apart from the district hospital, the samples of suspected covid-19 cases can be collected at the private medical colleges. We will send those samples, along with the samples that we collected, to Lucknow for testing.” 


