Biz buzz should start in lockdown 4.0: CM
2020-05-13
Bhopal: Dropping a hint on how lockdown 4.0 would be, chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan stressed that while continued efforts must be made to break the chain of corona infection and treat the affected patients, economic activities must kick-start to bring normalcy in people’s lives.

Reviewing the Covid situation in the state on Tuesday, Chouhan said the state governments have been asked by the Union government to prepare an outline for the next lockdown by May 15. The states should themselves decide on the measures needed as per local needs.

Chouhan said according to our planning, lockdown will be maintained to prevent corona infection, but in a different form. “We would like to continue with the night curfew. All normal activities must be allowed in the green zones,” he said.

Similarly, in red zone economic activities can continue except in the infected areas and buffer zone. He said that nobody will sleep empty stomach and move on foot to reach home in the state. Stating that the work of repatriating migrant labourers to the state is in full swing. As many as 31 trains carrying labourers have reached the state while nine trains will arrive on Tuesday. More trains would ferry the stranded workers. “We have made arrangements in the state that no labourer sleeps empty stomach and move on foot to reach his/her destination. Labourers of other states are being dropped at the state border by buses. For this, buses have been put in service,” he said. 

The chief minister said that the state has made vast changes in the labour laws keeping in view the interests of labourers and have given various facilities to the industries. Now, instead of different types of registers, factories will get facility to keep one register, file one return and facility of single window. These reforms will help in attracting industries in Madhya Pradesh. He said that the number of active patients of corona in the state is continuously declining. Patients in great number are making recovery and going home than the number of positive patients being found in the state.

The number of active patients in the state is between 1700 and 1800. Arrangement of 35 thousand beds has been made in Covid hospitals of the state, which is being increased to 85,000. The situation is under control, he added.


