‘Business claims due to virus unlikely’
2020-03-26
MUMBAI: The Indian insurance industry’s exposure to coronavirus claims is limited to event and regular coverage under health policies, according to chairman of the General Insurance Corporation (GIC Re), the national reinsurer.


Speaking to TOI, GIC Re chairman Devesh Srivastava said that despite the crisis, claims from businesses are unlikely. “Business interruption covers are bought by all corporates. But these policies will not be triggered as most of them come into force only if there is property damage,” said Srivastava. GIC Re provides reinsurance cover to Indian and multinational companies who want to pass on some of their risks to a large organisation.

The airline industry, despite major losses, is also not protected by an insurance cover. “For airlines, this is like the Icelandic volcano eruption in 2010 when most flights from Europe and America were grounded, yet no insurance claims were payable,” he said. Most insurance companies may have to refund some of the premium they collected.

Globally too, corporates are unlikely to claim under their insurance policies for coronavirus-related losses, except in the case of event insurance. “The biggest event globally is the Tokyo Olympics where fortunately we have zero exposure,” said Srivastava.

GIC does have a large exposure to the Indian Premier League (IPL) telecasts. “The event has been called off by BCCI. But if it is rescheduled, the exposure will be taken care of,” said Srivastava. “Our maximum exposure to other events is Rs 35-50 crore in film insurance. The claims will happen in the worst-case situation,” he said. 

While GIC does have exposure to domestic insurers’ books, which includes mediclaim, this is largely on account of obligatory cessions, under which insurers pass on 5% of their risks and premium to the national reinsurer. 

The crisis has led to an increase in the number of people buying health insurance. Srivastava said that the corporation’s capacity to provide cover has not shrunk despite the crash in the markets as in India appreciation in investments is not recognised. As a result, most of the investments are at book value and there is no provision to be made.


