Biz bodies adopt local mkts in Covid fight
2020-04-28
Kolkata: Following request from chief minister Mamata Banerjee to adopt local markets for implementing hygienic practices to combat the Covid-19 pandemic, leading business chambers and industry bodies have started sanitisation drive in over a dozen markets across the city. 

The Bengal Chamber of Commerce & Industry (BCC&I) has adopted Bansdroni Bazar, in addition to Jodhpur Park Market and Gariahat, for sanitization. The chamber representatives Deb A Mukherjee, president-designate, Subhodip Ghosh, director-general, and Smarajit Purkayastha, deputy director general handed over thermal gun, gloves, masks and sanitisers to the chairperson of the Bansdroni Bazar Committee last week. Earlier, on April 14 and 15, the chamber had distributed 35 litres sanitisers; 11 kg detergents, 2,000 pieces of reusable masks; 1,400 pairs of gloves to Gariahat and Jodhpur Park Bazar Samity.

The Bharat Chamber of Commerce has taken over Park Circus, Phool Bagan-VIP Market and Salt Lake CK Market for proper sanitisation awareness campaign. “All markets have been sanitised and masks and hand sanitisers were distributed to more than 500 hundred shopkeepers through the respective market management. Besides, West Bengal Hosiery Association, an affiliated body of Bharat Chamber, distributed more than 12,000 masks and 100 litres sanitisers to other markets, including Jadu Bazar, Entally Market, Shyambazar Market, Ashubabur Bazar, Charles Atten Market, Lake Market, Bansdroni Market, Behala Bajar,” the chamber added.

The CII has adopted the responsibility for sanitizing the New Alipore Market (NAM), Kolkata. A spokesperson of the apex body said that CII has distributed 400 pcs of 3 ply mask, 15 litres of sanitiser, 90 litres liquid handwash and 200 pair of gloves among 200 stall owners at New Alipore Market in the presence Mehul Mohanka, chairman, CII West Bengal State Council.

EEPC India has taken over the sanitisation project of Hazra Market in Kolkata while the Merhant’s Chamber of Commerce initiated hygiene drive in College Street Market and Ramlal Bazaar. “We are distributing thermal guns, mask, sanitizers in these markets,” said S Roy, deputy director general of MCCI. 

The president of Indian Chamber of Commerce and chairman of Keventer Group had adopted Lake Market and Nilganj market in Barasat. 


