Bizmen take precautions to check Covid spread among workers
2020-06-12
Ludhiana: After sudden spurt in the cases of Covid-19 after lifting of restrictions, fear has gripped city businessmen as they are worried about the probability of an outbreak of the disease among workers and other personnel coming to their factories.

According to businessmen, they have made proper arrangements about hygiene and safety measures in the wake of Covid-19 inside their factories but still there is constant fear of workers and other persons getting affected with the coronavirus at other places and later spreading the virus to other persons in their factories. Considering the situation, the businessmen are taking up different ways to ensure safety of their workers outside their workplace as well like getting their living places disinfected regularly, giving them free sanitisers and masks and other related things as well.

Jaswinder Thukral, president of Janta Nagar Small Scale Manufacturers Association, said, “As far as our factories are concerned we have made complete arrangements to fight coronavirus as we have taken all required steps, be it social distancing, keeping the premises clean and disinfected, not allowing entry of anyone without mask and without checking body temperature inside the factories. But as we cannot be sure whether the conditions are same at the homes of the workers, we decided to take matters into our own hands and we have regularly started getting their accommodations disinfected regularly at our own cost. Along with this, we are providing them free supplies of masks, sanitisers, soaps for use at their homes. Through this we can at least try and keep our workforce safe for their and our own betterment.”

According to Narinder Bhamra, president of Fastener Manufacturers Association of India, “In order to ensure the safety of our workers we are already providing free lodging facility to our workers inside our factory, where they are even being provided hygienic meals, which are cooked inside the factory. In addition to this, some of our members have also started the facility of free health check of our workers on regular intervals to rule out any infection. As far as visitors are concerned we have earmarked a proper area beyond which they cannot go anywhere else in our factory and without following proper safety procedure like using hand sanitiser, using mask or face shield we are not allowing anyone to enter our premises.”

Shammi Ahuja, a nut bolt manufacturer from Shimlapuri, said, “We can very much guarantee about the conditions inside our factories but we are unsure about the conditions of our workers after they exit our factories. Therefore, in order to ensure that they do not catch this deadly infection we have made arrangements of home delivery of groceries and any kind of essentials they want. Moreover, we have also deputed one person, who on workers’ behalf goes to deposit money into their family members accounts or gets mobile recharges or other tasks done.”


