Bizman, who returned from Delhi, is city’s 5th Covid-19 +ve case
2020-03-27
Nagpur: While the first Covid-19 patient of Central India recovered and was discharged from IGGMCH on Thursday, a city-based businessman tested positive and was admitted in the isolation ward of the same hospital.

The new case is the fifth positive patient in Nagpur city and eighth in Vidarbha so far. The businessman has no travel history to foreign country, neither was he in close contact with any positive patients, or travelled by flight. The person had travelled to New Delhi and returned by train recently.

Government authorities remained tight-lipped and refused to comment if this could be a case of local transmission. But the way NMC sprang into action and started survey of the entire locality of the patient shows that the administration has taken this case very seriously. Moreover, the patient has diabetes and high blood pressure, which increases his risk.

NMC zonal medical officer Dr Sunil Kamble claimed that the case came out due to NMC’s door-to-door containment drive. “Our door-to-door survey team visited the house of this person on Monday, and learnt he had high fever. Our team asked him to go to IGGMCH and get himself tested. This prompted the person to go for a check-up,” he said.

The patient runs a famous shoe shop adjacent to the residence of a former minister at Khamla. He and his manager, both from the same community, went to New Delhi by Tamil Nadu Express on March 16. They reached Delhi the next morning, and freshened at the station itself.

They went to Karol Bagh in Delhi and purchased materials for their shop. They did not stay in Delhi, and started back the same day by the Telangana Express, and reached the city on March 18.

One of the patient’s relatives, a former corporator, told TOI, “He and his manager had no health problems on March 18. The person has diabetes and high blood pressure. He and his manager went to their shop as usual till March 21,” he said.

The shop was closed for janata curfew on March 22, and the same day the patient started experiencing health problems. Since then, he did not go to the shop and the manager along with two more staffers managed the shop. He visited a nearby doctor and took treatment.

“After NMC staffers told him to visit IGGMCH, he called me in panic on March 25. I asked him to go with his entire family to Mayo Hospital and get checked so that he has no confusion or fear. He along with his mother, wife, son and daughter went to Mayo Hospital. After taking samples, he was asked to stay there while the others returned home. Today, doctors said he was positive for Covid-19,” the senior corporator said.

Immediately after the person tested positive, a team of health department with police reached his home and cordoned off the entire lane. Total 10 persons, including four family members of the patient and six family members of the manager, were also taken to IGGMCH by the NMC team for check up.

This sent ripples among residents of Khamla, which is a crowded market area of South-West Nagpur. Also, members of the businessman’s community are known to mingle a lot, with many meeting and visiting houses of each other daily.

Mayor Sandip Joshi has directed NMC officials to conduct door-to-door containment drive in the vicinity of the house of the shopkeeper and the activity has already kicked-off.

Till now, all five positive patients in Nagpur have been from south-west part of the city.


