Lockdown: Surat deputy mayor holds event, video goes viral
2020-04-12
SURAT: The city’s deputy mayor Nirav Shah and 17 others were booked for illegal assembly by defying prohibitory orders after their video of theirs gathering at a religious programme went viral on the social media.


Adajan police took sou motu cognizance of the video and lodged a complaint on Friday after verifying its authenticity. The BJP leader and otehrs were also booked under sections of Epidemic Diseases Act for negligent act that can spread infection of disease dangerous to life.

 

 
  
 


In the video, Shah along with others are seen discussing something and taking blessings of Jain monks. Sources close to the development informed that Shah made the event live on his Facebook page as well. The meeting was held at Guru Ram Pawan Bhumi in Pal on Friday morning. Police visited the spot in evening after the video went viral.

Though Shah and others have covered their faces with masks, they allegedly violated the mandatory social distancing 

Shah, who is the BJP councillor from Adajan-Gorat ward, defended the event and claimed that they had observed social distancing norms.

"We had gathered to start work for animal and birds suffering in the current lockdown. We were maintaining social distancing and it was necessary to call all the volunteers and give them instructions them,” Shah claimed.

Shah is seen making announcement about the donations of charitable persons.

"The volunteers gathered to take blessings of the monks and it was not a religious function. To do some good work it was necessary to call a meeting. Some people intentionally made the video of the entire event viral in which some of the participants are seen at close distance," Shah added. 

Along with Shah, his associates Sanjay Shah, Nitin Shah and 15 were booked. The complaint was lodged by Pravin Oghavwala, head constable in Adajan police station. 

"We have started taking statements of those present at the event. The investigation is at preliminary stage at present," said an official from Adajan police station. 

The police have not made any arrests yet.

R B Brahmbhatt, city police commissioner, said, "From the video, it looks like social distancing was being maintained. After proper investigation, we will take further actions.”


