BJP youth wing member who tested Covid +ve dies
2020-05-15
AGRA: A 35-year-old member of BJP's youth wing, Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM), who had tested Covid-19 positive, died during treatment at SN Medical College (SNMC) on Thursday. 

He was admitted at emergency ward of the government hospital with fever and breathing difficulties on May 12. So far, 27 coronavirus infected patients have died in Agra district. Also, a nurse of SNMC was tested positive on Thursday.

A resident of Vishnu Colony under Shahganj police station limits, the BJYM member was suffering from weakness for the past one week. According to family members, on May 10, the father of two started having breathing difficulties as well. He was taken to SNMC where he was admitted at the emergency ward. Doctors started treating him and his sample was taken for Covid-19 testing. On Wednesday, he was confirmed positive and shifted to an isolation ward. 

His health deteriorated on Wednesday evening. The SNMC’s administration confirmed his death on Thursday morning. Later, health department team collected samples of the patient's family members for testing. 

Meanwhile, according to Agra district administration, four new Covid-19 positive cases surfaced on Thursday. So far, 785 cases have been reported from Agra district. These included a 28-year-old nurse of SNMC who had served at the Covid-19 isolation ward. The other cases were related to Shahganj, Lohamandi and Nai Ki Mandi locality. 

Chief medical officer RC Pandey said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

“So far, 389 people have recovered and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. We are doing massive sampling in the hotspots to identify the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine,” he added.


