No groupism; Covid-19 fight our top priority, says Madhya Pradesh BJP
2020-04-23
BHOPAL: The state BJP scoffed at speculations in political circles and allegations by state Congress about resentment among senior BJP MLAs over being ignored in the cabinet expansion and Jyotiraditya Scindia loyalists being given light portfolios. State BJP spokesperson said the party is united and there is no internal squabble.


Chouhan on Tuesday appointed five ministers including Narottam Mishra, Tulsiram Silawat, Kamal Patel, Govind Singh Rajput and Meena Singh while some heavyweights like Gopal Bahrgava, Bhupendra Singh, Rampal Singh and Rajendra Shukla failed to make the cut.

After the cabinet formation, chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan assigned two divisions each to the ministers and on Wednesday, distributed portfolios to the new ministers. Contrary to the expectations Chouhan let Mishra hold the important portfolios of health and home while entrusting water resources to Silawat, who was health minister in Kamal Nath government.

One of the biggest surprise was omission of former minister and leader of opposition during Congress regime, Gopal Bhargava. Bhargava, an eight-term legislator and strong Brahmin leader in the Bundelkhand region, was an automatic choice, but failed to get through in the high command’s bid to strike regional balance.

Sources said that Bhargava has been offered the post of assembly Speaker which he is said to have refused.

Name of former home and transport minister Bhupendra Singh, who is considered close to Shivraj Singh Chouhan was also missing from the cabinet. Singh told TOI over phone from Sagar, "Only CM can comment on cabinet formation. I am helping people in the corona crisis in my constituency. Congress has its own political agenda, but, whatever decision party has taken, it must have been after thorough consideration."

Scindia supporters Tulsi Silawat and Govind Rajput were given water resources and food and civil supplies. Two former minister who were in the gang of 22 MLAs who split from Congress marking downfall of Nath government Pradyumn Singh Tomar and Prabhuram Chaudhary played down the issue. They said, “Right now the time is to fight corona and we are lending all support to government and people. It’s all Congress’ misinformation.”

The Congress has on Wednesday alleged that senior ministers were neglected in the cabinet formation while, during distributing portfolios, Scindia supporters were sidelined. "For the first time, a person who was expected to become deputy chief minister has been given the portfolio of water resources minister. BJP has clearly ignored the two Scindia supporters," said Congress state media coordinator, Narendra Saluja.

BJP state spokesperson Rajneesh Agrawal refuting the Congress allegation said, “"There is no groupism in BJP like the Congress. CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan is maintaining team spirit and Congress is it trying to spread rumours.”

