BJP mayor appeals to UP CM to ‘save Agra from becoming Wuhan’, Priyanka tweets support
2020-04-27
AGRA: Days after the Centre hailed the “Agra model” of containment of Covid-19 spread, Agra’s BJP mayor Naveen Jain has appealed to Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath to “save” the city of Taj from “becoming a Wuhan” even as the cases neared the 400-mark. In a letter written to the CM on April 21, Jain lashed at the district administration for its failure to check the rising number of cases.


On Sunday, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra tweeted support for Jain and cited his letter. She emphasised that transparency and testing were important to contain coronavirus.



Priyanka Gandhi tweeted, "The situation in Agra city is bad and the number of coronavirus patients is going up every day. The mayor of Agra says that if the right arrangements are not made, the matter can go out of hand.”

In his letter, the mayor had said, “Testing of people at quarantine centres does not take place for days together. Patients suffering from renal problems and other diseases have been dying as there is no arrangement for their treatment. The situation is very serious.”

“Nursing homes are not ready to admit expectant mothers. Family members of Covid-19 patients are forced to wait for many days to get tested. People of Agra are in a state of panic,” Jain told TOI.

Jain alleged the Agra chief medical officer has not been able to manage affairs at the district hospital. “Senior officials are not coming out of their houses. They come out for only 15-20 minutes to get their photographs clicked so that records can be maintained,” he wrote. 

“Due to the inefficiency of the officials, people are cursing the BJP government and public representatives. There is a lot of anger among the common people,” he added. 

When asked, Agra’s BJP MP SP Singh Baghel said, "To better manage the situation, the state government has to send a nodal officer in Agra. The efforts of the district administration to serve the citizens under the lockdown have improved in the last 2-3 days. I am regularly pursuing public issues with the local authorities.”

However, district magistrate Prabhu N Singh said that it was due to efforts of the district administration to implement the lockdown with a firm hand that a disastrous situation was averted. 

“A scientific analysis of data by the district health department suggests that we have managed to significantly reduce the spread of coronavirus. In case there was no lockdown, there would have been at least 5,120 Covid-19 cases in the district,” he said.

