BJP, ruling parties continue to spar over handling of Covid-19
2020-05-23
Pune/Kolhapur/Nashik: Leaders of the ruling and opposition parties continued to exchange barbs at each over the handling of the Covid-19 spread in the state. BJP again attacked chief minister Uddhav Thackeray, suggesting that he steps out of Matoshree (his residence), while Congress asked BJP MLAs to serve the people instead of going to meet the state governor. 

While BJP maintained that around 2.50 lakh party workers participated in the ‘Mera Angan Mera Rangan’ agitation, Congress described it as a damp squib. 

Maharashtra BJP president Chandrakant Patil told the media in Kolhapur that the CM would never understand the ground reality by sitting in Matoshree and all the elected representatives must come out to address the situation. 

“Entire health system has collapsed. Police are being attacked and dying because of Covid-19. Police are not getting ambulance to reach the hospital. What does this indicate?” he asked. 

He also drew comparison between Kerala and Maharashtra saying that Covid-19 patients were traced in both the states at the same time. “Kerala has 600 patients, while Maharashtra has around 40,000 patients. It shows the government’s failure,” Patil said. 

Maharashtra Congress president Balasaheb Thorat, who is also the state revenue minister, accused BJP of playing politics. In a press statement, Thorat said all political parties extended cooperation to Prime Minister on his appeal but BJP workers were playing politics in Maharashtra. 

Thorat said that BJP should make constructive suggestions and use their good office and bring maximum assistance to Maharashtra from the Centre. “Maharashtra must get maximum share of the central assistance in view of its contribution to the central exchequer”, he said. 

In Pune, around 5,000 BJP workers wore black badges and held placards condemning Thackeray government as a part of the agitation. In Nashik, city unit president Girish Palve, MLAs Devayani Pharande and Rahul Dhikale and others maintained physical distancing and held the protest. 

Dindori MP Bharati Pawar said, “It is difficult to make out who is running the government — the bureaucrats or the elected representatives. Why is the situation in the state going from bad to worse?” 

In Aurangabad, Rajya Sabha MP Bhagwat Karad, former assembly speaker Haribhau Bagde, MLA Atul Save blamed state government for failing to control spread of covid-19. “For the past two months, we have been making requests and suggestions to the state government, but in vain. The administration has failed to bring a check on spread of infection,” he said.

NCP demands support 

NCP MLC from Aurangabad Satish Chavan on Friday urged the BJP to cooperate with the state government in its fight against Covid-19 instead of resorting to meaningless Maharashtra Bachao agitation. Chavan said the situation has worsened because the central government-imposed lockdown without any preparation.


