BJP: CM ‘quarantined’ at home, babus in charge
2020-05-22
KOLHAPUR: The BJP’s Maharashtra unit on Thursday accused CM Uddhav Thackeray of “quarantining himself inside Matoshree” and failing to lead from the front in the fight against Covid-19. It has announced a day-long statewide agitation on Friday, named ‘Mera Angan, Mera Ranangan’, against the state government’s failure to curb the coronavirus crisis, asking its party members and citizens to stand in balconies or courtyards or premises of their houses wearing black clothes or holding black cloth.

“The CM of Maharashtra has quarantined himself at Matoshree and the state government is being run by bureaucrats,” BJP state unit chief Chandrakant Patil told reporters. He said it was expected that the CM would hit the ground by wearing a mask, gloves and PPE, but Thackeray had locked himself inside his Bandra residence. “How can one expect the common man to fight against the coronavirus when the CM has shown no courage and is defensive in his approach?” Patil asked. 

Though no time has been fixed by the BJP for its agitation, Patil said the party units in each city and district will decide these details considering the local situation and zone norms. “It is high time citizens of the state protest against the gross failure of the state government” to contain the Covid-19 threat, Patil said.

NCP state chief and state water resources minister Jayant Patil, however, said BJP should not politicise a serious issue. “Our party never criticised PM Modi, who was busy attending to US president Donald Trump when coronavirus hit India. The BJP is asking questions to the Thackeray government, forgetting that we never asked a single question to the Modi government,” the NCP state chief told reporters.

“The state BJP chief is announcing an agitation while former CM Devendra Fadnavis is busy meeting the state governor to keep himself in the limelight. Fadnavis must have the telephone number of Uddhav Thackeray. He should talk to him, meet and make suggestions. That’s needed at this hour. Not politics,” Jayant Patil said.

The NCP leader said that though the Maharashtra government had made arrangements for transportation of migrant labourers to their home states, many BJP-ruled states did not allow their own people to enter. “Instead of wasting time on agitations and publicity stunts, the state BJP leaders should ask their party leaders in other states to allow passage to these migrants,” he said.


