Lockdown: Blood banks run ‘dry’ in Patna
2020-05-08
PATNA: Blood banks in the city are facing an acute shortage of blood as regular donors are not showing up due to the lockdown. While some donors said they avoid going to blood bank as it would amount to violation of lockdown, others are apprehensive of getting infected by Covid-19. 


Saguna Mor resident Amit Sinha, who used to donate blood on a regular basis, said he stopped going to blood bank after the lockdown began. “There are too many restrictions due to the lockdown. Even if I have a genuine reason, I will be stopped at different points. Therefore, I prefer staying at home,” he said.

Patients of thalassemia and blood disorders are the worst affected as they require blood every 15 or 17 days.

Khusrupur resident Shambu Kumar, whose six-year-old son, a thalassemia patient, requires blood at least twice a month, said, “The disease demands lifelong regular blood transfusions. Prior to the lockdown, I used to take him to Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) every 15 days. Though thalassemia patients are at higher risk of getting infected by the virus, I had to take my son to another hospital in Patna on April 6. As it was just the beginning of the lockdown, I somehow arranged blood for him,” he said.

Blood bank owners in the city also admitted shortage of blood. Red Cross Society, one of the largest blood banks in the state, has hardly received blood in the last six weeks. 

Society’s chairman Dr B B Sinha said, “In a bid to encourage donors, we have released a helpline number – 9334172767 – for pick-drop facilities and doorstep collection of blood. People willing to donate blood can contact us to get the services.”

Jaya Prabha Blood Bank, where five people donated blood voluntarily on Wednesday, is also facing the crisis. “The number of blood donors has reduced by more than 95%,” said Dr Ravindra of the blood bank.

As blood banks are unable to hold camps, they are only giving the reserved stocks to serious patients. Rajeev Kumar Pandey, owner of Jeevan Rekha Blood Bank, said blood collection has reduced from 11-12 units to 0-1 unit per day. “It’s not possible to hold blood camps in a situation like this,” he said.

Social activist Mukesh Hissariya, who is planning to organise 36 blood camps on the occasion of World Thalassemia Day on Friday, said he has encouraged several people to participate in the camps.

