Jaipur: Blood clots reason for majority Covid-19 deaths, says SMS hospital
2020-05-05
JAIPUR: Sawai Man Singh Hospital doctors are finding blood clots in the lungs of Covid-19 patients which is making prognosis difficult leading to deaths. 


Doctors claimed that it was not the pneumonia which was damaging the lungs but clotting disorders. 

At SMS Hospital, more than 40 persons have died or have been brought dead who tested positive. The hospital has been developed as a tertiary coronavirus treatment centre, which has provided treatment to more than 600 patients. 

The hospital is using the latest technique to diagnose clotting disorder among Covid-19 patients. “We are conducting CT pulmonary angiography and ultrasound of lungs to examine the condition of Covid-19 patients. We have found that most of the critical patients are presented with clotting disorder with elevated d-dimers,” said Dr Sudhir Bhandari, principal and controller of SMS Medical College. 

“The clots are clogging pulmonary vessels causing death of patients,” said Dr Bhandari, who is part of the five-member core group of doctors for treatment of Covid-19 patients constituted by the government. The other members of the group are Dr Prakash Keswani, Dr S Banerjee, Dr Raman Sharma and Dr Ajit Singh. 

They pointed out that clotting in lungs affects the prognosis of patients. The disorder makes it difficult for patients to recover and a lot of them land in ICU for intensive care. 

Doctors claimed that patients develop thrombosis (blood clots) leading to pulmonary embolism, which is a condition in which clot travels into lungs and blocks the pulmonary vessels. 

Doctors have also discovered that d-dimers, a fibrin degradation product generated from blood clots, which gives indication to doctors that the patient is at the risk of pulmonary embolism. The d-dimers increase in the presence of pulmonary embolism. “We conduct tests to find out levels of d-dimers and we find the elevated levels of d-dimers in critical Covid-19 patients,” said the doctors. 

The Covid-19 patients are brought to hospitals with excessive blood clotting disorder, which is a major cause of death of patients. 

