Bengaluru: Blood donation drives take a hit amid coronavirus fears
2020-03-11
BENGALURU: Concerns surrounding Covid-19 are hindering blood donation programmes in the city. Several blood banks have confirmed they’ve cancelled their regular donation drives fearing low turnout in the backdrop of increasing confirmed and suspected coronavirus cases.

The cancellations started in the last week of February, they said. A mega camp set to be organised by a multinational company in association with Indian Red Cross Society was among them. 

“The camp was supposed to be held on February 28 but the company postponed it. Usually, between January and March, we collect 3,500-4,000 units. But this month, we may fall short as camps are being cancelled. The Covid-19 scare could be one of the reasons,” said Prashant Chandrashekar, general secretary, Indian Red Cross Society blood bank. 

“Covid-19 concerns have indirectly affected blood donation. There is fear among people to come forward to donate blood. IT firms are on alert mode over the past one week. For them, blood donation drives are not a priority now. Exam season is also affecting our drives,” said Rajat Agarwal, coordinator, Sankalp India Foundation, which keeps real-time data of all blood banks in the city. Three drives that were to be held in next one week have been postponed by the foundation.

However, he asserted there’s no shortage of blood and blood components yet. “We have enough stocks in all blood banks. But the impact will be seen if this scenario persists,” Rajat added.

Alphanso Kurian, coordinator, Sanjay Nagar Lions Bloodline, said voluntary donors continue to come forward to donate on a daily basis when the need arises. 

It may be recalled that in Kerala, the government had issued a circular to all blood banks to restrict blood donation from those with travel history to Covid-19 affected countries. No such circular has been issued in Karnataka. 

“We have not seen any dip in stock in blood banks yet. Drives have been going on in villages and small towns. All those who are under home isolation/observation are not going for blood donation. But that should not stop healthy volunteers,” health department officials told TOI. 


