Bengaluru cops seize 1,900 vehicles in one day for lockdown violation
2020-04-02
BENGALURU: Intensifying their crackdown on all vehicular movements in violation of lockdown restrictions, Bengaluru police on Wednesday seized nearly 1,900 vehicles. Cops warned violators that their vehicles would be released only after the lockdown period is over.


The move drew severe criticism, with several Bengalureans taking to online platforms wondering how could elderly people be asked to walk in the sun to buy essentials or for medical emergencies.

“This is not an April Fool’s prank. Two/four wheelers are banned from use till the 14th of April. We will SEIZE your vehicle if you CEASE to ignore this lockdown regulation,” tweeted Praveen Sood, state’s DG & IGP.



Police commissioner Bhaskar Rao also took to Twitter, giving details of the vehicles seized, along with an instruction to ‘walk to your grocery shop’. 

Later at 7.43pm, Rao tweeted that they had seized 6,852 vehicles till 7pm Wednesday. Police began the drive on March 24. The confiscated vehicles included 6,321 two-wheelers, 227 three-wheelers, and 304 four-wheelers. 

On Wednesday alone, 1,713 two-wheelers, 75 three-wheelers and 80 cars and SUVs were seized.

An earlier tweet by Rao suggesting Bengalureans should walk to their grocery shop drew a barrage of questions. The main concern raised was how would people who live 3-4km away from their grocery stores buy essentials without their vehicles.

“Sir, near by we have a small shop. We dont get diaper for kids and grocery are very limited. The nearest hypermarket is 3 to 4 kms from my location. Is it fine to go in Car?” wrote Twitter user @ronmania2009. Rao replied: “Your vehicle is liable to be seized if caught.” 

A Twitter user, @CRamanaKumar, said: “Difficult to understand the sheer absurdity of the police diktat. If one needs to get provisions/medicines not in walking distance & which are too heavy to carry home, will the cops/state provide the necessary transport? Wonder if its been thought through properly at all.”

“Not acceptable-first you ask us not hoard and now stop us from making trips to groceries/medical stores/veggie shopping!” tweeted @gayathripradeep.

“Online stores are cancelling our orders. we would need to go out to buy groceries. How will the police help in this case? We will need to travel by two wheeler. please clarify this for your people in Bangalore, said @parivesh87.

“We needed permission to move our 83yr old uncle...took us all day and we couldn't get through the helpline for such issues...nothing works. No one knows anything,” said another another Twitter user on the handle @JyothiNair76.


200 medical emergency passes per station

On Wednesday evening, police commissioner Bhaskar Rao announced that 200 medical emergency passes, which residents can use and return on a daily basis, will be issued at each police station in the city. He said more details about the passes would be released later.

