Coronavirus scare: Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation to start odd-even for public vehicles
2020-03-21
BHUBANESWAR: The Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) has decided to introduce the odd-even system to check the spread of coronavirus by ensuring social distancing through the regulation of public transport in the city. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The BMC officials said a new set of standard operating procedure (SOP) has been prepared in this regard. “It includes the regulation of the public transport system such as buses, taxis and auto-rickshaws. Such vehicles bearing odd registration numbers will ply on odd days and vehicles with even registration number will be allowed to ply on even days. There is no bar on the personal vehicles used by the government officials. The regulation is strictly meant for public transport vehicles with the exception of the ones used for hospitals,” a BMC official said. 

The regulation will see many Mo buses off the roads on those days resulting in less commuting and thinner traffic. Other private buses (other than the ones run by the Capital Region Urban Transport or CRUT) will also remain off the road on the basis of the odd-even formula. 

After coming up with an SOP for the markets and curtailing the timings of 17 big grocery, vegetable, fish and meat markets, the BMC on Friday listed out the types of shops that will remain closed to ensure social distancing.

Jewellery stores, automobile and cycle shops, shops selling electronics appliances, sports items, furniture, shoes, marbles, tiles, watches, paints, books and magazines and gift items will remain closed until further order. The grocery, vegetable, meat, chicken and egg shops shall remain open, the BMC order said. It was issued after the general administration department of the state government came up with stricter provisions to ensure social distancing.

The respective zonal deputy commissioners of the BMC will ensure that shops other than the vegetable, grocery and meat fish shops are closed. But they will have to follow the SOP of social distancing and sanitization. 

On Friday, the BMC restricted the entry of common people into its office to ensure that they don’t come in contact with the officials and employees engaged in emergency duties in view of Coronavirus. 

