BMC says people no longer need govt quarantine
2020-04-18
Bhubaneswar: With the gradual flattening of the curve of coronavirus in the state and in Bhubaneswar as well, the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) said it is not required any more to bring people into government quarantine. 

Currently, there are only 26 people in the government quarantine with samples of seven among them testing negative. 

But they are yet to vacate the quarantine centre as they hail from outside Bhubaneswar. The BMC will facilitate their stay in a separate accommodation till the lockdown is lifted. Samples of remaining 19 have been sent for test. 

In the past two days, around 2000 samples state-wide were tested but none came positive. Out of more than 7,500 samples tested until Thursday, so far in Bhubaneswar alone around 1900 samples have been tested out of which 60 are positive. 

Srimanta Mishra, BMC deputy commissioner in charge of government quarantine said since lockdown, 92 persons have stayed in government quarantine and only 26 are left, who will be discharged based on their health status and completion of quarantine period. From the government quarantine home, only 14 positive cases have been reported. Once reported positive, they are shifted to the hospital in a special Covid-19 ambulance, he said. 

Bhubaneswar accounts for around 76 per cent of states Covid-19 cases (46 out of 60). Eleven localities have reported positive cases here with 18 from Bomikhal alone followed by eight in Suryanagar, six in Jharpada, four in Satyanagar, three in Unit-IV, two in Unit-V and one each in BJB Nagar, Badagad, Saheed Nagar, Kapila Prasad and Gymkhana Palm Heights

BMC officials said no new suspects in the last one week have been brought to the government quarantine. If more positive cases are reported from here and more localities brought under containment zone, people will be taken to quarantine home. 

Currently, people in containment zones have been advised home quarantine. However, those who dont have facility in their home for remaining in isolation, they can be brought to government quarantine, said a BMC officer. Two days ago, chief minister had reviewed Covid 19 situation in the state and expressed concern about positive cases rising in Bhubaneswar and assigned six senior officers in the rank of additional chief secretary, principal secretary and secretaries to the government to oversee containment and prevention of disease in the city.

A week ago the BMC enforced home quarantine in the containment zone adjoining areas, where Corona positive cases have been found. Instead of brining those areas under containment zone or expanding the zone further, the BMC started door-to-door surveillance for daily health mapping of people living nearby. 


