BMC amps up fight against Covid-19 with mobile medical squads, home visits for swabs
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: Even as the civic authority has a 10-day stock of personal protection equipment (PPEs) for its healthcare staff, it has introduced mobile medical squads, free home collection of throat swabs, and rapid upscale of the number of beds available for quarantine and isolation.


Over the past two days, Kasturba Hospital’s molecular diagnostic laboratorythe main lab for Covid-19 tests —has collected 600 swabs from people’s homes. This service is mainly for people stuck in home quarantine and cannot move out or cannot afford to pay Rs 4,500 for tests in the private sector.

As the number of cases and hotspots in the city increase, BMC officials said the number of quarantine and isolation beds will increase from over 200 now to 10,000 next week. “We can increase this count to 20,000 at a short notice, if needed,” said additional municipal commissioner S Kakani. The Covid-19 infection has claimed 22 lives in Mumbai so far.

While Nanavati in Juhu is a private hospital to be converted to a fully Covid-19 hospital, new isolation facilities have been activated in three public hospitals as well. All asymptomatic cases below 60 years of age will be taken to seven designated centres while those with symptoms will be taken to the five isolation facilities of either the BMC or a few private hospitals. Efforts are also being made to gather more personal protection equipment (PPEs), though Kakani said, “If PPEs are used judiciously, we have stocks of N95 masks, gloves and PPEs to last us for 10 days.”

The BMC has also started fever clinics in containment zones, especially in Worli and Dharavi, that will work from 9am to 1pm. A BMC release said a team comprising a doctor and nurses will be posted to collect samples if they suspect Covid-19. So far, 16 mobile clinics have been conducted and 85 flu patients have been screened for the virus.

A BMC release said over nine lakh people have been surveyed and screened across the city.

