BMC sets up three-tier care system for Covid-19 patients
2020-04-22
MUMBAI: Hospitalization for a Covid-19 positive patient may now on entail moving from one kind of Covid hospital to another. The BMC has tweaked its discharge policy in such a manner that seriously-ill Covid patients who are admitted to Covid-only hospitals will be moved down the chain to a dedicated Covid health centre (DCHC) once they start showing signs of recovery. This movement will ensure that intensive care beds — which are in short supply — are free for those who need it.


On lines of central guidelines, the BMC has set up a three-tier care system, beginning with dedicated Covid hospitals at the top of the hospital pyramid, followed by DCHCs and with Covid care centres (CCC) at the bottom. The guidelines say that as segling to get ambulances to reach hospitals or get admitted.


 Coronavirus live updates

The BMC has decided to admit only critical patients to its dedicated Covid hospitals — Kasturba, Nair and Seven-Hills. They will be discharged and shifted to CHCs once they improve, but continue to have symptoms. If a patient further improves and becomes asymptomatic, the BMC will shift them to a CCC2.

The decision on the new discharge policy has been taken on the suggestion of Dr Sanjay Oak, the chairman of rious patients recover in a DCHC, they could be moved to CCCs, which are divided into two types — CCC1 (located in hotels, lodges, halls, newly constructed buildings; they don’t have round-theclock medical care) and CCC2 (government centres with doctors and nurses 24x7).

The BMC is struggling to increase bed capacity of Covid hospitals and CHC hospitals along with the required staff and doctors. There have been several complaints in the past week of people strugthe task force formed by the state government for patient management protocol for serious and critically-ill Covid patients.

“A change in discharge policy will help to optimize use of Covid hospitals and facilities. It will help us to prioritize treatment and keep hospital facilities ready for those who need them most,” said a civic official.

The BMC also took the decision to discharge high-risk contacts from CCC1s if their test reports come negative after seven days, and put them with a home quarantine stamp. High-risk contacts would be housed at CCC1s and asymptomatic Covid patients at CCC2s. Officials said treatment isn’t offered to people (high risk contacts) at CCC1s, but BMC will shift those who become symptomatic and also those who test negative to other facilities.

