BMC ward committees to keep tab on migrant movement, ensure adherence of home-quarantine rules
2020-06-08
Bareilly: Bareilly Municipal Corporation (BMC) has formed monitoring committees (nigrani samitis) across its 80 wards to keep a close watch on movement of migrants and people arriving from outside. 

According BMC officials, each ward corporator has been made president of their nigrani samiti, while local Asha workers have been roped in to make rounds and see if the state’s monitoring database has missed entering any migrant family or individual who has arrived from other states. They have also been given the responsibility of displaying “home-quarantined” stickers at the main gates of the returnees, and ensuring they follow guidelines. 

Bareilly mayor Umesh Gautam told TOI, “Monitoring committees have been formed for all 80 wards of Bareilly Nagar Nigam. Each committee has been asked to keep a tab on movement of migrants. They are responsible for identifying those who have returned home from other states, to put them on home-quarantine as per Covid-19 protocol. These committees are also responsible for ensuring that people adhere to quarantine guidelines.” 

Gautam added, “The committees, comprising of ward corporators and Asha workers, will also cross-check with the people under watch whether they underwent the initial health checkup at a government hospital, and update the local administration about it.” 

BMC officials said migrants have been returning home from across the country, which is why there is a significant surge in Covid-19 cases in the city since May. Local administration and civic authorities are taking all possible measures to contain the spread. Bareilly civic body has placed yellow dustbins across all wards, directing people to dispose of used gloves, masks, PPEs in these, instead of littering roads, etc.

So far, 65 Covid-positive cases have been reported in Bareilly district, of which 35 have been discharged while 28 are still active. Two patients have succumbed to the infection in the district.


