BMHRC to treat only Covid-19 patients, gas survivors & activists slam govt move
2020-03-25
Bhopal: State government has identified Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre as a state-level Covid-19 treatment institute. Hereafter, only Covid-19 patients will be treated in this hospital. 

Principal secretary, public health and family welfare Pallavi Jain Govil issued this order on Tuesday. 

This move has drawn protests from survivors of the Bhopal gas disaster and activist groups working among them. The order said that BMHRC, a super specialty hospital, has been identified as an institution for treatment of Covid-19. 

Only coronavirus positive patients will be treated in the hospital and the order will come into effect immediately.

As the BMHRC administration started evacuating the hospital, constructed for treatment of the gas disaster survivors at the behest of the Supreme Court, activist groups working among the gas victims swung into action, lambasting the decision and demanding its immediate withdrawal.

“The order spells doom for gas victims who were getting treatment here. Where will they go? How can a hospital with an OPD of 4,000 (inclusive of its six mini units) be converted into an isolation centre? Moreover, it’s a closed campus with families also living there. It can’t be converted into an isolation centre,” tweeted Rachna Dhingra, co-convener, Bhopal Group for Information & Action. 

She claimed that she tried the whole day to talk to Goel, but the latter she didn't pick up her phone. 

Goel didn't respond to phone calls by journalists either. Convener of, Bhopal Gas Peedit Sangharsh Sahyog Samiti (BGPSSS), N D Jaiprakash, was also surprised by the order. Stating that it is a clear violation of the Supreme Court order, he said that his outfit would move the apex court to get the order revoked.

Dhingra also said that her organisation would move the apex court as early as possible because the court —in its order—had observed that right to treatment for gas victims was equivalent to the right to life. Senior doctors of the BMHRC were also upset with the order. 

“Six gas victims are on ventilator. More than 4,000 gas victims turn up at the BMHRC OPD or its mini units and 230 gas victim get dialysis here. Where will they go?” asked a senior faculty at the hospital, on the condition of anonymity.

Purnendu Shukla, member of the Supreme Court Monitoring Committee, set up to supervise medical facilities being given to gas victims by gas relief hospitals, including BMHRC, said: “It’s blatantly wrong. It is against the mandate with which the BMHRC has been set up. I also tried to talk to the principal secretary, health, but she didn't respond.” 


