BMHRC takeover blunder: Not a single patient, but five Covid-19 deaths
2020-04-16
BHOPAL: The death of five Bhopal gas tragedy victims from coronavirus infection -- without being able to step into the hospital meant to give them free treatment -- has turned the spotlight on the administrative blunder that led to the takeover of BMHRC and a U-turn on that order without even a single patient, covid or otherwise, being admitted in the threeweek period.


The ‘de-reserving’ of BMHRC came too late for Naresh Khatik, Jagannath Maithil, Imran, Rajkumar Yadav and Ashfaq Nadvi, who died without being able to avail treatment at the hospital. The first of these deaths happened on April 7, yet the administration waited a week – during which four others died – before revoking the order. The takeover of BMHRC yielded no benefit either in the battle against coronavirus or for gas victims.

To make it worse, the six gas relief hospitals run by the state government also allegedly turned away BMHRC beneficiaries. Activists say the families of Khatik and Yadav had taken them to two of these hospitals, but they were turned away. One died in a private hospital and the other on the way to state-run Hamidia Hospital.

In the fog of coronavirus war, gas victims have turned into collateral casualties. Activists point out that this could have been avoided.

What was the logic behind taking over a hospital exclusively meant for gas victims, keeping it in readiness for Covid-19 patients, training doctors and paramedical staff on use of PPEs and coronavirus treatment protocol, and then handing it back for treatment of gas victims without admitting a single corona patient? Asked about this, health commissioner Faiz Ahmed Kidwai, who was appointed around a week after the takeover of BMHRC, said: “The hospital was dropped from the list of those designated for Covid-19 patients because some gas victims, who were undergoing treatment there, had been discharged before it was taken over by the district administration. Gas victims were demanding that the hospital should be restored for their treatment. Hence, it was decided to drop it from the list of hospitals earmarked for coronavirus patients.”

Activists say gas victims went through a nightmare during the three-week closure period. “The guard at the (BMHRC) gate used to decide whether there was an emergency with a patient,” said Rachna Dhingra, co-convener of Bhopal Group for Information & Action, who has filed a petition in high court against the takeover. “There was no logic (to the takeover). They, perhaps, thought that if both gas victims and Covid-patients are allowed in the hospital, there would be a rush and social distancing would be violated. So, they restricted entry of all gas victims, except for those suffering from flu-like symptoms and emergency patients. OPD patients at the hospital, who numbered 1,200 patients daily, dropped to 200,” said Dhingra.

What made things worse for gas victims, six state-run hospitals meant for them also shut their doors soon after BMHRC’s takeover on March 23, said the activist. “They opened only on Wednesday -- after the order to take over BMHRC was revoked. So, they were not treating gas victims during this period, either,” she said. Yadav had gone to Rasool Ahmed Siddiqui Pulmonary Centre in Jinsi (Bhopal) but was denied treatment, Dhingra alleged. However, Dr Ravi Verma, chief medical and health officer of gas relief hospitals, denied the charge and said though there were fewer patients due to the lockdown, the OPDs were operating. “We have all the records for this,” he said. Asked about Yadav, he said: “An inquiry was conducted into the allegation but it was found that the doctor on duty had sent him to Hamidia Hospital in an ambulance because he was complaining of chest pain.” Dhingra reminded the government that gas victims need extra care because their immune systems and vital organs are already weakened.

“After the death of five gas victims due to Covid-19, the administration seems to have realized what we had been telling them since the outbreak. Save the gas victims, they are more vulnerable to the infection than any other group,” she remarked, suggesting that BMHRC should now call up all the gas-victim patients of hypertension, diabetes, kidney dysfunction, cancer and pulmonary disorder and test them for Covid-19 so that they can be saved if they have contracted the infection.

