Coronavirus: Board may take call on discharge today
2020-02-13
THRISSUR/ALAPPUZHA/KOZHIKODE: The student in Thrissur who was the first patient in the country to test positive for novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has tested negative again on Wednesday, according to indications received by district administration officials from central testing agencies on Wednesday. Also, the patient in Alappuzha Medical College Hospital, who was infected by COVID-19, has been tested negative again. 

The state-level medical board will review the recommendation of Alappuzha and Thrissur medical boards regarding the status of two admitted COVID-19-infected patients on Thursday. A formal announcement of discharge is likely to be made after the state-level board meeting. 


No official communication on test results

The girl, who had returned from Wuhan in China, had tested positive for COVID-19 first on January 30, and she was under surveillance at Thrissur Medical College Hospital since then. She had tested negative on February 8. However, the test result is yet to be received officially. “We have sent several samples from her and we are yet to receive any official communication as to whether the indicated result is that of the latest sample,” district collector S Shanawaz said. 

As per medical protocol, she has to be tested negative consecutively twice, before ensuring that she is clear of infection. An experts’ team constituted by the Union health ministry will decide on her future course of treatment, the collector said.

The collector said only six people are under hospital surveillance for COVID-19 in the district now, while another 229 people are under home quarantine.

Three people who were under home quarantine in the district for COVID-19 have left for China violating the quarantine protocol. 


Health dept recommends discharge of patient

The health department has recommended discharging COVID-19-infected patient from Alappuzha Medical College Hospital after he was tested negative for the infection by National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune. The student was in the isolation ward of the hospital.

District collector M Anjana said: “The treatment was given to the patient through strict monitoring, and the patients and relatives strictly followed the directions of the health department. So, the patient could survive from the virus.”


Two admitted to isolation wards in Kozhikode

Two people who arrived from COVID-19-hit countries were admitted to isolation wards of Kozhikode Government Medical College Hospital (KGMCH) and Government Beach General Hospital on Wednesday. 

