Bodh Gaya temple driver’s death fuels Covid-19 fear
2020-03-23
GAYA: Death of one Arjun Kumar, a driver working in the Bodh Gaya Temple Management Committee (BTMC) office, has fuelled Covid-19 fear in the district.

The driver died early Sunday morning. The medical staff who handled the dead and his immediate family members have been quarantined and the man was in his early 40s. Confirming the driver’s death, district magistrate Abhishek Singh, ex-officio chairman of BTMC, said the driver’s employer has claimed that as per medical reports, the driver had a history of bronchitis. 

Agreeing that such people are more vulnerable to Covid-19 virus, the DM said that all measures are being taken to ascertain whether the deceased person had made any contact with the virus. He said that swab has been collected from the dead man’s body and sent to biological lab for testing. As a precautionary measure, the doctor and other medical staff along with the immediate family members of the deceased driver have been quarantined.

“The driver’s body would be cremated as per the Covid-19 protocol that stipulates proper covering of the body and segregation of the bereaved people, who would not be allowed near the body during the cremation,” he said.

As per available statistics, 19,095 passengers of Air India international flights and several foreign airlines disembarked at the Gaya International airport between January 29–March 20. Most international fliers were foreign nationals. Two Bodh Gaya hotels have been notified as quarantine centres.

Earlier, on Saturday, two passengers of the Thai Smile Airways flight number WE327, who landed at the Gaya airport with Covid-19 symptoms were sent to the isolation ward of the ANMMCH. Samples collected from the two air passengers, both of them residents of Gorakhpur (UP) have been sent to the virological lab for examination. The 10 other passengers of the flight were advised home isolation. The plane was thoroughly disinfected at the Gaya airport before boarding for the return flight.


