Bodies of Covid-19 patients left unattended for hours at GMCH
2020-05-26
Aurangabad: Bodies of five patients, who died of Covid-19, were left unattended for hours as the class IV employees deployed at the Covid centre of Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) failed to turn up for wrapping and shifting the corpses to the morgue.

After the incident came to light, experts expressed concerns over the incident, saying that such acts may spread infection in the Covid-19 ward.

As per official record, the five patients — 55-year-old woman from KatKat Gate, 48-year-old man from Garkheda area, 35-year-old woman from Rohidas Nagar, 75-year old woman from Kailash Nagar and 55-year-old woman from Sillod — died between Sunday night and Monday morning.

These bodies were moved to the morgue by 9am only after the GMCH superintendent reached out to the Forensic Medicine and Toxicology (FMT) department, seeking arrangements for wrapping these bodies.

Several doctors suggested that those deployed at Covid-19 centre should immediately wrap the bodies and move them to then morgue. There are also suggestions that instead of moving these bodies to the morgue, a separate room for preservation of these bodies should be set up at the Covid-19 centre.

Out of the 55 deaths related to Covid-19, most of them had history of co-morbidity and 50 of them died at GMCH.

Authorities at GMCH informed that due to fear and stigmatisation surrounding the infection, the staff is scared to handled the bodies. As a result, the already under-staffed mortuary team has been asked to handle these bodies.

When contacted, GMCH forensic medicine and toxicology department’s HOD Kailash Zine confirmed the situation. “Out of the four people from our department deputed for handling of Covid-19 bodies, three have been diagnosed with fever and are under observation.”

When contacted, medicine department HOD Meenakshi Bhattacharya refused to comment on the issue. However, other doctors posted at the Covid-19 centre blamed the class IV staffers for not cooperating with them.


