Body of Covid patient handed to kin for cremation attended by 40 people
2020-06-12
Agra: The body of an 83-year-old patient at a government college in Agra, who had tested positive for Covid-19, was handed over to his family for funeral rites instead of hospital authorities packing it in a leak-proof bag and taking it for cremation handled by staff in PPE kits. The family was shocked when hours after the man’s cremation — which was attended by 40 people — they got a call from the hospital informing them that he had tested positive for coronavirus.The chief medical officer (CMO) of Agra district told TOI that a probe has been initiated into the matter. On Thursday, the health department conducted screening of 12 family members of the deceased, Gajendra Pal Singh, who had retired as a sub-inspector from UP Police. The family was put under home quarantine. The area around the house has been sealed.Rajesh Kumar, Singh’s son, told TOI that his father had complained of chest pain and breathlessness on Sunday. “Two private hospitals we approached refused to admit him without a Covid-19 test report so we took him to SN Medical College. His health deteriorated and he was put on a ventilator on Monday. A day later, the hospital, which has an in-house facility for Covid-19 testing told us that he had tested negative.” Kumar added, “We had no reason to suspect anything after that. Unfortunately, he breathed his last on Wednesday morning after which we hired a private ambulance and took the body home.”Kumar, a resident of Vikas Nagar Colony, said at least 40 people attended his father’s funeral rites. “The hospital should make sure that everyone in my family who came in contact with the body gets tested.”Hospital authorities, however, said they never told the family that the patient had tested negative. Principal of SN Medical College, Dr Sanjay Kala, told TOI, “The patient’s Covid-19 report came after his death and we informed the family." When asked why the hospital released the body without waiting for the lab reports, Dr Kala said, "We are looking into the matter.”The family has not filed any complaint against the hospital but Agra CMO R C Pandey said the matter was under investigation.According to protocol laid by the Indian Council of Medical Research, the body of a Covid-19 patient should be packed in a leak-proof zipped plastic body bag, which is locked properly to avoid spillage of any fluids. Religious rituals like bathing, which require touching the bodies, should be avoided. The guidelines also add that personal protective equipment (PPE) is to be used while shifting the body in the mortuary if it involves direct handling of the body.