Coronavirus outbreak: Bookings of tourists from China to Rajasthan get cancelled
2020-01-30
JAIPUR: Following the outbreak of coronavirus, bookings of Chinese tourists to visit Rajasthan have now been cancelled, with tour operators and travel agents saying that the impact could only be offset if global tourists to China get diverted to India. While the impact of the cancellations have an immediate impact on tourism, it will take time for tour operators to reschedule travel plans that would also benefit India.

Former president of Rajasthan Association of Tour Operators (RATO) Khalid Khan said, “Bookings of Chinese tourists to Rajasthan have been cancelled from today. The numbers could be around 250-300 across all the operators.”

He said this will certainly impact the tourism and hospitality industry and occupancies at hotels will take a beating, however limited it may be. But there is an expectation that the impact of the cancellations will be neutralized if some of the global tourists visiting China get diverted to India by rescheduling tour itinerary.

“Diverting tourists will take at least a week. If we can manage some groups from the rescheduled itinerary of the global tourists, there is a chance to offset some impact,” said Mohan Singh Mertiya, general manager of a leading tour operator in the city.

Rajasthan attracted about 17.54 lakh foreign tourists in 2018 with France, the UK, the US, Germany, Australia and Italy being among the top 10 markets. China is not big market but the growth rates of foreign tourist inflows into the state are in the single digits which means any small drop in footfalls will have a big impact on the numbers, said a tour operator.

As per United Nations World Tourism Organisation, Chinese tourists are the biggest spenders globally, outpacing the Americans. Similarly, their numbers are the largest when it comes to outbound. According to experts, recent trends suggest that Chinese travelers prefer destinations that are rich in culture, heritage, and authentic experiences.

“To any country or state of India, China is an important tourism market. While many of the countries are wooing them, India is yet to get a sizeable share and the recent bilateral relationships does not help,” said a senior official at the state tourism department.


