Border force brings back jawans on leave, readies quarantine hubs
2020-05-08
Jaisalmer: BSF jawans from different districts of Rajasthan who had gone on leave around Holi and for various other reasons are being brought back to rejoin duty. These jawans are being brought at battalion and sector headquarters in BSF vehicles from their houses. In last two days, around 150 officers have been brought back to Rajasthan at various battalions and sectors and have been kept in quarantine. BSF has made quarantine centres at different levels at battalion headquarters and sector headquarters. 

Centre has issued order to keep these BSF jawans on mandatory quarantine after they return from leave. It is said that at present, around 5,000 jawans and officers deployed at various sectors and battalions in Rajasthan are on leave, at their homes. These jawans had gone on leave for Holi and other reasons and after the situation started deteriorating, these personnel were ordered to remain where they were. 

These jawans are required at the borders on duty, so BSF headquarters prepared a plan to bring back these jawans on duty, under which jawans in various places of Rajasthan were gathered and vehicles were sent to bring them to their battalion and sector headquarters. Vehicles were sent from four sectors of Rajasthan including Jaisalmer, Bikaner and Ganganagar and frontier headquarters. 

Confirming this, BSF Rajasthan frontier IG Amit Lodha said that after the orders of headquarters to bring back jawans who had gone on leave, a plan was made under which those places were identified in the state which were not hotspots and dangerous from the pandemic point of view and vehicles were sent to those places and the jawans were brought back to the place of their deployment and have been kept in quarantine.

He said that as per the orders from the Central government, the jawans and officers returning from leave will have to be kept in quarantine compulsorily for 14 days for which quarantine facility was made at different levels at battalion and sector headquarters. 

He said in any battalion, if the number of jawans is more, then the district administration has been requested to allot government buildings or schools to keep these jawans in quarantine there. 

IG said that in the entire Rajasthan frontier, jawans and officers have been directed to take strict preventive measures. The entire battalion and sector headquarters have been sealed. No one is allowed to go out from the premises and similarly, no one is allowed to enter into the premises. All buildings and border outposts are being sanitised and directions have been issued to wear masks and frequently use sanitisers. Health check ups and screenings of jawans and officers are being done from time to time. If any jawan is found with symptoms like cough, fever etc, then directions have been given for immediate testing. 


