Border chaos ends between AP-Telangana, students shifted to quarantine homes
2020-03-27
VIJAYAWADA: Bringing the chaos at the AP-Telangana inter-state border to an end, the Andhra Pradesh government on Thursday shifted the students and software engineers, who were stranded at the check-post at Garikapadu village in Krishna district, to quarantine homes in the state.


Officials allowed only those who gave their consent to stay at the quarantine homes to enter the state. About 43 people including students and techies from Krishna and Guntur districts have been shifted to quarantine home set up at Triple IT campus in Nuzvid.


 
 About 38 residents of East Godavari have been moved to an engineering college at Rajahmundry and those from West Godavari to Eluru with police escort.

Those who refused to go to isolation centres have been sent back to Hyderabad as the Telangana government had also initiated measures to reopen the PG hostels. A few people with valid medical records and medical emergencies have also been allowed to come into the state. No one has been allowed to go home straight as part of containment measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19.

The situation at the check-post had turned volatile on Wednesday when scores of students and software engineers, who were suddenly evicted by managements of private PG hostels in Hyderabad, tried to rush back to their native places in AP.

However, the officials at the inter-state border check post refused to give them entry citing lockdown rules and requested them to go back to Hyderabad. The situation worsened with the Hyderabad police hurriedly issuing NOCs to all those who wanted to leave the city without looking into the consequences on the highways. 

After students flooded social media with SOS tweets, chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy held discussions with Telangana CM K Chandrasekhar Rao and requested him not to shunt the students out of Hyderabad. 

Meanwhile, Jagan directed the officials to take all those coming into the state to quarantine homes and asked them not to allow them to go homes. Special chief secretary Dr KS Jawahar Reddy directed the police officials and district collectors in the border areas not to grant entry to anyone from other states from Thursday. 

Sources said that about 600 students who refused to join the quarantine homes in AP returned to Hyderabad in their vehicles in the early hours of Thursday. AP has also decided not to allow even students from Thursday. The officials clarified decision to grant the entry to the people stranded in the check-posts is only a one-time offer. 

Reports about similar troubles are coming from other border towns in Kurnool, Guntur, East Godavari districts and Orissa border in Srikakulam district. Several daily wagers who came to work in chilli fields in Guntur district from Nalgonda were stranded at Vadapalli border near Miryalaguda as the police from both the states refused to allow them to cross the border. 

