Ahmedabad: Borderline diabetic doctor frees self from medicines in lockdown
2020-06-04
AHMEDABAD: The lockdown was no productivity contest but for many, it was an opportunity to change for the better. While some took the weight loss challenge seriously, some others quit smoking. For Ahmedabad-based opthalmologist, Dr Parag Shah, his health and borderline diabetes was a serious concern and lockdown truly changed his life for the better. 


A borderline diabetic for over three years and dependent on medication to keep his blood sugar levels under check, Shah has now freed himself from taking any medicines.

“I used to go for a walk regularly but I did need to take medicines. When the lockdown was announced, my clinic used to open barely for an hour in a day to attend to emergency patients and I had the rest of the day to myself. So I decided to increase the time I devote towards workout,” said the 52-year-old eye surgeon, who lost 7kg weight during 65 days of lockdown.

“Instead of an hourlong walk, I increased the time to four hours. I walked for two hours in the morning and two in the evening,” Shah said. “My son, who is a college student, tends to workout at home which also encouraged me to add other exercises apart from walking. So I used to exercise with him at home every day for an hour,” said Shah.

After the lockdown ended, when Shah got his blood sugar levels monitored, it was absolutely normal. 

“When I consulted the doctor, I was told I don’t need to take any medication any more. I am indeed happy I could reverse this condition,” said Shah, who was preparing to get rid of blood sugar medication since a long time.

Being fond of mountaineering, Shah also hiked to the top of Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania in October last year and took it as an opportunity to work on his health. 

“With work resuming in full swing, maintaining the streak of working out for five hours is indeed a challenge. While the workout as now reduced to two-three hours in a day, I compensate for it by controlling my diet so that I maintain good health,” he added. 

