Bought air tickets during lockdown? Full refund likely
2020-04-17
NEW DELHI: The government provided some relief to air travellers on Thursday when it "advised" airlines to give full refunds to those who booked tickets during the lockdown for domestic and international flights cancelled in that period.


However, the respite is not for those who had booked tickets on and before March 24 (after which lockdown started) for flights between March 25 and May 3 (the lockdown period for now).

Indian carriers, most nearly bankrupt now, are unable to give full refunds to passengers for flights cancelled in the lockdown period due to a severe liquidity crunch. Like airlines abroad, they are asking passengers to utilise the money paid for flying anytime within up to a year. Passengers seeking refunds are made to suffer big cancellation charges. There has been a major public outcry on this issue.

The partial relief is also for a handful who booked tickets and paid airlines during the first lockdown for travel on dates that now fall within the extended lockdown period.

"Tickets booked during first lockdown (March 25 - April 14) for travel during second lockdown (April 15-May 3, 2020) and for which payments were received by airlines during first lockdown shall be refunded within three weeks from date of request for cancellation by airlines without levy of cancellation charges," aviation minister H S Puri tweeted on Thursday.

"Tickets booked during first lockdown for travel during same period and for which payments were received by airlines during first lockdown shall be refunded within three weeks from date of request for cancellation by airlines without levy of cancellation charges," the minister tweeted.


Tickets booked during 1st lockdown for travel during 2nd lockdown (15 April -3 May 2020) & for which payments were… https://t.co/Z0r5RUnFTq— Hardeep Singh Puri (@HardeepSPuri) 1587039104000

However not many would have booked travel in that period as most would have known all schedule passenger flights were cancelled.

Realising this move provides only partial relief, a senior official said the "reasonable" order "strikes a balance between stakeholders. Airlines need to survive for future refunds and they are facing liquidity issues and other payouts. For others who booked tickets (and are not covered in Thursday’s order), the option of rescheduling remains."



More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

Indian carriers, for their part, cite their frail financial health — with many close to bankruptcy — for not being able to give refunds. Their stand of not giving cash refunds and keeping the amount paid as a voucher for future travel has been endorsed by the International Air Transport Association (IATA).

With many airlines yet to pay March salaries to employees, the industry has sought relief from the government. "We are among the worst affected industries in this pandemic. We do not have funds for refunds. If forced, we will need to shut shop," said a senior airline official.

