Coronavirus scare in Goa: 'Bowing to parents’ requests, some schools cancel exams up to Class VIII
2020-03-17
PANAJI: Some schools on Monday decided to cancel their final exams for the 2019-20 academic year from Class I to VIII, as a precautionary measure in view of coronavirus (Covid-19) concerns. These institutes may decide to evaluate students based on their performance in the continuous comprehensive evaluation. The Class IX exam, however, will be held as scheduled. Other institutes are expected to follow suit as parents have demanded that exams to be called off to ensure safety of students.


“Parents of students from Class I to VIII are informed that there will be no final exams for their wards,” headmistress of Mapusa’s Saraswat Vidyalaya told parents in a notice issued on Monday. 

Chief minister Pramod Sawant, after chairing a meeting, announced last week that regular classes in schools have been suspended till March 31. However, he said, examinations would go on as scheduled. Following this, concerned parents took to social media and also began appealing to schools to cancel the exams altogether upto Class VIII as the Right to Education Act has a no-fail policy in force till this class.

“These are internal exams and not crucial state board exams. The children have already appeared for the continuous comprehensive evaluation exams and the school was requested to carry out averaging to assess them. Also, the students, upto Class V, are very young and vulnerable and sit close to each other,” said a parent of a child studying in a Dona Paula school.

While some schools have refused to cancel exams pointing to Sawant’s instructions that school exams can go on as scheduled, other institutes are mulling over parents’ requests.“If teachers are required to attend school daily; if they are travelling by public transport and then hold exams for children, what’s the of this half-hearted piecemeal approach of the administration?” asked a parent.

In many state schools, the exam for primary institutes ended on Monday. 

In most state board-affiliated schools, it will be high school students who will be answering their exams.

