Boy, 4, tests positive for Covid-19 in Ichalkaranji
2020-04-23
Kolhapur: A four-year-old boy tested positive for Covid-19 in Ichalkaranji late on Tuesday night, two days after his grandfather, aged 60, tested positive for the contagion.

Kolhapur district health officer Yogesh Sale told TOI on Wednesday that they have traced 11 of the close contacts of the senior citizen, 10 of whom tested negative. 

“However, the senior citizen’s wife, son and daughter-in-law as well as two other close contacts have tested negative,” he said.

According to Sale, the area around Kole Mala in Ichalkaranji has already been declared a containment zone. The area has a population of 4,000 people with around 800 families.

“We have launched a survey in the containment zone, where ae disinfection drive was organised. After the second case, that of the child, the area was once again disinfected. The contact tracing of the four-year-old boy, who could have gone to the neighbouring homes, is also being done,” he said.

Sale said that during the survey, they found two potential suspects with symptoms of Covid-19. “They were been brought to Ichalkaranji’s Indira Gandhi Memorial (IGM) Hospital. A check-up will be conducted, following which a clinical decision will be taken on whether to send their swab samples for testing.”

Another official from the IGM said that the boy is asymptomatic and stable and that there is nothing much to worry about. His grandfather has already been shifted to the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje (CPR) hospital, where he is also said to be stable. The grandfather is said to have underlying conditions, like hypertension and diabetes.

Sale said that considering the current situation, a three-day stricter lockdown is being observed from Wednesday while appealing to citizens to cooperate. Earlier, he had said that the 60-year-old man had no travel history, but his son had a travel history from Baramati.

BOX

15K families get essentials 

The district administration has distributed essential kits among more than 15,000 underprivileged families, said deputy collector Smita Kulkarni. Each kit contains 10 different items, which can last at least for two weeks for a family of four or five people, she added.


