Brakes on Covid-days' fleecing: Private ambulance fare fixed in Mohali
2020-05-02
MOHALI: District magistrate Girish Dayalan has issued an order to fix the hiring rates of private ambulances, based on complaints that the operators were charging at will for the trips during Covid-19 curfew.

He said the private ambulances were engaged for prompt medical assistance to people during the lockdown in force to contain coronavirus. Dayalan said: "In some sectors, private ambulance operators took a hefty amount for shifting patients. The fee ranged from Rs 5,000 to Rs 6,000 a day, which is beyond the reach of a common man, so we had to fix the charges."

The district administration and police now have orders to not only cancel the operating licence on any complaint of overcharging but also register an FIR (first-information report) against the operator. The rate of BLS (basic life support) ambulance (up to 2,000 cc) is now Rs 2,500 a day or Rs 10 for each kilometre. A BLS ambulance of 2,000cc or above can be hired for Rs 3,000 a day or Rs 12 for each kilometre. Similarly, the fare of ACLS (advanced care life support) ambulance is now Rs 4,500 a day or Rs 15 for every kilometre.

The fare will be for the distance between hiring spot and drop point. The driver, union, company is accountable for safe dropping, while the person who hires must make the payment.

A BLS ambulance carries medical and surgical patients who don't need cardiac monitoring and it carries psychiatric patients. It is used for home discharge of patients from nursing homes and rehabilitation facilities. Each ambulance carries basic life support medical supplies, including glucometers, albuterol, defibrillators, aspirin, EpiPens, pulse oximetry, intranasal naloxone administration, splints, bandages, oxygen tanks and masks, and spinal immobilization equipment.

The ACLS ambulance has a paramedic on board along with an emergency medical technician. The ambulance is equipped with airway support equipment, cardiac life support, cardiac monitors as well as a glucose-testing device. Of course, it also carries medication. The patients taken on board require a higher level of medical monitoring. They include those who need continuous IV drip, those put on a ventilator, and those whose heartbeat needs to be monitored. The crew of therse ambulances have a higher level of training than those who operate the BLS ambulances.

