Brass wary as 200 cops quarantined
2020-06-13
Bengaluru: With over 200 policemen quarantined for coming in contact with their Covid-positive colleagues, accused and others and eight stations shut for two or more days for sanitisation, senior officers are worried about the situation’s impact on policing. 

Police commissioner Bhaskar Rao said he’s asked his personnel to go slow on non-essential arrests and investigations, given the Covid-19 crisis. 

He, however, said the nature of police work is such that one can’t avoid coming in contact with the public. “Along with other senior officers, I myself had to recently enter Padarayanapura, a containment zone. We’ll be doing so often and can’t stop working. We have directed all police personnel in the city to be at their cautious best and and follow hygiene rules. I have asked DCPs to provide hot water and soap at their police stations so that staffers can wash their hands frequently,” he explained. 

The violence reported in Padarayanapura in April this year had resulted in at least 60 police personnel being quarantined. “By mid- July, the number may cross 300,” said a senior officer. However, none of the quarantined cops has turned positive for Covid-19 so far, he added.

On Thursday night, Central Crime Branch (CCB), a major arm of city police, downed shutters after an accused arrested in a cybercrime case tested positive. This is the first time since September 16, 1971 — when CCB began operations — that the office has been closed, cops say. Joint commissioner of police (crime) Sandeep Patil said, “We may reopen CCB after three or four days.” 

Earlier on Thursday, a sub-inspector attached to Shankarapuram police station in south division tested positive. “His wedding was scheduled for next week. It has been postponed and the SI has been quarantined,” a senior officer said.

DCP (south) Rohini Sepat Katoch said 11 staffers from Jayanagar police station have been quarantined after they caught a thief, who was elusive since mid-2018 and tested positive after arrest. “The suspect was accused of stealing cash in a petrol bunk,” she said.

A sub-inspector recalled the chaos when a Hoysala driver tested positive in north Bengaluru recently. “Three drivers were driving the same vehicle in different shifts. After one was hospitalised for Covid-19, the other two refused to drive the vehicle. As a result, the Hoysala was parked outside the station for four days,” he said.

Pulakeshinagar traffic constable Guruswamy was Bengaluru’s first cop to test positive for Covid-19 on May 19. He was discharged on May 30. Since then, five more city policemen have tested positive.


