Breaking quarantine rule to attract police charge: Desai
2020-03-22
Kolhapur: The district administration has threatened to file the police complaints against individuals, who have been instructed to quarantine themselves at home for 14 days, if they violate the quarantine norms.In the city, around 25,000 persons have been screened for Covid-19 symptoms. The Kolhapur Municipal Corporation (KMC) has found one person with a travel history and he has been put in the quarantine ward.District collector Daulat Desai has ordered the health staff to keep a watch on the other home-quarantined people. The officials have been asked to visit them thrice every day for follow-ups. Moreover, people completing the home quarantine period must be referred to the CPR Hospital for a final check-up before they are given the go-ahead to move around freely.“To stop coronavirus transmission, home quarantine has been made compulsory. Those violating the rules will have to face police charges. The health authorities have been asked to forcefully take them into custody and keep them in the quarantine wards,” said Desai.He added that violators will be charged under various sections of the Indian Penal Code and Communicable Disease Control Act.So far, the district has had 523 people with symptoms akin to coronavirus infection. Of them, the authorities have identified 495 people who have come to India from abroad. Currently, 384 persons are under home quarantine. There are at least 24 local residents, who do not have any foreign travel history, in home quarantine. No confirmed coronavirus case has been reported in the district yet. The number of swab samples sent for the testing at the Pune-based NIV has increased to 12, which, according to the health officials, is much lower than the number of persons with symptoms.The number of people completing the 14-day home quarantine period is 138. Collector Desai said these persons have to report the district health authorities time and again for their health check-up. Each such person is given a card stating the suggestions by the doctors.Satej Patil, district guardian minister, said: “Checkpoints have been set up at several locations. We are tracing the persons coming from abroad. They will be compulsorily brought to the quarantine centres. Those who have come from cities like Pune and Mumbai, will be asked to quarantine themselves.”