Briton jailed in Bhopal for lockdown violation, kin campaign for freedom
2020-05-26
BHOPAL: The family of a British national, Sohail Hughes, who is now in Bhopal jail for alleged visa and lockdown violations, has initiated an online petition for his freedom.

The petition claims Sohail, 29, was on an extended holiday to visit family in Gujarat before undertaking a pilgrimage of mosques, when he was detained last month. Bhopal police say he was among 60 Tablighi Jamaat members arrested for participating in various religious programmes of the organisation in violation of Foreigners Act and IPC.

Sohail’s wife, who has launched a campaign to have him released, calls his arrest illegal. “Sohail Hughes from Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, has been detained in India in a place called Bhopal, accused of spreading Coronavirus and violating visa regulations! Just because he was staying in a mosque along with other people when lockdown was announced in India,” says her petition. 

Tablighi Jamaat made headlines across the country after a religious congregation held at Nizamuddin in Delhi in March this year was blamed for a spurt in Covid-19 infections in several states.

Sohail was detained in Bhopal in the aftermath. Some other foreigners, who were arrested with him, have requested consular access.

The Jamaatis ended up in prison after their bail pleas were rejected by a local court. In all, 64 foreigners, mostly from Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Tanzania, South Africa and Myanmar, were taken into custody.

They face charges under IPC sections 188 (disobeying order of public servant), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and provisions of Disaster Management Act and Foreigners’ Act.


No rule has been flouted, says DIG Wali
 Am truly distressed with story of Sohail arrest.I have appealed to state CM and Director General Police MP to withd… https://t.co/4JHg0W0lyO— Vivek Tankha (@VTankha) 1590408801000

Member of parliament and Supreme Court lawyer Vivek Tankha has written to chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan to address this family’s plight. “I’m truly distressed with the story of Sohail’s arrest. I have appealed to the chief minister and director general of police to withdraw the FIR and seek closure of the case. Such arrests and investigations are a blot on our criminal justice system,” he told TOI.

Tankha tweeted a copy of his letter to the CM, saying: “This issue has a transnational ramification and directly affects the relationship between MP government and UK.”

Bhopal DIG Irshad Wali told TOI that everything was by the book. “Cases were registered for violation of visa conditions under the Foreigners’ Act. No rule has been flouted,” he said. Police haven’t said if Sohail had attended the Nizamuddin Markaz in Delhi.


