Brother of Covid-19 victim had also died of ‘unknown illness’ recently, was buried secretly
2020-04-17
Bareilly: A day after a police and health department team was attacked by a mob in Moradabad’s Nawabpura area, it has come to light that the elder brother of the 49-year-old man, who succumbed to Covid-19 on Monday, had died of an unknown illness on April 5, but the family didn't inform the police and buried the body secretly in a nearby graveyard.

Moradabad SSP Amit Pathak said they learnt about the death only after the mob attack on Wednesday. Both the deceased brothers had visited Delhi recently. Meanwhile, an FIR has been registered against 221 people and 17, including seven women, were arrested for Wednesday’s mob attack on cops and health workers. 

After the incident, the rioters had run away after crossing the Ramganga, and according to police, they had taken shelter in forest area across the river. Police raids are on to nab the remaining accused, the SSP said.

Additional superintendent of police (city) Amit Kumar Anand told TOI, “After the 49-year-old man was quarantined on April 9, we examined his call details to learn that he had visited Daryaganj in Delhi on March 12.”

The ASP said that after he died due to coronavirus on April 13, the health department as well as local administration got anxious. His family had already been home-quarantined.

“After the Wednesday’s incident, we learnt that his elder brother, who was 70, had died on April 5 and the body was buried secretly. We examined his CDR to find that he was also in Delhi on March 13 and after staying there for three days, he reached Piran Kaliyar Sharif, a 13-century sufi shrine located in Roorkee in Uttarakhand. It cannot be ruled out that he may have come in contact with a Tablighi Jamaat Covid carrier there,” the ASP said.

Meanwhile, police on Thursday went through the CCTV and drone-camera footage and videos shot by local residents of Nawabpura area to identify the rioters involved in Wednesday’s attack.

The ASP said that teams have been set up to arrest others involved in the incident.


