BSF ups its defences against Covid-19
2020-03-30
CHANDIGARH: As Punjab is one of the states hit the worst by the coronavirus, the Border Security Force (BSF), which guards the 553km Indo-Pak border of the state, has been taking extraordinary measures to keep troops safe. 


While those on leave have been asked to stay home till April 15, a strict protocol is being used for those deployed to along the border. “We are frontline border guarding forces and cannot keep our troops inside the campus or cantonment area. All preventive measures and guidelines related to health are being followed while deploying troops. All BSF deployment areas and camps have been sanitised and quarantine centres have been prepared in BSF hospitals and campuses to meet any eventuality,” said the spokesperson of BSF (Punjab frontiers).

He also informed that troops assigned to guard the boarder were being regularly shifted and sanitised to avoid any kind of spread of virus.

Ground training has also been suspended and only briefings are being done by the BSF in their camps. Even the strength of office staff has been reduced and others have been asked to stay at home. Nobody is allowed to move out or move inside BSF camp areas.

Sources, however, confirmed that the border force had minimised contact with its Pakistan counterpart to avoid any kind of spread of virus. A meeting with Pakistan Rangers is necessary whenever there is any incident of smuggling or intrusion on the border. The force has already stopped the movement of general public to attend the retreat ceremony between India and Pakistan on the Attari-Wagah border in Amritsar and Hussainiwala in Ferozepur in Punjab in view of coronavirus.

Punjab is one of the worst0hit states in the country as far as spread of coronavirus is concerned. Thirty-eight positive cases and a death have been reported in the state till now. The state government has imposed a curfew to prevent its spread. The state has a large population of NRIs and others who had returned from abroad after the outbreak of the deadly disease in other parts of the world. 

In Punjab, BSF guards the Indo-Pak border which comprises a 518-km stretch on land and 33km riverine area. It is manned by 19 BSF battalions, one unit of BSF’s water wing, an artillery and other force multipliers. In all, 212 villages of Amritsar, Gurdaspur, Ferozepur, Tarn Taran, Pathankot and Fazilka are located near the border guarded by BSF.


