Covid-19 scare in Bengaluru: Health department holds meetings with 25 IT/BT companies to allay fears
2020-03-10
BENGALURU: With Karnataka in the grip of Covid-19 scare, authorities from the health and family welfare department recently held two rounds of meetings with HR representatives of 25 IT and BT majors in Bengaluru.


The state reported its first case of Covid-19 on Monday. With the infected man having returned from the US only last week, the health department is taking measures to address concerns raised over Bengaluru techies travelling abroad for work.

“We’ve had two rounds of meetings with representatives from 25 companies. We explained to them the guidelines to be followed pertaining to Covid-19, the dos and don’ts and precautions to be taken. We briefed them about collecting travel history of all their employees, who went abroad,” said Pankaj Kumar Pandey, commissioner, health and family welfare department.

Proactive declaration from persons with travel history to the affected countries is very crucial, officers said.

Deputy CM and minister for IT/BT CN Ashwath Narayan told TOI the IT and BT companies must adhere to precautionary measures. “Many are already avoiding international trips. We don’t want to create fear, but one has to be aware. Companies are aware of the risks. All the suspect cases that we have seen till now are those who had travelled to affected countries earlier,” he said.

Medical education minister K Sudhakar said persons with travel history to affected countries have to honestly self-report themselves in case of symptoms. “All they have to do is report to the toll-free Arogyavani (104),” the minister added.

Besides, the Karnataka government has got into a proactive mode, advising IT/BT firms to allow workers showing flu-like signs to work from home and promote and encourage standard hand and respiratory hygiene practices at workplaces.

Close on the heels of the advisory, business parks across Bengaluru confirmed they are adopting thorough measures to ensure their premises are clean and hygienic, while companies said they are drastically reducing business travel to affected countries and are advising employees to work from home in case they show any flu-like symptoms.

