BU prof looking for coronavirus vaccine hospitalized in Kolkata
2020-02-09
Bhopal: A professor of Bhopal’s Barkatullah University, who was heading an investigative project on a potential coronavirus vaccine, has fallen sick during a tour to Kolkata and is said to be in a critical condition.Ashok Munjal, senior professor heading BU’s department of biochemistry and genetics, and his three-member team were working on the pattern of spread and possible source of infection of the novel coronavirus (nCoV) outbreak in China. “We found that though the bat is a major host for the virus, the role of other wild animals — like Sika deer, green peacock (an indigenous Chinese peacock), and masked palm civet — in spreading the infection can’t be ruled out. We are also investigating how a potential vaccine may be prepared as soon as possible,” said assistant professor Dr Rekha Khandia, who works with Prof Munjal. “He was already working on the genomics and immunoinformatics part with bat viruses, including Nipah. As soon as it started in Wuhan city, it caught our attention. Zoonotic viruses are our field of work,” she said, calling Munjal an “extremely good HOD, colleague and person”.Unlike its cousin SARS, nCoV spreads much faster. Prof Munjal’s team studied 45 animals that are reported to be sold in Wuhan’s wet market.Investigations have shown a possible link between masked palm civet, which was reported to be the host of SARS virus, and the nCoV epidemic. Sika deer, green peafowl and duck-billed platypus were also found to be potential hosts harbouring nCoV, Munjal’s research says. The virus may have been transmitted from infected animals to humans through aerosols created during slaughter of the animals as well from their nasal and fecal secretions, the study says. “In Wuhan’s wet market, animal are kept in crowded cages and share space with animals of other species as well. Body discharges, like nasal secretions and urine of diseased animals, act as the source for infection to spread to other stressed animals,” says research, pointing out that animals are often slaughtered in front of consumers, opening another channel of infection.