Budget passed under Covid shadow
2020-03-31
Bhubaneswar: Thermal scanning of MLAs wearing masks and use of hand sanitizers at the entrance gate marked the day-long proceedings of the second phase of budget session amid the coronavirus scare here on Monday.

The assembly passed the state’s Rs 1.50 lakh crore budget for the coming fiscal (2020-2021) in the absence of chief minister Naveen Patnaik and attendance of around 80 of the 147 members at the convention centre of Lok Seva Bhawan.

The location was chosen because seven employees of the assembly had come in contact with the state’s third Covid-19 patient, a 60-year-old banker. Speaker SN Patro had directed that the assembly and its premises should be sanitized and had asked the employees to go for home isolation.

The MLAs sat around 1.8 metres away from each other. Replying to the brief debate on the budget, finance minister Niranjan Pujari said, “I am seeking passage of the appropriation bill unanimously amid state’s firm resolve to contain the spread of coronavirus. This will give us more strength to fight the virus and to spend on other public welfare initiatives.” 

The finance minister regretted the fact that elaborate debate on various aspects of the budget could not be held because the session had to be curtailed in view of coronavirus scare.

The budget was presented in the assembly on February 18. The speaker had adjourned the proceedings from March 16 to March 29 as part of the efforts to contain the spread of the virus. “The appropriation bill was unanimously passed,” BJD MLA Amar Prasad Satpathy told the media.

Taking part in the debate, leader of opposition Pradipta Naik said the government should take all into confidence to fight the spread of the virus. Congress legislature party leader Narasingha Mishra said the opposition is firmly behind the governments at the Centre and the state in the fight against this health challenge. “However, the government should also take the opposition into confidence and convene an all-party meeting. This will instil more confidence among the public,” he said. The opposition also lauded the role being played by the doctors in treating patients as well as the police in ensuring the lockdown.


