West Bengal: Building plan poses problem, move to turn Medical College into Covid-19 treatment unit shelved
2020-04-04
KOLKATA: The state has shelved its plan to set up 300 isolation beds at Medical College Hospital’s new superspeciality building after the G+8 structure with central air-conditioning and huge glass windows posed a challenge in creating negative-pressure rooms, which are required to treat patients with airborne infectious diseases.

 The MCH will now have a 15-bed critical care unit (CCU) with ventilation support for critical Covid-19 patients.

According to health department officials, the MCH plan did not fit in with the WHO and National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) stipulations for Airborne Infection Isolation (AII) rooms, also called negative-pressure rooms. The officials said it was also explored whether breaking down the glass panes would help in creating ventilation. However, this idea was dropped after doctors pointed out that working in heavy PPEs for long hours without central air-conditioning may pose a practical challenge. Breaking windows, experts said, would necessitate a longer time-frame for repairs.

This, however, was only part of the problem. The more significant issue was disposal of bio-medical waste. “Donning and doffing of PPEs is also critical in such facilities. There is a protocol on how to wear the PPEs and their subsequent disposal, for which specific units must be earmarked. Since the new building wasn’t designed for infectious disease treatment, attending doctors, nurses and other staff would have had to take the stairs to reach the units. This would have posed a risk of infection to others,” a source said. 

In successive meetings, experts were also informed about some other problems. Though some non-critical patients at MCH were discharged on March 24 and 25, to discharge all patients and accommodate those needing medical attention to other hospitals was a problem, sources said. 

“Firstly, all medical college and hospitals are scaling up their isolation facilities. Given the situation, it would be logistically impossible to immediately shift a few hundred patients to these hospitals. Secondly, discharging patients would require an approval from the attending doctors, which may differ from case to case,” a doctor said. 

It was also pointed out that MCH is situated in a congested locality, which may pose law-and-order challenges given the amount of fear the disease has generated among people.

 “Considering all these issues, the state has decided to put on hold the proposal to covert MCH into a 300-bed Covid-19 hospital. But to make use of the expertise of the medical staff in MCH, a separate CCU is being set up,” an official said. 


