Built during one pandemic, Daga statue collapses in another
2020-04-20
Nagpur: The fierce squall amid the lockdown lull on Saturday night left nearly a century old statue of Sir Kasturchand Daga shattered as a tree fell on it.

Erected on December 8, 1924, Daga’s statue has been a landmark in the city, with the ground next to it also named after him. 

It is a coincidence that work on the statue began in 1918-1919, a year after Daga’s death in February 1917, when the Spanish flu pandemic had hit the world. Now when it fell, the world is in the grip of coronavirus pandemic, said his great grandson Govind Daga, an industrialist.

Ashok Mokha, a member of NMC’s heritage committee and an architect, told TOI it may not be possible to put reassemble the statue from the pieces. The white stone may be marble. Mokha said the committee will be taking up the issue in its next meeting.

Daga’s firm M/s Bansilal Abirchand ran a successful business extending to areas in today’s Pakistan and Rangoon. A known philanthropist of his time, he was also among the pioneers of coal and manganese mining in the erstwhile Central Provinces (CP) and Berar.

The statue dedicated to the city by his business partner Sir Manekji Dadabhoy was unveiled at the hands of then governor of CP&Berar, Sir Frank Sly. It was built by noted sculptor of the time G K Mahatre of erstwhile Bombay. The stone having Mahatre’s name was also broken.

“The firm was also the bankers to the British government during the World War,” Daga said. The family had learnt of a ground named Kasturchand Park at Rawal Pindi in Pakistan too. This was confirmed by Daga’s classmate in the US, Ishaq Khan Khakwani, who had served as the railways minister in General Musharaff’s government.

“After Govind requested, I deputed an officer of divisional superintendent’s rank sometime in 2005-06, who confirmed there was a place by that name in Rawal Pindi. It was part of railways property. Of course. it as not in same condition as it is in India,” Khakwani told TOI.

Sly in his speech had noted that the statute could have been ready long ago but got delayed due to World War I.

In December 2017, Sly’s grandniece Alison Graham Varney had also visited the statue. In a function, she read the speech delivered by Sly in 1924. It also happened to be centenary of Daga’s death. 

“My granduncle died in 1928. My grandfather, his youngest brother, inherited his mementos from India. I grew up with this knowledge of India,” Varney told TOI over emai.


