Bulandshahr DM removes Dibai SDM after 16 corona suspects flee quarantine facility
2020-04-14
Meerut: In the backdrop of the 16 Covid-19 suspects who fled the quarantine facility in Bulandshahr on Sunday, district magistrate Ravindra Kumar has removed sub divisional magistrate (SDM), Dibai Sanjay Kumar over negligence in the matter. He has also ordered that an FIR be registered against six government officials -- four assistant development officers and two village panchayat secretaries -- for negligence.

All the escapees were traced by Monday morning.

The orders to remove the SDM and filing an FIR against the six officials were issued a day after 16 Covid-19 suspects fled from a quarantine facility at Janta Inter College in Dibai.

“Instructions have been given to file an FIR against village panchayat secretaries, Jaipal Singh, Kripaal Singh, Mohit Bhushan and

Nrip Singh, besides assistant development officer (Dibai) Abhilash Batham and assistant development officer (Danpur) Suresh Chandra Rai for negligence shown by them in following the Covid-19 norms of the state government,” said Bulandshahr DM Ravindra Kumar.

TOI had earlier reported how 16 people suspected of suffering from Covid-19 kept in a 14-day quarantine at Janta inter College in DIbai on Saturday broke open the grill and escaped from the quarantine centre. 

Police launched a manhunt for them and traced all 16 of them by Monday morning.

Akhilesh Kumar Gaur, station house officer, Dibai police station, said, “During investigation, it was found that the officials concerned were entrusted with making a list of the villagers who came from other districts around this time. They made a list but did not send the actual number of people into quarantine. For instance, a list of 60 people was made but only 16 from that area were sent into quarantine, thereby creating confusion when 16 of them fled and the others were also not found at the facility. It was later revealed that the others were never put into quarantine.”

An FIR under IPC sections 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and relevant sections of the Epidemic Diseases Act has been filed against the officials concerned.


