Buldhana Covid-free now, only Vid dist to be through all 3 zones
2020-05-11
Nagpur: Last three Covid-19 patients of Buldhana, who tested positive on April 25, have recovered and discharged on Sunday. With this, the district, which once had 24 positive cases and was in Red Zone, has become Covid-free and marching towards Green Zone. Buldhana is the first and only district in Vidarbha that had been in all three zones (Red, Orange and Green) between March 29 and May 10.“Buldhana is free of Covid-19 now. We had total 24 cases, including one deceased. We treated 23 patients successfully. They responded to recovery protocol and were discharged accordingly. Today, last three of them were discharged,” said district collector Suman Chandra.“Since the last three detections on April 25, we have tested more than 300 samples and all have been reported negative. This indicates our containment strategy has been largely successful,” she added. Technically, Buldhana has zero active Covid-19 cases at present. The district has reported no new case after April 25, i.e. more than 14 days now. This qualifies Buldhana to be a Green Zone. But, as per Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) protocol, the district should not record new case for 14 days after recovery of last patient. So, the district will have to wait for next two weeks to get the official Green Zone tag.Buldhana recorded its first Covid case on March 29 when a 45-year-old teacher, who died in a government hospital, tested positive after death. Later, four of his close contacts tested positive. The chain ended right there. Second chain of Buldhana started from April 5 when people connected to Nizamuddin Markaz were identified and tested. Total 12 such persons and four of their close contacts had tested positive. All of them have recovered and discharged.Last three patients of Buldhana, discharged today, are in fact members of Tablighi Jamaat (a religious group) from Kamptee near Nagpur. An 11-member group was staying in Buldhana district. When they requested the collector to allow them to return to Nagpur, they were tested for Covid-19 and three of them had tested positive on April 25.