Rajasthan: Bundi Covid-19 free till date, thanks to strict enforcement of protocol
2020-05-14
KOTA: Bundi district administration’s strict enforcement of guidelines by the central and state governments has helped the district remain in green zone with not a single Covid-19 patient detected so far.


Bundi city is not only a tourist hub, but also shares its borders with Kota, Bhilwara, Chittorgarh, Sawai Madhopur and Tonk districts, which are now red zones.

The sampling, however, has been very little in proportion to the district’s population of nearly 12 lakhs. The officials, though, termed the sampling to be as per the guidelines. Around 600 samples in the district were collected and none tested positive for Covid-19. Over 25,000 people were home quarantined and nearly 3,500 are still under quarantine.

District collector Antar Singh Nehra said the main focus was on strict enforcement of the guidelines by the central and state governments, identifying and treating ILI patients, tracing secondary contacts, home quarantine to those coming from outside and sealing of district boarders.

“Besides tracing the secondary contacts, intensive sampling as per the guidelines, was carried out to check community spread in areas like ward number 44 of Bundi city, in Keshoraipatan town and Jajawar village on Tonk border,” Nehra said.

“Since sampling is limited, we have not been provided with adequate number of Viral Transport Medium (VTM) kits so unnecessary sampling was not carried out,” Nehra said. Plying up and down for the government staff from other district was strictly prohibited.

Since the onset of Covid-19, the main focus was on door-to-door survey, which was carried out in three phrases by 268 teams comprising anganwadi workers and medical staff, chief medical and health officer (CMHO), Bundi Dr Gokul Meena said.

On the report of detection of ILI patients, sampling was carried out in the particular area and the medical officer of the concerned CHC immediately administered required medical treatment to the ILI patients, Meena added.

The high risk groups that included people over 65 years and children below 5 years, pregnant women, cancer and diabetic patients were identified in the first phase of the survey from March 17 to March 28 and they were put under watch, he added.

Besides, emphasis was laid on creating awareness on hand wash with SUMAN K (Seedha Ulta Mutthi Angutha Nakhun Kalai) formula, he added. The staff of guest houses in the old city were thoroughly screened and samples were collected when required.

However, some health experts termed the lack of testing a reason behind non-detection of Covid-19 cases in Bundi. “I take it just as a coincidence and stroke of luck that our district is still left out of the list of red and orange zone districts, otherwise no intensive sampling and screening in the residential areas of the district has been carried out,” a medical officer in the district hospital said on condition of anonymity. 

