Bundi tribal community flouts lockdown, holds holy procession
2020-04-06
KOTA: Despite Section 144 and lockdown amid Covid-19 pandemic, hundreds of people of Kanjar tribal community of Ramnagar village of Bundi district on Friday assembled in the village and participated in Neja procession, a community custom. 


At least five persons were on Sunday sent to jail under judicial custody for violation of Section 144 and lockdown by inviting congregation of hundreds of people and holding community event called Neja a day after Ram Navami on Friday in Ramnagar village under Bundi Sadar police station of Bundi district. One person involved in the matter is yet to be nabbed. 

Meanwhile, action against the three officials concerned and two police personnel of the area was initiated and notices were served to them for negligence of duty by not reporting of the event to the administration. 

In Kanjar tribal community customs, procession of Neja with community oracles is taken out every year to mark conclusion of the nine days of Navratras either on the day of Ram Navami or a day after. Around 1,200-1,500 people of Kanjar tribal community of Ramnagar village on Friday, a day after Ram Navami, assembled to watch and offer prayers to the Neja procession being taken out through the main areas of the village, Bundi SP Shivraj Meena told TOI. 

On receiving the report of the event, police rushed to the spot and dispersed the people. However, noticing the police, most of them had fled away from the spot, he said adding that six persons, who had allegedly organized the event, were booked under relevant sections and five of them have been arrested. 

Disciplinary action against two police personnel, posted at Ramnagar police check posts has also been initiated for negligence on duty and notices have been served to them, the SP said. The event was organized by the locals and no outsider had reached there to participate in the event, the SP claimed. 

“No permission was sought for the event in Ramnagar village on Friday. However, the gathering was dispersed within 20-25 minutes and the police have initiated action in the matter,” Bundi collector Antar Singh Nehra said.

Six persons, who allegedly organized the event and were identified as Himmat, Ranjeet, Netram, Hukumchand, Ramkishore and Bakishan, were booked in the matter under relevant sections and five of them were arrested on Saturday evening while Hukumchand is absconding and he is yet to be arrested, circle in charge (CI), Bundi Sadar police station Mukesh Kumar Meena said. 

The five arrested accused were on Sunday produced before the court that ordered to send them to jail under custody till April 13, he said adding further investigation into the matter is underway.

Panchayat Elementary Education Officer (PEEO) of the gram panchayat, village development officer and patwari of the area were on duty on the day of the event in Ramnagar on Friday but the three officials concerned did not inform of the event either to him or to the district control room, sub divisional magistrate (SDM), Bundi Kamal Kumar Meena said. 

Disciplinary action against the three officials has been initiated and chargesheet has been handed over to the patwari, while senior officials concerned have written for the same to PEEO and development officer, the SDM said. 

