Burglary at ‘Covid hotspot’ house, valuables missing
2020-04-14
Bareilly: A house of a Covid-19 family whose six members were found positive recently was said to have been unlocked and allegedly burgled, on Monday. Alarmingly, the house is situated in Bareilly's Subhash Nagar locality which has been completely sealed and heavily guarded by police for the past few days and identified as one of the "Covid hotspots" in the state. 

Members of the family after the infection were isolated for treatment. Their neighbours found locks of the empty house broken. Burglars are said to have decamped with valuables. The extent of theft couldn’t be ascertained yet. Apparently, two members of the family were discharged from a Covid-19 facility on Monday.

Police came to know about the neighbours' discovery at 2pm and initially didn’t enter the house as they thought the place was not properly sanitised. Health department, however, claimed that they had sanitised the house's interior on March 29 and had even shot a video of it. The cops later entered the house and confirmed the burglary.

The incident has also raised questions over police's vigil in the area. Six members of the family were recently tested positive and admitted to district hospital for treatment.

Notably, police have already sealed the Subhash Nagar locality from its 25 entry and exit points after a few Covid-19 cases were found here and the entire area is being monitored with drones. The lock of the house was reportedly intact on Sunday night which suggests that the robbery took place sometime late on Sunday, the police said.

Additional SP (City) Ravindra Kumar said, “We believe that the accused is from the same locality as all the entry and exit points are sealed by us and no one has moved out. We are scanning the footage of suspects recorded by CCTV cameras in the area. We'll achieve a breakthrough in this case soon. And we will register an FIR once the family is able to ascertain the missing articles and money from the house and gives us a written complaint.”


