Burqa-clad Covid-19 samaritan on sanitization mission in Lucknow
2020-06-06
LUCKNOW: With a mask strung across her face, a burqa-clad woman can often be seen walking briskly or negotiating her scooty through narrow alleys of Old Lucknow with a small tank strapped on her shoulder and sprinkling machine in her hands. 


Many mistake her for a municipal corporation employee sanitizing lanes to keep coronavirus at bay during the lockdown. But, this woman on a mission is no ordinary Covid warrior. Sayyad Uzma Parveen, 29, resident of Saadatganj, has covered more than 20km with her sanitization kit through dense localities of Saadatganj, Thakurganj, Yahiyaganj, Chowk market, Balaganj and Aminabad since April 26, breaching conservatism and defying risk of infection.

An avid biker and mother of two children, two and four years, she has spent more than Rs 5 lakh to fund her sanitization drive and distribution of food and essentials to the needy. “I have been supporting the needy with food, money, ration and footwear among other things, besides undertaking regular sanitization drives. I withdrew Rs 2 lakh, kept aside for higher studies of my 4-year-old son, who wants to become a pilot. Also, I ploughed into my life savings of Rs 3 lakh to fund my charity work,” Uzma told TOI.

Though her in-laws were not amused, Uzma received support from her husband, a businessman. “After witnessing my dedication and with appreciation pouring in, relatives too offered support,” said the homemaker, who completes household chores before setting out on her mission. Cleanliness had been her obsession since childhood and Uzma embarked on the mission after seeing several parts of Old city in LMC’s blind spot. She bought two spraying machines and drove through dingy and congested lanes, sprinkling disinfectant, sodium hypochlorite. Two acquaintances came forward to donate two additional machines.

Initially, people looked at her with shock, surprise and suspicion. Some even joked about her initiative. “Gradually, people’s perception changed from apathy to appreciation and admiration,” Uzma said. Now, she has begun getting calls from people to help sanitise their localities.

“People often ask me, why being a woman, I am doing a man’s job? And how I manage to carry such heavy machines? I tell them all that in this hour of crisis, we all should contribute in the fight again the virus,” she said.

