Covid-19 scare: Bus drivers, conductors demand safety equipment
2020-03-15
HUBBALLI: The government has been encouraging people to work from home to ensure they don’t fall prey to Covid-19. However, not only do bus crews of NWRTC and private operators have that luxury, many have frontline exposure to the virus. Yet, NWKRTC has not provided them safety kits like hand sanitisers and masks and many drivers, conductors and their families are worried.


Vijaya Patil, the wife of a conductor, told STOI that her husband bought two masks after the death of a patient in Kalaburagi. “The price of gloves has skyrocketed and not available. I’ve been pleading with my husband to stay away from work, but he can’t do it. I request either the government or NWKRTC to provide sufficient safety equipment to all drivers and conductors,” she added.

Satish Godi, college student and son of a driver, pointed out that activities for which people gather in large numbers have been banned. “The government should consider the plight of drivers and conductors who travel with an average of 50 passengers at a time. Bus crews are a vulnerable group and bus stand toilets are far from clean. Drivers and conductors should be given protective equipment by NWKRTC or government in the larger interest,” he said.

RF Kavalikai, vice-president, KSRTC Staff and Workers Federation, said the organisation has demanded safety equioment. “This is not restricted for drivers and conductors but in the interest of passengers. If any driver or conductor attacked by the virus, he’ll spread it among passengers. We hope the RTC managements respond positively soon,” he said.

‘Safety equipment soon’

NWKRTC has 22,262 employees which include 16,300 drivers and conductors. We have instructed controllers of all nine divisions to take appropriate measures to protect our staff, particularly, drivers and conductors, who come in contact with a larger number of people. Divisional controllers will procure masks, sanitisers and other required equipment within a day or two.

