Bus from Ajmer Sharif shoots up Assam Covid-19 tally
2020-05-09
GUWAHATI: Assam’s number of Covid-19 positive cases reached 58 on Friday after another five passengers of the bus from Ajmer Sharif to Silchar tested positive raising fears of many more such cases from among the remaining travelers by the Rajasthan-registered vehicle. 

In Guwahati, though the fear is that virus might have gone into community transmission mode after three of the four positive cases reported on Thursday have not been found with any travel history, indicating that it is the virus, which might have traveled in a human carrier to the state from outside.

The four positive cases in Guwahati, include a 16-year-old girl, who was tested positive after her death, a 55-year-old housewife, a post-graduate medical student in Guwahati Medical College and Hospital and a 44-year-old employee of Tata, who is the lone case with a travel history from Siliguri.

Assam health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said that the situation has deteriorated since the bus from Ajmer Sharif arrived in Silchar on Wednesday morning.

“Five more persons, who travelled in the bus from Rajasthan have tested positive today. Yesterday and day before yesterday five others from the bus had tested positive,” Himanta said.

He said that a 53-year-old passenger, who tested positive on Thursday, has been found with “massive viral load.” He added, “This is the first positive person with such high virus load in his body and so we fear that the number of positive cases from among the bus passengers might increase. But, we were able to bring all the passengers to the facility quarantine within a short span of time and so the transmission may not have taken place outside.”

“But, in Guwahati where three of the four positive persons reported yesterday did not have any travel history, it looks like the virus might have come from outside. We can assume that the virus is in transmission within the city,” Sarma said.

He added, “There is no need for any panic. Because, we have tracked the positive cases, completed the contact tracing in three hours and we are getting full cooperation from their families. But, violation of the lockdown under relaxation can send the situation out of control. So do not allow children and elders above 65 years of age to come out of their homes.”

He appealed to the people of Guwahati not to break the guidelines during the relaxed lockdown period. “The moment anyone has cough or fever or slightest diarrhea, one should immediately call up 104 or contact a doctor or nearest hospital. Do not ignore these symptoms,” he appealed to the people.

The Kamrup (Metro) district administration has declared two hostels of GMCH, where the Covid-19 positive doctor lives and had meals and areas around the Guwahati Medical College Hospital, the employers' colony near the B Barooah Cancer Institute, where the 16-year-old girl is living and the ESI hospital at Kahilipara, where she had gone for treatment and areas in Kharghuli and Chandmari, where the housewife was living, as containment zones.

The fourth Covid-19 positive person had returned from Siliguri on May 6 along with two others in a personal vehicle and three of them were screened at Sarusajai. The positive person has been admitted to Mahendra Mohan Choudhury Hospital while his other two friends, who have tested negative are in a facility quarantine.


