Covid-19 scare: Buses not to ply in Bihar till March 31
2020-03-22
Patna: The state government on Saturday suspended all bus services in the state, including interstate and inter-district buses, till March 31 as a preventive measure against Covid-19 pandemic.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The state transport department has decided to stop the operations of city and other private buses as well as the services of interstate buses from Sunday (March 22) till March 31. 

Transport secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said the decision to stop interstate and city buses till March 31 has been taken as preventive measure and to follow the guideline of social distancing. The DMs concerned will take decsion to allow any bus in their respective districts in emergency situation “Buses operated by Bihar State Road Transport Corporation Limited (BSRTC) as well as private operators have been stopped with immediate effect. The interstate buses would also stop plying from Sunday onwards,” he said.

“The instruction to ban bus services till March 31 has been issued to all the operators. The suspension order would be revoked only after the situation improves,” he said.

On being asked how the department would ensure restriction on bus operators, Agarwal said district magistrates will monitor and take action against violators. 

“The salary of bus drivers and conductors will not be deducted for this period. Meanwhile, the passengers, who booked the bus tickets in advance from travel websites for interstate buses will get full refund for cancellation,” Agarwal said.

There are about 125 city buses of BSRTC and 250 by private operators in Patna. BSRTC operates 20 interstate buses on Delhi and Jharkhand routes and private operators run more than 100 buses on Kolkata, Lucknow, Delhi, Agra and Jharkhand routes.

Earlier, an order was issued on March 15 to suspend operation of buses from Patna and Gaya to Kathmandu and Janakpur till March 31. 

The district transport officers, motor vehicle inspectors and enforcement sub-inspectors of the respective districts have been instructed to ensure that public transport vehicles are being sanitized.


