Coronavirus lockdown: Buses bear the brunt on Day 1
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: With all modes of public transport shut down on Monday, the less than 1,000 buses of Delhi Transport Corporation(DTC) allowed to operate witnessed crowding during peak rush hours.


Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday evening announced the lockdown to ensure that the spread of Covid-19 is minimised in the capital. Earlier in the day, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) had already announced that its train services will remain suspended till March 31. 

Delhi government had allowed only 25% buses of the fleet to operate from Monday and due to the overcrowding witnessed on the first day of the lockdown, DTC has been now asked to operate 50% of its fleet. Around 2,000 buses are expected to operate from Tuesday.

While bus services are being continued only to help transport those involved in essential services, there was no checking on Monday as people were allowed to travel on self-declaration.

“While most people in our office have been asked to stay home, those who are in senior positions have to come to office. I don’t own a vehicle, so the only option to travel was by DTC buses,” said a central government employee who didn’t wish to be identified. “The frequency of buses was low and the ones that were arriving, already had so many commuters I felt afraid of catching an infection and waited for the next bus,” he said.

A DTC official said that there is no way it can be checked if those boarding a bus are involved in essential services. “There were quite a few government employees and those working in hospitals who travelled by buses on Monday but a very large number of commuters told our conductors that they are going to buy medicines unavailable in their area or that they are visiting a family member admitted in a hospital,” he said.

“With 50% of DTC’s fleet out on Tuesday, hopefully there would be less crowding but ideally limited services of Delhi Metro should have been continued instead of shutting down the entire network,” he said. “Metro stations have stringent access control and unlike buses and all commuters can be thoroughly checked,” he said. “Our buses are being thoroughly disinfected and our staff is also taking precautions but they are extremely afraid of ferrying so many passengers amidst the pandemic,” he said.


