Butibori power co asks 141 to resign amid Covid mayhem
2020-05-22
Nagpur: Vidarbha Industries Power Limited (VIPL), a subsidiary of Reliance Power Limited, has made 141 out of its 170 staffers at the 600MW Butibori power plant tender their resignation. The plant was closed since January 2019 and the staffers were doing only maintenance and preservation work. The remaining 29 staffers will continue this work.

Station director Rajendra Kale said the plant had closed down due to regulatory issues after Adani Power took over Reliance’s power distribution business in Mumbai. “We initially closed one 300MW unit and then had to close the second one too,” he added.

Employees have been asked to work for another three months till August. The employees are distraught over the fear of not getting jobs due to the coronavirus pandemic-induced recession.

“We had requested the station director to let us continue till December and then ask us to resign. By March 2021, economy would be back on track and we would get jobs elsewhere. However, at present the economic scenario is bleak. Moreover, due to the lockdown we can’t even go for interviews. The company has behaved in a heartless manner,” said an employee.

Another employee said, “It is not our fault if the plant closed down. If the company was unable to run it why didn’t it sell off the plant. The new owner would have restarted the plant and our jobs would have been saved.”

Employees alleged that company used pressure tactics to make them resign. “We were told that if we did not resign, we would not be given three months’ salaries and release letters. We had no option but to resign,” said a despondent employee.

An engineer working at the plant said he had purchased a flat recently and was paying a monthly instalment of Rs28,000. “If I don’t get salary, how will I pay this amount? My two kids are in good schools and the fees is quite high. Besides, I will have to buy food items, pay electricity, water and mobile bills. All this needs money. I don’t know what I will do after three months unless I get a job,” he added.

A technician said he did not have much savings and would find it difficult to feed his family after three months.


