Kolkata: Bypass hospital set to reopen with revamped Covid-19 unit
2020-05-17
KOLKATA: After shutting down new admissions and OPD services for almost two weeks, Peerless Hospital is set to resume all services, including surgeries, from Monday. The hospital has also revamped their Covid-dedicated facility, where they have strengthened infrastructure and added more beds. 

The multi-specialty hospital shut services on May 4 after some doctors and nurses tested positive for Covid-19 and several health workers had to be quarantined. The authorities had to suspend certain services owing to manpower shortage and for a sanitization drive. “We regret the inconvenience caused to our patients during the temporary closure. We are now in a better position to provide safer services,” said Sujit Kar Purkayasthya, managing director of Peerless Hospital. 

The hospital, which has been treating novel coronavirus patients right from the beginning with only 10 isolated beds, has now upgraded the Covid unit. A ward has been converted into a negative-pressure facility with 20 single-bed cabins and eight ITU beds. An extractor machine has been installed on the rooftop to create negative pressure. “This ward has been created in such a way that there will be no interaction of people attending to Covid patients and the rest. This is a very advanced facility with intensive care and other services under the same roof,” said hospital CEO Sudipta Mitra. 

Many hospitals across the city have had their share of Covid scare, as asymptomatic patients tested positive and infected several healthcare workers. But with guidelines now allowing samples of asymptomatic patients to be tested, hospitals said such cases would go down. “Hospitals had started emerging as hotspot for transmission of the virus. But now that the government has eased the norms for testing, we hope the risk of healthcare workers as well as patients getting infected in hospitals will be reduced,” said an official at a hospital off EM Bypass. 


