Coronavirus scare in Pune: Cabbies wary of picking passengers from airport
2020-03-11
PUNE: With reports of the taxi driver, who ferried the Coronavirus-affected city couple from Mumbai to Pune on March 1 also testing positive for the flu, cabbies in the city, especially those who undertake inter-city rides and pick up passengers from the airport, are a worried lot.


Kamlesh, a driver on a cab aggregator platform, said he recently cancelled the ride of a passenger who wanted to travel to Navi Mumbai from the Pune airport.

Another driver, who did not wish to be named, said, “Carrying passengers from the airport has become a scary affair now.” The city-based couple, who tested positive for the Coronavirus, had travelled to Dubai in the last week of February and used a private cab to travel from Mumbai to Pune on March 1.

The driver, who ferried the couple, had initially claimed that he worked for Ola. However, Pune divisional commissioner Dipak Mhaisekar told TOI. “Upon further investigation, we have come to know that the driver does not belong to the Ola platform. We have sought help from the cops for his call record details. Once we have the list, we will contact the people, including passengers, he was in touch with,” he said. An Uber spokesperson said that drivers had been informed about the dos and don’ts. “We are supporting drivers and delivery people diagnosed with COVID-19 or placed in quarantine by a public health authority. They will receive compensation for a period of up to 14 days,” Andrew Macdonald, senior vice-president, rides and platform, Uber said.

Guru Katti, president, Swarajya Vahan Chalak Sanghatna, said that more than 500 face masks had been distributed among the drivers. “If they are waiting at the airport, they should always wear a mask. Also, we have asked them to use gloves if they touch the luggage of passengers at the airport,” he said. Ola officials said, “Our walk-in centres across cities have been equipped with sanitisers and masks, which can be used by drivers,” an Ola spokesperson said.


