Bihar: Cabinet approves Rs 809 crore fund for Covid-19 fight
2020-05-29
PATNA: The state cabinet on Thursday gave its sanction to the disaster management department’s proposal for advance withdrawal of Rs 809 crore from the state contingency fund for expenditure to be incurred on measures taken for the containment of the Covid-19 pandemic in the state.

With regard to another proposal moved by the department, the cabinet gave its post-facto sanction to the transfer of money made by the government in the personal accounts of migrant workers, who had arrived from other states by Shramik trains as well as those who had arrived by other means.

As per announcements made, the state government had reimbursed the train fares to migrant workers apart from Rs 500 towards expenses during the journey and also a minimum of Rs 1,000. Similarly, migrant workers who had arrived using other means were paid Rs 1,000 each. In both cases, the reimbursement was made by transferring the money into their personal accounts.

The cabinet also gave its nod to the payment of Rs 2,416 crore to the urban local bodies in the state. The money had been transferred to the state government by the Centre on the basis of interim recommendations made by the 15th Finance Commission. The cabinet also sanctioned constitution of a committee headed by the chief secretary to find the ways and manner of expenditures to be made by the urban local bodies.

The cabinet also approved the government’s proposal to create 397 posts in the assistant grade for the Patna High Court. The cabinet also gave its sanction to the promotion of personnel at 190 posts in the field offices of the transport department, besides creation of 163 other posts in the department’s field offices.

The state cabinet gave its sanction to creation of posts in the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) meant to implement the Smart City projects at Bhagalpur, Patna, Muzaffarpur and Biharsharif. Those selected would be recruited on contract basis, while a committee headed by the urban development department secretary would decide on the fixation of posts, educational qualification and experience of the candidates required for their selection.

The cabinet also gave its approval to the expenditure of Rs 9.94 crore to be incurred by the two software consultancy firms to set up and operate programmes such as CFMS, WAMIS and HRMS. The two consultancy firms will be given one-year extension, if required, to monitor the quality of the project.

The cabinet also gave its approval to the government’s proposal to celebrate the birth anniversary of former Union minister and firebrand leader George Fernandes on June 3 as the state function each year. 


