Cabinet allots Rs 100 crore for Covid-19 fight in Jharkhand
2020-05-21
Ranchi: The state cabinet gave its nod for allocating Rs 100 crore to the state disaster management department for tackling the Covid-19 pandemic in Jharkhand on Wednesday. 

In its first meeting since the lockdown was imposed in Jharkhand on March 22, the 11-member ministerial council headed by chief minister Hemant Soren gave its approval to 15 proposals tabled by various departments. 

Speaking to reporters after the meeting, cabinet secretary Ajoy Kumar Singh said: “The cabinet okayed the proposal to disburse Rs 100 crore to the state disaster management department from the state contingency fund to tackle Covid-19. The money will be spent for setting up quarantine centres, screening and sampling of suspected patients, procurement of medical equipment, food and other essential provisions in quarantine and isolation centres.” 

Singh said the disbursement was done as the budgetary allocations for the disaster management, pegged at Rs 30 crore, was insufficient. In another decision, the cabinet gave its post facto approval to the proposal of procuring PPE kit, medicines and other equipment on nomination basis from agencies and companies identified by AIIMS (New Delhi) and the Union ministry of health and family welfare. The cabinet also gave its post facto approval to the decision whereby MLAs can spend up to Rs 25 lakh from their respective MLA-LAD funds to fight Covid-19. 

In another decision, the cabinet allocated Rs 84.95 crore to the state department of food, civil supplies and consumer affairs for transportation of food grain which is to be distributed for free to all beneficiaries of the National Food Security Act under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana in between April and June this year. 

The cabinet also gave its nod to seeking loan of Rs 229.93 crore from Nabard for 36 undergoing water-harvesting projects. Pegged at a cumulative cost of Rs 300 crore, the projects were sanctioned in 2016 but work commenced two years later, Singh said. The cabinet also okayed a proposal to seek loan of Rs 104.68 crore from Nabard for six new rural piped-water supply projects which are planned in Kapali (Seraikela-Kharsawan), Chandil (Seraikela-Kharsawan), Nimiya, Chatarpur and Patan (all of them in Palamu) and Kanhara in Dumka. 

The cabinet gave its nod for setting up one new industrial training centre each in Khunti, Giridih, Ranchi, Ramgarh, Simdega and Dumka under the Union government’s skill development programme for youth in leftwing-extremism-affected districts. It approved Rs 34.22 crore for the ITI buildings, including the Union grant of Rs 20.65 crore. 

The cabinet gave its post facto approval to the commencement of Budget session of the fifth Jharkhand assembly, budgetary allocations and tabling of Jharkhand Economic Survey report in the assembly. 


