Kolkata: Cabs to switch off ACs during rides to beat coronavirus threat
2020-05-14
KOLKATA: Don’t expect a cool ride in AC cabs this summer. Cab operators and online cab aggregators have decided to roll down windows and switch off the AC while ferrying passengers so that novel coronavirus cannot thrive and infect both commuters and drivers. Many AC taxi operators in the city are already doing it with the consent of their riders.

There is a growing concern over the possibility of transmission in the confines of AC cars. A Chinese study suggested the spread of the virus in an air-conditioned restaurant. “Though the study is not irrefutable, the possibility cannot be ruled out completely. Particularly, the space within the car is very limited,” said Professor Prabir Basu, an automobile expert.

 


Two major online app-cab aggregators – Uber and Ola – have already issued advisory of rolling down the window glass and switching off the AC during the ride. Both the aggregators have urged for a strict compliance of the advisory for the safety of passengers and driver-partners. The aggregators have also adopted flexible cancellation policy where both the rider and the driver partner can cancel the ride, if they feel that the pandemic protocol is not being followed, said app-cab aggregator sources.

In its “10 steps to safer ride” guideline, Ola has stated that AC is to be switched off to avoid recirculation of air. Windows will be kept open during all rides. In its advisory, Uber also harped on rolling down the window for better ventilation. The riders have been asked to request the driver to switch the AC to fresh air mode.

Doctors said rolling down windows is indeed a safer option. “Cross-ventilation is good as it will tend to drive away the viral droplets that may have landed inside a cab. In a closed environment with the AC on, the chances of the virus surviving and getting transmitted are higher,” said RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences consultant, Arindam Biswas.

However, there is a widespread apprehension about regular arguments and possibility of losing passengers, given the severe weather conditions during peak summer, said operators. “Majority of our customers will insist on switching on the AC, even if they are aware of the danger. They will tell us that the fare includes air conditioning charges,” said Indranil Banerjee, general secretary of West Bengal Online Cab Operators’ Guild.

However, many metered taxi operators have already been practising it in the city. “We are taking consent of the riders on keeping the widow open and switching off the AC. We are telling them why it is necessary for the betterment of their health under such circumstances. In most of the cases, riders appreciate the move. In some cases, they insist on switching on the AC,” said Sanjib Roy of Bengal Taxi Association.


