Calangute woman travels from Mumbai, ducks Covid test, ‘attends wedding’, turns positive
2020-06-05
PANAJI / CALANGUTE: The tourist hub of Calangute was in a flutter on Thursday after a senior citizen, the mother-in-law of a local panchayat member, tested positive for Covid-19 after she arrived from Mumbai and skipped the screening test at the Goa border.

The woman had allegedly come to attend the wedding of a relative that was held on May 31 at the panchayat member’s residence, next to the residence of a prominent nightclub owner with around 400 guests.

CM Pramod Sawant admitted that the woman had skipped the screening test. “It is true that she came without any test. After she was found positive, she has been admitted to the Covid hospital,” he said.

Locals said after the woman complained of breathlessness, she was taken to a private hospital, which referred her to Goa Medical College, where her results for Covid test came positive.

Sawant said he would inquire into how the woman skipped the test. “It is very difficult to know how she skipped. Around 3,000 people come in every day, so it is difficult to know about one person. There may have been a human error,” he said.

As per the protocol followed by the state government, domestic travellers coming into Goa have to either submit a certificate taken within 48 hours from an ICMR-approved lab that the person is Covid-19 negative or undergo Covid test at a government facility by paying Rs 2,000.

Sawant said close contacts of the woman have already been tested and asked others who have come in contact with her to come forward for the test.

“We have started active contact tracing of the woman,” said health secretary Nila Mohanan.

“The panchayat member has been isolated and tested for Covid-19 along with all his close family members,” ports minister and Calangute MLA Michael Lobo told TOI. Their reports are expected on Friday, he said.

“All the panchayat members are self-isolating till the reports come in. As a precautionary measure, the Calangute panchayat office will only admit one person at a time till things clear up,” Lobo said.

Lobo further denied rumours that he was present at the wedding. “I was in South Goa on that day,” he said. “From what I know, it was a small wedding with 50-80 guests.”

Calangute sarpanch Francis Rodrigues also refuted allegations that he along with other panchayat members were present at the event.

“The wedding was on May 31. The panchayat member’s mother-in-law came on June 2. She’s a heart patient and because she fell sick, she was admitted to a private hospital. After testing positive, she has been shifted to the GMC, Bambolim,” Rodrigues said.


