Can ARB drugs be used to treat Covid-19 patients?
2020-05-13
Visakhapatnam: Can Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (ARB) drugs, which are commonly used to control high blood pressure, be used to treat Covid-19 patients? A pulmonologist at the ESI hospital in the city believes it can. His approach is based on the basic genome structure of the virus.

Dr Phanender Ketha, who is a respiratory disease specialist at the government hospital, says he wrote to WHO (World Health Organisation) and the Lancet medical journal about his approach in February. He also wrote to the Atlanta-based Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and to the chief of infectious disease control in Italy in March.

In fact, clinical trial of ARBs for Covid management has already begun in many parts of the world. The government general hospital in Vijayawada too is exploring the possibility of trying out ARBs for treatment of Covid patients from this month.

“Novel coronavirus enters the human host through respiratory route and enters the endothelial cells of the capillaries of the lungs, and also endothelial cells of the capillaries of various organs of the body like kidneys, heart and brain by binding to the ACE receptors on the endothelial cells,” Dr Ketha said, elaborating on the approach.

A receptor is a cellular structure made of protein molecules. It binds to specialized molecules that can cause chemical changes inside cell membranes.

“After entering endothelial cells, the virus gets integrated into the genome of the endothelial cells for its replication. New viral particles are produced, which infect other endothelial cells. After this replication, the endothelial cells get damaged, leading to interstitial pneumonitis, capillary leaks, pulmonary edema/ARDS and dysfunction to other vital organs. ARB tablets are generally used to control high BP. These drugs can also help prevent the entry of the virus into the endothelial cells in the capillaries of the lungs and become the antiviral medication for Covid,” he explained.

This approach can be useful as it is cheap, the medicine is readily available, and the side-effects are minimal if used in appropriate doses, he added.


