Can the humble Betadine help fight Covid-19?
2020-05-06
Amaravati: Can a simple Betadine solution help eliminate the novel coronavirus? The researcher, who started trial and study on the efficacy of betadine on Covid-19 patients, says the initial results have been encouraging.

An associate professor in plastic surgery at Rangaraya Medical College (KMC), Kakinada, Dr Sumita Shakar started the study on Covid-19 positive patients at NRI Medical College Hospital and Pinnamaneni Siddartha Medical College, both Covid-19 dedicated hospitals, almost 40 days ago. 

She secured green signal from Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) and AIIMS almost a month ago to take up the study. Interestingly, Stanford University has also taken up a similar study after Shakar started the research. “Betadine is a common disinfectant known across the world but less known for its gargle. I am confident that this drug is going to be more effective solution before a vaccine comes,” Sumita told TOI.

She explained that Povidone-iodine (PVP-I) or Betadine has been known as a microbicidal agent for the past few decades and it has also demonstrated better anti-viral activity than other antiseptics in a few in-vitro studies against other coronaviruses (SARS-CoV and MERSCoV). 

“Betadine is valuable because of its most potent bactiricidal, virucidal and fungicidal properties. It is the only known broad spectrum antiviral agents. Its efficacy was studied in-vitro after the outbreak of MERS and SARS-COR and found that at 0.23% concentrate is more than 95% efficacious in killing these viruses,” she said. Dr Sharkar said. 

Since the effect lasts for four-six hours, it needs to be repeated at least four times a day, she said. She noted that this seems to be the most simple and inexpensive way of protecting people in the current scenario. She said that her husband and additional DGP Ravishankar Ayyanar, also a medical graduate, have also played key roles in taking up the research. Ayyanar is, in fact, encouraging all police personnel on Covid-19 duties to gargle with betadine twice a day. 


