Can conduct SSLC, HSE exams a week after lockdown: Kerala education department
2020-04-24
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: State general education department has intimated a high-power committee chaired by chief secretary Tom Jose that it was prepared to conduct SSLC, Plus One and Plus Two examinations a week after government lifts lockdown and if other conditions remain favourable.

“This doesn’t mean that government would be conducting the pending examinations immediately after the lockdown, which may be lifted by May 3. The final decision and examination schedule are dependent on many things, of which nobody has any clarity. When discussing about the preparedness of the department, the future course of action is planned on the basis of a hypothesis that lockdown would be lifted on May 3 and normalcy would follow thereafter. But that should not necessarily happen in the same fashion as is planned now,” said a senior official with the department.

After discussing the preparedness at a quality improvement programme (QIP) committee meeting on Tuesday in which officials and teachers’ organisations participated, the department shared their plans with the high-power committee. “Several state boards have not yet begun their Class X examination. Since the lockdown is nationwide, any decision about the conduct of any examination would be highly depended on the nature of directives from the Union government. Some clarity might emerge on such aspects in the proposed video conferencing of Prime Minister Narendra Modi with chief ministers,” another top official said.

According to a tentative plan the department has evolved at present, the Plus One and Plus Two examinations can be conducted in two time slots.

Considering the examinations, the department had exempted examination centres and valuation camps from running labour camps during the lockdown.

The department, in association with NSS units, has taken steps to provide masks and sanitisers for students attending examinations in the post-lockdown period. “In case the Covid-19 situation in the state abates and the intensity of the diseases continue to be unfavourable in Gulf regions where also the Kerala board examinations are held, it has been suggested that on such circumstances permission may be given for online monitoring of the examination in such places,’’ the report said.

