Can NMMC contract workers get Covid-19 benefit of PM's insurance scheme, Bombay HC asks
2020-05-15
MUMBAI: The Bombay high court on Thursday asked if the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kamgar Package Insurance Scheme for health workers fighting Covid-19 can be extended to contract workers of Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation (NMMC).


During a hearing via video conferencing by justice Shahrukh Kathawalla of a petition regarding contract workers, the court was informed that central government has been added as a party. NMMC and the state government's response was also sought on payment of daily allowance of Rs 300/- to them as given to permanent employees. 

On Tuesday, the NMMC was directed to submit the number of masks, gloves and sanitizers in its possession before announcement of the lockdown and a detailed break up of their distribution. The petition was filed by Samaj Samata Kamgar Sangh on the behalf of 6,277 contract workers saying they are only provided with 2-3 drops of hand sanitisers before they start work and at the end of the shift. There is not protection provided from Covid-19 including hand sanitisers, gloves, masks, personal protection equipment (PPE) except for low-quality masks and gloves given once.

An affidavit by Tushar Pawar, deputy municipal commissioner (Solid Wastes Department) denied the union's claim. He said protective material such as masks, gloves and sanitisers are provided by their contractors. 

``Such protective material are procured by the contractors at their own costs, as well as provided by the corporation to the contractors,''' he added, and sought time to give details of procurement of protective material. 

The sangh's advocate countered that false statements have been made on oath and fabricated documents relied upon by NMMC which bear forged signatures of workers admitting to receiving protective material.

``The above statements of the petitioner union and the corporation amounts to the word of one against the other. Since there are 225 contractors, it is not possible for this court, and that too at this stage, to enter into an inquiry and determine as to which side is speaking the truth,'' noted Justice Kathawalla in his order. 

He directed that on every Monday at 10am, the representative of the NMMC, the sangh and the contractor shall meet at the head office of NMMC and the necessary protective material for an entire week for the contract workers shall be handed to the sangh's representative who will distribute the same to its members according to their duties. The court will take an update on May 15.

