‘Cancer patients can’t be denied fertility preservation even during pandemic’
2020-06-07
Dr Sadhana Patwardhan is a gynaecologist and an IVF consultant. She has been practising since two decades. She is also a national executive member of Fertility Preservation Society of India, clinical secretary of Maharashtra State chapter of ISAR and chairperson of High Risk Pregnancy Committee AMOGS 20-22. 

On the occasion of World Cancer Survivor’s Day (first Sunday of June), Dr Patwardhan, director of Nagpur Test Tube Baby Centre, talks to TOI about the importance of fertility preservation among young cancer patients.

Excerpts from the interview...

Q. How is fertility preservation linked to cancer survivor’s day?

A. The concept started from the USA and it was introduced in India a decade ago when the Fertility Preservation Society of India was formed in New Delhi. The need for fertility preservation was felt as 4-5% among the newly diagnosed cancer patients are less than 35 years old. With early diagnosis and better treatment modalities, the life span of cancer survivors is increasing. This was not possible a few decades ago. The essence of fertility preservation is to give them a biological child or retain the ability to procreate once they are cured.

Q. Are young patients convinced of fertility preservation?

A. Young cancer patients look at the prospects of becoming biological parents once they become disease-free. However, the need for fertility preservation has to be weighed against morbidity and mortality associated with cancer. The ultimate aim of today’s oncologist, IVF specialist, onco-surgeon, endocrinologist and health counsellor should be to bless these young cancer patients with their own biological child and a fruitful and purposeful life. In fact, the patients very much wish to retain their fertility.

Q. Has the Covid pandemic affected this option?

A. As per the guidelines of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHERE) and American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), a cancer patient can’t be denied the option of fertility preservation even during this pandemic. We have been getting referrals to freeze their gamete – cryopreservation of the semen, oocytes and embryo with the necessary triage and safety precaution. No published reports show that Covid19 will affect the reproductive system and fertility of male and female though this possibility cannot be ruled out. SARS CoV-1 SARS Cov-2 receptors are expressed in ovary testis and uterus but SARS Cov-1 RNA was not found in these organs.

Q. Can you call it part of cancer treatment?

A. The life of patient is more important than anything else. If the disease needs immediate treatment, we can’t wait for fertility preservation. It takes a week for men while in women it takes 2 to 3 weeks because she has to undergo ovarian stimulation. 

Q. What is the preference level? 

A. In two years of launching fertility preservation in Nagpur, more than a dozen patients have opted for it. It is quite affordable for men but slightly expensive for women as she has to undergo one complete IVF stimulation cycle. Mostly, the option is for people in the early stage of cancer. If the disease is curable and the patient has a good long term survival after treatment, it is strongly recommended.

Q. Is there a need to regulate fertility preservation through a law?

A. In 2006, the American Society of Clinical Oncology first published recommendations on fertility preservation stating that “as part of education and informed consent before cancer therapy, oncologists should address the possibility of infertility with patients treated during their reproductive years.” Fertility Preservation Society of India is formulating guidelines. Fertility preservation strategies require two to three weeks to complete. There are many technical, logistical and ethical questions which surround this concept. Legal help is also needed along with all clinical experts to execute this work. Issues such as compulsorily discarding the semen or embryo in the event of patient’s death need to be addressed.

Q. How does cancer treatment affect fertility?

A. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy remains the mainstay of cancer treatments. Both can be damaging to the ovary and testis depending on the agent used, dose given, and age of the patient. Interdisciplinary collaboration between medical and surgical oncologists, reproductive endocrinologists, and urologists is important. Oncologists have the initial responsibility to discuss the reproductive risks of intended cancer therapies.

Q. What are the options for men and women patients?

A. The options are embryo cryopreservation, oocyte cryopreservation, ovarian tissue cryopreservation (OTC) and in-vitro maturation (IVM) among women. For men, cryopreservation of semen and testicular sperm extraction is done.

Q. Can fertility be protected before beginning cancer treatment?

A. Fertility sparing surgery is essentially offered for female cancer patients where ovarian transposition i.e. moving the ovary out of the field of radiation is done. Medical management is also largely applicable to female cancer patients when adjuvant therapy is given to prevent loss of ovarian reserve.


