Cancer care to change in Covid times
2020-05-22
KOCHI: If a cancer patient or a person undergoing diagnostic evaluation for cancer tests positive for Covid-19 , he/she would be first provided treatment for the virus infection before receiving cancer treatment.

The state government has come out with cancer care treatment strategy for coronavirus-affected or suspected patients in Kerala amid fear that the influx of Malayalis from other states and countries might change the Covid scenario in the state.

Cancer patients fall in the vulnerable group and are at an increased risk of catching the coronavirus infection. More than 1 lakh people are being treated for cancer in the state and most of them are above the age of 55. Studies have shown that cancer patients have a higher risk of Covid-19 infection compared with the community population. 

As per the new treatment strategy, life-threatening cancer emergencies can be carried out in any hospital offering cancer care, irrespective of Covid status by making sure that universal high-risk infection precautions are taken by healthcare workers. However, biopsy or surgery in Covid positive patients may be deferred till they test negative. But a final decision on it will be taken by the multi-disciplinary medical board (MDMB) based on the nature of the cancer, possibility of cure and risk involved.

A cancer patient or a suspect with coronavirus infection would preferably be treated at medical colleges and will not be referred to non-Covid cancer centres such as the Regional Cancer Centre, the Malabar Cancer Centre and the Cochin Cancer Research Centre. 

After lockdown relaxation, the number of cancer patients approaching hospitals for treatment has seen a steady increase. But hospitals are not encouraging walk-ins and insisting on prior appointments. 

“We are taking all necessary precautions, ensuring social distancing at the hospital and discouraging too many bystanders. We also advise patients on the precautions they need to take to protect themselves,” said RCC medical superintendent Dr Sajeed A.

Even in private hospitals, the situation is no different though many of them are discouraging follow-ups, unless they are unavoidable. Also, medicines are delivered to homes of patients after online consultation. Hospital admissions and recurrent hospital visits are potential risk factors for Covid-19 infection.

“We encourage only chemo patients to come to the hospital. Hospital visit increases risk, and lung cancer patients are more at risk,” said Dr K Pavithran, head of the department of medical oncology and hematology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences.

