Coronavirus in Goa: Cancel Ketevan festival on top priority, health minister tells Pramod Sawant
2020-03-12
PANAJI: Health minister Vishwajit Rane on Wednesday asked chief minister Pramod Sawant to cancel this weekend’s Ketevan sacred music festival “on top priority” in view of the exponential number of coronavirus cases worldwide. The festival, which boasts “70 artistes from 14 countries”, is set to become the state’s first Covid-19 casualty as Rane has asked the CM to act “in public interest and in the interest of the people of Goa”.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In his letter, Rane mentioned a circular issued by the government of India on Wednesday which stated that persons coming from 14 identified countries must self-quarantine themselves for 14 days. Thus, he asked Sawant to direct the organisers to postpone the festival till further notice.

 The festival was to feature artistes from Argentina, Spain, Italy, Vietnam, France, Germany, UK, Spain, Portugal, Georgia, Switzerland, Russia and Japan. Many of these countries are in the throes of the global coronavirus scare. 

Earlier in the day, art and culture minister Govind Gaude was keen that the festival carry on. “The show must go on,” he said. 

“This is a pre-planned programme so it should go on. Everyone knows about the virus and international airports are thoroughly conducting checks and only then are allowing people to go ahead. It is therefore the responsibility of the health department and the airports authority of India (AAI). Proper care must be taken by each and every one.” 

While many institutions worldwide cancelled their events in view of the coronavirus scare, the Ketevan organisers were keen to go ahead. Festival director Santiago Lusardi Girelli had said there would be no artists coming from “critical areas”. “We are following Indian government regulations,” he told TOI. “So no artistes from countries like Italy, Iran, China and South Korea will be hosted at the festival.” Girelli said that artistes representing Italy and Spain were “cancelled”. The move comes in the backdrop of the government of India suspending visas and e-visas granted to nationals of France, Germany and Spain.

Meanwhile, the festival seemed to have taken some precautions in the wake of the virus. “Volunteers will wear gloves to hand out tickets and keep hand sanitisers at the festival venue for attendees,” the festival’s PR head told TOI earlier on Wednesday. Sources said that some of the artistes have already arrived in Goa, while others are scheduled to arrive. The festival team told TOI that many artistes already have their visas, and are expected to make it for the event.

Though Goa has not yet seen a confirmed case of Covid-19, the the fear of the virus spreading at mass gatherings has led to the cancellation of major events across the globe, like Coachella. Even Holi celebrations in Panaji earlier this week received a lukewarm response owing to the fear of any breakout, while the event scheduled in Ponda was cancelled.

Rane, meanwhile, said that the AAI is screening international fliers, and that there is no need to panic. However, he appealed to the people to avoid mass gatherings as a precaution. 

The Ketevan festival is held annually at various venues in Old Goa, including the ruins of St Augustine church, the church of Santa Monica, and St Antony’s Chapel. This year’s edition was scheduled to be held from March 13 to 15.


