Can’t Chennai alone be under lockdown, Madras HC asks Tamil Nadu
2020-06-12
CHENNAI: On a day when the Madras high court prodded the state to explore the possibility of bringing the city under lockdown, representatives of the state’s largest traders guild, Tamil Nadu Vanigar Sangankalin Peramaippu, met finance secretary and offered their support for a 15-day lockdown, while at least two senior ministers asserted that a decision would be taken only by the CM and it would be based on the advice of a panel of health experts. 


Earlier on Thursday, at a virtual court hearing, the HC flagged concerns over rising Covid-19 cases in the city. “Despite the steps taken by the state government to contain the Covid-19 spread, every day the number of cases is steeply rising and the situation has become alarming, particularly in Chennai and its outskirts,” a bench of Justice Vineet Kothari and Justice R Suresh Kumar told government pleader V Jayaprakash Narayan. “Therefore, we want to know whether the government has devised any special scheme, which includes complete lockdown or curfew, to contain the spread in Chennai,” the judges said. The court, however, made it clear that it was not a suo motu proceeding and it has not initiated any PIL either suo motu or otherwise on the issue. Narayan told the court he would get instructions from special officer J Radhakrishnan and other officials on the issue, including a proposal on any special scheme, by Friday. After social media was rife with rumors about an imminent lockdown, senior minister D Jayakumar told reporters that the state cannot take a suo motu decision and it will be a call taken by health experts.

“Our CM has been announcing relaxations based on consultations with health experts. We can act only as per their advice,” he said. 

The four-day complete lockdown announced by the CM in April for Chennai, Coimbatore and Madurai corporations had received widespread condemnation after it sparked panic buying.

Meanwhile, A M Vikramaraja, president of the guild, said, “People must get at least four to five days to purchase goods. We can offer mobile service to sell goods at some places suggested by the government and close our shops during the lockdown. The government can allow one member from each family to buy goods.”

With the CM stationed at Salem, officials were tight-lipped about the development. He is expected to return to Chennai on Sunday night. 

Talking to reporters in Coimbatore after inspecting ESI Hospital along with municipal administration minister S P Velumani on Thursday, health minister Vijayabaskar said decisions on lockdown are being taken based on views of committee of health experts and guidelines of the Centre. 

 “Livelihood of people should not be affected, spread of the virus should be contained and Covid-positive patients should be cured. So decisions are being taken after considering all these factors,’’ he said. 


