Can’t let down guard even after lockdown ends: Yogi Adityanath
2020-04-05
LUCKNOW: Chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Saturday said we cannot let down our guard and it is imperative to continue the practice of social distancing and follow all prescribed preventive measures if the 21-day lockdown is lifted on April 15 or else there will be chaos.

Interacting with MLAs and MLCs through video conferencing, CM Yogi said if coronavirus spread is not curtailed before winter.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

“We have to lift the lockdown in phases to ensure that there are no crowds. We need your support to implement this. UP’s health system needs strengthening for which we have started a fund and request you to donate to it. We have to control the spread of the virus before winter. Till now, we thought we had it under control, but the Tablighi Jamaat triggered infection and we saw a sudden spike in cases,” CM Yogi said.

“UP’s first positive case was reported on March 3 and 121 patients had tested positive till April 2. However, between April 3 and 4, these numbers went up suddenly,” he added.


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

“Out of 227 cases so far, 94 are those who attended Delhi jamaat and came here. This figure is likely to go up because of violation of social distancing norms and lack of awareness,” he said.

Yogi appealed to legislators to prepare list of dailywagers like rickshawpullers, labourers, vendors and their bank details so that government can transfer Rs 1,000 in their accounts as assistance. He sought their assistance in getting ration cards made for those who do not have food so that they can get free ration.

Yogi also appealed them to encourage people to participate in PM Narendra Modi’s call to switch off lights at 9pm on Sunday and light up diyas, torches or mobile flashlights for nine minutes. “Fans, air-conditioners, coolers, street lights and hospital lights will remain on. Only lights are to be switched off,” he said.

