Can’t let economic activity grind to a halt to fight Covid-19: Maharashtra CMO
2020-06-11
MUMBAI: If people violate social distancing rules and unnecessarily crowd public areas, the state government will be forced to roll back the relaxations and reimpose a strict Covid-19 lockdown, warned chief minister Uddhav Thackeray on Wednesday. He also appealed to the citizens to be alert and not let their guard down as the “battle was not yet over”.

The CM also said that the state government had repeatedly asked the Centre to allow resumption of suburban train services in Mumbai for employees in essential services, but the Centre was yet to respond.


The Govt is taking cautious steps for ‘Mission Begin Again’. Like we imposed the lockdown in phases, it will have t… https://t.co/wqIL1VRX46— CMO Maharashtra (@CMOMaharashtra) 1591803167000

Late at night, the CMO tweeted: “Like we imposed the lockdown in phases, it will have to be lifted in a phased manner. The danger is yet to pass. But, we cannot bring the economic cycle to a grinding halt even as we fight coronavirus.” 

Expressing concern over pictures of crowded gardens and public places on Monday, the CM said: “We have to learn to live with the virus, but people have to be cautious… Outdoor activity has been allowed for your health, not to spoil it.”


No friction in cabinet meeting, says CM Uddhav

The CM said that if the lockdown relaxation turns “life-threatening”, the government will have no choice but re-implement a strict lockdown. “The crisis is not yet over. We have allowed some sectors to resume operations in a phased manner as we have to restart the economic cycle… but if the crowd is not reduced, then we will have no choice but to roll back the relaxations,” said Thackeray, after a meeting at the Vidhan Bhavan.

His statement comes at a time when Maharashtra registered over 94,000 Covid-19 cases and around 3,400 deaths.

Refuting allegations of ‘issues’ between chief secretary Ajoy Mehta and ministers, Thackeray denied that there was any ‘friction’ in Tuesday’s cabinet meeting. “The cabinet meeting works for people’s projects and there are last-minute proposals that do come up. No one comes to fight in the cabinet meeting,” he said.


