Maharashtra: Cap seller booked, quarantined again for violations
2020-04-19
NAGPUR: In less than a day after being discharged from Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), the 32-year-old cap seller, first positive patient of Covid-19 from Mominpura, was booked and quarantined agained at MLA Hostel for alleged violation of Covid-19 guidelines and spreading wrong information.


GMCH dean Dr Sajal Mitra also assured of an inquiry as the cap seller was discharged at 10pm despite discharge being not permissible after 9pm and also without providing an ambulance. He is city’s first positive case who has been taken under institutional quarantine and booked after discharge.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI, “We saw posts, pictures and videos of cap seller on Saturday. He was seen with others without wearing mask. He can ben seen in a group sitting in a room and giving interview on social media. Also, he gave wrong information on media. It was mandatory for him to be in home quarantine for 14 days after discharge. He violated guidelines and also gave wrong information. Therefore, we lodged a complaint with police. The person was traced and quarantined at MLA Hostel and will be there for next 14 days,” he said.

In some cases patients have tested positive a few days after being discharged. Therefore, it is mandatory for them to stay in home quarantine for 14 days.

Following a complaint from NMC assistant commissioner Ashok Patil, Tehsil police station registered an offence against the cap seller under Section 188 (disobedience to public servant), Section 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 51 (b) of National Disaster Management Act and Section 3 of Epidemic Diseases Act.

A person connected with cap seller posted, “Mominpura Nagpur’s first coronavirus patient who was termed positive has turned negative.” Interview posted on social media too was in such context. TOI is having record of all posts, pictures and videos.

In one of the pictures, he along with two more persons on two bikes are posing for a picture without having a mask on a public road. In one video, he spoke using ear phones that were later used by others in the same room for giving their comments.

Before the cap seller, 11 positive persons from the city had got discharged. All were provided ambulance to reach their homes. At around 11pm, the cap seller walked out of GMCH all by himself, gave an interview for social media and boarded the bike.

Norms say he should have been provided ambulance by GMCH. This is done to ensure patient lands directly at home and stays in home quarantine for next 14 days. None of the above instructions were followed by GMCH.

Norms also say any patient cannot be discharged after 9pm. He was handed over discharge letter having time 10.02pm. He came out around 11pm. This has put GMCH in a fix.

Sources in the GMCH told TOI, “The patient was eager to go home as soon as he received the negative report. Patient and his colleagues pressured the doctors at the GMCH and asked for early discharge,” sources said. Dr Mitra said, “Entire matter will be investigated. We will conduct an inquiry,” he said.

On April 14, Shanti Nagar police had booked nephew of Satranjipura deceased who was first positive patient to be booked for giving wrong information to NMC, spreading disease and violating norms.


