Cap on all gatherings amid Covid-19 scare in Pune
2020-03-13
PUNE: Collector Naval Kishore Ram on Thursday issued an order under the Disaster Management Management Act, prohibiting any programme — religious or social — across the district with the number of Covid-19 cases going up to nine in the city. 

The collector also cancelled all official programmes involving mass gatherings in the city for now. He, however, said the administration has not yet taken any decision on closing schools and colleges because the eight persons detected Coronavirus positive are related to persons returning from Dubai.

 
 
The ninth person, a 33-year-old working professional, had travelled to the US and returned to the city in a flight from Pune. The official said the administration was ensuring mapping of the first and secondary contacts of the people affected with Coronavirus.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“We had to issue the prohibitory order, as the number of Covid-19 cases in the city rose to nine. The order will be in force till further orders and our teams will monitor any kind of public events. We will be compelled to take legal action against people violating the order,” Ram said. 

“There have been reports about mass gatherings despite repeated appeals against such events. We had to issue the order in the wake of the Tukaram Beej and other religious gatherings. The monitoring will become more stringent once the orders have been issued,” he said. 

In the meantime, the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) has home quarantined 34 people, who came in contact with the three confirmed Covid-19 cases in its limits. 

Among the home quarantined people are some of the relatives of the three persons. Five persons were initially suspected to have caught the virus. Tests at the National Institute of Virology (NIV) confirmed that only three of them were Covid-19 positive. The remaining two have been discharged from Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial Hospital, which has 10 beds to quarantine people. 

PCMC officials said about 40 beds were ready at its new hospital in Bhosari for quarantine, while 20 more beds have been kept for isolation. The corporation has also established a helpline (8888006666) for the citizens.


No Disclosure Of Patients’ Identity

Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar on Thursday said penal action would be taken against anyone revealing the identity of people testing positive for Covid-19 on social media platforms.

This was decided following a complaint by the relative of a Pune-based person who tested positive for the virus. The divisional commissioner said the police have been told to monitor the social media posts and take appropriate action. The police have also been told to ensure that rumours were not spread.

(With inputs from Satyanarayan Iyer)


