Covid-19: Delhi now has 237 containment zones
2020-06-10
NEW DELHI: The number of containment zones in the national capital reached 237 on Tuesday with six new areas added to the list. One area was de-sealed.


The newly contained areas included parts of Classic Apartments in Dwarka’s Sector- 22 (Southwest district), Flat no. 1 to 58 in AD Block of Shalimar Bagh, and parts of Block A and B of Rana Pratap Bagh (Northwest district), WZ 247 in New Delhi district’s Naraina and parts of Gali No. 11 in North district’s Sant Nirankari Colony.

According to senior Delhi government officials, the officials of 11 revenue districts have also issued scaling down order in 37 sealed areas where no new case has emerged in the last 28 days. As many as 43 such areas, wherein no new case had emerged in over a month since the last person tested positive, have been de-contained so far.

As per the protocol in Delhi, a residential pocket is sealed and declared containment zone if three cases of Covid-19 positive emerge from the area. In certain cases, the district authorities contain a pocket despite just one positive case if they think the spread could be larger.

With 35 containment zones, North district has the highest number of active sealed areas followed by 33 in South and 32 in Southwest and 31 in West districts. While Northwest has 22 containment zones, East has 19, Central has 17, Southeast 16, New Delhi 15 and Shahdara 14. Northeast district has just three containment zones.

“Several blocks of Jahangirpuri have been sealed by the district authorities. It is one of the largest containment pockets,” said an official.

Southeast district has so far witnessed highest number of 15 de-contained zones, followed by 11 in East, five in West, three each in New Delhi and South West, and two each in North, Shahdara and Northeast districts. No area has been de-contained in Northwest, South and Central districts so far. Officials, however, said that scaling down orders had been issued in 12 areas in South district. Seven areas in West district have been scaled down till date.

