Bhubaneswar turns to community leaders to keep virus at bay
2020-05-16
BHUBANESWAR: While interior Odisha is busy tackling the rush of migrant workers and keeping the virus at bay, the state capital is keeping one wary eye on those returning from abroad.

With two more flights set to bring in stranded people from Chicago and Kuala Lumpur later this month, the city authorities, including police, have sought greater community cooperation to tackle the situation.

On Friday, Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation commissioner (BMC) Prem Chandra Chaudhury, twin city police commissioner Sudhansu Sarangi and city DCP Anup Sahu interacted with community leaders at Jayadev Vihar and Sailashree Vihar.

Around 25 representatives from Jayadev Vihar Sanskrutik Unnayan Parishad, N5 Development Council, Rameswar Barishta Nagarika Sangha and Jagannath Barishta Nagarika Sangha participated in the interactive session with the city’s top officials.

The city, despite being a red zone, has only three active Covid-19 cases, and the authorities intend to keep it that way. The cases were reported more than a week back, on May 7, from three different locations. The BMC hasn’t created a containment zone in those areas.

On Thursday night 151 people returned from Dubai, of which 23 are from Bhubaneswar. They have been advised 28 days of home quarantine.

“All those who have returned from Dubai will have to stay home for 28 days, starting from the day they landed here. The quarantine posters have been put up at their homes so that others in the community are kept informed. People are responsible enough and they won’t allow any violation of quarantine,” Chaudhury said.

“We went to the community leaders because those foreign returnees, who will be staying in home quarantine, need support of the community and particularly the neighbours. The community leaders must understand the situation and help keep away feeling of social stigma. They should also be vigilant to ensure that those in quarantine don’t violate the norms,” said Sarangi.

