Coronavirus in Lucknow: Flyers from China send health officials on wild goose chase
2020-03-06
LUCKNOW: Three flyers from China who touched down at Lucknow airport on different dates last week are untraceable, ringing alarm bells in the state health department, who are scrambling for clues to track them down.


The trio was screened at Chaudhury Charan Singh Airport, Lucknow, and found asymptomatic to Covid-19 and allowed to proceed to their homes in Maharajganj and Deoria districts with a rider that they would remain quarantined for 14 days. 

Health department officials were told to track the three as per protocol. When health teams from Maharajganj and Deoria reached their homes as per address details in passport, they were found missing.

Sources in the office of chief medical officer (CMO) said the missing trio includes two women — a 27-year-old resident of Bhanauli Paniyara area and a 23-year-old native of Maharajganj. 

Neighbours revealed the first could be staying at a private girls’ hostel in Indiranagar area of Lucknow while the younger one could be residing adjacent to a private hospital on Faizabad Road. The third untraceable person is a 22-year-old native of Deoria.

“Neighbours told the health team the women lived in the area decades ago and could now be staying with a relative in Lucknow,” said an official in Maharajganj.

CMO of Maharajganj spoke to his counterpart in Lucknow to check the authenticity of addresses. 

“We tried to track them down from addresses mentioned in the passport. Now, separate teams have been formed and we sought help from Lucknow police commissioner to trace down,” said Dr Narendra Agarwal, CMO, Lucknow. 

The trio was part of a group 18 passengers, who returned from China last week on different dates.

Nodal officer, coronavirus, UP, Dr Vikasendu Agarwal, said: “We are tracking scores of passengers every day. Sometimes, addresses given by them are not updated and this makes tracking difficult. Health teams are searching for them. However, there is no need to worry as the three persons were aymptomatic.”

