Car factories make ventilators and protective masks to fight Covid-19
2020-04-09
CHENNAI: Call it lockdown transformation. A company which dealt with pistons and bearings is now making fiberglass protective masks. Another that was talking about horsepower and cubic capacity is making ventilators. 


Ford has opened its factory to make glass visors, M&M & MG are making ventilators, TVS Motor is making masks. Motown is pitching in to offer scale, training, component making and process support to the medical equipment industry to quickly offer equipment most needed to fight the Covid-19 pandemic — masks, ventilators, protective gear and equipment. Indeed GSK Velu, CMD of Chennai-headquartered Trivitron Healthcare, is currently negotiating with two or three auto companies and will announce the final alliance shortly. “Tamil Nadu government has asked for at least 2,000 ventilators by May-June and we are in talks with auto companies which will provide components,” said Velu. The plan — to make at least 1,000 ventilators by May. Big auto is using its deep pockets, assembly line experience and engineering knowhow to branch into medical equipment necessary to fight the Covid-19 infection. 

Take Ford India. The company’s Sanand and Maraimalainagar factories — which make engines and SUVs like Ecosport and Endeavour — are now making 40,000 face visors with raw materials from Noida-based company Indica. “Close to 20000 request is for Chennai, 10,000 for Ahmedabad medical association and the rest for Delhi,” said the company spokesman. “More raw material is being secured for additional requests,” he added. Around 100 employees are working on this project.

TVS Motor, through its social services arm Srinivasan Services Trust, is making 1 million masks for essential service providers and supplying them in villages across Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Almost 8 lakh masks have already been distributed. 
 News in BriefExplore BriefsIndia not to budge from its stand of LAC being non-negotiable with ChinaIndia will continue to strongly press its demand for China to withdraw its troops and restore status quo ante along the LAC in eastern Ladakh, though it remains prepared for the long haul in the high-altitude region. With China adopting a rigid stand in its design to forcibly push the LAC westwards, the military confrontation is into its fourth month now.100 Cong leaders write to Sonia Gandhi urging leadership change: JhaSome 100 Congress leaders, including MPs, have written to Sonia Gandhi asking for a change in the political leadership and transparent elections in the party, suspended leader Sanjay Jha tweeted on Monday. Jha, who was suspended from the party in July this year, said that several leaders have been "distressed at the state of affairs within the party."
Others like Mahindra & Mahindra, Tata Motors and Maruti are focussing on ventilators which India is severely short of. M&M is working with an indigenous maker to produce affordable ICU ventilators. These machines cost between Rs 5-Rs 10 lakh but the M&M model will cost below Rs 7,500 apiece. It is also making face shields which are already in use.


