Covid-19 scare: Bhadohi jolted, Delhi carpet expo deferred
2020-03-13
VARANASI: The rapid spread of Covid-19 virus has triggered a massive scare across the globe and has hit the economy, with the latest sufferer being the carpet industry of Bhadohi as the India Carpet Expo, one of the largest handmade carpet fairs in Asia, scheduled to be held at Okhla, New Delhi from March 28 to 31, has been postponed owing to the threat.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

A day after the World Health Organization (WHO) termed the coronavirus outbreak as a pandemic and the Union government announced curbs and issued advisories, the Carpet Export Promotion Council (CEPC) decided to reschedule the expo. 

Over 200 foreign buyers had registered for participation in the expo, but later many cancelled their trip due to corona scare, CEPC chairman Siddh Nath Singh told TOI on Thursday. 

“Since Covid-19 has affected many countries, there is a great possibility of less participation of buyers and exporters in the 40th edition of the expo. Hence, it was decided to postpone the event for the time being,” he said. 

“The council will review the situation around April 30 and may then announce fresh dates for the event depending on the situation,” said Singh.

“Among the registered overseas buyers, as many as 63 had also sent their travel itineraries, but owing to coronavirus scare most buyers are hesitating in travelling. It is estimated that business of around Rs 400 crore would be affected due to the postponement of the event,” said CEPC executive director Sanjay Kumar. 

“The last carpet expo held in Varanasi in October 2019 had done business of around Rs 400 crores. As many as 361 overseas carpet buyers from 45 countries and 322 buying representatives had participated in the expo,” said Kumar. 

The overseas buyers had come from Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Egypt, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Korea, Lithuania, Mexico, Nepal, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, UAE, UK, USA, and Vietnam.

CEPC organizes the India Carpet Expo twice a year, at New Delhi in March and Varanasi in October. The Business-to-business (B2B) event solely focuses on overseas buyers and serves as a unique platform for buyers to source the best of handmade carpets, rugs and other floor coverings. 

The fair is sponsored by ministry of commerce and ministry of textiles. The manufacturers from Bhadohi, Varanasi, Panipat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jaipur exhibit their exclusive handmade carpets.

