Cartoons decode parenting during lockdown
2020-04-14
PRAYAGRAJ: From brokering peace between quarrelsome siblings to keeping their child entertained while being forced to stay indoors amidst a lockdown and a pandemic, life for most parents nowadays is busy. 


And if there’s one thing that most of them are looking for, it would be a guide to ensure that their journey of parenting is indeed stress-free.

A Kaushambi-based writer’s cartoons on parenting might be the solution for many such problems. Ankita recently launched an online cartoon series, which guides parents on how to work out the kinks in their relationship with their children. 

Aiming to bridge gaps in communication, these cartoons advise parents on how to act in tricky situations like those involving food wastage, sibling rivalry, education of children and how parents could do a better job at bringing up their kids. 

Ankita uploads these cartoons in the form of videos on social networking websites.

“It is common for feelings like monotony, irritation and unhappiness to seep in minds as people are confined to their homes during the lockdown. There are times when it might be difficult for parents to understand their child’s behaviour,” said the mother of two. 

“There are times when the adults themselves don’t know how to react,” she added.

“This might be because of family problems, financial constraints or something as simple as a child’s curiosity. Every parent believes that were raised in the right way and they should follow the same strategy with their kids. This might be largely true, but we should understand that there is always scope for improvement in our behaviour.” 

The writer has penned books on parenting in the past and counsels young parents on the topic.

According to Ankita, parents should try to be honest while answering their kids’ questions and not try to impose their opinions on them. 

“If you feel that a your child is good at something encourage and reward them. Also, take care to acknowledge their feelings. Don’t hesitate to initiate dialogue, if you feel your child is hesitant to do it. And lastly, try become your each other’s friend and never shy away from expressing your affection freely,” she added.


