Case of youngest Covid-19 patient in state stumps authorities
2020-03-28
MANGALURU: The medical case of ‘P-56’, a 10-month-old boy from Dakshina Kannada (DK), with no prior history of travel to Covid-19 affected countries, testing positive for the disease, has stumped the district administration. ‘P-56’ incidentally became the sixth positive Covid-19 case in DK, and is touted as the youngest patient in Karnataka. The infant was among the two positive cases to emerge from Dakshina Kannada, taking the total tally to 7.


Confirming the case of ‘P-56’, deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh said on Friday that the child from Sajipanadu in Bantwal taluk suffered from fever and severe acute respiratory illness, and was admitted to a private hospital in the city on March 23. As per testing protocol, and with approval of the state team, his throat swab was sent for testing the next day, and the report that the administration received on Thursday confirmed it to be a Covid-19 case.

‘P56,’ along with his mother and grandmother, have been kept in isolation at a designated hospital. As per a preliminary investigation, the family had taken the child to Kerala. A detailed investigation is ongoing, and six primary contacts including the child’s grandmother, have been traced and are under quarantine. The second throat swab of ‘P56’, and swabs of his mother and grandmother will be sent for testing, and further action taken after reports are received.

Affirming that the infant is responding well to treatment, the DC said that as a precautionary measure, Sajipanadu village in Bantwal taluk from where the family hailed, has been quarantined. “No one is allowed to enter or exit the village,” the DC said. Authorities sought the help of a neonatologist from Bengaluru to suggest the course of action for treating ‘P56’, given his age. All the necessary care is being taken to ensure the child’s well being along with that of the mother and aged grandmother,” she said.


2 test positive for coronavirus

Two new Covid-19 cases were reported in Dakshina Kannada on Friday.

Meanwhile, six were admitted for observation in the district, and the total number of people in home quarantine touched 3,032.

Samples of a ten-month-old-boy from Sajipanadu in Bantwal taluk and a 21-year-old man from Karaya village in Belthangady taluk tested positive, taking the total number of Covid-19 cases to seven in the district. The 21-year-old had arrived in Bengaluru International Airport on March 21. He had travelled to his native village in a KSRTC bus. He was admitted to Puttur Government Hospital due to showing symptoms on March 24. His throat swab was sent for testing on the same day, and the results arrived on Friday.

While his close relatives are under observation, efforts are on to trace all his contacts.

While 64 people were screened for Covid-19 in the district on Friday, the total number people who underwent screening touched 38,115. Samples from 15 people were sent for testing, and 20 people completed 28 days of home quarantine on Friday.

Asha workers visited 3,20,359 houses and created awareness on coronavirus among 13,17,439 people. 

Deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh said all necessary measures are being taken to treat Covid-19 patients in the district. 


One positive case in Udupi

In Udupi district, a person tested positive for coronavirus on Friday. While the district has sent 124 samples for testing as on Friday, results of 92 cases were received, wherein 91 samples tested negative. Reports of 32 samples are yet to be received. A total 21 people were kept under observation on Friday, due to the coronavirus scare.


