Cases in Agra, UP’s Covid-19 epicentre, cross the 100-mark
2020-04-13
Agra: With 12 fresh cases of novel coronavirus surfacing in the district in a day, the tally for Agra district, which has emerged as the epicentre of Covid-19 outbreak in Uttar Pradesh, crossed the 100-mark on Sunday. With 104 cases so far, Agra has reported the highest number of cases in the state while its neighbouring districts – Firozabad (16), Mathura (4) and Hathras (4) – have also seen spurt in the number of cases.

Besides the city, from where majority of the cases have been reported, the district administration is now facing a major challenge to stop the spread of the pandemic in the rural areas. Of late, Covid-19 positive cases have surfaced in Sainya, Khandoli and Fatehpur Sikri blocks of the district. A doctor at the Sainya block community health centre had tested positive recently.

Out of the 104 coronavirus cases in Agra, 52 are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi’s Nizamuddin and their contacts. Another 11 patients have had direct overseas travel history while the remaining are all contacts of the people who tested positive earlier. 

Two hospitals and a clinic have emerged as major Covid-19 hotspots in the city. So far, 16 positive cases – nine of them on Sunday – related to a private hospital on National Highway 2 have surfaced. A 76-year-old admitted to the hospital had later tested positive following which the staff were screened. Another six cases, including two doctors and two paramedics, had been found at a private hospital in Namner locality. Then, another five cases, including a doctor and his compounder, had surfaced at a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality of Agra city. 

Meanwhile, a doctor and ward boy serving in the isolation ward of SN Medical College tested positive. Last week, a 53-year-old woman who had tested positive for Covid-19 had died at the hospital.

The health department has collected samples of over 2,100 people in the district which has witnessed over one-fifth of state’s total 480 cases. 

Around 700 people have been shifted to institutional quarantine and 350 people to isolation ward. Another 4,306 people have been home-quarantined. Police are monitoring the lockdown through drone-mounted cameras and CCTVs connected to the Agra smart city project’s Integrated Command and Control Centre (ICCC).

Chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the 12 new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health checkup of all these people.”


