‘Cases will peak sooner in Maharashtra; lockdowns inflict huge additional costs’
2020-05-27
Ramanan Laxminarayan, director of the Centre for Disease Dynamics, Economics and Policy, a global health think tank, says lockdowns cannot be part of long-term strategy in India. In an interview with Nisha Nambiar, he analyses India’s Covid-19 situation, with focus on Maharashtra. Excerpts from the interview:


What is the way forward for Maharashtra?
Despite what appears to be a bad situation, the state has done well on Covid-19. It was the first to be seriously impacted because of flyers from Covid-hit countries. Given Mumbai’s density, the virus was bound to spread rapidly there. Cases will also peak sooner in Maharashtra. The state has to now contain new clusters by counting cases and deaths correctly. Second: avert deaths by identifying at-risk patients. Hospitalise them early.


On air travel....

Maharashtra will have both incoming and outgoing cases. The state should now focus on reducing deaths. Any individual above 65, with even slight symptoms, should be prioritised for testing and hospitalised if there’s need. Places without facilities for RT-PCR testing or cluster containment may opt for pooled RT-PCR tests. This is a vital tool for identifying community clusters as they are done by taking samples from many people at one go. Serological surveys can’t identify a current set of infectious patients on time. But serological studies can determine extent of spread and if population immunity is being built up.


What about lockdowns?

Compared to the West, lockdowns are both less effective (because of population densities) and more expensive in terms of livelihoods for India. The curbs were to be a short-term measure. The lockdown should be replaced with a disciplined approach that uses pooled testing, serological surveys, cluster containment at a very local level, social distancing and a ban on mass gatherings. These measures will have to be a part of our lives for next six months.


After lockdown 4, do you expect cases to surge?
The lockdown is an artificial situation that cannot be repeated without inflicting huge additional costs on the country. Cases of Covid-19 are likely to surge, not just in the states where there are more cases at this time, but in other states as well. The past two months should have been spent readying important healthcare infrastructure across the country. Lockdowns are not a permanent solution; they are temporary measures that let authorities purchase more time to prepare preventive steps against the infection.


