Covid-19 cases cross 4,000 mark in Rajasthan, spike in Udaipur continues
2020-05-13
JAIPUR: Covid-19 positive cases in the state crossed the 4,000 mark on Tuesday with 138 more persons found infected. This took the total tally to 4,126. Four persons also died on the day, making it 117 mortalities in the state. The deaths were reported from Jalore, Jaipur, Nagaur and Bikaner. It was the first death due to Covid-19 in Jalore.

A 45-year-old man, resident of Sanchor of Jalore who was rushed to MDM Hospital in Jodhpur, was declared brought dead by doctors on Monday. He tested positive on Tuesday. A 37-year-old woman, resident of Nokha of Bikaner, was also found infected on May 10. She died on Monday while undergoing treatment at PBM Hospital in Bikaner. Her test report showed that she was positive. She had co-morbid condition of chronic kidney disease.

In Jaipur, a 35-year-old man from Ghat Gate area was admitted to SMS Hospital on Monday. He died on the same day. He had suffered head injury in a road accident. Besides, one 68-year-old woman from Basni of Nagaur tested positive on Sunday. She died while undergoing treatment at MGH Hospital in Jodhpur on Tuesday. She had co-morbid condition of rheumatic heart disease and hypothyroidism. 

The districts which reported new cases are Udaipur (42), Jaipur (34), Jodhpur (25), Churu (6), Nagaur (6), Kota (5), Jhunjhunu (4), Ajmer (3), Dausa (3), Jaisalmer (3), Sikar (2), Pali (1), Chittorgarh (1), Bikaner (1), Rajsamand (1) and Hanumangarh (1). 

In Jaipur, three Jaipur Municipal Corporation staff, three Zanana hospital employees including a doctor and two persons at the hospital mess, while one more healthcare worker of Zanana hostel was found infected. 

The places which reported cases in the state are Jaipur Municipal Corporation (3), Zanana hospital (3), Zanana hostel (1), Chandpole (3), Kalyan Nagar (2) while one each case was reported from Agarwal hostel, Vaishali Nagar, Kalwad Road, Ajeet Nagar, Adarsh Nagar, Jagatpura, Durgapura, Sanganer, Phagi, IBS hotel at Civil Lines, Indira Gandhi Nagar, Pratap Nagar, Nahari Ka Naka, Agra Road, Kalyan Nagar on Tonk Road, C-Scheme, Jhotwara, Jorawar Singh Gate, Road No.11, Panch Batti, Murlipura, Khatipura and one case from a private university.


