Covid-19 cases surge past 8,000 in Tamil Nadu; six deaths recorded in a day
2020-05-12
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu’s Covid-19 tally rose to 8,002 on Monday with 798 more people testing positive, 538 of them in Chennai, which continues to be the hotspot. The city, which registered more than 500 cases for the second consecutive day, now has a total of 4,371.


Six deaths – the highest in a day so far — were recorded on Monday, pushing the TN toll to 53. While one of these deaths happened on Friday, four occurred over the weekend and one was registered on Monday morning.

 

The doubling time for cases in Tamil Nadu was six days compared to five days in Chennai on Monday. In the past one week, the city has recorded an average of 377 cases, sometimes nearly three-fourths of the state’s daily spike. “The swift decline in case doubling time indicates rapidly increasing rate of infection,” a senior epidemiologist said.

“A large number of cases were being reported from the southern parts of the city, including Perungudi, Thoraipakkam, Meenambakkam, Adambakkam, Nanganallur and Madipakkam. While some of them are a part of the Koyambedu cluster, many of them were outside the cluster,” said a senior official.

The positivity rate – the percentage of those turning positive among those tested – is now at least 6%.

On Sunday, of the 7,204 cases registered in TN, 1,350 were from the Tablighi Jamaat cluster and 2,296 were from the emerging Koyambedu cluster. On Monday, the neighbouring districts of Chennai also reported high increase in cases. 

 A senior official at the Covid-19 control room said, “There were still 3,558 people outside these two clusters. This group includes people who had travel history, contacts of people who tested positive, frontline workers such as doctors, healthcare workers, journalists, sanitary workers and conservancy staff. This group is growing steadily. And it is a cause for concern.” 

On Monday, when Chennai recorded 538 cases, it bordering districts also reported high spike in cases. While Tiruvallur recorded 97 cases, Chengalpet registered 90 and Kancheepuram recorded eight.

Most of the 33 cases recorded in Ariyalur were a part of the Koyambedu cluster. Tiruvanamalai recorded 10 cases, while Madurai and Ramnad recorded four each. Nine other districts had three or fewer cases.

A 32- year-old woman from Cuddalore, who had hypertension, bronchial asthma and enlargement of a blood vessel in the brain, died in Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital in Chennai on Friday.

Two patients, who passed away hours after admission on Saturday, were also added to the toll on Monday. They included a 36-year-old woman with diabetes and bronchial asthma admitted to the GH on Saturday. A 65-year-old man with advanced stages of pancreatic cancer died in Kanyakumari Medical College Hospital on Saturday. A 50-year-old man with systemic hypertension and diabetes mellitus admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital four days ago died on Sunday.

Less than two hours later, a 67-year-old woman with systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism, died in the same hospital. A 66-year- old woman with hypertension and heart disease admitted to a private hospital in Chennai died on Monday.

On Monday, 92 people were discharged, taking the total number of people cured to 2,051. At the end of the day, 5,895 people were undergoing treatment.

