Caste commandos enforce lockdown at infamous Una village
2020-05-12
AHMEDABAD: Mota Samadhiyala, the village in Una taluka of Gir-Somnath district, which got infamous in July 2016 due to the flogging of four Dalit men by gau rakashaks (cow protectors), has now come up with a caste formula to combat Covid-19, by deploying ‘caste commandos’ to enforce the lockdown.

Mota Samadhiyala has appointed representatives from each caste to monitor unnecessary movement within their ‘vaas’ (the ghetto of a particular caste in villages). 

Dhanji Korat, sarpanch of Mota Samadhiyala, said that as Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the lockdown for the first time from March 24, these caste enforcers were deployed to restrict the movement of people. 

“We selected people from all castes in the village and gave them the responsibility of taking care of their vaas. If they find any unknown person in the village or unnecessary movement, they will inform me and I will inform the cops,” said Korat. 

Vashram Sarvaiya, who was flogged by gau rakshaks along with three of his siblings in 2016, has been nominated to monitor activities in his vaas. 

“When we were going to implement the idea, we were not sure on how this would work. But it has given good results and our village seems to be safe and has maintained untouchability with corona,” said Sarvaiya.

Mukesh Chovatia, who belongs to the Patidar caste, said that benefit of this caste-based organization is that people listen to members of their own caste and do not get into unnecessary quarrels with people of other castes.

“A person from a particular caste will know people and their relatives from his caste. If he finds any guest in the village, he will instruct people of his caste not to host them and as he has authority over members of his caste and there will also be effective communication,” said Chovatia. 

Bharat Vanjhar, who belongs to the affluent Ahir OBC community, said that the system has brought harmony in the village even though it puts the existing caste divisions on the surface. 

“Everything in this society is managed though caste system now and this is the situation in Mota Samadhiyala to. So rather than using the caste system in negative way, we have been using it in a constructive way to prevent corona,” said Vanjhar.

