Cattle sheds turning their backs on sick animals due to Covid fear, say activists
2020-05-23
Nagpur: Fearing spread of coronavirus, the gaurakshans (cattle sheds) in the city are refusing to take in injured and sick cattle, animal activists have alleged. They who believe that domestic animals do not carry the virus. Due to this, many sick cows and buffaloes are being left untreated.

One such case happened three days ago when a sick bull died in the Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s (NMC) hydraulic ambulance. According to activists, the NMC staffers took the animal to different gaurakshans for eight hours but none of them accepted it in.

Following this, animal activist Karishma Galani filed a police complaint against one such gaurakshan. “The police officials also issued a notice to the gaurakshan authorities. Despite this, they refused to accept the cattle,” said Galani.

TOI learnt that NMC veterinary officer Dr Gajendra Mahalle also wrote to the departments concerned, raising the issue. “I have been receiving many complaints from NMC that when the ambulance takes injured cattle to the shelter, they refuse to treat them,” said Galani.

When Galani filed a complaint with deputy commissioner of animal husbandry Manjusha Pundlik, the latter replied stating that gaurakshans are run on funds and they are trying their best to take care of cattle. “They also have certain limitations and we can’t pressurize them to take in animals,” she stated. Pundlik further recommended to take sick and injured animals to the cattle shed in Deolapar.

Calling her reply unsatisfactory, Galani stated, “Deolapar is too far from the city. If a cow or buffalo gets sick or injured inside city limits, it will die by the time we take it to Deolapar. It is the duty of other gaurakshans to provide them care and treatment.”

On Thursday, Galani again wrote a letter to district collector, complaining that rescue operations of cattle in the city are getting hampered due to negligent behaviour of gaurakshans. “Whenever the ambulance takes an animal to the shelter, they should get proper treatment. If any shelter is refusing to do so, strict action must be taken against it,” she wrote.

The activist, who is also a member of Nagpur’s Society for Prevention of Cruelty against Animals, stated that domestic animals do not spread coronavirus. “Till date, only wild animals have been found to carry the virus. There are no cases of presence of virus in cattle,” she added.


