CCMB readying testing kits under Rs 1,000
2020-03-28
Hyderabad: The city-based Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB) is likely to come out with a special kit to test coronavirus in the next two or three weeks. The kit could substantially bring down the cost of coronavirus (Covid-19) tests. CCMB plans to make the kit at an affordable price so that the cost of each test is below Rs 1,000. CCMB is also planning to culture Covid-19 virus.

The premier research body is working round-the-clock to develop cost-effective and accurate diagnostic kits that could be used for covid-19 tests. The CCMB is also supporting incubation companies attached to it for the development of the kit. It is also testing and validating the diagnostic kits proposed by these incubation centres.

“CCMB may soon come up with diagnostic kits for Covid-19,” CCMB director Dr Rakesh K Mishra said, hoping that the kit will be ready in next two or three weeks.

Dr Rakesh said CCMB is helping its incubating companies and they have come out with ideas. “We are supporting them. We are testing and validating the diagnostic kits proposed by them. We may come up with some good kits and it may take at least two to three weeks if everything goes well. Quality and accuracy of the kits are the most important things. If the kits give 100 percent results, then only they will be approved,” he said.

The CCMB is also keeping in mind the cost, according to an official press release from the Union ministry of science and technology. The CCMB estimate is that the test should be less than Rs 1000.

“We are also thinking of kits which are as cheap as Rs 400 or Rs 500, but at present we cannot assure that, as it is a different route, and all this needs more standardisation”, said Dr Rakesh.

Stating that the CCMB is planning to culture the covid-19 virus, the official statement said the institution has facilities for this and approvals from the government. The CCMB is waiting to receive sample and kits to initiate the culture.

Dr Rakesh told TOI that the CCMB has trained 25 people in testing covid-19 in other recognised laboratories across Telangana. 

The teams were drawn from covid-19 testing laboratories - Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), Gandhi Hospital, Osmania General Hospital, Sir Ronald Ross Institute of Tropical and Communicable Diseases, all in Hyderabad, and also Mahatma Gandhi Hospital in Warangal.

Stating that vaccine and drug development are another aspect of fighting the virus, Dr Rakes said as of now CCMB is neither working on the vaccine nor on the drug development. “We have no expertise for working on this. However, when the virus is being cultured, we will try to set up a system as it can be used for screening,” he added.


