CCRC: Lockdown affects plan to rope in one more contractor
2020-04-17
KOCHI: Lockdown has dealt a fresh blow to Cochin Cancer Research Centre (CCRC), which was already hit by slow pace of work. Inkel, the special purpose vehicle for the CCRC project, had been planning to bifurcate the works. It was following the slow pace of the construction that Inkel decided to rope in one more contractor for expediting the works. But the technical committee of Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board (KIIFB), the funding agency, haven’t met for more than a month and so the tender for roping in the second firm couldn’t be awarded.

The state government is expected to give exemptions for emergency construction works soon. As per the revised plans by Inkel, the existing contractor will be doing the works of two towers, while the remaining two towers will be constructed by a new firm. “We had completed a revised detailed project report (DPR) for bifurcating the work and submitted it to KIIFB by the third week of March. We are waiting for the approval from technical committee of KIIFB,” an official associated with the project said. “The existing firm has completed more than 30% of the works. But the pace of their work is too slow. So, we are forced to bring in another firm so that the works of four towers will progress simultaneously,” the official said.

 

Despite the authorities asking the existing contractor to increase the manpower and expedite the works, the private firm couldn’t mobilize more than 150 workers while the required strength for completing the project on time is 300. “Once the civil works register progress, the authorities can invite tenders for mechanical, electrical and plumbing (MEP) works. Even if the MEP works are started by June, the works can be completed by December this year. Tenders for lift, firefighting facilities, medical gas, medical equipment, etc. also will have to be invited,” said the official.

As of now, the progress of the work of CCRC building is close to 35%. The progress of the work was around 28% when a portion of the main building, which was under construction, collapsed on November 25, 2019 bringing the work to a halt. Later, the authorities resumed the works but the contractor couldn’t speed up the work. It was in October 2017 that KIIFB board chaired by chief minister Pinarayi Vijyan gave approval for the first phase of CCRC. As per the revised schedule, the entire works should be completed by the end of 2020. 

The state government had allotted Rs 379 crore for setting up the hospital. Out of it, Rs 87 crore has been disbursed and it is for completing the civil works. “We are in the preparatory works for procuring equipment and staff for the CCRC. We expect that the first phase of CCRC with at least 100 beds can be started by the beginning of 2021,” said a source with the CCRC. “We have given instructions to the existing contractor to resume the work which was stopped following Covid-19 spread,” he said.

