Celebrity chef Vishnu Manohar lines up lockdown menu
2020-03-28
The 21-day lockdown has naturally shaken up many with the biggest concern being running out of food. Many others are wondering how much they can innovate in kitchen with limited ingredients. Celebrity chef Vishnu Manohar says there’s no need to panic as the average kitchen shelf packs enough punch to take us through

Common belief is that 3-week lockdown needs heavy stocking up of food items

No, because all essential commodities shops are open so you can always go and buy things. But even if that’s not the case, regular items like wheat flour, oil, rice, daal etc will be more than enough for you to have a variety of items that will keep your appetite satiated for the next three weeks. There is no need to panic and hoard up on grocery items. According to my experience, for a family of five the amount of items needed for a 21-day period is very minimal. For the typical three meals a day, you only need 10.5kg of rice, 6.5 litres of oil, 8.5kg tur daal etc. So why buy 20 or 30 kg rice at one go?

The other concern is that limited items can be made during the period

That’s the biggest misconception. Variety of food does not mean using dozens of ingredients. Variety can be brought about by cooking the same food item in a different way. For example, we all have had sprouts at one time or the other. So the item is same, but you can cook it like a gravy item, or have it like a salad. In fact, I suggest people make it like a bhurji. Just sauté onion, tomatoes and green chilli in oil and add the sprouts with salt etc. Don’t add water and let it sizzle. I guarantee that you will forget egg and paneer bhurji. So the food item is the same, but the way you approach a dish makes all the difference.

Parents are worried about kids, who are usually fussy eaters

Here the trick is, which obviously is possible because of the lockdown, to get them engaged in cooking process. The other day we decided to have pasta in white sauce. Now to get the kids involved I said to them we will make the pasta at home rather than boil the packaged product. So we kneaded wheat flour dough, flattened it and then cut strips which were boiled. Get kids involved in the cooking process, according to their age, which will ensure they enjoy eating it too. The white sauce can be made so easily if you have butter, milk and flour. I later gave it an Indian twist by serving it with tempered daal, which is somewhat like Gujarati daal dhokli.

Most have potatoes or onions stocked up and will avoid going to vegetable markets

They don’t need to either. Use the stuff that’s already there. Potatoes are extremely versatile and so many dishes can be made using it. Similarly, for those missing non-vegetarian food, and avoiding to buy it in the current scenario, patodi rassa is something that can offer you a nice spicy kick. The good reliable soyabean wadi is also there as an accompaniment for a spicy gravy. So there is no need to panic, no need to hoard food. There’s enough of it available in shops and even the stuff in your kitchen and fridge will go a long way.


