Maharashtra: Census enumeration takes a back seat thanks to Covid-19
2020-06-08
PUNE: In the wake of the pandemic, the census houselisting process that was to commence statewide last month and be completed by June 15 has taken a back seat. As of now, there is no time frame given to the process.

The census, which collects individual-level demographic, socio-cultural, occupational, educational and migration-related information, is scheduled to be conducted in February-March 2021 followed by enumeration of population in February next year. The census forms the basis for reviewing the country’s progress in the past decade, monitoring ongoing government schemes and plan for the future. 

There were doubts about the launch of the phase even before the Covid-19 lockdown, especially as it was clubbed with updation of the National Population Register, opposed by many states headed by non-BJP governments. 

State census officials, who were to commence work by mid-May, said that in wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, it looks highly unlikely that the process can take place anytime soon.

“We have been told to stop all our operations and our staff has been roped in for other work related to Covid-19. We trained our officers but now we will have to wait until further instructions. We are not even sure the process will happen this year,” shared an official. The field investigators travel to remote areas and spend roughly two hours with each household.

Census officers added it looks unlikely that even by year-end there will be a change in the present condition and they would possibly have to wait for the 2021-22 survey.

While the first phase was house listing with basic details, it was to be followed by a detailed analysis of individuals in the second phase. In 2011, the state had registered a population of 11.3 crore.

“Now without this data, assessment for various sectors would be difficult. For example, in terms of migrant population analysis, which is expected to have risen to nearly 40% from 30% in 2001 and 2011 there is no current date for comparison. The census considers a person a migrant if s/he, on the date of enumeration, is at a place different from his/her place of birth. In an unusual year such as this, where many migrant workers have gone back to their villages, you might end up with data different from the actual overall decadal trend,” added the official.


