Covid-19: Centre eases discharge rule, BMC scraps strict test order
2020-05-10
NEW DELHI/MUMBAI: In a move that is likely to reduce India’s need for Covid-19 testing kits, the Union health ministry on Saturday said mild and moderate cases do not need to be tested before discharge of such patients from hospital. So far, patients have had to test negative twice prior to discharge. The new directive is part of the revised policy for discharge of patients from hospitals.

Even for severe cases, a patient would need to test negative only once, as against twice earlier.

 

Testing rules were eased in Mumbai too as the BMC on Saturday revoked a change in protocols ordered by ex-civic chief Praveen Pardeshi on Thursday. The change had meant patients had to go to a BMC quarantine centre to give swab samples and stay there till test results were out, and tests could be done only if routed through BMC’s medical health officer. AMC Suresh Kakani said the order requiring patients to get admitted for tests stood revoked. “Private doctors too can write prescriptions as long as the patient has symptoms,” he said. (See P 2)


Case severity to be decided by oxygen saturation

The Union health ministry, outlining its revised discharge policy, said, “Mild/very mild/pre-symptomatic cases admitted to a Covid care facility will undergo regular temperature and pulse oximetry monitoring. The patient can be discharged after 10 days of symptom onset and no fever for 3 days. There will be no need for testing prior to discharge. At the time of discharge, the patient will be advised to follow home isolation for further 7 days as per guidelines.”

Moderate cases have been categorised as those whose symptoms resolve within 3 days and where patients maintain oxygen saturation above 95% for the next 4 days. “If the fever resolves within 3 days and the patient maintains saturation above 95% for the next 4 days (without oxygen support), such patient will be discharged after 10 days of symptom onset in case of absence of fever without anti-pyretics, resolution of breathlessness, no oxygen requirement. There will be no need for testing prior to discharge,” stated the policy.

The policy also stated that at any point of time, prior to discharge from a Covid care centre, if the oxygen saturation dips below 95%, the patient has to be moved to a Dedicated Covid Health Centre (DCHC) with ICU facility.

After discharge from the facility, if the patient again develops symptoms of fever, cough or breathing difficulty, he/she will contact the Covid care centre or state helpline or 1075. His/her health will again be followed up through tele-conference on the 14th day, the policy stated.

Till Saturday morning, 15.23 lakh samples were tested for Covid-19. According to the health ministry, the capacity has been ramped up to test around 95,000 samples per day across 332 government and 121 private labs.

However, positive cases also continue to rise across the country. In the last 24 hours, 3,320 new confirmed cases have been added, taking the total number of cases to 59,662.

