Central team asks Ytl GMCH to set up testing lab soon
2020-05-18
Nagpur: A central rapid response team (RRT) from AIIMS Nagpur visited Yavatmal, one of the districts worst hit by the Covid-19, and recommended a slew of measures to contain its spread. The team recommended setting up of dedicated Covid operation theatre and labour room on urgent basis and also starting a Covid-19 helpline. It also instructed the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) to start a testing laboratory at the earliest.The team comprising Dr Ranjan Solanki (epidemiologist), Dr Amol Dube (physician) and Dr Vishal Shete, (microbiologist) visited the Covid hospital at GMCH, institutional quarantine centres, and containment zones to assess the preparedness and administration’s response to the pandemic.The team further recommended installation of CCTV in isolation ward to monitor patients closely and starting recreational activities, relaxation techniques and counselling services for the inmates. “The ward has been left to the care of junior residents without much hand-holding from seniors. The college administration was made aware of these facts,” the team stated.RRT observed that the quaranine centre inmates were satisfied with food and residential arrangements. They however pointed out that very purpose of quarantine seems to be failing. “As the inmates share the same balcony and socialize with each other, Covid distancing is not being followed. If the positives intermingle with negatives, there is a high risk of transmission,” it said.For containment zones, the team recommended regular screening of high-risk population, including elderly, pregnant/lactating mothers, and children below 12 years for finding out suspected Covid-19 cases. It called on to involve Mahila Arogya Samiti, Asha and Anganwadi workers, and community leaders into this exercise for better community participation.To alleviate the fear and stigma caused due to Covid-19, RRT suggested use of education and communication material designed for the community in its local language. “It needs to focus on positive message like only 20% of patients infected with Corona need hospitalization and only 2-3% of them may get severely ill. Also, the messages for a healthy lifestyle like regular exercise, nutrition, and relaxation techniques, need to be emphasized regularly,” it said.RRT recommendations:* Dedicated Covid operation theatre & labour rooms on urgent basis* Covid-19 helpline with psychiatry dept’s help to alleviate anxiety * Telemedicine facility to support Covid Hospital & Primary Health Centre* Complete Civil work & get testing laboratory functional at earliest* Enforce proper distancing in quarantine centres