Centre revokes visas, will deport Tablighi members
2020-04-03
NEW DELHI: The home ministry on Thursday blacklisted and cancelled the 'tourist' visas of 960 foreign Tablighi Jamaat members for having violated their visa conditions by engaging in 'missionary' activities here. 


It also asked the states and Union territories where these foreigners are present, to take necessary legal action under the Foreigners Act, which sources said was likely to involve their deportation after payment of a $500 financial penalty, as well as under the Disaster Management Act.

The blacklisting order against the 960 foreign Tablighi Jamaat visitors will debar them from entering India for at least two years.

Announcing the action on Twitter, home minister Amit Shah stated: "Home ministry has blacklisted 960 foreigners found involved in Tablighi activities on a tourist visa and also cancelled their Indian visas".

"Home ministry has also directed the states DGPs and Delhi Police commissioner to take necessary legal action against the 960 foreigners for violation of provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005," he added.

As per financial penalties laid down under the Foreigners Act rules for various visa violations, indulging in Tablighi activities while on a tourist visa attracts a US$ 500 penalty.

Sources added that 960 foreigners linked to Tablighi Jamaat activities in India could be deported back to their respective countries as and when they complete the quarantine/hospitalisation period and international flights resume. In case international flights are not available at the end of the quarantine period, they may be shifted to detention centres during the interim period.

While Section 51(b) of the Disaster Management Act provides for imprisonment of up to one year or fine for violation of an order issued by due authority under the Act, which can further extend to up to two-year jail if such violation results in loss of lives, it was not clear if this clause will be invoked against the foreigners. "Why bear the unnecessary burden of putting them on trial here," said one officer.

Sources meanwhile said the Tablighi Jamaat authorities will henceforth be told to strictly maintain a register of all foreign visitors along with their correct passport and visa details as well as activities undertaken by them.

