Centre clears Maha plans for pool tests, plasma therapy to power Covid fight
2020-04-25
Mumbai: Given the rising graph of Covid-19 cases and deaths, the state on Friday received permission from the Centre for pool testing as well as plasma therapy treatment.

Pool testing—a method of testing batches of samples instead of just one—will help the state conduct 10 times more tests. It is also likely that the BMC-run Kasturba Hospital at Chinchpokli will be able to start plasma therapy soon, said an official.

Permissions were granted during Union health minister Harsh Vardhan’s video-conference with state health ministers and secretaries, held to discuss ways to reduce the death rate and check the rise of Covid-19 cases.

Maharashtra was asked to conduct pool testing and plasma therapy in accordance with Indian Council for Medical and Research (ICMR) guidelines. ICMR had earlier refused to permit Mumbai to do pool testing due to the high rate of positivity of samples. In pool testing, multiple samples are put through one real-time polymerase chain reaction test kit. If the results are negative, the entire pool of samples is considered free of the virus. If it tests positive, all swab samples are individually tested to identify the infected one. The method is usually used in low infection clusters for surveillance. It is learnt that ICMR has suggested some new sampling sizes to resolve the problem. 

Currently, the state conducts over 7,000 tests a day but the World Health Organisation has said more testing will help identify more patients early in the infection stage. State health minister Rajesh Tope has said Maharashtra intends to conduct over 75,000 tests using pool testing.

An official, who attended the meeting with Tope, said the state will conduct pool testing in the cities which are among the worst affected.

“Our major concern is Mumbai and Pune. We are considering implementing pool testing in Mumbai by taking precautions, like collecting a group of only five samples instead of 10,” said the official.

State medical education minister Amit Deshmukh said Covid-19 patients will soon receive plasma therapy in state-run hospitals in Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur and Solapur. 


