Centre sets up key panel to help states fight Covid war
2020-06-14
NEW DELHI: Amid rising number of deaths due to Covid-19, the Centre has initiated multiple interventions to help states efficiently and effectively manage the cases at the clinical stage, especially those who are severely ill and need critical care.


The move comes in the wake of concerns raised during a meeting of the cabinet secretary with states on Thursday. While the issue of rising death rates was discussed, many states sought central expertise to ensure standard and effective clinical guidance.


Following the discussion, the Centre set up an expert group at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, to provide clinical advice to states to manage cases. A WhatsApp group has also been set up with nodal officer/doctor from each state.

Highlighting such interventions, health secretary Preeti Sudan has asked states to form similar expert groups and clinical management hubs at state levels to efficiently manage severe cases in ICUs and reduce deaths.

“All these interventions have the objective of effective clinical management of Covid-19 cases and reducing avoidable deaths. I hope you would utilise these interventions by adopting them to the needs of the state and reducing the case fatality among Covid-19 cases,” Sudan said in a letter to chief secretaries of states and UTs on Friday. TOI has reviewed the letter.

On Saturday, the health ministry recorded 11,458 news cases and 386 deaths in the last 24 hours since Friday 8am.The total tally crossed 3 lakh on Saturday and the death toll was at 8884.

Of the 386 new deaths reported, 129 were in Delhi, 127 in Maharashtra, 30 in Gujarat, 20 in UP, 18 in Tamil Nadu, 9 each in West Bengal, Telangana and Madhya Pradesh, 7 each in Karnataka and Rajasthan, 6 each in Haryana and Uttarakhand, 4 in Punjab, 2 in Assam, 1 each in Kerala, Jammu & Kashmir and Odisha.

States had raised the need for an expert group in the meeting with the cabinet secretary. It has also been suggested that states can set up their own expert groups of doctors for tele-consultations on how to handle ICU cases.

Sudan also added that some states have already set up such groups which are working pro-actively in reaching out to the hospitals and enquiring about specific cases to provide specific clinical guidance.

The Centre on Saturday also revised the clinical management protocol for treatment of Covid-19 patients.


