Centre’s one-size-fits-all strategy to fight virus is not very efficient: Mayaram
2020-04-21
Jaipur: Former finance secretary Arvind Mayaram said the Centre’s one-size-fits-all strategy for lockdown and lifting it in a diverse country like India is not an very efficient move. 

He said the Centre should concentrate on arranging for finances through different ways for the states which are in the frontline of the battle against Covid-19 pandemic.

“Tax revenues of states have fallen substantially. The states need money but they don’t have much options whereas different fiscal and monetary instruments are with the Centre can be used for providing financial assistance,” said Mayaram.

He said the Centre should not get into the micromanagement of the entire country by saying which industry should start and which should not.

“They should leave this to the state governments. Because every state has different circumstances. You cannot have a one-size-fits-all policy for a country as diverse as India. Therefore, they should have simply put broad principles and allowed each state government to come up with their own strategies on how to deal with the contagion and manage the lockdown and lift it. They should have asked the states to develop their own strategies,” added Mayaram.

The Centre has told that states not to open liquor shops during the lockdown and excise a big revenue generator for any state.

“Rajasthan is losing excise revenues of Rs 30 crore a day and it amounts close to Rs 1,000 crore a month. Now, the question is where there is a green district with no Covid-19 patients, how different it is from any other times, and why should not the shops remain open there. There is also the orange category of districts where there a few cases which can be sequestered,” explained Mayaram.

Even as certain category of companies have been allowed to operate after Monday, most have preferred not to reopen because of issues related to labour, supply-chain uncertainties and the strict guidelines.

“They have to manage efficiently inter-state supply chains and facilitate movement of all kinds of goods. If this does not happen, opening manufacturing units would be futile. If manufacturers don’t have a place to sell, there is no way then can produce and sustain. So inter-state supply chains have to be fully managed by the Centre,” added Mayaram.

Similarly, he wants the Centre to try and push the external trade so that the industry does not face the constraints of raw material imports and exporters also does not lose out.

“In my opinion, it is counterproductive for a central directive to say that every state government should follow it is not efficient. The way it is being done will only give suboptimal results. The centralization of this nature is suboptimal,” added Mayaram.

The ‘Action Plan of the Task Force on Restarting the Economy of Rajasthan’ prepared by CM’s Economic Transformation Advisory Council (CMETAC), headed by Mayaram as the vice-chairman, has made several recommendations to revive the industry and the report includes suggestions from former RBI governor Raghuram Rajan, ex-CEA Kaushik Basu, and ex-RBI governor Urjit Patel among others.


