Central Railway engineer makes robot to help doctors fight Covid-19
2020-05-08
Nagpur: To ensure safety of doctors and nursing staff while treating Covid-19 patients, a mechanical engineer from Nagpur, now with Solapur division of Central Railway, has developed a cost-effective robot that minimizes direct exposure to patients.The robot, produced in-house for Rs 47,000, was pressed into service at Dr Kotnis Railway Hospital in Solapur on Wednesday. Railway minister Piyush Goyal lauded the efforts of divisional mechanical engineer (DME) Suryakant Bhimrao Munjewar (30), who developed the robot.“There is a great need among all the doctors and nurses fighting the war against coronavirus to avoid direct contact with patients. In view of this, DRM Shailesh Gupta inspired me to develop this robot,” said Munjewar.It is very difficult to don PPE for six hours while on duty. It is like wearing a raincoat in summer. Munjewar informed the robot operated in 30 metre range and minimized contact by providing necessary stuff like hand sanitizer, medicines, towels, fruits etc to patients. It can carry material up to 7.5kgs.“It has a battery backup of one and a half days. A two-way video communication channel is available so doctors can directly interact with patients. The doctor and can ask what the patient needs,” said Munjewar.“Doctors can pay full attention to patients through this robot. If a doctor outside the hospital needs to be consulted, there is a video communication channel for it,” he said.Special care has been taken to ensure there should wasn’t any torque imbalance as the robot moves. The camber has been taken care of so the robot remained stable. Aluminium is used for the body which makes it light weight. It is ensured that the centre of gravity remains stable at a single point so there is no chance of load shift anywhere, thus rigidity and stability are ensured. It is proving to be a technical warrior in the fight against coronavirus. It is also sanitized by spraying liquid which doesn’t have water content.DRM Gupta told TOI, “The robot has been helping doctors and nursing staff a lot in minimizing contact with Covid-19 patients. We plan to add two more features like pulse meter and BP measurement in it to make it more effective.”Dr Anand Kamble, chief medical superintendent (CMS), Solapur, too is happy with the robot service. The idea for the robot was drawn from a remote operated trolley in Asansol division under Eastern Railway. Munjewar and his team comprising Viswanath Watkar, Shradha Kulkarni, Shrikant Kulkarni, Chandan Mane, and Yogesh Watkar worked 15-18 hours daily to make the robot in 4 days. The engineer created a mobile script and used Bluetooth to operate it with mobile.After the Solapur division successfully commissioned the robot, there have been demand for it from other divisions and doctors. Earlier, Munjewar had made an automatic sanding machine used by loco pilots at slippery spots. This was first innovation across the railways.