Central team pats Telangana cops for Covid-19 fight
2020-04-27
HYDERABAD: An inter-ministerial central team (ICMT), visiting the city to assess the Covid-19 situation, appreciated the efforts of Telangana police in tracing contacts of Covid-19 patients and advised cops to continue the existing security set up at containment zones and quarantine centres. 

The committee suggested government agencies to install a transparent separation between the driver and passengers in cabs used for emergency transport in the city. 

On Saturday night, the central team, comprising Arun Bakora, additional secretary, ministry of Jal Shakti, Dr Chandra Sekhar Gedam, senior public health specialist, Dr Hemalatha, director, National Institute of Nutrition, SS Thakur, director, ministry of consumer affairs and Shekhar Chaturvedi, associate professor, National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), New Delhi, visited the Hyderabad police commissioner’s office and reviewed Covid-19 work. 

A team of city police officials, headed by Hyderabad police commissioner Anjani Kumar, explained to the five-member ICMT how they had tracked over 2,000 contacts of the 400 plus positive patients from the city so far. “The committee members were happy with the contact tracing and asked us to keep up the good work. They have also enquired how the family members of police personnel have been coping with the situation and asked us to take all precautions while performing our duties,” a deputy commissioner of police level officer told TOI.

After the meeting, the team visited Charminar and Mecca Masjid and spent about 20 minutes observing the historic monuments. On Sunday morning, the team visited Telangana police headquarters and DGP M Mahendar Reddy and senior cops explained work that has been done through Covid-19 control room, including coordination for supply of essentials and food to migrant workers,supply of medicines and emergency transport for medical treatment. 

“The step-by-step methods used for contact tracing were explained to the committee. We explained the security arrangements at containment zones, quarantine facilities and hospitals to ensure that no one slips in or out . We also explained that all cops posted at hospitals were provided with personal protection equipment (PPE) kits,” a police source said.


