Central team takes stock of Covid-19 readiness in Chennai
2020-04-27
CHENNAI: A five-member team of National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) visited on Sunday various spots in the Chennai to assess the state government’s preparedness to handle the Covid-19 pandemic.

The multi-disciplinary team held a review meeting with revenue administration and disaster management commissioner J Radhakrishnan and director of disaster management D Jaganathan at the disaster management data analytics centre. 

The centre was established by the state disaster management authority in association with HCL to project the data collected from various departments for better understanding and coordination in executing Covid-19 preventive measures. 

After the review meeting, the five-member team split into two. While joint secretary of NDMA V Thiruppugazh and two other members visited the Koyambedu market complex, professor of community medicine Dr Anita Khokar and another member of the team visited Kilpauk Medical College Hospital and Government Medical College and Hospital in Omandurar estate and interacted with doctors and healthcare staff at the Covid-19 facilities.

Later, they jointly visited the 532-bedded quarantine facility at the Trade Centre in Nandabakkam and an Amma canteen in Saligramam. The team once split into two and inspected several facilities -- including an exclusive call centre for people with disabilities established by the social welfare department and the corporation’s community hall that accommodates more than 50 guest workers. Thiruppugazh and his team also visited Port Trust and the hospital on the premises. 

The team conducted ‘surprise inspections’ at all the spots. "The team meet officials of various departments in the next four to five days. They will evaluate various measures taken by the government and submit a report to the Centre. The team will also recommend if anything more needs to be done," said a senior official who accompanied Thiruppugazh.


