Centre lauds Agra administration’s efforts to contain Covid-19 outbreak
2020-04-12
AGRA: The central government on Saturday lauded the ‘Agra model of containment’ as the Union health ministry detailed on how the local authorities in coordination with the Centre controlled the spread of the pandemic in the western Uttar Pradesh district.

During a press briefing, Luv Aggarwal, joint secretary, health ministry, said, “It was a coordinate effort with the Agra administration using existing infrastructure, like smart city control room, which was converted into a war room to fight the pandemic. The action taken at the ground level by frontline workers of the district administration was in coordination with the Centre.”

 

“Detailed and active contact tracing, isolation of patients, identifying 38 epicentres and hotspots on the map, house-to-house survey of 9.3 lakh people by 1,248 special teams which helped us trace 2,500 people with flu-like symptoms, establishing central helpline, implementing lockdown as well coordinating with private players to develop 566 paid quarantine beds helped Agra combat Covid-19,” said Aggarwal.

He said, “Agra district administration also worked simultaneously on other fronts, including distribution chain management, movement of essential commodities, provision of food & shelter for homeless and needy, food distribution for animals and risk self-reporting and helpline facility for citizens.”

Meanwhile, district magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “From March 1 till April 10, we have collected samples of over 1,900 people suspected of coronavirus infection. Total 675 people were admitted in institutional quarantine and 327 people were admitted in the isolation ward. Besides doctors serving in the isolation ward, we have dedicated teams working on specific tasks, including screening, sample collection, area surveillance, contact surveillance, contact tracing, tracking of travellers, rapid response, control room, logistics etc.”

He said, “So far 92 coronavirus cases have surfaced in Agra. Out of these, nine people have been cured of the infection and discharged from the hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patient are being screened. We are doing massive sampling to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine.”

