Centre to decide on Covid -ve certificates for returnees: Shailaja
2020-06-15
Thiruvananthapuram: Health minister K K Shailaja defended the state government’s ‘suggestion’ that expatriates should produce Covid negative certificate before boarding chartered flights. However, she said a final decision on this will be taken only after Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s meeting with the chief ministers on Tuesday. 

“The government had only suggested that those who come by chartered flights should have a Covid negative certificate. We haven’t taken any decision. It is the preserve of the Centre to take any decision on this,’’ said Shailaja while responding to the severe criticism the state government faced from various quarters against demanding Covid negative certificate.

She said the government had suggested this as a precautionary measure to protect the passengers in the flights. “Imagine the situation if a Covid-19 positive person travels in a flight which has pregnant women, children and even senior citizens as co-passengers. All of them will turn positive once they reach here. It is to avoid such a situation that we suggested testing before boarding the flight,” Shailaja said.

“No person, who is a known Covid-19 positive case, should be allowed to travel. Allowing it would put the entire passengers in the flight in deep trouble. We cannot let such a situation happen. Many returnees are being tested positive after reaching here. But that situation is different from a positive person travelling in a flight,” said Shailaja.

The government is not of the opinion that all the people who are coming from abroad are disease carriers. But it is always better for a carrier to avoid travel since it will protect others. 

The minister also flayed the criticisms made against the government on this. “There is a section of people who finds fault with whatever we do during the Covid-19 period. We cannot do anything to satisfy them. All the strategies adopted by the state in the Covid-19 prevention have so far evolved as a success model. But these people are not ready to accept it,’’ she said.

Shailaja also reminded the critics that it was Kerala which first demanded that the expatriates stranded in different countries should be brought back, she added.


