Covid-19 in Kolkata: Challenges ahead to enforce quarantine
2020-03-21
KOLKATA: With an increasing number of people rushing to Infectious Diseases & Beliaghta General Hospital, the isolation ward at the state’s nodal hospital for Covid-19 is bursting at its seams. With another youth from Kolkata testing positive to the virus, the emergency wing of the hospital saw a mad rush of people wanting to get their swab samples tested on Friday. A police picket has been posted to prevent any chaos.


Coronavirus in India latest updates

“Going by the increasing volume of flyers, mostly from abroad, thronging the emergency, we see tough days ahead. On certain days, we are running out of beds and occasionally have to refer patients to other hospitals,” said a source at ID Hospital.

On Friday, more than 300 people queued up at the emergency wing. Those who came from abroad were made to stand in a separate line. Doctors said most had turned up in panic. Eventually, only seven suspected patients were admitted during the day. “A day after the meeting with the chief minister, we got six doctors deputed from another hospital. This is a huge relief as we were running out of manpower,” said Anima Haldar, principal of the ID Hospital. 

The teaching hospitals have earmarked isolation beds and Mamata Banerjee has asked health officials to set up more such wards. But sources said that the isolation beds in other hospitals will not be as specific as the ones at ID Hospital. “For example, the 30 isolation beds that SSKM Hospital has created is in a maternity home. Though it is a satellite unit of the hospital, how can Covid-19 patients be treated in a maternity home that lacks basic infrastructure?” asked a health department official.

Of the 1,420 internationals flyers who arrived on Friday, 377 were escorted to the quarantine facility in New Town to get screened before being allowed to either return home or stay quarantined there. 

All 207 passengers who arrived on flights originating in the Gulf were sent to the facility. This was the second day of compulsory quarantine for passengers arriving on Gulf flights. The remaining passengers to be sent to the quarantine centre on Friday included five who flew in from Germany and France on an Air India connecting flight from Delhi, 13 South Koreans who flew in by Thai Airways and one from China who arrived by Singapore Airlines.

“Compulsory quarantine ensures a double check on arriving passengers — first at the airport by health officials and immigration officers and then by doctors at the quarantine centre. However, passengers arriving from the east do not have to be compulsorily quarantined unless their travel history includes the 10 notified countries,” said an official. 

Scientists at ICMR-NICED, the nodal Virus Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) for eastern India where most of the swab samples from the state are being tested, apprehend an increasing pressure on its laboratory. At present, it is testing around seven samples every day on an average. “We are using two dedicated machines for Covid-19 confirmation. So far, there is no issue with kits. We can press five more machines from our research lab into service if the need arises,” said Shanta Dutta, director, ICMR-NICED.


