Covid-19: Karnataka's Chamarajanagar district loses its green zone tag
2020-06-10
MYSURU: Chamarajanagar’s fine run as the only coronavirus-free district in Karnataka, ended on Tuesday when it recorded its first case – that of a 22-year-old medical student who had travelled from Mumbai. The student was referred to the district Covid-19 hospital by a fever clinic in Kollegal.

While district deputy commissioner MR Ravi insisted Chamarajanagar will remain a green district since the patient is not a native of the district, the state medical bulletin attributed the case to the district.

Ravi told reporters that the patient and his elder brother, 24, had travelled to drop their mother, 45, off at Palimedu village near Martalli in Hanur taluk. The three had reached Palimedu on Friday evening. The family had travelled by train to Bengaluru and the woman’s brother had picked them up from the railway station, from where they continued their journey by road.

“Since they had come from Maharashtra, they have been sent to the government institutional quarantine centre in Hanur,” Ravi said. “The woman was suffering from diabetes and a sample was taken on Saturday, but she tested negative. Her elder son also tested negative, but the younger son, a medical student, who developed Covid-19 symptoms including diarrhoea and stomach ache on Sunday, tested positive.”

Ravi said the mother and elder son are primary contacts, while the patient’s maternal uncle and his family members are secondary contacts. “All have been moved to institutional quarantine,” he said.

Ravi said neither the sons nor the mother had registered their names on the Seva Sindhu website. “They did not follow protocol. Since all their documents show a Mumbai address, they will be considered patients of Mumbai. Chamarajanagar continues to be a green district,” he said.

Sources say the district administration learnt of three only when they visited a fever clinic in Kollegal on Saturday for testing. When the authorities at the clinic found that they had not registered on the Seva Sindhu portal, all are sent to institutional quarantine.

Meanwhile, a positive case each was reported in Nanjanagud and Ittigegudu of Mysuru district. They include a 22-year-old man who returned to Nanjanagud from Delhi. The man had completed his stay in institutional quarantine, but tested positive while serving time in home quarantine. The entire colony comprising 20 houses in Neelakantanagar has been sealed.

The Ittigegudu patient is a 60-year-old man who had returned from Tamil Nadu. The area has now been declared a containment zone. 

With this, the total positive cases in Mysuru district touched 99, but there are only five active cases in the district. “Three patients were discharged on Tuesday,” said DC Abhiram G Sankar. 

