Chamarajanagar free of Covid-19 despite contiguity with Mysuru
2020-04-26
MYSURU: It is counted among the state’s most backward districts, and shares its border with Mysuru, which has registered the highest number of Covid-19 cases in Karnataka and yet, Chamarajanagar has successfully managed to keep the deadly pandemic at bay. This, despite the movement of vehicles from neighbouring Kerala. 

Until a few days ago, as many as 234 residents in the district had been in quarantine, of whom 55 were employees of the pharmaceutical firm in Nanjangud – India's first cluster case – and many others delegates of the Tablighi Jamaat in New Delhi. However, all of them have tested negative for the novel coronavirus, and what is more, not a single resident of Chamarajanagar is now even in quarantine. 

Its proximity to a Covid-19 hotspot sets Chamarajanagar’s accomplishment in keeping itself free from the infection in stark relief. Among the reasons for the border district’s success was the decision to enforce the lockdown from the very first week of March, and the efficiency of the personnel at the six checkposts across Chamarajanagar, who scrupulously subjected all those entering to medical examination. 

The stringent measures initiated by the Chamarajanagar district administration led by deputy commissioner MR Ravi and superintendent of police Anand Kumar, have been supplemented by the tireless service of ASHA and anganwadi workers, who surveyed more than two lakh households, and the healthcare personnel. At the designated Covid-19 hospital in Chamarajanagar, the 32 paramedical personnel and 52 doctors, who have been toiling round-the-clock for nearly a month, have finally been relieved of their duties for the present. 

“Those with severe acute respiratory infections (SARI), influenza like illness (ILI) were also tested to check any possibility of community transmission of virus. This helped us locate two individuals with SARI and 51 who had ILI,” Ravi told TOI. 

The launch of ‘Aushada Mitra’ through which 13 pharmacists were deployed across the district to ensure delivery of necessary medicines at the doorstep of residents ensured people, particularly the elderly, did not have to step out of their homes, further reducing scope for the transmission of the novel coronavirus. 


