Change of guard in Maha, Covid-19 crisis keep inter-state flood panel formation on paper
2020-06-02
Belagavi: Among the problems that result from surplus rain in Maharashtra is the inundation of the delta regions in the neighbouring state, and the districts in Karnataka downstream of rivers that originate there. On Monday, the Southwest Monsoon made landfall in Kerala, bringing back into focus the need for an inter-state joint panel to prevent loss of human lives and damage to property. However, the constitution of this panel remains yet a distant dream. 

In August 2019, the secretary of the Command Area Development Authority (CADA) for the Maharshtra government Rajendra Pawar proposed the idea, and in the ensuing months, talks were held to take the idea closer to realisation. But nothing substantial was achieved, and management of a disaster, should it occur, will remain a formidable task for both states. 

The chief objective of the panel is to revise the quantum of water to be released from the major dams – Koyna, Warna and Almatti – by assessing the situation prior to and during the monsoon. 

In 2019, both states bore the brunt of floods – Belagavi district alone reporting damage of up to Rs 11,500 crore, while Raichur, Bagalkot and Vijayapura also suffered badly from the calamity. Heavy rain over the past few days has revived memories of last year’s deluge among the people of Belagavi, and North Karnataka. 

A source in Karnataka Neeravari Nigam Ltd (north), Belagavi said that the panel could have foreseen and helped mitigate the damage caused by floods. “The panel’s aim is to prevent surplus storage of water in the dams, which will then lead to discharge of a large quantity. We must plan to construct agricultural and water shortage ponds to prevent such a calamity,” the source said. 

Deputy chief minister Laxman Savadi, who had held discussions with officials and elected representatives in Maharashtra, attributed the delay in forming the panel to the Covid-19 crisis. “The Maharashtra government had earlier alleged poor maintenance of the Almatti Dam. But an expert panel constituted by Maharashtra has cited encroachment on the banks of the river in that state as the cause for the floods. Following the submission of the report, things have stagnated in the neighbouring state, not to mention the change of guard there,” Savadi added. 

Ashok Chandargi, an activist, while endorsing Savadi’s observations, did not restrain himself from criticising both the Karnataka and Maharashtra governments for dragging their feet on the issue. “The panel must have been constituted before the monsoon. This has not happened, and if there is another flood, the state will have to suffer,” Chandargi rued. 


