Chandigarh: School classrooms all set to go virtual amid Covid-19 lockdown
2020-03-25
CHANDIGARH: Amid coronavirus outbreak, a few schools in the Tricity plan to start the new academic session in April, as scheduled, albeit digitally. Many schools have resorted to online assignments and live or recorded classes for senior students. Teachers are also sharing activities with their respective classes of other schools. However, students of junior classes are enjoying extended holidays. 


The tools and techniques being used by teachers include live classes with students in attendance, recorded lectures, online worksheets, voice messages, audible stories, daily tips and fun quizzes based on vocabulary and mental Maths. The Times of India takes a look at what is being done by a few schools.

Principal of Dikshant Global School Sarika Sarin said, "We have created well planned home engagement modules and online classes for all subjects. Lessons for Class X and Class XII students started on March 24 and those for other classes will start on the scheduled start date of the session in April.

"To implement this, teachers have been trained in conducting live classes using the online application. They conducted trials among the teachers' community and then switched over to the student-teacher model. Each teacher has been given the schedule and time slot of 45 minutes to host a meeting with students. Ten minutes have been kept aside as buffer for transition. The schedule and planned syllabus is sent to students one day in advance. Teachers are keeping a track of attendance, classwork, and homework daily. The existing portal of the school and class groups are being used to share worksheets, audible stories and fun games with students at all levels. Teachers who teach primary classes have also recorded lectures to make it easier for children," Sarin said. 

According to her, more than 90% of students attended classes in the first phase. "Students used this opportunity to clarify their doubts, interact with the teacher and access resources being shared by the teacher during class," she said.

Delhi Public School, Chandigarh will hold two to four sessions a day. School principal Reema Dewan said, "In addition to online modules, we will start regular hourly sessions for senior classes in a day or so and the reach will be broadened with time. We are sending content regularly. First the subject content is sent with the relevant video link. Afterwards, an assignment based on that is sent. Students' queries are also addressed." 

At Gurukul Global School, Chandigarh the new session will start in the first week of April. School principal Urvashi Kakkar said, "We have already sent the link for e-Deeksha app of CBSE. As the new session was to start from April 6, our e-content shall be sent on a regular basis to students. This will include worksheets and assignments. For classes IX to XII, live online classes will start in the first week of April."

At Sky World School, Panchkula, virtual classes will start from April 7, when the new session was to start. "This was the opening date for regular school. Now it will be Sky Virtual School," said school principal Santosh Bhandari. 

Principal of Saupins School, Panchkula said online classes will be started from the first week of April. "We will start online classes from the first week of April. These days, teachers are preparing lectures at home. All teachers are instructed to prepare lectures, question-answers, solved workbooks of all lessons of unit one, which will be put on snaphome app. Worksheets and home assignments will also be given through this app. We hope parents are able to procure workbooks before we start. Otherwise, we will prepare general lessons and send through the app," principal Jayeta said. 

Hansraj Public School, Panchkula will also use apps. Principal Jaya Bhardwaj said, "We have started online lessons for classes VIII, X and XII. We have made a schedule and at least three teachers of each class share their lessons and assignments every day through Snaphomework and My Classroom apps." 

Vineeta Arora, senior principal, Bhavan Vidyalaya, Chandigarh said, "Students of classes VI-XII are being actively engaged through online platforms and videoconferencing. New classroom timetables have been set up for these platforms. Worksheets and assignments are uploaded onto class groups and teaching is being done through video conference."

"We have tied up with top global educational companies. Since students are not allowed to visit the school during the Covid-19 lockdown, we have made an online academic plan wherein they can study from home. We are using MangaHigh for mathematics, ChildAcademy for Science and English and MyKensho as a career development programme for secondary and senior secondary students. Our smartclass company will provide free content to all students, which will be available online. We have shared lists of multiple online tools and portals which can be used by parents to continue educating children at home," said Reekrit Serai, managing director, Satluj Group of Schools.

 
Online orientation 

Apart from publishing the result online, schools are conducting orientation for new parents using an online app and live chat tool.

