Chanda man admitted to GMCH tests negative for coronavirus
2020-03-10
Nagpur: A 28-year-old man from Chandrapur, who was admitted to the isolation ward of Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Sunday, was tested negative for coronavirus and was discharged from the hospital. The isolation ward of GMCH now has no new patient.

However, a city-based middle-aged man having a travel history to Dubai in February last week has developed cough, cold and bodyache on Monday. The patient himself informed the GMCH about his health condition. Hospital authorities said that they have asked him to report to the hospital and get himself admitted in isolation ward.

“But, the person is not willing to get admitted so far. He insisted that he will remain at home ensuring no close contact with any other person. His samples will be collected on Tuesday and will be sent for testing,” said a senior official from GMCH.

The only lab testing facility in the Indira Gandhi Government Medical Hospital (IGGMCH), Nagpur, is receiving swab samples from Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and part of Madhya Pradesh for testing. Till Monday, they have tested 40 samples.

“These include four from IGGMCH, five from GMCH, one each from Amravati, Akola, two from Wardha, 20 from Chhattisgarh and 7 from Madhya Pradesh. No sample has been tested positive so far,” said Dr Sagar Pande, assistant medical superintendent of the hospital.

Thermal screening of commuters coming by international flights is being done at the city airport since March 6. Till date, more than 260 commuters have been scanned at the airport and no one of them was found as a suspect.

The health department has kept the ambulance and medical team ready at the airport in case the thermal scanner detects any commuter as a suspect.

Ahead of Holi, citizens were seen buying hand sanitizers in large numbers on Monday. In fact, sanitizers went out of stock in most of the medical stores in Dhantoli and Central Baazar Road where many big hospitals are situated.


