Chandigarh: Man threw rooftop party before coronavirus struck him
2020-04-26
CHANDIGARH: The resident of Bapu Dham Colony in Sector 26 who had tested positive for novel coronavirus on April 24 had organised a party on his marriage anniversary at the rooftop of his house on April 17 during curfew, leading the police to register a case against him. The ward attendant in Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), Sector 32, had invited around 40 to 50 people for the bash.


The information came to light after the municipal corporation (MC) questioned him about his whereabouts to trace his primary and secondary contacts.



Charanjit Singh Virk, DSP, public relations officer, said the man had invited his relatives and family members who lived in the same locality. “There was no music or dance. Only food was served on the rooftop of his house to his family members,” Virk said.

Sector 26 police registered a case under Sections 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant, 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread a deadly infection) of the IPC.

As many as 138 people, who were found to be contacts of the patient, have been quarantined. These include his 16 family members, neighbours, relatives and people he met in the past few days. Residents of Mauli Jagran and housing board colony, Dhanas and a resident of Sector 29 are in the list. As it had come to notice that the patient had taken medicines from a doctor in Bapu Dham Colony, he and his family members have also been quarantined.

Sources said the phone call details of the patient were checked. “The patient met his relatives in Mauli Jagran and Sector 52. All of them have been quarantined at their homes,” said officials. The MC found he had interacted with a resident of housing board colony in Dhanas and a resident of Sector 29. Both have been placed under home quarantine.

“The health department has also taken samples of seven family members of the patient and other suspected people of the area on Saturday. Two blocks of the area have been sealed as a precautionary measure,” sources said.

