Check on int’l flyers amid one more Covid-19 case
2020-03-13
Pune: Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar on Thursday said flyers reaching the city from Dubai following travel to seven high-risk countries would go for an institutional quarantine for a minimum 14 days as per an advisory issued by the Union government in the wake of rapid spread of Covid-19 across continents.“As per the health authorities, all incoming travellers, including Indians, arriving or having visited China, Italy, Iran, Republic of Korea, France, Spain and Germany after February 15 shall be quarantined for a minimum period of 14 days,” the advisory stated.Mhaisekar said the administration has informed the airport authorities about the decision and sought details about the flyers. In case of any Covid-19 symptom, the flyer will be admitted to the Naidu Hospital for treatment. “A Spice Jet flight will reach Pune at 4.30am on Friday. All travel details about the people on board have been sought. Each flier has been told to fill a self-declaration form. The forms will be checked and the fliers with recent history of travel to the seven countries will have to go for institutional quarantine,” he added.Pune airport director Kuldeep Singh, “One copy of the self-declaration form is given to the airport health officer and the other to the immigration officer. Forms of the passengers are closely scrutinized, in addition to the screening of each passenger and those with a travel history to the restricted countries. People with Covid-19 symptoms are sent to the Naidu Hospital. Since March 5, we have screened around 1,600 passengers and nine of them have been sent to Naidu Hospital.” Once a traveller is quarantined, his or her relative will be requested not to meet the person. Mhaisekar said, “The purpose of institutional quarantine is to ensure isolation of a person if there are any Covid-19 symptoms within the 14-day period.” Mhaisekar said arrangements for the institutional quarantine were being made at centres coming up within the Pune Municipal Corporation’s (PMC) limits in coordination with the civic authorities. Officials said over 400 beds were already in place at over 21 facilities for institutional quarantine and the number would increase in accordance with the requirement.Till now, Pune district has reported nine Coronavirus positive cases. The latest Covid-19 positive person was a man who had returned to the cty from the US on March 1. He tested Coronavirus positive on Wednesday.