Chef’s wife petitions collector to bring back quarantined ship crew
2020-02-14
MADURAI: Malliga, the wife of chef Anbalagan of the cruise ship “Diamond Princess”, which has been quarantined off Yokohama in Japan for more than a week, on Thursday petitioned Madurai district collector T G Vinay seeking steps to bring home the Indians on board including the Tamil crew.

“I am not here for my husband alone but on behalf of the 160 Indians including five Tamil Nadu crew,” she said after petitioning the collector. The mother of two said her husband is healthy, confident and also comforting her. “But our fear is on the rise as coronavirus is spreading day after day. Everyone please pray (for them),” she said and appealed to the Union and state governments to reunite the men with their families before the quarantine period ended on February 19.

Thiruparankundram MLA P Saravanan (DMK) who accompanied her said his party is taking efforts to bring the stranded men home through Anbalagan who is from his assembly segment. He said the collector promised to make all efforts in this regard. Meanwhile, on Thursday, Anbalagan told TOI that the crew members on board have been separated. “Yesterday when the Indian Embassy officials in Tokyo contacted me I expressed concern over the crowded crew mess and that it could result in the virus spreading. I don’t know if they have made the changes because of my complaint but I am happy about it,” he said.

The chef said the Japanese health officials have made arrangements in such a way that the crew members are not seated opposite or close to each other while having food. “Only six more days (quarantine) to go. By then those with symptoms will be known. It will be over on the 19th and we will be sent home. We are likely to return home any time next week after 20th,” he added.

Meanwhile, Japanese health officials are planning to get the guests to voluntarily disembark to complete their quarantine period at a shoreside facility. This was stated by Princess Cruises, the parent company of Diamond Princess, in a statement on their official website. It said the most medically vulnerable guests will go out in the first phase and be tested for the novel coronavirus. If the test is positive they will be transported to a local hospital for further evaluation and isolation. If negative, they will be given the option to leave the ship and be transported to a quarantine housing facility. There are no clinics in these facilities, but prescription medication will be provided. Medical care will require transportation to a hospital or clinic. 


