Chennai registers 75% fewer deaths during lockdown
2020-06-09
CHENNAI: Keeping with the national trend, the overall number of deaths registered in Chennai has reduced by about 75% between May 1 and 20, as compared to the same period last year. While a sharp decline in accidents due to reduced traffic is cited as one of the reasons, reports of death registry not being updated could not be verified.

Only 434 death certificates were issued by Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC) during the period. It covers every type of death – natural, medico-legal, road accidents – reveal official data. Public health expert K Kolandaisamy said, “Though it is too early to come to a conclusion, we can safely assume that the overall death rate has come down due to three important factors: drop in accidents on roads and construction sites, shift in change of place of death registrations and lesser number of stress-related deaths like heart attacks and strokes.”

 

TN road safety commissioner Tenkasi S Jawahar said the number of road accidents reduced by 86% in April this year compared to the same month last year. The trend continued in May. Only 548 road accident deaths were reported across TN in May. It was almost double in May last year.

As for the lesser number of deaths in hospitals in Chennai, Kolandaisamy said that due to travel restrictions during lockdown, a lesser number of people might have been referred to Chennai hospitals at the last minute and therefore deaths could have been reported at nearby hospitals in other districts instead of Chennai.

AB Gopalmurugan, senior interventional cardiologist at Kauvery Hospital, said that heart-related ailments were always a major contributor to overall deaths (roughly 22%). “This has come down,” he said. “The most common causes of such deaths is stress due to long working hours and sleep deprivation, unhealthy eating, smoking, drinking and excessive travel. These habits are on the wane during lockdown.”

On the crime front, there has been a 66% drop in incidents within the city. Only 12 murders were reported in May and they too were cases of sudden provocation, said a senior police officer. City corporation deputy commissioner (health) P Madhusudhan Reddy was unavailable to comment on reports that the death registry may not be getting updated regularly.

