Chennai: Want me to come with you, cop with coronavirus mask asks motorists
2020-03-29
CHENNAI: Just two days into the lockdown, S Rajeesh Babu, fed up with seeing multitudes of city residents violating the stay-at-home directive, decided to act. "We tried holding placards, speaking to individuals, but nothing worked. We wanted something more creative and impactful," said the inspector attached to the Villivakkam police. 


On Thursday night, Rajeesh and his artist friend B Gowtham decided to create a helmet shaped like the image of the novel coronavirus available online. It took broken pipes, old newspapers, tissues, a broken helmet and five hours before "it came out just the way we wanted," said Gowtham.

 Rajeesh got approval from his seniors, put it on and went out on to the streets. "I volunteered because I feel very strongly about this cause," he said. On Saturday, he started walking around the roads, highways, and flyovers, stopping people and explaining to them the importance of staying home. A few found it funny, others found it scary but all of them cringed after taking a closer look.

"We made the helmet look disgusting and creepy because the virus is life-threatening. And people should know that," he said.

On one occasion, when a motorist didn't seem to take his advice seriously, Rajeesh told him that if he found him on the road again, he would sit in his car next to him wearing the corona headgear. He even opened his car door offering to accompany him home. "He immediately promised to not come out. Nobody wants someone with a big, scary virus helmet near them. I think it made perfect sense."

Rajeesh walked around Padi flyover, Villivakkam market and areas around it, wearing the headpiece. "Sadly, people still do not realise the seriousness of this issue. Our aim is to inform in any way possible," he said. 

Rajeesh will be donning this helmet maybe for the next two days, after that he has a new plan. "We are working on it. The next will be another strong, creative costume, similar to this," said Gowtham.

 "We are strictly against causing any harm to the public. And if I can spread awareness by wearing such helmets or even outfits, I'm up for it," said Rajeesh.

