Chennai a challenge, Covid under control in Tamil Nadu: EPS
2020-05-30
CHENNAI: Amid the spike in Covid-19 cases as the fourth lockdown approaches its end, chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami on Friday said the virus spread has been contained in the state, excluding the densely populated Chennai which remains a challenge. District collectors were instructed not to resort to suo motu relaxations and seek permission from the chief secretary.

Addressing collectors through video conferencing, the chief minister cautioned that the virus spread was due to the returnees from other states. "The infection is found more among them. The collectors should remain cautious and subject workers and others returning to testing, and extend treatment," he said. 

Palaniswami said people need not panic since recovery rate in the state increased to 54%. The CM indicated that there was a possibility of opening more economic activities in the coming days. Collectors can ignore online registrations of migrant workers to go home if they were willing to stay as several industrial units have opened. At least 2.47 lakh guest workers have been sent home in 170 trains so far.

The chief minister is scheduled to meet health experts on Saturday before taking a call on further relaxations, including transport, and announcement on extending the lockdown on Sunday.

"Lockdown will continue in Tamil Nadu. Relaxations depend on the Union government’s framework and the ground reality. The inputs received from collectors and health experts will be considered by the chief minister," chief secretary K Shanmugam told TOI.

The CM sought explanations from administrators of top 10 districts with active cases -- including Chennai, Chengalpet Kallakurichi, Kancheepuram, Tiruvallur. The collectors said arrivals from other states, especially Maharashtra and from Chennai, were the reason for the spurt. Tiruvannamalai collector K S Kandasamy said passes issued by the Maharashtra government were valid up to the destination instead of the state border. Kancheepuram collector P Ponniah informed that the industries are under watch after cases emerged from the units. 　Workers with mild temperature will be sent to government hospitals or primary health centres.

"The containment zones are disinfected even at night. Mattuthavani and Paravai markets have been decentralised," Madurai collector T G Vinay said.

The collectors were told to allow uninterrupted movement of construction material and strict vigil on check posts and industries.


