Chennai’s poor hit hardest by Covid, show micro clusters
2020-05-23
CHENNAI: More than three of five people who tested positive for Covid-19 in the state aren’t part of any cluster. The directorate of public health has clubbed more than 9,000 people into the group of “non-Tablighi and contacts” – most of them living in low socio-economic conditions in Chennai and neighbouring districts.




On Thursday, there were 1,370 people in the Tablighi cluster, one of the first noticed in late March. Since April 24, when the Koyambedu cluster was noticed, officials have tracked down 1,097 primary cases and 1, 957 close contacts testing positive. Since the second week of May, 547 natives who returned to various districts from other states were added to Covid-19 registry. Outside these groups, 8,989 are grouped as “non-Tablighi and contacts”.

Directorate of public health officials say the group includes a few hundred people who returned from other states or countries and their contacts, frontline workers such as doctors, nurses, conservancy staff and their families, and people from community. “Many of these people haven’t stepped out of their houses much. Yet, they were infected because they live inside a containment zone that is crowded. Nearly 80% of this group is in Chennai,” an official said. “We named it ‘non-Tablighi’ only because we did know how to name it.”

“Call it by whatever name you want, but let’s admit there is a community spread,” said Dr Jayaprakash Muliyil, member of the National Task Force-constituted research committee on (Covid-19) epidemiology and surveillance and chairman of the scientific advisory committee of the National Institute of Epidemiology (NIE). “It’s there everywhere across Chennai City. And it is no one’s fault. The virus is lapping its guts out.”

“There is no point in going after the virus. You can’t stop the flood with a teaspoon. Lockdowns aren’t helping. So, the best thing to do is to isolate vulnerable population, ease the lockdown and ask people to wear masks and follow social distancing norms until vaccines arrive,” he said.

A majority of TN districts have flattened the curve, while Chennai remains in the red zone, with most cases still in micro clusters. “There is challenge in containing them because of living conditions. They share common toilets, water pipes and live in less than 250 sqft houses,” said Greater Chennai Corporation nodal officer J Radhakrishnan.

NIE scientists recommend testing 100 per lakh population and high risk contacts of positive patients. NIE deputy director Prabhdeep Kaur says containment is a challenge but if efforts are intensified it can be achieved as experts know where to find cases. “In the Delhi congregation cluster we knew the source of infection. So everyone who went to the conference were tested and treated. Koyambedu market, on the other hand was a geographical cluster. People who worked and visited the area took it to a larger group. What we see outside these two clusters in the city are also still in micro clusters. The number of isolated cases we see is minimum.”

Infectious diseases expert say cases may rise when lockdowns are relaxed. “That’s inevitable. We can’t keep people indoors for long but a few things we must adhere to now is prevent crowding and ensure social distancing. So, no malls, schools/colleges, gyms, resorts or pubs for a few more days,” said Dr V Ramasubramanian.


