Chennai’s Koyambedu market newest Covid-19 threat for Andhra Pradesh
2020-05-10
VIJAYAWADA/TIRUPATI: The spurt in Covid-19 cases in Rayalaseema region in recent weeks could be attributed to the Koyambedu wholesale market in Chennai, which is often frequented by farmers and traders from the state, particularly from the bordering districts of Chittoor and Nellore.


The bustling market was closed on May 4 after a sharp spike in positive cases in the neighbouring state. 



Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy, during his review meeting with officials at his Tadepalli camp office on Saturday, was informed farmers and traders from Chittoor and Nellore districts often visit Koyambedu, which is believed to have contributed over 2,000 positive cases in Tamil Nadu.

The CM asked officials to keep an eye on the Koyambedu returnees and their contacts in the two districts. “Conduct tests on those who have been to Koyambedu market and quarantine them if the results return positive,” Jagan said. 

He also asked officials about migrant labour returning to the state and cautioned them against negligence. “Open test centres at all the border check-posts and ensure that every one coming to the state is tested,” he said.

When told that around 700 migrant workers have entered the state without tests and without informing the officials, he directed the officials to take the help of village and ward volunteers to identify them and subject them to tests immediately. 

Meanwhile, Chittoor collector Narayana Bharat Gupta said the 11 new cases in the district have links to Koyambedu vegetable market. The district, after a week’s lull, has been witnessing a spike in the last two days.

“We have identified and isolated the truck drivers, cleaners and all those with travel history to Koyambedu. Screening of all suspects, their primary and secondary contacts is being carried out. Out of 160 suspects, screening was done for 80, of which 11 tested positive. The remaining 80 would be screened soon,” Gupta said. Screening of nearly 1,000 contacts of those with travel history to Koyambedu would also be done in the next couple of days, he added.

