Chhindwara to Colaba: How Corona War Room ‘watching’ home quarantined
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: From the archaic hall having multiple hanging fans on the first floor of Old Zilla Parishad building, a team of 20 medical officers (MOs), paramedics and teachers make calls throughout the day from their cell phones.


An MO asks a woman from Colaba a set of questions related to her health. Another MO tells a man from Chhindwara to immediately rush to a nearby PHC after he complains of fever and cough.

Similarly, there countless calls during the day to over 1,000 flyers who landed at Nagpur Airport since March 6 from the Corona War Room set up in the wake of Covid-19 scare. Those under watch are from the 10 identified high-risk nations and have landed through two international flights from Sharjah and Doha.

The teams ensures that the flyers are observing home quarantine guidelines ever since they left for their destinations from Nagpur. “Most of them are happy that someone cares for them,” said Dr Suresh Mote, a duty officer at war room.

The team has been divided into groups of two — an MO and paramedic or teacher — who are assigned around 50 to 70 flyers. They have formed WhatsAppp groups where advisories are sent several times a day. Each group calls up from their own cellphone asking if they are in self-isolation and reminding the days left out of the 14-day period.

Dr Chandra Suresh Dongarwar, an MO, said some had exited the group but preferred direct messages and calls. “They too ask us to take care,” Dr Dongarwar said.

Dr Asim Inamdar, the other duty officer monitoring the team, said they had been continuously updating the list of passengers flying in to Nagpur since March 6, when the city’s first positive patient landed from the US. “There were many discrepancies like incorrect phone numbers, addresses etc. The team initially had to search for accurate passenger details from airport authorities,” he said.

Dr Mote said there were many discrepancies like incorrect phone numbers, addresses etc. The team initially had to search for accurate passenger details from airport authorities,” he said.

The phone number was the only and most important link between the administration and these flyers. Hence, after anomalies surfaced as the team members couldn’t connect with them, the officials tightened the system. Of the over 1,000 flyers, 300 remained unreachable for several days. “The number came down to 200 now as we sourced their working numbers,” Dr Mote said.

Dr Inamdar said no flyer from these countries was allowed to leave unless the phone number was verified on the spot. “A passenger had to wait for three hours till a relative, whose number was given, called back to confirm,” said Dr Inamdar, adding that they could no more go by what people mentioned in the forms.

He said persistent efforts had to be made to connect with the foreign returned people. “We were happy some called back after three days. Most of them have been honest about their health and are reporting us all details,” Dr Inamdar said.

ZP CEO Sanjay Yadav said his department took up the responsibility on its own. “As the team members are using there own cell numbers, we would be reimbursing them the amount spent on calls,” he said.


