Chicken seller quarantined after Markaz link unearthed
2020-04-09
VISAKHAPATNAM: The health and police departments in the city are on their toes after a chicken shop owner in the city admitted to having coming in contact with people who had attended a religious congregation in New Delhi.


Last Sunday, the shop owner had sold meat to 200 customers. A list of his customers is being prepared by the health and police departments, most of them believed to be migrant labour from Bihar.

According to sources, the chicken stall owner has been tested negative for Covid-19. However, as a precautionary measure, he and his parents have been kept in hospital quarantine. He also had played a game of cricket with local boys in the Parawada area.

The authorities have identified 48 secondary contacts of the chicken shop owner and 11 people turned up voluntarily for tests.

Except Dwaraka, positive cases were reported in the seven zones within the city police limits. So far Vizag had 21 positive cases and four were discharged after repeated tests proved negative. Tests on another two patients turned negative but they would remain in observation for a few more days, sources said.

Meanwhile, a surveillance survey was carried out in the seven red zones. “Our health staff is conducting survey every day to know the health condition of the people. We have taken up another round of spraying in those areas,” said GVMC commissioner G Srijana.

As a part of disinfecting, GVMC is spraying doors, windows and the premises of Covid-19 patients and houses of the secondary contacts. “We have 19 Delhi returnees, including one from the rural area. Out of which, five are positive cases. And from these positive cases, we have identified 23 primary contacts. Another 33 primary contacts were identified through other positive cases, leading to 56 primary contacts. Their test results were negative,” said RK Meena, city police commissioner.

The top cop said no one has been allowed to enter the red zones. “All essential commodities are made available to them. The GPS system tracks all primary contacts and they are kept in home quarantine,” he said.


