Coronavirus: Children recover faster, 35 of 40 go home
2020-05-17
SURAT: Compared to adult Covid-19 positive patients, children below the age of 12 years have shown faster recovery rate of 92% in the city.

When Covid-19 hospital built on New Civil Hospital (NCH) campus is overflowing with adult patients, positive news has trickled in from its paediatric ward. Out of the total 40 Covid-19 positive children, 35, including a three-month-old girl, one of the youngest patient in Surat, defeated the deadly virus and were discharged in the last one month. Hospital authorities said condition of five remaining Covid-19 positive children is stable and that they too will be discharged soon. Out of the 40 children, 17 were girls and 23 boys and their age ranged from three months to 12 years.

Dr Panna Bulsara, nodal officer of Covid-19 paediatric ward, told TOI, “Most of the children were asymptomatic and had tested positive during community sampling drive. The winning spirits of the children, dedication of the health staff and doctors at the NCH were responsible for the recovery of the children.”

The children were provided with healthy and nutritious meal, medicines including antibiotics and vitamin supplements. A positive environment also helped them to fight back, he said.

“Our nursing staff and doctors used to play with the children to remove the fear of disease from their minds. Mothers of many small children were staying with their kids in the ward,” said Dr Bulsara.

Two cousin brothers-four-year-old Jeet Rana and five-year-old Vadik Rana- residents of Maan Darwaja tenements defeated the deadly virus within seven days. They were admitted in the paediatric ward on April 20 and got discharged from the hospital on April 27.

Dr Vijay Shah, head of the paediatric department at NCH, said, “It is very difficult to manage children with Covid-19 and keep them in the ward for days together. We had to attend to each one of them personally. Our team of nurses and doctors took utmost care of the children, which resulted in their faster recovery. From time to time, the children and their parents were counselled that the virus can be defeated. ”

