Coronavirus scare: Chinese lockdown hits artificial gem cutters in Trichy
2020-03-14
TRICHY: The scare over the novel coronavirus has created an unusual victim in Trichy, the artificial gem cutting industry which depends solely on China for raw materials and machinery. Ever since the virus outbreak was reported from China, the movement of both has ceased. The lockdown has put aspiring entrepreneurs in the artificial gem cutting industry in a fix too.


Trichy was once considered the capital of artificial hand-made gems or artificial diamonds supplied to jewelleries. These were used in the value-addition process of gold and imitation jewels. However, the rise of Chinese artificial gem cutting machines in the past decade had paved the way for the downfall of hand-made artificial diamonds in Trichy. Gradually, jewellers imported artificial diamonds from China while a few entrepreneurs imported the machinery itself to produce artificial gems here.

Except for the few local gem makers, jewellers were importing artificial diamonds from China and other countries. Things were smooth until Covid-19 outbreak started to wreak havoc in the local artificial gem making industry. “We still depend on China for the cutting and polishing tools. We usually import on a monthly basis to cut the artificial diamonds. The clampdown on goods movement has kept our workshop closed,” T Rajasekar, leading artificial diamond maker from Karumandapam, said. 

Rajasekar is one of the few artificial gem producers with imported Chinese gem cutting machine worth Rs 30 lakh to produce 30,000 artificial diamonds a day. On seeing his success story, a bunch of conventional gem cutters mobilised fund and subsidies and were to follow suit. They are in a fix now as they could not launch production after the lockdown in China. “I mobilised Rs 25 lakh to procure Chinese gem cutting machines and was about to visit China. But Covid-19 scare has derailed our plans,” M Kalyani, a conventional artificial gem maker said. Kalyani is not alone as at least five such conventional gem makers who mobilised funds to purchase the machines are in trouble. Citing visa restrictions till April 15, the entrepreneurs said they have to wait for two more months to resume their business. 

