Coronavirus scare in Nashik: Chinese importer cancels consignment due to outbreak
2020-03-12
NASHIK: A chemical container meant for export to China has returned back from Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), Mumbai as the importer refused the consignment sighting coronavirus outbreak. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Interestingly, this is the first export consignment from the district that has been affected due to virus. 

The container, which belonged to Halcon (a joint venture between HAL and Concor), was sent from Nashik to Mumbai but the consignment was cancelled by the Chinese importer on the grounds of the virus outbreak.

According to Halcon sources, the export orders of grapes and fresh vegetables to China has been going on smoothly. So, the cancellation of the chemical consignment comes as a surprise to them. The total value of the consignment was worth Rs 45 lakh. 

Halcon has been providing custom clearance procedure for the fruits and vegetables at the facility. “Our objective is to increase the export of vegetables and fruits at large from here to benefit farmers,” said the Halcon official.

The Inland Container Depot (ICD) and air complex at Ozar was inaugurated on March 15, 2008 adjacent to the airport. Halcon has invested nearly Rs.70 crores to upgrade the existing infrastructure. 

The facility at ICD and air cargo complex comprises warehousing, integrated packing center for perishables, cold storage, screening, comprehensive ground handling services for airlines, CCTV surveillance, bar-coding, labelling and customs clearance facilities.

The facility has been set up to boost export of fruits and vegetables by sea and air. Most of the Nashik exporters are sending grapes, pomegranates and vegetables by sea cargoes to the ICD facility for clearance. The exporters don’t have to go to JNPT Mumbai for the same process. 

The containers are ferried by road to JNPT in Mumbai and then shipped further by sea cargo. Fresh vegetables are also exported by air to London, Dubai and other destinations via Mumbai airport.


