China’s coronavirus outbreak has cotton industry feeling ill
2020-02-10
Nashik: The outbreak of coronavirus in China is taking a toll on cotton exports from India.

China is a major market and India exports around 15 lakh cotton bales to it. However, since the coronavirus outbreak, exports from India have been temporarily stopped.

“Last year, India had exported 15 lakh cotton bales (1.78 quintal in each bale) to China. So far this year, it could export only 4 lakh bales,” said Pradeep Jain, the president of the Khandesh Ginning and Pressing Factory Owners’ Association.

This year, China was expected to import large volumes of cotton as its internal cotton reserves had reduced. It was to import more than 20 lakh bales of cotton from various countries — a bulk of which would have been from India,” said Jain. Such expectations had created a positive mood in the market and the prices of raw cotton had increased by Rs 200 per quintal to settle at Rs 5,300 per quintal in the first week of January.

“But the outbreak of coronavirus has badly hit cotton exports from India. The export has stopped temporarily,” said Jain.

The prices of cotton have now stabilised at around Rs 5,000 per quintal. The government is procuring cotton at the price of Rs 5,500 per quintal, but it is also expected to stop procurement of cotton from farmers soon.

The market is so slow. The country has exported 28 lakh bales of cotton so far this year, against 50 lakh bales last year. The cotton export will get a boost if exports to China restarts in the next few days, added Jain.

North Maharashtra includes four district — Nashik, Dhule, Jalgaon and Nandurbar. Of these, Jalgaon, Dhule and Nandurbar together are known as Khandesh. This belt is known to produce good quality cotton.

The average area under cotton cultivation in North Maharashtra is 8.5 lakh hectare. Of which, cotton acreage in Nashik district is only 50,000 hectare, while it is over 8 lakh hectare in Khandesh. North Maharashtra contributes 10% of the country’s total export. While India exported around 50 lakh bales of cotton in 2018-19 (Oct-Sept), North Maharashtra along exported 5 lakh bales.

This year, the incessant rains caused a loss to the cotton yield by almost 5% in North Maharashtra. But the production was the same as last year due to a rise in the acreage of cotton by 5%. The areas under cotton in North Maharashtra increased from 8.5 lakh hectares to 9 lakh hectares this year.


