China virus scare: Screening of flyers begins at KIA
2020-01-22
BENGALURU: With the deadly novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection affecting more than 200 people and claiming three lives in China, doctors in Bengaluru are as concerned as their counterparts elsewhere in the world.

While medical professionals feel growing passenger traffic between Bengaluru and China is enough cause for worry, authorities at Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) on Monday sounded the first alert as a precautionary step.

“Bengaluru airport has no direct flight to the affected cities in China. However, BIAL has taken precautionary measures to manage novel coronavirus cases. Based on the guidelines received from the Union ministry of health and family welfare, BIAL has set up a helpdesk at international arrivals. Thermal screening of passengers from Singapore, Hong Kong and Kuala Lumpur started on Monday,” said a BIAL spokesperson. Thermal imaging scanners used at airports can potentially detect if a person has fever. 

Coronavirus is a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe ones like Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV). However, nCoV is a new strain that has not been previously identified in humans, according to the World Health Organisation. 

Meanwhile, the state health and family welfare department has deputed health assistants from Bengaluru Rural district to Airport Health Organisation, KIA, for passive surveillance of self-reporting passengers seeking medical assistance.

The department on Friday held an orientation programme for district surveillance officers on nCoV infections. Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Health Sciences in Bengaluru and Wenlock Hospital in Mangaluru have been identified for treatment of any suspected case. 

“Till now, no suspected cases have been reported in Karnataka or India. However, if symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness are experienced during or after travel, passengers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with healthcare providers,” said Dr Prakash Kumar, joint director, communicable diseases, health and family welfare department.

Novel coronavirus can be mistaken for common cold, cough and respiratory infections, given the similar symptoms.


Novel coronavirus & its symptoms
nCoV is a new variant of coronavirus not previously identified in humans. Symptoms include fever, cough, shortness of breath and breathing difficulty.


‘Segregation has to start at airport’

According to Dr Satyanarayana Mysore, HoD, consultant pulmonology, respiratory and sleep medicine, Manipal Hospitals, coronavirus belongs to the same family as the SARS virus. “Though there’s no immediate threat in Bengaluru, there are concerns as Wuhan, the worst affected city in China, is a transit hub. Asking for the travel history of a suspected person is essential. But we must also note that infection-control mechanism is strong worldwide, especially as countries have experience in handling SARS. Patient segregation has to begin at the airport itself,” he said.

Dr Mysore added that respiratory infections see a spike from October to January, suggesting those with asthma, upper respiratory infections and underlying lung conditions get vaccinated for influenza. However, the influenza vaccine doesn’t provide blanket coverage and only shields one from influenza virus. 


