Coronavirus scare grips Bhopal
2020-02-06
BHOPAL: In a first major scare of Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection here in the state capital, a 31-year-old man suffering from acute respiratory syndrome was admitted to AIIMS on Wednesday.

Institute officials confirmed that the man had a recent travel history to China and his samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune.

Meanwhile, test reports of four suspected patients sent from AIIMS, Bhopal are still awaited and no positive cases of 2019-nCoV has been yet reported in Madhya Pradesh though there are around 26 suspected cases of the deadly virus.

According to AIIMS Bhopal officials, the 31-year-old patient who is in a serious condition was admitted to the hospital on Wednesday. He has been placed under quarantine. The patient, who is a businessman by profession, has a severe respiratory infection along with fever, cold, cough and is also diabetic. He had visited China three weeks back and returned to Bhopal recently. His family and relatives are also being screened for the suspected infection.

The current coronavirus outbreak was initially noticed in a seafood market at Wuhan city in Hubei province of China on December 12, 2019, and has spread across China and many countries, including India.

Internationally, approximately 24,000 confirmed cases of 2019-nCoV have already been reported with a death toll nearing 500 – a 2.07% fatality rate.

The health ministry has informed that the number of airports screening passengers for symptoms of 2019-nCoV infection has also been increased as a precautionary measure.

Coronaviruses are respiratory viruses and broadly distributed in humans and other mammals. Rarely, animal coronaviruses can evolve and infect people and then spread between people such has been the case with SARS.

Although most human coronavirus infections are mild, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) — have caused more than 10,000 cumulative cases in the past two decades, with mortality rates of 10% for SARS-CoV and 37% for MERS-CoV, as per the Union health ministry guidelines on prevention of 2019-nCoV.


