Coronavirus outbreak: Chinese students at Savitribai Phule Pune University cancel holidays
2020-02-04
PUNE: The students from China enrolled in the Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) and its affiliated colleges have cancelled their annual holidays to celebrate the Chinese New Year back home in the wake of the novel coronavirus outbreak. 


There are nearly 10 Chinese students in the city, enrolled in departments including botany, commerce, hotel managements, among others. 


 
The students said the Chinese New Year started on January 25 and around this time they would travel to their hometowns to celebrate with family and friends. However, this time they decided to stay back because of the novel coronavirus outbreak in China. 

Hang Zhou, a student of the SPPU’s botany department pursuing his master’s degree, said, “We have been in touch with our near and dear ones over the phone and have been taking updates regarding the situation. Our new year is definitely not quiet like this. People go out on a holiday and enjoy the celebrations. Some of my friends studying here have also decided to stay back.”

Another student Zhou Chong from the SPPU’s economics department said, “The fear of the virus spreading has kept many away from visiting their hometown. I did not plan to go back anyway as I did not get many leaves because of the assignments. I am in touch with my folks and taking updates of their health.”

The International Students Centre at SPPU has 10 Chinese students in various departments of the university and they all have stayed back. 

Satyendra Upadhyay, who formed a group of Indian teachers in Maharashtra for the Chinese language, said there were over 50 students from China who where studying in different universities and colleges in the state. He said, “It’s not just the students who are studying here. But, those in China have also cancelled their trips to Mumbai. An Indo-Chinese conference was scheduled in February and many delegates informed of their unavailability because of the outbreak.” 

Yogesh Kale of Pune had taken admission in the Tianjin University of Finance and Economics in Tianjin, China. He came back to Pune in mid-January, “After appearing for the first semester, I cancelled my admissions as I had to come back because of some personal reasons. When I came the situation was fine. There was little news of the virus. At the airport, the authorities were conducting health screenings. But, I thought it was routine. When I reached Pune, the news about the outbreak came in and that’s when the situation became more serious.” 

Vidya Yeravdekar, principal director of Symbiosis Society, said there were no students in the university from China. 


