Coronavirus scare: Chinese yuan offtake comes to a halt in Kolkata
2020-03-01
KOLKATA: For the first time in recent memory, foreign exchange units in Kolkata have stopped transactions in Chinese yuan, a currency that was being bought and sold in impressive volumes till the novel coronavirus outbreak brought an abrupt end to trading around 10 days ago.



 

With both business and leisure travel to China coming to a halt, forex units are refusing to buy yuan. “We are not purchasing yuan now as there is no possibility of trading in it under the current circumstances. Once travel to China resumes, trading in yuan will restart,” said A K Dutt, director of RN Dutt & Sons that has been in the currency exchange business since 1887.

The only two currencies to witness suspension in trade in recent years were the Qatar riyal and Kuwaiti dinar after both countries faced external conspiracy and aggression. But neither currency traded in high volumes. 

The Chinese yuan, on the other hand, has emerged as one of the most popular currencies in the past decade following a sharp rise in business and leisure travel to the country and introduction of direct flights to Kunming and Guangzhou apart from Hong Kong. 

Till January, around 4,000 people from Kolkata — businessmen and holidayers — were travelling to China every month. That has dramatically changed since the news of outbreak hit headlines. There were very few travellers in the first week of February. And, no one has travelled to any Chinese city from Kolkata in over a fortnight now, leading to a crash in the demand for yuan.

Kirshore Majumdar of Lakshmi Narayan Air Travels that also deals in forex said purchase of the Chinese currency was unofficially suspended by most forex traders in Kolkata around a week ago. At the time, yuan was being purchased for Rs 9.20 and sold for Rs 10.50.

“All money changers are holding some Chinese currency but there are no takers. Similarly, many businessmen who regularly travelled to China and a few holidayers who were about to depart for the country but were forced to cancel their trip are saddled with yuan that they cannot sell,” said Travel Agents’ Federation of India chairman (east) Anil Punjabi.

Dutt explained that holding the Chinese currency at a time like this entails risks as one doesn’t really know the kind of volatility it may encounter if the country remains isolated for a prolonged period due to the nCoV outbreak. It has already had a ripple effect on China’s economy — and the global economy — as many factories remain closed, disrupting supply chains and impacting revenue.

Also with nCoV spreading to other countries, travel to the entire region has dropped drastically. This has led to a dip in all forex trading in the past week.

While the US dollar is by far the most traded foreign currency in terms of value in the city, euro, Japanese yen, UK pound, Thai baht, Singapore dollar and Arab Emirate dirham are the other major currencies traded in Kolkata. The currency that is traded in the highest volume in Kolkata is, however, the Bangladeshi taka.


