Coronavirus outbreak: Chinese restaurants continue to do brisk business in Coimbatore
2020-02-06
COIMBATORE: Anything related to the word ‘China’ shouldn’t be immediately related to 2019-nCoV. 


Though neighbouring Kerala reported three confirmed cases of novel coronavirus, it has not deterred customers from devouring their favourite dishes from three oldest Chinese restaurants in the city. 

These restaurants started by Chinese families and other restaurants say they have not seen a fall or change in business since the outbreak of the new virus in Hubei province in mainland China. 

The Chinese restaurants are now run by the third generation of the families and they are not looked down on after the outbreak. 

Their non-vegetarian orders, including pork, too has not changed, they say. 

Regulars to these restaurants don’t find any reason to believe the messages doing rounds on WhatsApp and Facebook stating that the virus outbreak was due to Chinese eating too many animals and often raw. 

Micheal Paun, whose grandfather moved to Coimbatore from China at the age of 10 and started Peking restaurants in the city, said there has been no change in business due to the virus. “We have not seen any fall in business over the last three weeks,” Paun said. “In fact, not a single customer has even bothered to discuss about the virus or how we cook our meat,” he said. “Many of our customers come to us specially for pork. Sales of pork has not reduced,” he added.

Other two popular Chinese restaurants, Kowloon and Ninhao, report the same status. “Nobody doubts the way we cook our meat or hygiene. They sometimes ask us the ingredients to understand a taste but not doubt our hygiene,” said a worker at Kowloon restaurant which is again started by a Chinese family. “Like most restaurants, we also have employees only from northeast India,” he said.

Sharika of Ninhao said they do not even source ingredients from China and most of their customers know that. “I don’t think they even associate the virus to Chinese restaurants,” she said. Even top Chinese restaurants in star hotels like Red Pearl in the Taj, Chin in The Residency Towers and Ponzu in Le Meridien say business has not changed. 

