Choreographer posts Covid-19 status on FB
2020-03-20
Bengaluru: Choreographer Diya Naidu from Bengaluru went public on Thursday with her Covid-19 infection, saying her throat swab test confirmed it and is now waiting for the blood test result. The state government declares a person Covid-19 positive only after the second confirmatory test. 

She returned from Switzerland on March 9 and was admitted to the isolation ward of ESI Hospital, Indiranagar on Wednesday night.

Diva posted on Facebook: “I am sorry to do this here. The BBMP is supposed to but seeing how unprepared we are I'm trying to make sure. I have tested positive for Covid-19 and am in hospital currently. I was barely symptomatic... In case you have come into contact with me or someone who has met me - please quarantine yourself.”

She added: “The only thing I got was total loss of smell - no cough or cold or fever or shivering - none of the typical symptoms yet.”

Several people asked Diya why she didn’t go into home isolation. But many appreciated her for going public when there is fear, stigma and discrimination of Covid-19 suspected cases and patients. 

Diya told TOI on phone that when she returned to Bengaluru, no one told her about home isolation. “The focus was only on countries like Italy, Dubai, the US and the UK. I called the helpline number posted at the airport, but couldn’t connect despite multiple calls. I went to a private hospital to check if I should be tested. But the general physician told me I would be tested if I developed symptoms.”

“I went out on work for one day. I took part in a fund raising activity. I was an audience member at a public event on March 12. I have told the organisers that I’ve tested positive,” she said. 

On Thursday evening, India Foundation for the Arts (IFA) sent a note stating that an audience-member at the Mir Mukhtiyar Ali Concert it had organised on March 12 has tested positive and all those present must take precautions and contact local health authorities if they experience any symptoms.

“Diya Naidu is a suspected Covid-19 patient and was admitted in our hospital for quarantine purpose. Her test results are awaited,” a doctor from ESI Hospital, Indiranagar, said.

Firm says employee is positive

Kronos Incorporated, a provider of workforce management and human capital management cloud solutions, said on Thursday that one of its employees in Benglauru tested positive.

“We can confirm that an employee from Bengaluru region has a positive diagnosis following travel outside India and hasn’t come to our office since February-end. We communicated this to Kronites in that region and the building landlord, ensuring that the employee did not come to the office,” it said.


