Covid-19: Chotila temple to remain closed along with three others in Ahmedabad
2020-03-18
AHMEDABAD: In the fight against Covid-19, Surendranagar collector K Rajesh decided to close Chotila temple on Tuesday. Along with the famed Chamunda Mata temple, three other temples — Vadvala temple near Wadhwan, Lalji temple at Sayla and a temple in Little Rann of Kutch — are closed as a precautionary step.


Officials close to the development said that as the Gujarati month of Chaitra is approaching, the district administration was expecting lakhs of devotees to take part in the darshan and the fair associated with the events.

 
TimesViewMajor temples in the country, including the Siddhivinayak and the Shirdi shrines, have already closed to prevent COVID-19 infections and spread. The Government of Gujarat has put the onus on individual organizers of religious gatherings. While several socio-religious organizations have toned down events or cancelled them, as the Chaitri Navratri is approaching it’s high time the state government issues orders to reduce public gatherings in the interests of public safety. 

In Ahmedabad, the famed Camp Hanuman temple would be off-limits for the devotees till March 29, mentioned a notification issued by the Ahmedabad Cantonment Board. 



Coronavirus in India live updates


However, no statewide step has been taken for the religious places. A few of the temples have already initiated online darshan and have appealed to the devotees not to approach the temple if not necessary. Masks and hand sanitizers are already provided to the devotees.

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), told media on Tuesday that all the social and religious organizations have been appealed to cancel or postpone their events so as to prevent mass gatherings. “We have not taken any decision on the Chaitri Navratri functions yet. But we are appealing to the organizers to take the call and put the public safety as a priority along with the faith,” she said, adding that the collectors and district administrators are talking to the communities.


