Chullikkal in dist identified as Covid hotspot
2020-04-20
Kochi: The health department has identified Chullikkal area in West Kochi as hotspot in the district following the death of a local resident due to Covid-19 and his three family members were tested positive for the illness. Agriculture minister V S Sunil Kumar said restrictions will remain in the hotspot even after lockdown is lifted. The relaxation in restrictions at Chullikkal will be allowed after examining the prevailing situation in the area. 

The death of Yakub Hussain Sait of Chullikkal on March 28, was the first Covid-19 casualty in the state.

Minister said there will be restrictions in the district even after lockdown is lifted. “Rumors that normal life will return once the lockdown ends are baseless. The relaxation will be given adhering to the protocols as per the directives of the state and central government directions. There will be restrictions on public transport and movement of vehicles inside the district,” he said. 

Adequate steps have been taken to address the shortage of certain medicines in Ernakulam. Health and district administration will also look into the spread of other diseases in Ernakulam. Around 2,000 health workers, including 600 doctors, have come forward to work as volunteers in the district. The service of additional doctors from the volunteers will be provided at community health centres, if necessary. 

As many as 18,707 people were placed under quarantine in Ernakulam. Now, it has come down to 378 and the number of people under treatment also come down to three. 

The construction activities in Ernakulam will resume after Friday. But the works will be carried out following the criteria under Covid-19 protocols. 

The facility for doctors to visit people with serious illness at their houses itself has been arranged and 120 vehicles have been arranged for this purpose. Social distancing and sanitization should be followed properly at the worksites. Health aspects of labourers are the responsibility of the employers. The workers who suffer from fever and cough should not be allowed to work. 

Guest workers should be employed for various works. Pre-monsoon cleaning works should be completed on a war footing. Steps to complete first and second phase works under Operation Breakthrough should be completed. 

Minister asked to start works with existing raw materials and speed up works with the help of machineries. 


