Kolkata: Churches’ first on-site mass since lockdown
2020-06-08
KOLKATA: Two churches in the city came alive on Sunday morning, the first time since lockdown. While archbishop Thomas D Souza, head of the Roman Catholic Church, read mass at St Patrick’s Church, Dum Dum, Bishop Paritosh Canning, head of the Church of North India, carried out church service at the historic St Paul’s Cathedral. While the two church heads said they missed speaking in front of a congregation as it used to happen before the lockdown, both welcomed the change for a greater cause.


Archbishop D Souza inducted new parish priest, Father Irudaya Raj to St Patrick’s Church through a traditional investiture ceremony. Only 10 invitees were called in from the parish to attend the special occasion because of the current lockdown induced rules. “We were all looking forward to the first mass inside a church, though all these days I was conducting service and mass inside my chapel at the archbishop house,” Father D Souza said.

He reiterated that it did feel strange speaking to just 10 people inside the vault of the church. He invoked the Trinity for strength and the way forward. Among the 10 people who were invited were, Anjali Toppo and Leo Gomes. “We felt so happy to be included…it’s a rare honour given the present times when one has to actually measure steps to stay safe,” Toppo said.

At St Paul’s Cathedral, Bishop Paritosh Canning read from the scriptures and prayed for unity and peace. This was broadcast online for the devotees to follow. “I felt so happy to be back inside a church, reading mass, after such a long time. There was no congregation but the entire church reverberated with a presence…” he said. 

After the mass, Bishop Canning sent a message to all the 35 churches of the Diocese of Kolkata, to start corporate worship only from the first Sunday of July and that too keeping in mind the most recent guidelines/norms. A fresh circular was issued later in the day keeping with the latest Central guidelines for religious institutions. The circular asked parish priests not to distribute Holy Communion to worshippers or sprinkle holy water. No physical offering of bread, communion wine or touching of idols or holy book will be allowed inside the churches, according to the circular. 

The CNI had earlier requested the state to allow at least 10% of parishioners to enter the respective churches for worship because they are large in size. However, the permission is still awaited. In the meantime, the Centre’s guidelines on re-opening have arrived and they have been added to the earlier precautionary measures.

