Church relaxes rituals to curb spread of virus
2020-03-07
Panaji: Catholics who went for Mass at the Our Lady of Fatima shrine at Don Bosco, Panaji, on Friday, noticed the holy water fonts empty. Later, they were requested to receive Holy Communion on the hand, rather than on the tongue. 

As coronavirus spreads, the Church is relaxing certain religious practices to fight it. On Friday, Archbishop of Bombay Oswald Cardinal Gracias issued an advisory to parishes in Mumbai to encourage temporary changes in age-old religious rituals. 

While Gracias’ communication was only issued to churches and institutions in the Archdiocese of Bombay, he said that “after appropriate consultation, will send a similar note to the Church in India”. Gracias, who is also president of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, recommended that devotees exchange the sign of peace during mass with folded hands (namaste) instead of shaking hands. 

The Archdiocese of Goa and Daman hasn’t issued any such recommendations yet. 

However, some churches in Goa have already decided to follow Gracias’ advice — like the shrine of Our Lady of Fatima at Don Bosco Panaji. The celebrant assured devotees that the holy water fonts weren't empty by accident — he had asked for them to be removed. Later, during the homily, he read out Gracias' advice in full.

In the note, Gracias advised priests to encourage people to receive Holy Communion on the hand instead of on the tongue, as is widely practiced.

Fr Loddy Pires, in-charge of the shrine, requested that devotees at the shrine should only receive holy communion in the hand, reverentially. “You must consume the host there itself before going to your place,” he said. Pires also advised devotees not to touch the statues around the shrine. He stressed that the precautions are for the devotees’ own safety.

In his communication, Gracias advised that the veneration of the cross on Good Friday doesn’t have to include kissing it. “The blessing with a raised cross would be adequate,” he said. “Those who desire, they could come in a queue make reverence with a bow and go back,” he advised.

The unprecedented recommendations also include priests and ministers purifying their hands in a bowl of water or sanitiser before distributing communion. In Panaji, the Shrine of Our Lady of Fatima has provided sanitisers in the sacristy.

These new norms are temporary, and valid till Easter, on April 12.

“It there is any indication that an individual in the community is infected, parish priests can temporarily suspend meetings of cells, sodalities, associations, etc,” Gracias stated in his advisory. “Do advise people not to panic. Government authorities are doing their best to face this challenge. All of us need to co-operate so we can combat this effectively.” 


