Covid-19 threat: Church suspends Sunday Mass obligation, Way of Cross
2020-03-20
PANAJI: As a pre-emptive measure against the spread of Covid-19, the archdiocese of Goa and Daman on Thursday dispensed the faithful from the obligation of participating in Sunday Mass. It also suspended, with immediate effect, all community devotional practices and gatherings including the Way of the Cross, ‘Santos Passos’, processions, domiciliary visits of the statue of Our Lady, retreats and Lenten dramas.


The archdiocese has further advised that marriage celebrations with large attendance should be postponed to a safer time and funerals be conducted only with close family. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

Stating that this unprecedented situation called for unprecedented measures, archbishop Filipe Neri Ferrao, in a circular issued on Thursday, strongly advised children, people above 60 years, those with common cold symptoms, and those having co-existing ailments not to attend Mass. People who have travelled from any virus-hit areas after March 1, have also been advised to not attend.

The circular discourages the faithful from daily Mass unless it is strictly necessary and to keep a distance of not less than one metre from one another.

Priests should take sanitary precautions before distributing communion and should continue to celebrate Mass even without a congregation, the archbishop said, while also instructing the faithful to receive communion on the hand.

“Wherever possible, the celebration of the Mass is to be live-streamed or recorded and then broadcast,” he stated.

Ferrao also advised that churches and chapels be kept open during the day, at least for a few hours, so that the faithful can pray privately while taking all the necessary precautions.

“All meetings of association and church groups are to be suspended, barring those that are necessary for urgent consultation or decision-making and for charitable activities,” the circular stated.

Earlier on Thursday, the Shrine of Our Lady of Fatima at Don Bosco, Panaji, announced that its Blessed Sacrament chapel will remain closed till further notice. The shrine has also cancelled Thursday adorations and Way of the Cross. “It is Christian charity also to care for the safety of others. Let not your piety imperil the health of your neighbour,” Fr Loddy Pires, director of the shrine, said.


