Coronavirus scare: Patna churches restrict entry
2020-03-20
PATNA: Churches across the city have restricted the entry of people to prevent the spread of the Coronavirus, which has claimed thousands of lives across the world, including three in India so far. Several churches have also suspended Sunday mass.

Father Prem Prakash, head of St Joseph Pro-Cathedral at Bankipore, confirmed that all mass gatherings have been postponed. “Mass outside the church has also been cancelled for the time being. Only small events with not more than 10-15 people will be conducted till the pandemic exists,” he said.

Amar Aaron, secretary of Baptist Church said, “Keeping in mind the current situation, we have started a two-time church service for offering prayers and conducting mass. We have also instructed people not to make a gathering of more than 30-35 people at one time in the Church premises.”



Coronavirus in India live updates


Pastor Pramod K Sebastian of India Pentecostal Church of God at Rajendranagar, said all events, including services, mass and prayers have been partially cancelled. “We have instructed people to restrict themselves from offering prayers at the church if they are sick. Besides, we are not conducting any special gatherings. In order to reduce the number of people, we have cancelled all services except on Sunday,” he said.

Authorities at small churches, on the other hand, are not taking any special measures. “Since the crowd is already very limited, we are not limiting entry. However, programmes and events are not being conducted,” said Anand Kumar, defence committee member at Khagaul’s Union Church.

Parish priests and other church authorities pointed at dwindling number of devotees offering prayers in the past two weeks owing to the state government’s instructions to avoid public gathering. “Around 250-300 people attend Sunday morning prayers every week, but due to the outbreak, only 50-60 devotees visited the church last Sunday. Even the 40-day long ‘Chalisa’ that is going in the Church, where prayer service is held at 5pm on every Wednesday and Friday, is not witnessing a huge crowd,” Fr Prem Prakash said.

Worshipers, too, said they have limited their visit to church. Fairfield Colony resident Atul Symon said, “Earlier, my family and I used to visit the church at least five times a week, however, due to the outbreak we have limited our visit. Besides, we make sure we maintain distance from other devotees.”


