CID dog squad member, BMP Gorkha Vahini jawan test Covid positive
2020-06-10
PATNA: Two state security personnel have tested positive for Covid-19, including a member of the CID’s dog squad posted in Patna and a jawan of the Bihar Military Police’s Gorkha Vahini, which is deployed for VIP protection.

CID sources said that the policeman attached to the dog squad was tested as a precautionary measure as he was scheduled to leave for a training programme in Hyderabad with 49 other colleagues.

Following the development, several CID personnel attached with the dog squad in Patna have pulled out of active duty as a precautionary measure. Patna SSP Upendra Kumar Sharma said the jawan tested positive on Monday and he has been taken to an isolation centre for treatment.

The BMP jawan from the First Battalion, also known as Gorkha Vahini, tested Covid-19 positive after returning from his hometown Darjeeling after his leave ended. The jawan is associated with one of the four companies of the Vahini, which gets deployed for VIP security duty such as providing cover for the chief minister, Patna high court Chief Justice and senior IPS officers among others.

The jawan was living at the Imam complex located near the Dakbungalow roundabout which has the temporary office of a company of BMP-1.

The premises also houses small company offices of other BMP battalions which are deployed for law and order duty in Patna. Several others from the premises have been quarantined as a precaution.

Following the development, a section of the eastern flank of Fraser Road from Dakbungalow roundabout going towards Patna railway junction was shut on Tuesday by the district administration.

ADG (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said contact tracing is being done after the BMP-1 jawan tested positive.

“His report came in the last 24 hours. Rest of the battalion is safe as he was at a separate office in city. Necessary actions are being taken by the health department as well as the district administration as per protocol. The headquarters is monitoring the situation,” he said.

The ADG said altogether 94 police personnel across the state have tested Covid-19 positive till now which includes the Gorkha Vahini jawan.

“71 of them have already recovered. This includes all 46 BMP-14 jawans living inside the BMP-5 battalion premises in Patna,” ADG Kumar added. 


