Coronavirus: Jaipur cinemas witness major drop in collections
2020-03-06
JAIPUR: Such is the scare among public on coronavirus, majority of the cinema halls across the state, including Jaipur, witnessed drop in their collections. Majority of the cinema halls have witnessed dip in their daily collections while many cinema lovers have opted for cancelation of their advance booked tickets.


Besides, many cinema producers who have planned to shoot their films in Jaipur and Bikaner have postponed their schedule.

Taasee Pannu starter Thappad has been the worst affected. “Since Monday when an Italian tourist was tested positive of corona virus, there has been dip in the collections of the film Thappad. The film was doing well till Sunday. Many people are opting for cancelations too. With the apprehensions and scare I think upcoming releases would also be affected,” said Raj Bansal, a leading film distributor of the state told TOI on Thursday.

There were also reports of cancellations of shows from Ajmer, Jodhpur and Alwar where the cinema hall owners had to cancel their shops due to lack of audiences.

“Our noon show had no audience, thus show was to be cancelled,” said a cinema hall owner of Alwar on the condition of anonymity.

The fear of coronavirus has also affected the ongoing shootings of the films. “The film unit of Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 which was in Jaipur for the shooting has already packed up from here. Also a film unit of the upcoming film Bhuj too packed up from Bikaner,” said a film distributor who is into facilitating the film shootings in Rajasthan.

The ongoing scare has also made the makers of Sanjay Dutt starrer Prithviraj to postpone their shooting from Jaipur. “They were to start their shooting from the second week of March in Rajasthan and were to shot in Jaipur. However, no confirmation has been given by them on the shooting,” said a distributor. Also the shooting of upcoming films by Yash Raj films and Dharma Productions too has been stalled.

Now cinema trade of Rajasthan is jittery on the eve of the release of Baaghi 3 starring Tiger Shroff. “People are actually scared and are avoiding public places. Who will go to cinema halls?,” said Prateek Sharma, who is into watching every movie on its first show.


