CISF distributes masks to personnel at Kolkata airport to guard against coronavirus
2020-02-04
KOLKATA: Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) personnel deployed at Kolkata airport have been issued protective masks to guard against the spread of coronavirus from passengers. 


Sources in the force told TOI the decision to provide masks to all personnel at airports was taken after the coronavirus scare. Initially, the decision was to provide masks to all personnel deployed at international wings, where the chance of dealing with a coronavirus carrier was high, particularly flyers arriving from China. Later, it was decided that masks would be provided to everyone on duty at airports.

According to a senior CISF official, the order came last week. “We were told to wear masks as a precaution. We had initially approached the airport director for masks but as we were told that they would need some time to get them, we got them on our own. As told, all CISF personnel, especially those at the international wing, have been wearing masks since last Saturday,” said the official.

Another official said CISF dealt with passengers at close quarters, first at the time of entry, then at security check-in, leaving them at high risk of catching the infection. “That is true not only among those on duty in the international section but also those at the domestic wing as international passengers can also fly on the domestic network after arriving here,” he said. Personnel at the terminal entry gates and frisking points at security check have been particularly asked to don the masks all the time as they are the most vulnerable due to their proximity to passengers. “We would like to introduce a regimen in which the personnel wear the masks throughout their duty, even after the coronavirus scare is over as, given the huge number of people they deal with daily. The habit is yet to set in. So some of them, like those screening cabin bags and away from direct passenger contact, are still reluctant to wear masks,” said another official. 

In November 2019, when the air quality in the Delhi-NCR region had plummeted drastically, CISF had issued N-95 anti-pollution masks to its personnel at IGI Airport, Delhi Metro, government buildings, Special Service Group (SSG) and other units, directing them to wear them till the AQI improved. The masks distributed for protection against coronavirus are also N-95, where respirators are thicker, making it difficult for some to wear them for prolonged periods. Those wearing the mask need to fit the respirator around the nose, cheeks and chin to ensure that they don’t breathe around the edges of the respirator. “If the mask is not worn properly, it is difficult to breathe and so, the reluctance to use it at a stretch. It will take getting used to,” a jawan said.


