CISF team quarantined after museum guard dies
2020-05-09
Kolkata: An assistant sub-inspector with Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), Asit Kumar Saha, who was posted at Indian Museum and had tested positive for Covid-19, died at Calcutta Medical College and Hospital (CMCH) on Thursday.He was due to retire next year.

While another colleague is admitted in the same hospital, the 32 other personnel in the CISF mess on the museum premises have been quarantined. So have a few other museum staff who have been going there for administrative work and upkeep of the facility. Even though the museum is shut, 33% workforce joined office from the last week of March. Following the death on Thursday, the museum has been completely shut till further notice. 

Saha was admitted to CMCH with fever, body ache and cough on May 5. On May 6, his saliva sample was collected, but the result was yet to come. On May 7, he died around 7am. 

A resident of Ambika Kalna in East Burdwan district, Saha was as amiable and helpful, his colleagues recounted. 

According to sources, Saha had complained of fever three days before being hospitalised and even visited a local doctor who diagnosed it as common flu and cold. 

The 59-year-old with a heart condition was admitted after he and a younger colleague complained of unbearable body ache.

On Friday, the assistant commandant of CISF and head of the unit, Umesh Chanra Gautam, confirmed the ASI who had died had contracted the dreaded virus. The other CISF personnel in the barrack are being sent for testing in batches.

“The situation is very grave. The CISF personnel are scared. The barrack quarters and campus will be sanitized. The entire unit has to be replaced with a new one. Even the museum staff who had gone to clean the CISF barrack, have to be sent to quarantine,” said an Indian Museum official. 

“Only a handful of people were coming to museum for emergency works. Now, they have been asked not to come to their office. Kolkata Municipal Corporation is sanitizing the museum,” said Indian Museum director Arijit Dutta Chowdhury.


