Citizens get creative with birthday celebrations in lockdown
2020-03-30
Nagpur: Ever heard of a cake made of chips and savoury snacks or seen people celebrating their birthdays with a protecting mask on? Thats the new reality in the era of long lockdown. Nagpurians confined to their homes are celebrating their birthdays in the unique ways. Some have decorated their houses with glittery happy birthday wall hangings, while others enjoyed their ‘Quarantine birthday’ with delicious home-cooked meal, making it a memorable one.

Giving some insights into her celebration, Pallavi Bais, a psychology student, stated she cut a cake made of chips and snacks, “I had a fun virtual birthday as I was busy attending video call of my loved ones. My friends a made a cake with ingredients lying around such as chips, kurkure and other stuff. It was special in its own way,” she said.

Gaurav Medha, a banker, celebrated his birthday on March 25 and feels it was an unusual yet happy experience of being at home for the entire day. “It was indeed a different birthday and I will always remember it for years to come. We did not have any cake or outside food, but celebrated it at home with my family. I just cut some bread symbolically instead of a cake,” he said.

Citizens also invoked their inner chefs and baked their own cakes on their birthday, as they are avoiding outside food and delivery was closed too. Rakhi Ghode celebrated her 46th birthday on March 21 with her family and made her own cake. “It was a different experience altogether. Yet I was happy as I baked my own cake, decorated it and celebrations were doubled as my son who usually stays outstation joined me,” she said.

Sampada Shinde, an architecture student, celebrated her birthday on March 26 with nicely done decorations and also posted pictures of herself wearing a mask. “My brother and mom ordered a cake online, and it was home delivered. They decorated my room with whatever was present at home. I spent the whole day with my family. Otherwise, each year I go out with friends and party. We played carom, watched a movie and had own sweet time at home,” she said.

Self-isolation gave an opportunity to Rinkesh Gorasiya, an entrepreneur, to celebrate his birthday with his family after seven years on March 27. He cut a home-baked cake at midnight and calls it the best birthday ever, “This birthday was special to me as I celebrated it after seven years with my family. I cut the cake which to my surprise was baked at home. We played UNO, and the room was filled with laughter. My most special birthday, better than any fancy party,” he said.

Adding to this, Rahul Dhok who celebrated his mother’s 57th birthday on March 26, said, “We tried very hard to get a cake from a bakery as we had already cancelled big celebration plan. My friend who stays nearby joined for a small get together at home. My mom was happy. It was a very different,” he said.

Talking about her lockdown birthday on March 27, Dhanashree Mathulkar, a banker, said, “No cake was cut as no shop was open. I went to office and came back home. My mother made me sweet halwa and I stayed at home with my family.” 


