Citizens reconnect with nature via home composting during Covid
2020-06-12
The Covid pandemic has brought out the best among communities. Even as the pandemic threw life out of gear following the lockdown, residents in Punjab’s Kapurthala district were up for the challenge. 

It is in these dire circumstances that ITC Mission’ Sunehra Kal’ along with technical support from FINISH Society decided to transform lives of the people by helping them reconnect with nature. The Home Composting Programme was jumpstarted after ensuring that Kapurthala be first declared ODF. Soon after achieving ODF status, a survey of houses in the locality and to find people deeply connected with nature was conducted. A sticker in Punjabi describing and differentiating between wet and dry waste were placed in the kitchens of the people. 

The exercise triggered by Covid now involves 29 wards, of which 17 are also busy promoting the solid waste management programme. The total number of houses is around 12,500, with each ward having about 850 houses. These wards are further divided among individuals that work for ‘Sunehra Kal’ in concert with FINISH society. The main idea behind this endeavour is to motivate people and inform them about home composting, and help people understand the distinction between wet and dry waste. Local residents realize how waste segregation is important to keep coronavirus at bay. 

Chander Mahadev, media consultant, FINISH Society, says: “Initially, when the team began working in this area, there were not enough composting demo units. So composting was started in pots that the family already owned. The pots were filled with kitchen waste, and jaggery water was added to them to facilitate fermentation. Chili and turmeric powder was also added to prevent odour and rotting, and airing through ‘turning over’ was required.” 

 FINISH team members Kalpana and Ajay Kumar’s work mainly entails monitoring and motivation, and changing people's thought process about waste. After tackling door to door contact, the concept of segregation of wet waste and dry waste is explained using pamphlets and stickers. The ITC-FINISH team has positively impacted around 2,100 houses

Among the first to adopt this practice was Harvinder Kaur. Her house has several plants and also boasts of a kitchen garden. The kitchen waste of the house is used as fertilizer for these plants. She sets an example in self-sustained gardening through home composting within the community. 

Another motivating personality in the home composting space is Vineeta Rani, who generates income by making and selling compost and stitching clothes. She also grows various vegetables. To produce compost, she collects vegetable peels and other kitchen waste from houses and vendors in her neighbourhood. Veena sources wet waste from around 20 houses in the neighbourhood, and in three months, about 15-20 packets are produced,.These compost packets are sold at 50 rupees a kilo to homes for usage in potted plants or to other people from smaller areas. 


