Citizens take to yoga & meditation to tackle lockdown stress
2020-04-02
NAGPUR: There’s never been a better time to indulge in self-care, take a deep breath and do some stretching. With people forced to stay at home during the Covid-19 pandemic, the wellness conscious citizens have introduced ways to build daily exercise into the schedule for the sake of maintaining sanity.

To avoid sedentary behaviour during self-isolation, a group of citizens is making best use of social media. Ad guru Sanjay Arora, who is also a yoga instructor, has designed a special 21-day yogasan module in which one asan a day is taught to people through a live video. “The day lockdown was announced, I started thinking that people locked indoors will not get any physical exercise and being cooped up inside will lead to considerable stress and depression,” says Arora.

He began by requesting people to post pictures of them doing one asan a day in a WhatsApp Group. “Then came a suggestion from one of my teachers from Janardan Swami Yogabhyasi Mandal to go live with the asanas. Though I had never gone live on Facebook before, there was this awkwardness but I decided to take the plunge,” says Arora.

Since last week, he has been going live at 8am every morning with one simple asan. “The objective was to get even beginners, who hadn’t ever done yoga before, to start doing the asanas. I decided to do this ‘21 simple asanas for beginners in 21 days,” he adds.

Never did he expect the response to be so overwhelming. “We have had around 2,000 views on best day and on an average, at least 1,000 views per video,” he tells.

Not just from Nagpur, people from other cities and countries too are partaking actively. “One lady from New York City messaged she was suffering from sciatica pain, so one day I did the Konasan for that and she sent a thank you message for that,” says Arora.

Arora focuses on a blend of different asanas – sharir sanchalan which is a yogic warm-up, Tadasan which helps to reduce weight and joint pains, Katichakra asan which strengthens the lateral muscles, Pawanmuktasan, which is a sure shot remedy for constipation and digestive problems, Bhujangasan, which is excellent for asthma and other respiratory issues and many more.

To help people keep calm amidst the coronavirus scare, another citizens’ group has started meditation sessions on social media. NGO GrowWill Foundation has created a WhatsApp group for this. “People sit together at their respective homes and meditate by listening to our guided audio tracks. This takes place twice daily at specific timings,” says Dr Abheek Ghosh from the foundation.

Their sessions too have international participants. “We do it stage-wise; people who are successfully able to practise meditation for three consecutive days join the Level 2. Our aim is to help people relax during this pandemic,” says Dr Ghosh. 


