Cities under lockdown, many skip the last flight
2020-03-25
Jaipur: It was expected that fliers would throng the airport on Tuesday before the suspension of domestic flights takes effect from the midnight of March 24 to 31. On the contrary, there were not many to catch the last flight to their homes.

In the eerie silence, a dozen of passengers who had reached Jaipur from Hyderabad in the afternoon flight could be seen haggling with a taxi driver at the outer entry gate of the city airport. He was asking Rs 2,000 to drop them at Tonk Phatak and there was not a second taxi around to turn to.

On the road to airport from Jawahar circle, where on normal days cars would zip through, the emptiness was overpowering. A few people could be seen walking down towards the airport with their bag and baggage. It’s hard to notice taxis or private cars.

“The airport handles around 55 flights a day but today we have only 25. Despite the reduction in number of flights, not many passengers are there. That's why the level of activity has declined in the airport,” said airport director Jaideep Balhara.

With the city under lockdown and transport services having been shut down for travelling from Jaipur to other towns and villages, the demand for air travel has also come down significantly.

“We don't know how to reach Sikar. We came from Hyderabad but now the challenge is to go to Sikar. One of our friends is coming in a car to pick us but he said he is having to plead with police who don't allow him," said a youth in another group of seven sitting at a bus stop.

He said this is another reason why people are not travelling because it is tough to travel to home towns from the airport.

The police manning the checkpoints to restrict movement of people at Jawahar circle said they allow people who show air tickets. But family members or friends going to receive those arriving are not allowed by the police.

"As such it is very hard to control people. They give you false excuses to move around. That's why if there is a proof behind the travel and if it merits a permission, we allow. Otherwise, we don't entertain the requests," said the police officer.

Even though the suspension on air travel has been declared up to 31, the resumption of flight services would depend on how the country is able to contain spread of the corona virus


