Citizens adopt home remedies in battle against coronavirus
2020-03-19
PANAJI: Nowadays, the morning ritual for Margao-based senior citizen Shanta Dhumatkar begins with drinking a glass of warm water with a teaspoon of turmeric spooned in, along with a few drops of lime juice. She also ensures that her three grandchildren gargle with turmeric-infused salt water every night before retiring to bed.

Dhumatkar is not the only one. With growing concerns over the spread of Covid-19, social media is abuzz with recommendations of preventive home remedies, attributing alternative medical streams, especially ayurveda, as the source of these recommended practices.

Consuming turmeric and burning camphor at home are some of the most common

suggestions doing the rounds. Many citizens are also putting these recommendations into practice, finding them just a hassle-free addition to their routine, which they see as harmless precautionary measures to keep their body and home disinfected.

Ayurveda doctors like Dr Anura Bale, principal of Gomantak Ayurved Mahavidyalaya and Research Centre at Shiroda, says that some of these suggestions do indeed have their base in ayurveda and are not just a hoax circulating on social media.

Turmeric, tulsi leaves and neem leaves are known to keep infections at bay and boost immunity, she said.

“A teaspoonful of turmeric can be added to warm water, along with a few drops of lime juice. This can be consumed on an empty stomach in the morning. Similarly, either curry leaves or neem leaves can be boiled in water and sipped first thing in the morning,” said Dr Bale.

She said that tulsi leaves and neem leaves can be boiled together as well to make another beneficial concoction. “Also, camphor or neem leaves can be thrown over embers of burnt out coconut shells inside the house for fumigation,” she said. 

The ayurveda doctor said the practice of rubbing coconut oil on the nostrils before venturing out of the house, as being suggested by some posts circulating on social media, can also be beneficial in keeping impurities out of the respiratory system.

Dr Bale, however, said that none of it will help keep the body from viral infections if basic sanitary practices like frequent washing of hands and general cleanliness are not maintained.

“One should also ensure that the food being consumed is well-cooked. Avoid eating half-cooked or uncooked dishes for the time being, as an extra precautionary measure. A temporary meat-free diet is also known to benefit the body,” said Dr Bale.

