Varanasi reports 3 new Covid cases, Jaunpur district crosses 100 mark
2020-05-24
VARANASI: After scoring zero on Friday, the Covid-19 meter restarted in Varanasi on Saturday when three new positive cases came to light while the number of corona patients crossed the mark of 100 in Jaunpur district.

In adjoining districts, five in Mirzapur and two new cases were also reported in Ghazipur districts.

Regarding the new Covid-19 positive cases in Varanasi, district magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “BHU lab gave reports of 225 samples on Saturday in which three had been found positive. With it total number of positive cases reached to 129. Of them 80 had been discharged after getting cured while four had died. Now, active cases in the district are 45.”

As per the reports, 17-year-old daughter of an infected woman of Umrah Barai hotspot area had been tested positive. She had returned from Mumbai in a car with her mother. A 51-year-old man of Mokalpur village in Chaubeypur area, who had returned home from Mumbai in a truck on May 18, was also tested positive. This positive case is a 22-year-old youth of Mahgaonpura village of Cholapur area and he also had returned home from Mumbai in a truck on May 18.

As many as eight Covid-19 patients including three of Varanasi, four of Jaunpur and one of Ghazipur, who were admitted at BHU and DDU district hospitals, were discharged on Saturday after getting cured. Two new areas including Mahgaonpura and Mokalpur were declared new hotspots. After it total number of hotspots in Varanasi reached to 60 of which 37 are in category of active hotspots.

Jaunpur district, which had recorded detection of 43 Covid-19 positive cases in a single day on Friday, again witnessed 21 new cases on Saturday. 

District magistrate Jaunpur Dinesh Kumar Singh confirmed that with the arrival of test report,s 21 more persons had been tested positive in the district and they all had been admitted to isolation ward. The high number of positive cases in two days took the tally of Jaunpur to 112, he said adding, two patients had died while 11 had returned home after getting cured. Now 99 active cases are in the district. Most of the persons found positive on Saturday are either migrants or infected by them.

In Ghazipur, two youth of Kasimabad area, who had returned from Delhi and Mumbai recently, had been found positive, confirmed DM Ghazipur Omprakash Arya. With it total tally of Ghazipur reached to 75 of which six had become cured. Now active cases in district are 69. Mirzapur also found five new cases, confirmed CMO Mirzapur Dr OP Tiwari, mentioning the newly detected patients have been infected by Mumbai returned persons, who already had been tested positive. Now, total Covid-19 positive cases in district has reached to 31 of which three had become cured. Active cases are 28, he added.One person in Majhgai village in Naugarh area of Chandauli district, who had returned from Mumbai, was also tested positive, said DM Chandauli Navneet Singh Chahal, now total number of Covid-19 positive cases in the district has reached 17.


