Nagpur airport ground staff fear contracting dreaded Covid-19 infection, job worry for cabin crew after flights stop
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: Even as the centre and state have closed down all the transportation services, the flights in domestic sector continue to operate. It was on Monday that the Union aviation ministry decided to stop domestic flights from Wednesday. In the current situation, the staff working on ground are feeling scared of getting infected by coronavirus. 


Around 100 to 200 persons are engaged in duties at airport that includes staff from the private aircraft carriers. Some of the crew members who spoke to TOI without revealing their identity said that despite high risk of contracting infections they have to report for duty.

Even the cabin crew of private carriers are worried over increasing threat of Covid-19, which according to them spread due to international flyers arriving in India. 

According to them, the private companies would sack them immediately if the flights were grounded. They didn’t want to lose their jobs at this juncture due to the slump in employment.

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) leader Raj Thackeray has also raised concerns over continuance of domestic flights when other important services like railways, bus and local trains were stopped. According to him, he had spoken to chief minister Uddhav Thackeray in this regard.

A senior official told TOI that he didn’t understand the logic behind operating flights despite losses. “Yesterday’s Air India flight from Delhi which was routed through Bhopal had only 41 passengers. Today’s flight of the national carrier from Delhi that was routed through Raipur had only 25 flyers. For the sake of just few passengers there’s no point in risking lives of the ground staff,” he said.

Another aggrieved employee from a private carrier said the government was risking lives of thousands like them working at various airports. “The virus was brought by those arriving from abroad. We are at big risk being the first persons interacting with them at the airport. Had the government stopped flights from abroad last week, the infected passengers wouldn’t have arrived in India and risked the entire population,” she said.

Partially agreeing with the grievances of aggrieved employees, Mihan India Limited (MIL) director Abid Ruhi said that even MIL employees were at risk. “We are taking due care by providing them masks, hand gloves and sanitisers. Even team of doctors and counsellors from the public health department, who check and counsel the passengers, are at risk. However, this is national duty and we all need to follow the government’s instructions,” he said.

Adding that the government had suspended domestic flights from Wednesday, he informed that at a time about 100-200 employees from Central India Security Force (CISF), MIL, housekeeping and other departments work at the city’s airport.


