City crosses 1k Covid casesas state breaches 3k mark
2020-05-05
Jaipur: The state reported highest number of Covid-19 cases in a single day, with 175 persons testing positive for the virus on Monday. Earlier on April 21, the state had reported 159 cases in a single day. With record new cases, Jaipur crossed 1,000 positive cases, while the state breached the 3,000 mark on the day. Six people also died in the state, taking the toll to 77. While four died in Jaipur, two deaths were reported from Jodhpur.

Meanwhile, state cooperatives minister Uday Lal Anjana put himself in home quarantine following an avalanche of virus cases reported from his constituency Nimbahera in Chittorgarh. In a video released by him, the minister said he was shocked after his town was severely hit by coronavirus. He claimed that he had came in contact with those who tested positive for the virus 19 in the last few days while discharging his duties as an MLA.

In Jodhpur alone, 85 persons were diagnosed with coronavirus. These cases were reported from Nagori Gate, Pratap Nagar, Udai Mandir area. “We are doing extensive sampling in the area. Daily, we are taking samples of 1,100 to 1,400 people from affected areas. We have sent the samples for testing to Jaipur’s private medical college to clear the backlog as well as to medical college, DMRC and AIIMS in Jodhpur,” said a senior health department official in Jodhpur.

A 58-year-old man, resident of Topkhane Ka Rasta in Chandpole who was admitted to SMS Hospital on May 2, died on the next day after his admission. He had no comorbidity, health department officials said. A 75-year-old man, resident of Khazane Walon Ka Rasta who was rushed to SMS hospital on Sunday, also died in the city. Health department officials said that the patient was brought dead. His samples were taken after his death and he tested positive on Sunday evening.

A 70-year-old man, resident of Tikki Walon Ka Rasta in Kishanpole Bazaar who was admitted to SMS Hospital on May 1, died on Sunday. 


