Coronavirus scare in Mumbai: Schools follow Unicef norms, cancel morning assembly, eye e-learning option
2020-03-12
MUMBAI: With year-end exams on or coming up soon, most city schools have already begun to follow the Unicef advisory on Covid-19 care in schools. The UN body recently issued an advisory to prevent and control the virus through instructions, including social distancing and exploring the use of online education in case of a shutdown.



 
   Coronavirus outbreak live updates 
 
 

Listed as part of social distancing, the Unicef has recommended that schools cancel morning assemblies, sports events and any other activities involving mass gathering. The timing, though, has helped most city schools. “Internal exams are over and so are our classes. School will resume in April,” said Jose Kurien, principal, DAV Public School (Nerul). CBSE, ICSE and ISC board exams are underway. Most state board schools and junior colleges are centres for HSC and SSC board exams and are calling in younger students only for half a day. Annual exams for lower classes soon after will require them to come to school just for a few hours a day.
 
 

In its guidelines for safe operations in schools, Unicef said, “Precautions are necessary to prevent the potential spread of Covid-19 in school settings; however, care must also be taken to avoid stigmatizing students and staff who may have been exposed to the virus. It is important to remember that Covid-19 does not differentiate between borders, ethnicities, disability status, age or gender. Education settings should continue to be welcoming, respectful, inclusive, and supportive environments to all.”

The body has also discouraged perfect attendance awards and incentives.

 City schools have already begun taking steps. R N Podar School principal Avnita Bir recently participated in a webinar on online learning tips for school closures. “We are working on it. We will use Google Hangouts/Meets, pre-recorded content, Google Classroom, Zoom,” said Bir. HVB Global Academy, Marine Drive, which does not have a break coming up, is equipped to use a flipped classroom to teach students remotely. 

A teachers’ union has demanded the education department cancel the innovation exhibition on March 16 and 17. Another has sought cancellation of census duties.


