Lucknow students stuck in Iran amid coronavirus outbreak
2020-03-03
LUCKNOW: Scores of students from Lucknow are stuck in Iran after the outbreak of the deadly coronavirus in the country. 

As many as 210 deaths have been reported in Iran where, according to the latest reports, about 1,000 cases of the disease have been confirmed over the past two weeks. With flights and trains mostly cancelled, students studying in different cities of Iran are finding it difficult to travel home and are facing the risk of being exposed to the virus. 

Research scholar of Islamic ethics in Iran, Ali Abbas, 31, from Lucknow is in two minds about leaving the country. While Ali wants to return home to India, he does not want to risk exposing himself to the virus outside his home in the Iranian city of Qom. “Airports and railway stations are the most contaminated places. Moving out of my place would mean exposure. But I do wish to go home. Our university is shut though classes are being taken online and through social media,” Ali told TOI from Iran. 

For Syed Muhammad Abul Fazl, 27, a theology student in Qom, the 14-day observation period in India is also a concern. 

“I want to return to Lucknow but where will we be kept for testing and observation for 14 days in India? It would be better if we were tested for the virus in Iran itself and then given a medical certificate for Indian authorities,” he said.

Another student, Syed Iman Ahmad, 27, wants to return home for his family’s peace of mind. 

Efforts from Lucknow are also being made to get these students back home safe. On February 28, Maulana Saif Abbas had written to the ministry of external affairs. 

“I have requested for a special flight to Tehran or a nearby airport from where Indian nationals and students can be airlifted. After a lot of effort, foreign minister S Jaishankar has tweeted that they are working with Iranian authorities on the issue and there could be a solution soon,” said Abbas. 

On Monday, Majlis-e-Ulama-e-Hind general secretary Maulana Kalbe Jawad also wrote a letter to the external affairs ministry on evacuation of Indians from coronavirus-hit countries.


