City corpn on a drive to identify, quarantine Chennai returnees
2020-05-03
Trichy: Trichy corporation has identified and home quarantined three people who returned from Chennai in the last three days. The y were identified as daily wagers who reached the city on vegetable-laden trucks. The civic body has also launched a survey in all four zones to identify people, including students, who have returned to the city from other districts.

Ever since Covid-19 cluster was reported in the vicinity of Koyambedu market in Chennai, daily wagers and vendors who had set up eateries at Koyambedu and adjacent localities are returning to their native places.

After some of these returnees were found positive for Covid-19 and responsible for spreading the infection in Ariyalur and Perambalur districts, the civic body has been identifying people arriving from Chennai.

“Three people have been identified so far, there could be a few more. Our sanitary supervisors are surveying the 65 wards. People who have returned from Chennai and other districts will be home quarantined for 14 days,” a corporation official said. Though inter-district travel has been prohibited, people are hitchhiking on trucks carrying essential commodities. 

The civic body has planned to take samples from Chennai returnees only if they display Covid-19 symptoms. “We are also in contact with the truck owners to extract information about the truck drivers and number of people on the truck and where were they were dropped. Apart from labourers, other people who reached the city using other modes of transportation including with two-wheelers in recent days are also being surveyed,” another corporation official added.

The civic body has affixed home quarantine stickers at the houses of the three people who returned from Chennai and also disinfected the streets and roads near their houses. Using social media, sanitary officials have appealed residents’ welfare associations to report the arrival of people from other districts in the last week, including those who availed e-passes for inter-district travel.


