Nagpur breathes fresh as lockdown delivers cleaner air
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: The ongoing coronavirus lockdown may have turned our world topsy turvy but it has had one good fallout. It has improved the air quality of the city. The levels of two major toxins nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and carbon monoxide (CO) have significantly gone down.


TOI analyzed the data of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and found the levels of toxic pollutants saw a significant drop in the city post the Janata Curfew. Before it, the levels of NO2 and CO were as high as 165 and 127 micrograms per cubic metre (mpcm) respectively.

However, post the lockdown, the NO2 levels saw a drastic drop to 47 mpcm while the CO levels reduced to 63 mpcm. From 89 on March 21, the overall AQI of the city reduced to 74 on Sunday.

According to experts, a drastic drop in the number of vehicles on road and other activities led to the improved air quality. “The shutting down of transport sector along with other non-essential activities has brought enormous decline in NO2, CO and particulate matter which are majorly emitted from vehicles and fuel burning. The curfew has been a blessing in disguise for us as we can now define the pie of source contribution,” said Padma Rao, senior principal scientist at CSIR- National Environmental Engineering Research Institute’s (Neeri) air pollution control division.

Highlighting that air pollution levels in the city had gone down by 30% due to lockdowns, founder of Green Vigil Kaustav Chatterjee said, “Major contributors to air pollution in the city are construction activity, roads and transportation. Lockdown has reduced pollution levels as there is a restriction on these. Many citizens have observed birds are coming out in large numbers after the lockdown, which is a sign of human interference in the ecosystem.”

Stating that vehicles contributed nearly 18% of the city’s air pollution, environmental activist Leena Buddhe said, “Apart from it, many industries have shut down, construction activities of road, metro etc have stopped. Hence the major contributors of pollution have gone. The local government should take this as a lesson and take mitigation measures like ecofriendly transport, building green corridors and fountains to suppress dust.”

Rao stated that more information on air quality data of coming days of lockdown will throw up major insights on air pollution mitigation, thus providing inputs in streamlining the action plans. “Major reforms are needed in transport sector to improve air quality. Alternative options like use of electric/CNG/Clean fuel etc for commercial vehicles will prove effective. Apart from this, transition towards BS-VI standard, rationalization of use of cars, improved signaling and traffic decongestion will help in significant reduction of pollution,” she said, adding that use of public transport should be encouraged.

In agreement, Chatterjee added, “Government can definitely analyze this reduction of pollution and put forth as an example of how human activities are polluting our atmosphere. This can be taken as lesson to formulate a local act for plying vehicles and riders to combat air pollution.”


