Kolkata’s 1st Covid-19 patient, two others on recovery path
2020-03-30
KOLKATA: Amidst the increasing number of Covid-19 positive cases in the state, three infected patients who had been under treatment are on the path to recovery. The swab samples of the trio have tested negative to the virus in the first test conducted during treatment. However, doctors at ID Hospital, where the three are admitted, said their samples will go through another round of assessment before they are declared free of the virus. They will continue to be treated at the hospital till they test negative in the second confirmatory test.

“Two consecutive reports have to confirm that the patient is negative to the virus. The first test can show a sample negative to Covid-19 due to intermittent shedding of the virus. In that case, the consecutive test might show positive. That is why a second test is necessary,” said a doctor. 


 

The first patient to test negative was the Oxford-returned 18-year-old boy who tested positive on March 18. The other two were a 22-year-old youth from Ballygunge and a 23-year-old woman from Habra. The two returned from London and Scotland, respectively, and had tested positive to Covid-19 on March 20 and 21.

“A hard-working and dedicated medical team is taking care of the Covid-19 patients in our hospital. Though the three have to undergo another round of tests, we are hopeful of their complete recovery. Once the second test confirms they are negative to the virus, we will be ready to send them home, following protocol,” said Anima Haldar, principal of Infectious Diseases and Beliaghata General Hospital.

The trio had to be given only supportive medicine to treat their symptom. “The good thing about these three patients is that they are young and none showed any aggressive symptom during treatment,” said another doctor. 

Though none of the positive patients are critical, doctors are concerned with the 76-year-old woman from Egra who tested positive on Saturday and was subsequently admitted. She had attended a wedding with a 56-year-old woman and a 66-year-old man, who also tested positive to Covid-19. The 66-year-old was admitted to Peerless Hospital and is responding to the treatment of Covid-19-induced pneumonia. His urine output had been low on Saturday night, indicating a kidney problem. But there has been improvement with medication. Doctors, however, said his condition was still critical. 

“There is no new infection in the lungs and no increase in demand for oxygen. The patient is also maintaining blood pressure and his urine output is improving. But despite the marginal improvement, his condition remains critical,” said Sudipta Mitra of Peerless Hospital. 

The two women were brought to ID Hospital on Sunday. Immediate family members of the 66-year-old Nayabad resident have, however, tested negative to the virus. 


