Kolkata on Covid-19 map, teen back from UK tests positive
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: The 18-year-old son of a senior bureaucrat, who returned home from England on Sunday, became the first confirmed Covid-19 case in Kolkata and Bengal after test reports from ICMR-NICED came positive on Tuesday evening.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The Bengal government late on Tuesday sent a preliminary report to Delhi, which included the teenager’s travel history from England to Kolkata. The undergraduate student at a top-tier UK university took an Emirates flight from London to Kolkata via Dubai. He had been to a birthday party in Cambridge, where three of his friends were later found to be Covid-19-positive, officials here said.

Officials said the teenager and five persons who came in close contact with him — his parents, their driver, an attendant and a neighbourhood doctor — were all in isolation at the Infectious Diseases Hospital in Beliaghata. 

The family stays in an upscale residential complex off EM Bypass.

Unconfirmed reports from state government headquarters Nabanna suggested that the bureaucrat had been to office on Monday. Officials said they were in the process of ascertaining how many more people might have come in touch with the teenager and his immediate family, including his bureaucrat mom.

“We have identified five persons who came in direct contact with him in Kolkata and all of them have been kept in the isolation ward. We are waiting for the test results of these five persons,” Bengal director of health services Ajay Chakraborty said. “We will now retrace every person who were in contact with the family and put them in isolation,” another senior health department official said. Virologist Amitabha Nandi said this was the right approach. “It is crucial to track people who came in contact with the teenager,” he said.

“The family claimed they learnt only on Tuesday morning that three friends, with whom he had been to a party, had tested positive for Covid-19. They then brought the boy to the hospital,” a health department official said. “The boy had also complained of sore throat and cold, which prompted the family to consult a doctor,” the official added. 

The teenager was found to be asymptomatic after he landed at the Kolkata airport and was allowed to go home after being advised home isolation for a fortnight. His family claimed he stayed home on Sunday and did not venture out on Monday either.

“But we have still asked the family to inform the state health department of every person who may have come in touch with the teenager or his immediate family,” an official said, adding that some relatives had come to the Beliaghata hospital to enquire about his condition. “We are trying to trace everyone,” a senior health department official added.

Another official said all protocols were being followed. “The teenager has been kept in a separate Covid-19-positive ward,” he added.


