‘Ahmedabad has high-risk factor for Covid-19’
2020-04-20
AHMEDABAD: Municipal Commissioner Vijay Nehra has said the city has a high-risk factor because it has a population of around 80 lakh. Moreover a total of 6,000 people had come to the city from abroad, some people had visited cities like Delhi, Mumbai and Indore, and the most important reason was that the Walled City was densely populated.


“These four factors made the Ahmedabad city a hotspot for corona. But with our strategy of aggressive testing we have been able to detect more cases from the field. Around 70% of testing was done through proactive surveillance. We definitely see a spike in the number of cases, but with each case we detect, we reduce the chances of spread of infection as one patient infects around 4,00l people,” Nehra said.




The commissioner said that the number of cases in Ahmedabad was high as the city has a high-risk factor and surveillance is high priority. The AMC has adopted the strategy of aggressive testing which helps detect cases early.

Nehra said, “We are going in for aggressive testing and as a result we have been able to catch asymptomatic patients. 

The city has a total of 978 such cases. Active surveillance has led to detection of 775 cases and as a result of active surveillance we were able to save 3 lakh people from getting infected, and trying that by May 3 all active infection cases are removed or reduced from the population.”

The commissioner said, “We will see a high number of cases in the city for next two or three days as 90% of the population in Walled City, Behrampura and Danilimda areas have been covered.”

He further said that the city had 139 new cases in the last 12 hours and of these 84 cases are from Central zone — the hotspot zone, while there were 36 cases from South zone of the city. In North zone there were eight cases in the past 12 hours, two cases each from Southwest and Northwest zone areas, and three from West zone of the city. The commissioner said that of the 139 cases there are 15 cases with symptoms and the remaining 124 were asymptomatic cases.


