City corp links app-based CRS to Covid-19 help desk
2020-04-14
Thiruvananthapuram: The city corporation has linked its app-based complaint redressal system (CRS) to the help desk which was recently launched as part of Covid-19 management measures.

All department heads have been issued user ID and password and when a complaint or request is received via phone at the helpdesk, an alert is passed on to the official concerned. Mayor K Sreekumar has directed that the first response from the part of the official may be recorded within three hours and in case the status of the query or request has not changed after that, a follow up call is made to the official concerned from the team of volunteers who are running the help desk and grievance redressal system of the city corporation.

CRS was integrated with corporation’s Smart Trivandrum mobile app as part of mayor’s grievance redressal system. “After CRS was integrated with the system, it has brought in so much transparency. We are effectively able to alert the official concerned and they are acting within the stipulated timelines, which helps in faster solutions,” said a corporation official.

Mayor K Sreekumar said that he would personally take calls from priority groups seeking help for various needs on Wednesday and Friday. “We have been able to ensure quick response through linking of CRS and help desk. All official heads are part of this network and directions were issued to update status of response,” he said. 

The help desk has been set up by the city corporation primarily to cater to 15 groups who have been identified as priority groups who would need special care and attention in the current situation. These groups include elderly persons, those undergoing treatments for various serious ailments, immunosuppressed persons, disabled people and the like. The local self-government department has directed that those with heart diseases, respiratory ailments, and those undergoing cancer treatment shall be given help to obtain food kits, medicines and steps for reverse quarantine and counselling should also be initiated if necessary. 

Four requests were received at the help desk regarding delay in receiving old-age pension of which two problems could be solved within three hours, the officials said. There have also been requests regarding procuring ration from shops and calls were placed by the beneficiaries for volunteer help. Such calls were directed to health circles and volunteers were deployed to get the ration card and procure the ration from shops for those who can’t travel due to ailment or old age.

The corporation has established a wide network of institutions at the help desk, which includes Kudumbasree units, urban health centre, major hospitals, police, community kitchens, ration shops, medical stores, ambulances, budget restaurants and online food delivery services. 


