City scales up quarantine facilities to brace for spurt in corona cases
2020-03-17
Visakhapatnam: Health authorities are setting up quarantine facilities and isolation wards in hospitals in order to be prepared for a spurt in coronavirus cases.

As per doctors, Visakha Institute of Medical Sciences (VIMS) has a 75-bed-strong quarantine facility has been set up. The Government Hospital for Chest and Communicable Diseases (GHCCD) has 25 beds in its isolation ward, which can be extended to 50 now. The Area Hospital at Anakapalle has six beds. Apart from these, major private hospitals have also been asked to keep some beds ready away from the crowd in a separate wing for isolation.

Speaking about the importance of quarantine and isolation wards, Dr L Kalyanprasad, retired epidemiologist and former district nodal officer for swine flu, said, “Quarantining of suspected patients either at home or hospitals is needed to prevent him or her from infecting others because the person can be a carrier of the infection. Ideally, isolation or quarantine should be done in a separate room or cabin for each suspected case but in India, such complete isolation is not possible in most hospitals and therefore a few suspected cases or those with travel history share a room or ward.”

Dr P V Sudhakar, principal of Andhra Medical College (AMC) said, “In VIMS, there is provision of 20 bed wards for people with travel history but no symptoms. However, persons with conditions such as diabetes, hypertension and heart problems are kept in individual rooms for extra care even during quarantine. If anybody shows symptoms of Covid 19, they will be immediately transported to GHCCD by ambulances. In GHCCD, isolation rooms with glass partition are provided for suspected cases. If a patient is fine after spending two weeks in quarantine, the patient is sent back home. A standard operating procedure has been developed from quarantine to transport of suspected cases.” Speaking about the treatment modality, Dr Sudhakar said, “Suspected patients are treated not just with paracetamols for Covid 19 but simultaneously treated for Swine Flu as well. They are also administered Cetrizine and antibiotics to prevent additional infections.”


