Covid-19 scare: Mumbai schools start promoting students of classes I to VIII
2020-03-20
MUMBAI: While several states across the country have asked schools to not conduct second-term examinations for classes I to VIII, the Maharashtra government is yet to make an announcement in the matter. City schools, though, have taken the initiative and informed parents that students would be promoted to the next class on the basis of past exams.


Nikhat Azam, principal, Billabong High International School, Santacruz, said, “The management had taken this call when we decided to shut the school and impart learning through online portals. All the students will be promoted to the next grade and an average will be taken based on their past performance in this academic year for report card purpose. The results are always published on the school's online portal and the same will be done for year-end exams too.”

Similarly, at Vibgyor group of schools, all students of classes I to IV will be promoted and students of classes V to VIII will be exempt from second-term exams. “The cumulative/aggregate marks obtained by the students in the current academic year 2019-20 shall be considered for promotion to the next grade,” said a notification sent by the school. Additionally, the school has suspended all activities, including the summer camps scheduled for April, till further notice. Other schools that have taken similar steps include Children's Academy Group of Schools, St Mary's School (ICSE) Mazgaon. 

Teachers said the state should make an announcement. “Teachers usually prepare for exams during this period and it would be extremely difficult to have exams once students are back from the break due to the uncertainty. Schools anyway promote students till Class VIII and must hence be exempted from taking final exams. While private schools take a call on their own, government and aided schools have to wait for instructions,” said Rajesh Pandya, Teachers’ Democratic Front, a teachers’ group.

A senior education department official said the decision on Class I to VIII exams will be taken by March-end. “Whether to schedule an exam or to grade students on the basis of performance of the last three exams will be decided soon. However, Class IX and XI will be held but dates will be announced only after taking review in March-end,” said the official.

