City hotel hosts 77 quarantined people on way back home
2020-04-10
Nagpur: Two buses from New Delhi, ferrying a group which was quarantined there for almost 25 days, made a pit stop at Nagpur en route to their final destination in south India. The group of 77 had completed their mandatory quarantine holding period following which the Delhi government gave them permission to return to their states.

Hotel Centre Point, Ramdaspeth, offered them free use of their building to freshen up or stay the night before continuing their long journey to Hyderabad, Bengaluru and Chennai. These people have not only completed the mandatory 14-day quarantine, but also an additional 10-day isolation period. Two tests done over a period of two weeks have also come negative.

Jasbir Singh Arora, director of the hotel, said “These people left from Delhi and en route there was no decent place for them to stop as all hotels are closed. Somebody reached out to us and we were more than happy to offer the use of our facilities.” Arora immediately contacted the authorities and informed them of the request he had received. Following protocol, Arora first sought the authorities’ permission to offload the passengers and accommodate them in the hotel.

One of the passengers, who identified himself simply as Rahul, said “We started yesterday around midnight from Delhi and stopped only at petrol pumps to use washroom facilities. It is a privilege for us to get to use a star hotel like this.”

The group has decided against spending the night in Nagpur as all of them are eager to get back home.

Arora’s offer is not only free of charge but also comes with complete professional service. “At Delhi, six of them stayed in one room. We have made arrangements for two in one room. Food and refreshments will be made available to them as per requirement,” said Arora.

This is just part of the community outreach started by Arora since he first opened up his hotel for doctors and nurses. Instead of going home, where there is a fear of passing on the infection to their near and dear ones, medical health workers are using the hotel’s facilities to rest before going back to work. The hotel has even offered free pickup and drop facilities for health professionals from the hospital to hotel.

Commenting about movement of buses during lockdown, divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar said once their quarantine period is over, the people have to be discharged. “People will have to move out of quarantine facility once the holding period is over and they test negative. That’s why the government must have given them necessary permissions to return home,” said Kumar.


