City entrepreneurs’ EzySpit is seen as top tool for prevention of coronavirus
2020-04-07
Nagpur: EzySpit, a unique invention developed by three city youngsters last year, has emerged as one of the top prevention solutions to tackle the coronavirus pandemic.Fed-up with the obnoxious habit of people spitting everywhere, Prateek Malhotra, Ritu Malhotra and Pratik Harde did research and found out that governments spend several crores on cleaning paan and tobacco stains. The trio then got inspired to create a first-of-its-kind mobile spittoon.Following the outbreak of Covid-19, the demand for the invention has gone up almost 50%. “We are supplying the spittoon to various hospitals and health care professionals, not just in India but also in other countries. We are also in touch with hospitals in Hong Kong,” said Ritu.Australia-based research blog Startus recently declared the invention as one of the world’s top five preventive solutions to fight coronavirus. Made from a combination of paper, pulp and polymer, the material absorbs the heat in the spit and converts the liquid into granules. After absorbing multiple spits, the spittoon can be easily disposed of as it becomes a biodegradable waste.Highlighting that Covid-19 can survive in the air for up to three hours, Startus stated: “Salivary droplets transmit several viruses including corona. During a pandemic, public spitting exponentially increases the chance of community transmission of the virus. Indian start-up EzySpit kills microbes present in saliva, making it safe to dispose of after the usage.”Stressing that the invention was an effective tool to combat coronavirus, Ritu said, “When people spit in EzySpit, it locks down the bacteria and viruses within a few seconds and prevents them from coming in contact with air. As we are locking the source, spread of the disease gets controlled.”The spittoon is specifically designed to provide users with a re-usable and socially responsible place to deposit the refuse generated. The product is spill-proof and releases fragrance every time someone spits in it. “We have added materials that can kill 75-80% of the germs present in human saliva. Even after its disposal, the product will not spread any infections,” added Ritu.The invention was also recognized under the Young Champions of the Earth, a prize for young environmentalists under the United Nations Environment Programme. The trio won TOI’s Nagpur Heroes award last year., made it to the list of 30 young achievers of the country. The list was released by Forbes, an international media company. 