City corporates ensure employees' well-being during lockdown with fun activities
2020-04-18
For most corporate employees, the occasional work-from-home option was a relief from having to brave Bengaluru's infamous traffic. Back then, they had the luxury of household help, and could focus on the official tasks at hand. The coronavirus pandemic and the subsequent lockdown, though, turned things around. Not only did work-from-home get a more permanent status, but it also meant that they had to work for home as well. And if maintaining a work-life balance was tough earlier, imagine now, when you are doing everything yourself. 
Realising that the morale of employees needs some serious upliftment in these gloomy times, most companies have begun conducting fun online activities and exercises.


Fitness classes, music concerts and more to motivate employees
From online mediation, yoga and zumba sessions to virtual music concerts, organisations are doing their bit to ensure their employees' well being. Shraddhanjali Rao, vice president - HR, SAP Labs India, says that they have been conducting online fitness sessions to give employees a well-deserved fun break from work from home. Their next initiave was also well received. "We conducted a virtual music concert that was attended by 800 employees. Some even joined the session with their families and it was nice to see people bond over music overcoming language and distance barriers," she says.
Walmart Labs' employee engagement programme involved some special family members - pets. "On April 11, which was the National Pet Day, associates were asked to share pictures of themselves with their pets. Not only did this help them have some fun, but it also made them feel connected with each other while being socially distant. The initiative had great participation and created a lot of buzz on our internal platforms," says Sunita Venugopal from Walmart Labs.


Feeling overwhelmed? Help is at hand
"We’ve started an internal newsletter called #WorkFunHome, where people share pictures of their work-from-home setting with a witty caption. We also have a COVID crisis helpline and a confidential counselling helpline for employees and their families, should they feel overwhelmed by the current situation," says SV Nathan, Chief Talent Officer, Deloitte India. 
Punitha Anthony, Director of Human Resources at CSS Corp, says that a dedicated helpline for IT and admin support and virtual help desk for HR support have been set up. "Employees are being provided counselling support to cope with working in isolation. We have also been conducting webinars and podcast and sending out emailers regularly for employee awareness," she adds.


Not to forget birthday celebrations
Missing the fun of birthday celebrations at the workplace? Management teams are making sure you celebrate your big day with them. "On my birthday, a cake was home delivered, which I cut during a video call with my entire team. The management has been doing this for other employees as well," says Vivek Kangath, senior global manager at Ness Digital Engineering.



Funky headgear to lighten up the mood 
Elita Dsilva, a 28-year-old manager with a French bank's branch in the city, says that her seniors at work decided to lighten the mood on a video conference by wearing unique and funky headgear. "From caps to wigs to headbands and vegetable baskets, my colleagues' new avatars made the call so much fun. I didn't have a cap, so I turned my scarf into a headband. Our team lead is looking at regularly having such exercises for stress relief," says Elita.

With inputs from 
Hansy.Sanctis@timesgroup.com
