Trichy has no Covid cases, but health officials continue random sampling
2020-04-30
TRICHY: With the recovery of three more patients on Tuesday, Trichy city has become free from Covid-19 positive cases. Meanwhile, the public health department is not leaving any stone unturned and closely monitoring random sampling on pregnant women, people with severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) and influenza like illness (ILI) in containment zones across the district. 


While heaving a sigh of relief that all patients in the city have been cured of the disease, health officials are still apprehensive over its likely penetration into the community. 

A source in the public health department said that it is too early to rule out that all the Covid-19 positive cases have been identified and treated. “There may be asymptomatic carriers of the viral disease. Our focus is now on the three categories of the people. In the past one week of random sampling, none of them tested positive. It may not be the case always,” said the official. 

Nine areas in the corporation, one in municipality, three in town panchayats and seven in rural areas have been brought under the containment zone in the district. 

Pregnant women, people with SARI, ILI in the containment areas are being traced and their samples sent to the hospital. Sources said that there were no new SARI cases in the past three days in the containment areas while ILI cases were reported in small numbers. 

Trichy district administration is hopeful of making the entire district free of positive cases once the final six patients from rural areas are discharged by the end of this week. 

As of Wednesday, two patients from Somarasampettai and four patients from Thuvarankurichi are being treated at the Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH). 

Out of the 39 Tablighi Jamaat delegates, a lone patient is still under treatment. Of the total 51 cases in the district, 39 patients got the infection primarily, while 12 others were their family and secondary contacts. 


