Ludhiana students studying abroad weather lockdown with help of parents back home
2020-04-04
LUDHIANA: According to the Ministry of External Affairs, more than 7,50,000 Indian students are studying overseas — 7,52,725 to be exact — in more than 90 countries of the world. A majority of them in many countries are from Punjab.


At this time, when the World Health Organisation (WHO) has declared Covid-19 a pandemic, parents in Punjab are talking to their children in different countries with their heart full of worries and doubts.

Manavjot Singh (22) from Ludhiana said, “Right now, I am in Canada, and I am here since December 2019, but I never imagined this kind of thing would have happened in the world. I am studying for a post-graduate diploma in Operation and Supply Chain. In this problematic hour of the world, I miss being at home and close to my parents physically. As I am the only son of my parents, I feel the tension on their mind when we chat or do video calls on Whatsapp.”

His dad said, “It’s really important to stay inside. Whether it’s Canada or India, we have to follow the instructions of the government, in which we can’t move out. We sure miss him being here, but I am relaxed that he is safe there in a good environment, and he is taking care of himself in a good way.”

Ashu Chopra, a student from Sydney in Australia, said, “I am more worried about my mom than myself, as she is working in the healthcare department in Mohali, where they have found some positive cases of coronavirus. Whenever I talk to her on video call, I tell her I am fine, first let’s talk about you, as I am the one sitting at home, and she is the one fighting in this time, and working with her full power. Even though I am in Australia, I fully support her and respect her, that in this time, she is there for our country and helping the people.”

His mother Kiranjeet Chopra said, “I cry sometimes while talking to my son, as it’s not easy to stay away, but what can we do now, nothing can be done. The only solution is to stay safe. When the situation was normal, I used to call him once a day, but now sometimes, he calls or I call him nearabout five calls a day. If there is a chance I can get him back from Australia, I would have taken it, because I am really worried about him, as the situation is going really bad now. I just hope everything gets fine quickly.”

Vibha Bajaj, a private employee in Sydney, said, “Normally, my parents or my brothers used to call me twice a day at the most, that too voice call, but now all they do is video call to check whether I am inside or whether I am taking care of myself properly or not. I understand their concerns and their worries. Even I am worried that my parents are in Jalandhar, and it is not safe to go outside, whether you are in Jalandhar or in Sydney. Talking to my parents gives me relief that everything is going to be fine and good.”

Her father Sunil Bajaj, a businessman from Jalandhar, said, “I pray daily for children who are not with their parents right now, as I can understand the situation of every parent whose children are not with them. My daughter is in Australia for the past four years, and I trust her that she is taking care of herself properly, but still as a parent, my heart always says I should call her and check on her. Even late at night, I call her to ask if she is fine and what she is doing? Sometimes to time pass together, we play online games like Ludo and Tambola. If there is anything I wish for, then it’s I should get her back safely in the house, so she can be in front of my eyes whenever I wake up in the morning. I request everyone to stay at home, and don’t lose hope. Everything is going to be alright.” 


