Delhi records 2nd Covid-19 death, nine cases in a day
2020-03-29
NEW DELHI: Delhi recorded its second Covid-19 death on Saturday with state authorities confirming that a Yemeni national who died at Apollo hospital two days ago had tested positive for the novel coronavirus. The capital also reported nine new cases on Saturday, the highest in a single day, taking the total number of cases to 49.

Among the new cases, one is the 60-year-old Yemeni national who died. Another 19-year-old girl, resident of Todarmal Square, had travelled to the UK recently. The wife of a person from Vasant Kunj who has been confirmed positive for Covid-19 had travelled abroad recently. In another case, the son of the person, 61-year-old man from Sukhdev Vihar, had travelled to Germany.

 
 
One person from Jahangirpuri had come in contact with a Covid-19 positive patient while another one, a 48-year-old man, had visited the home of a person with history of travel to country affected by the pandemic.

Authorities said the details of two other positive cases, a 63-year-old man from Uttam Nagar and another 82-year-old man from Nizamuddin West, are still awaited. “House to house surveillance is being done for contact tracing in all districts. We have put 11,493 contacts under home quarantine as on Saturday and 1,639 people have complete their 14-day quarantine period,” said an official.

He said that the Yemeni who died had other co-morbidities and he was undergoing treatment at a private hospital. Earlier, a 68-year-old woman who contracted Covid-19 from her son had succumbed to the illness, becoming the first Covid-19 casualty in the state.

The state has allowed testing of healthcare workers who are directly involved in the treatment of Covid-19 positive patients and in drawing samples from patients at designated centres for testing.

All patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) admitted in government hospitals are also being tested. Sources said testing of these people with ARDS, which can be caused by the novel coronavirus infection as well as other infections, is important to find out if Covid-19 has spread at community level. So far, there isn’t enough evidence of a wider spread of novel coronavirus through community transmission.

