Aurangabad: City police register 45 offences so far for violating lockdown guidelines
2020-03-25
AURANGABAD: Police across the eight districts of Marathwada resorted to force in order to send people, flouting the norms, back to their homes.


Scores of videos have gone viral on the social media showing policemen from Aurangabad, Jalna, Beed, Parbhani, Nanded, Latur, Osmanabad and Hingoli canning people on the road.

Initially, senior police officers did not pay any heed to these videos saying these videos would act as deterrent to those stepping out of homes for no reason, but later in the evening, instructions were passed to not record such videos as it may boomerang and fuel public sentiment against the administration and police.

Later during the day, authorities from different districts — through a series of communications — reiterated that curfew would continue to remain in place and except for essential services all the business would remain closed.

The authorities also appealed to the people to stay indoors unless in emergency situations. Aurangabad district collector Uday Choudhary said the administration is going all-out to prevent the spreading of this disease.

“People should understand that the outbreak of this disease would result into mass casualty. For us every life is precious and the orders are aimed at preventing the disaster from happening,” he said.

In Aurangabad city, 24 offences were registered by police against autorickshaw drivers and shop owners on Monday. Along with the 21 cases registered on Tuesday, the total has risen to 45.

With imposition of ban on sale and supply of country-made as well as foreign liquor, the number of cases involving local smuggling of liquor has also registered a surge.

Aurangabad commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad said, “Our ultimate aim is safety of the commoners. We are on the road so that unwanted people remain indoors.”

Police have also started helpline numbers so that in case of doubt or any emergency, people can get assistance without stepping out

Aurangabad rural superintendent of police Mokshada Patil informed that they have started a dedicated helpline number +91-7768932222 for the commoners to contact them for any assistance during the lockdown period.

She also said that even social media accounts of Aurangabad rural police are open for assisting the commoners. Beed district police led by Harssh Poddar on Tuesday registered 14 offences against those caught violating the curfew.

Beed police appointed a nodal officer and have appealed people to get in touch with him on +91-9921070690 for getting any emergency permission during the lockdown period.

Authorities informed that all district borders from across the region have been sealed for all vehicles except those catering to essential services. However, in case of emergency situation, relaxation may be granted by the administration. Osmanabad SP Raj Tilak Roushan informed that they registered 16 offences in their district for against those violating the lockdown orders.

