Kanpur lab likely to begin testing samples soon
2020-04-11
KANPUR: The work of testing samples of Covid-19 suspects is likely to commence from Sunday in the city’s first lab which is almost ready in the microbiology department of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi memorial medical college (GSVM).


Principal of GSVM medical college Dr Aarti Lalchandani said the lab has a testing capacity of around 100 samples per day. Briefing divisional commissioner Sudhir M Bobde, who had come to inspect the lab on Friday, Dr Lalchandani stated that the new lab would help test samples of Covid-19 suspects in the city itself. So far the samples were being sent to KGMU and SGPGI in Lucknow. The lab has been set up in the maternity wing of Covid-19 hospital, she said.

“The samples will be tested as per the guidelines issued by the health department authorities. The 100-bedded hospital is equipped with 20 ventilators, and the order for 40 more ventilators has already been placed”, said Dr Aarti Lalchandani. The Covid-19 hospital has been leveled as Corona-2 stage hospital, she added.

The entire staff, including doctors, nurses and paramedics is fully trained and equipped with protective gears, she said and added that directions had already been issued to cover the staff under insurance cover as per the state government’s guidelines.

The divisional commissioner thereafter visited Rama Medical University in Mandhana which has also been levelled as phase-2 hospital. “It has 22 ICU beds and is equipped with ventilators. It also has 160 beds to quarantine suspects”, said P Lal, director of the medical university.

Later, district magistrate, Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari, SSP/DIG Anant Deo and chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla inspected Rama hospital and Rama Ayurvedic hospital. The DM told the director of Rama Hospital to provide PPE kits to the entire staff during the training period. 

Meanwhile, the district administration has pressed LED vans to fight Covid-19. The LED vans are roaming in the city displaying orders of the government and the district administration.


