Bhopal malls reopen to few footfalls and Covid-care instructions
2020-06-09
BHOPAL: Even as there were only a few visitors at the malls on Monday ( the first day when shopping malls reopened after 75 days) , one thing was clear- shopping experience here won't be the same as pre-lockdown days, at least till the coronavirus scare persists.

Shoppers never expected a security personnel in a mall to ask them not to touch anything or women with sanitisers in their hands waiting for them to leave a table in the food court so that they could immediately sanitise it. Staffers also asked people not to put their hands on the railing of the escalator. All this was done in good faith and in a very polite manner, but shopping in a mall is not the same as before, said those who visited these places on day one.

However, one thing that appeared to be missing even though the malls were largely empty was -social distancing of six feet. There were marks on the floor, at the entrance, on the elevator and in the lift, but except for a few patches, the distance was not of six feet as the district administration has been insisting. Moreover, the marking was not uniform. For example, in the food court at DB Mall in MP Nagar, some tables were as far away as 10 feet from each other and for some others, particularly the ones on the fringe, the distance was not even three feet. 

On one or two floors, there were markings, suggesting where the shoppers should stand, but on the third floor or in food court, there were no such markings. People, too, seemed to be casual about observing social distancing and once the crowd swells in the malls, ensuring social distancing would definitely be a problem.

" It is not that people are casual; they are not used to it. The crowd today is that of youngsters mostly, which also makes a difference, they are definitely less scared," said Ravi Awasthi, a middle-aged man, who on his own was asking people not to crowd the escalator.

There were very few cars and the fact that a couple of youngsters made an entry in the parking lot at a speed , which they won't have dared on even a deserted road, could give an indication of the empty parking lot. But, in the parking lot, care was taken to allow parking of vehicles at a safe distance with markings at 6 feet distance.

While entering the mall, even before shoppers could press the button of the machine for parking ticket, a girl standing nearby rushed in saying 'Don’t touch the machine. I will help you'. 

There was censor-driven sanitising machine at the entry, provision of thermal scanning and an enquiry whether shoppers had downloaded the Aarogya Setu app, and those who said no, were politely requested to do it.

On the elevators, marks were there for the purpose of social distancing but they were erratic. "I was told to stand on these yellow marks put on the elevators steps. However, I noticed that on one side, they were at far more distance than the other. I don't think they were at 6 ft distance from one another," said Ashok Sikarwar, who came for shopping along with his wife.


Big Bazaar was the most crowded place in the mall
Here also social distancing was found missing. Even though the employees kept telling visitors to follow the safety norms. Inside the grocery market, several floor markings were found trying to keep a distance of 6 ft. Realising that number of visitors was very less, only a few payment counters were opened. One noticeable thing here was that staff and security personnel were both wearing face covers and masks as well. There was another round of thermal scanning and sanitising of hands before shoppers were allowed inside.

Few shop owners have put requests at the entrance of the shops and guidelines to follow. At one shop it was mentioned that 'all garments steamed post trial and rooms sanitised after every use'. 

Several retail shops were shut. At the food court also, several shops were found closed.An employee at food joint said, "We were expecting poor presence of visitors as it was the first day of reopening. May be people would turn up in the evening.” In the lift, only two people were allowed to enter at a time.

At Aura Mall, too, parking had markings for vehicles at a distance of 6 feet. The person giving the parking ticket was noting down the registration number of vehicles. Several racks at Big Bazaar outlet here were empty and there were a few shoppers inside. Body temperature which was taken at the entrance was checked again before entering Big Bazaar and sanitised Food court, at the mall, was completely empty. There were markings on the floor but nowhere the distance of 6 feet was seen between those markings. Here, four people were allowed in the lift at a time. 


