Chennai students school people on Covid-19 don’ts
2020-04-11
CHENNAI: Girl students from city corporation schools, who had actively participated in dengue awareness campaigns held in October and November last year, are now raising voice for the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.


The youngsters, who are actively fulfilling their roles as student health ambassadors by creating awareness in their neighbourhoods, also recently released an emotionally charged video against those violating the lockdown orders. 

Minister for municipal administration S P Velumani released the video on his Twitter account.

“We are all aware of the ongoing pandemic. Yet, the activities of a few who venture out unnecessarily put children like us at risk. Despite appeal from the Prime Minister and government authorities, many are unwilling to listen. Does our future mean nothing to you?” Nanditha Gandhi, a student ambassador, asks in the video. 

Nandita Gandhi and Navya Sri, class VIII students of Chennai Girls Higher Secondary School in Pulla Avenue, Shenoy Nagar, have been creating awareness about the pandemic in their neighbourhood since the lockdown began. 

“I have been doing the whatever little I can. At first, when I saw people venturing out in my street, I appealed to them to take the issue seriously. At home too, I have asked my parents to exercise social distancing while going out,” Nanditha said, and emphasized that it is important for the public to listen to the authorities in these times. 

Nanditha was chosen as a student health ambassador last year as part of the ‘clean chennai, healthy chennai’ campaign by the civic body after she took several cleanliness initiatives in her school. 

The corporation had used the student ambassadors during dengue awareness campaign last year and there has been a positive response to their videos. 

“A few of my relatives and friends called and told that the videos have brought about a change. In my street too, the number of people who venture out has come down and I was told that my requests were among the reasons,” Nanditha said. 

According to a corporation official, such videos by school students, especially girl students, tend to appeal to the public. “There are videos by celebrities and elected representatives too. When children appeal, it has a sentimental tinge to it and most parents listen to their children and eventually most will stay indoors,” the official said. 

