City sees a drop in death count during lockdown
2020-05-01
Nagpur: The city has recorded a dramatic fall in the number of ‘natural’ deaths at a time when coronavirus casualties are more heard of not just from the state but across the globe.

According to a study by Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC), the city has registered 22% drop in the number of deaths due to natural causes in March-April 2020 than in the corresponding period of 2019.

Additional municipal commissioner Ram Joshi said, “The NMC study was aimed at analysing whether the epidemic is underreported or not and whether the death rate has increased. The study shows that between March and April 2019, the city had recorded 3,408 deaths. This year, 2,670 deaths have been reported during the same period.”

The study suggested that Covid-19 deaths, which are recorded separately and generally announced before compiling overall mortality data, were not being underreported.

Joshi, however, attributed the reduction in natural death cases to lesser pollution and fewer road accidents due to lockdown.

Echoing Joshi, city psychologists said coronavirus scare and especially lockdown played a key role in reduction in natural deaths. With lockdown, senior citizens are getting the required attention, they say. “If we’re not seeing increase in deaths, it seems that people are happy and enjoying life in lockdown,” they added.

Fewer murders too: The data procured from Nagpur police too revealed lesser number of murders during March and April this year than in the same period last year. In March and April 2019, the city recorded 16 murders as against nine this year. Sources in crime branch police said the lockdown, especially closure of wine shops, played a vital role in curbing crime rate.

Decline in road accidents: The nationwide lockdown brought down the rate of accidents. In 2019, the city traffic police had recorded 55 deaths in March and April 2019, which saw a drastic drop during the same period this year to 14. This is due to barricading most of the roads to prevent spreading of coronavirus, said a senior traffic police inspector.

“Road accident cases, and even general patients have been coming in fewer numbers,” said Dr Shishir Shrivastava, who has a hospital on Koradi Road. He said the number of patients coming to the hospital has reduced by almost 50%.

“We used to get at least 10 accident-related cases every day. But after the lockdown, we’re receiving hardly any cases in a week,” said another doctor.


