Gurugram has 75 active cases and one Covid hospital as Medanta halts admission
2020-05-09
GURUGRAM: While the city teeters on the edge of becoming a red zone with increasing number of novel coronavirus cases every day, Gurugram has only one functioning Covid hospital at the moment.

Medanta, which had been treating Covid-19 patients, is not taking on any more cases now. The reason is a technicality — that it is not a designated Covid-19 hospital.

“Gurugram has dedicated Covid-19 hospitals where patients are getting treatment. Medanta is not a Covid-19 hospital, so we are not taking any patients,” said Dr Naresh Trehan, chairperson and managing director of Medanta Hospitals. 

That leaves ESIC Hospital in Sector 9 as the only functioning Covid hospital for Gurugram residents. “We are getting patients admitted to ESIC. We are also taking some of them to SGT Medical College in Chandu Budhera (about 12 km from the city), which has 300 beds. We have also engaged six private hospitals in the city and added 600 beds for Covid-19 patients,” said Gurugram chief medical officer JS Punia. 

But the new units in private hospitals are not operational yet. Nor is a 500-bed Covid hospital at Manesar. “We were supposed to start the Medeor Hospital operations but could not because of technical problems. He hope to get it up and running by next week,” the chief medical officer added. The hospital was supposed to become a Covid hospital by April.

This has put ESIC under a lot of pressure. The 126-bed hospital has 72 doctors, 80 nurses and 66 patients. Which means it can take on 60 more patients before it runs out of beds.

The city has reported 68 cases since last Friday (an average of 8.5 a day). If that trend continues, it will run out of beds in another week.

But there has been a staff shortage at the hospital and the staff turning up are not being tested enough. “One of our own doctors has tested positive for Covid-19. However, people who were in contact with the doctor were not tested. They were not even put in quarantine,” said a doctor from the hospital. 

Some doctors said it’s possible that private hospitals have stopped taking on Covid-19 cases as a conscious decision because of the number of private hospital staff who got infected.

So far, 15 healthcare workers in the district have tested positive for Covid-19. Twelve were from Medanta.


