Covid-19 threat: Nashik police invoke section 144 for shops, establishments
2020-03-18
NASHIK: City police have invoked section 144 (1) (2) of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), 1973, involving shops and establishments within malls to prevent large gatherings of people that may lead to transmission of coronavirus (Covid-19).

The district administration has also announced a series of measures, including closure of 450 gardens and jogging tracks across Nashik city, banning gathering of people for any religious, political or personal celebrations that include ceremonies as well to stop the community spread of the virus.

Commissioner of police Vishwas Nangre-Patil said section 144 is only for shops and commercial establishments in malls, gyms, swimming pools, theatres, etc.

“Any assembly of people in those areas would entail legal action by police. The violators will be prosecuted under section 188 (Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of Indian Penal Code,” Nangare-Patil said, adding if need be city police would impose this section in other domains as well in the future.

Malls, swimming pools, movie halls and gyms have already been shut down till March 31 following instructions from Nashik district administration.

While addressing the reporters on Monday, district collector Suraj Mandhare said that all organizations, including commercial establishments, government bodies, religious places, will be held responsible if there is large gathering of people at one place that could lead to transmission of the virus.

“We have directed the owners of individual shops, hospitals, clinics, among others to ensure that there is no unregulated gathering. At the same time the Nashik Municipal Corporation has also ordered closure of more than 450 parks and jogging tracks across the city from Tuesday,” the collector said.

“These steps are essential to prevent community spread of the virus. We need to be alert as some of the neighbouring districts have registered positive cases,” he added. 

The collector said that meetings of any religion, political party, non-government organisations as part of raising awareness, or celebrations by individuals have also been banned.

“The prime responsibility of people, coming from other country or city, is to contact the medical officers and inform them about their travel. At the same time the MSRTC, private tour and travel operators have been directed to make list of travellers with contact numbers and submit the same to medical authorities on a daily basis and raise alert if they see any suspect patient among the passengers,” the collector said.


