Hyderabad scientists look to horses for Covid-19 cure
2020-05-16
HYDERABAD: After finding vaccine candidate for novel coronavirus, the city has now joined the race for treatment of Covid-19 patients through antibodies obtained from horses. While a researcher from the University of Hyderabad (UoH) had earlier found a vaccine candidate that could help in the development of vaccine to prevent Covid-19, the UoH has now teamed up with the city-based Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB) and Vins Bioproducts Limited to develop antibody fragment-based immunotherapy for immediate treatment for Covid-19 pandemic.


Scientists and doctors, the world over including India, have turned their attention to immunotherapy to deal with the rogue virus that has been playing havoc with human life and economy. Many are trying plasma-based passive immunity against Covid-19 to treat the pandemic. Plasma is obtained from people, who are cured of Covid-19. But, moving a step further, the city scientists are exploring alternative strategies of using horses or other higher animals to create antibodies to tame the novel coronavirus or SARS-CoV2.



“The use of antibodies has been an effective method in protecting against several human and animal diseases. Although plasma-based passive immunity against Covid-19 has been reported to be working well in clinical trials, it has several theoretical and practical concerns including limitation in the availability of human plasma samples. As the pandemic has become a major global crisis, we are exploring alternative strategies of using horses or other higher animals to generate antibodies,” the researchers said.

The UoH team is headed by Dr Nooruddin Khan, associate professor, department of animal biology, School of Life Sciences. Dr Khan’s laboratory specializes in the area of immunology, infection biology, and vaccinology. The CCMB team is led by principal scientist Dr Krishnan Harinivas, who is a specialist in molecular virology. 

According to Dr Nooruddin, the antibodies raised in horses using inactivated coronavirus is fractionated and purified to produce antibody fragments for neutralizing coronavirus in patients aiding in recovery.

The collaborators have complementary expertise required for developing the therapy for treating the Covid-19 pandemic.


