Bhopal plans 44,000 Covid-19 tests in two weeks
2020-04-29
BHOPAL: In the next fortnight, an anticipated 44,000 plus Covid-19 tests would be carried out in MP, as per health department estimates. Availability of Covid test kits is going to be a crucial issue with the current stock barely matching the demand.

“There has never been a situation wherein a request has not been met,” said National Institute for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH) director, Dr Rajnarayan Tiwari. 

NIREH is a permenant institute of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). It has also been made one of the 16 regional distribution depots by ICMR. There are about 6,000 RT-PCR kits, about 3,400 RNA extraction kits and about 8,000 VTM with NIREH, Tiwari said. 

NIREH distributes stock after the portal order is confirmed by ICMR. 

Besides this, there are about 8,332 RT-PCR kits in different labs across MP. MPPHCL has 6,436 kits and one lakh more have been ordered. In the labs, there are 4,962 RNA extraction kits, about 3,950 with MPPHCL while supply of 24,920 kit is awaited.

Rapid antibody test effective after 7 days of onset of symptoms: According to Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the rapid antibody test will only be of use after a minimum seven days from the onset of symptoms. 

In the backdrop of this new information, the gold standard frontline test for Covid-19 diagnosis — the real time PCR-based molecular test, which is aimed at early virus detection, becomes even more important. “The rapid antibody test cannot replace the frontline test. There have been cases in Bhopal where the condition of patient has deteriorated faster than the average,” said a Gandhi Medical College consultant. 

The rapid antibody test is a supplementary tool to assess the prevalence of the disease within a specific area perimeter. Data about these rapid tests is emerging and understanding of their utility for diagnosis is still evolving. The rapid tests are useful for epidemiological studies and surveillance purposes. The test has to be done under strict medical supervision, as per guidelines.

