Civil hospital in Ludhiana to use gas, electric crematoriums for Covid victims
2020-04-08
LUDHIANA: The district administration plans to cremate the bodies of Covid-19 victims in gas and electric mortuaries. It has sought information about these chambers from the municipal corporation. 


The ministry of health and family welfare has issued certain guidelines to handle bodies of Covid-19 victims. Specific lists will also be prepared on the name of the cremation ground and the person who will perform the last rites. Personnel of the district administration will also be given training on how to cremate the bodies.

In the district, a 42-year-old woman from Amarpura was cremated earlier at Gau Ghaat Cremation Ground near Division 3. And on Sunday, the city’s second casualty — a 69-year-old woman from Shimlapuri — was cremated at a ground in Dana Mandi, after her family members allegedly refused to claim the body.

Deputy commissioner Pradeep Agrawal told TOI, “Guidelines have been formed for taking precautions with bodies, like preventing the infection from spreading, and disinfection of the surrounding environment. We are getting ready with gas and electric crematoriums. There is one gas crematorium in Model Town, and the MC has an electric one, which is lying non-functional. However, we are exploring the possibility of making it functional, and we will also seek help from cremation grounds.”

Municipal commissioner Kanwalpreet Brar said, “There are only two crematoriums in the city — one gas and another electric — but they have never been used, perhaps due to the religious beliefs of people. To kickstart them, it might take a day, as our staff too is not familiar with their functioning, but we are working out a way.” 


Guidelines 
The guidelines claim that attendants and family members of coronavirus victims will claim the bodies and cremate them according to guidelines, and in the presence of members of district administration. If any family member refuses to claim the body, then the hospital and medical superintendent should inform the police station of the area concerned immediately.

Then, the head of the police station will take action against the family member, or may state the body ‘unclaimed’ and perform the last rites, in which case, the district administration will assign a team, which includes a senior district magistrate to coordinate with police officials, health department, and the local council as duty officers, along with the caretaker of the cremation ground. Before the cremation, the team will convince the family members to perform the last rites, and they will be allowed to follow their rituals.

Apart from this, the civil surgeon should ensure that the cremation team is provided sufficient PPE kits, for which a nodal officer would be appointed to confirm the provision of sufficient stock. It is pertinent to mention that it is the hospital’s duty to send the body to the cremation ground.



