Kolkata: Civic body starts random tests at high-rises to check Covid spread
2020-06-14
KOLKATA: The Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) has started conducting random tests on residents living in high-rises and apartment buildings. The decision was taken after several Covid-19 cases were reported from such residential complexes in the past 10 days.

A KMC anti-Covid squad on Thursday communicated to the residents of Arvind Tower, a high-rise on Arabindo Sarani, that they would conduct a random test there after one of the residents tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. Besides conducting the test on a section of residents of the 14-storey housing complex, visitors, who had come in contact with the infected person, will also go through this test. 




Chandana Mitra, an advocate and a resident of Arvind Tower, said: “I strongly feel that such a test may prove to be effective for many of us after one of the residents tested positive. I hope the KMC will conduct such a test at the earliest.”

According to a KMC official, merely sanitizing any housing complex or apartment building, where positive cases are being found, won’t dispel the fear from the minds of the people. “We have started random tests to determine whether others in the housing complexes are carrying the virus,” the official added. The KMC health department special team has already conducted random tests in several high-rises or housing complexes in areas of south Kolkata, including Ballygunge, Dhakuria, Lake Gardens, Golf Club Road, Behala, Baghajatin, Garia and large areas off EM Bypass. 

According to a KMC official, apart from conducting swab tests at different market places and slums, such random tests at high-rises will help the civic body identify the number of infected persons from neighbourhoods which have several high-rises and housing complexes.

Meanwhile, Jawahar Dutta slum in Muchibazar — located near Ultadanga station — has reported six Civid positive cases in the past 48 hours.

Police said what has worried them is the fact that at least two of the infected people are vegetable and fruit sellers at the busy Muchibazar market and were a regular there. “There is a possibility that several brought food from them. We are trying to prepare a list of all those who had longer exposure periods with these six patients,” said an officer. So far, 16 such individuals have been identified.

A joint team of KMC, six doctors from SSKM and the police on Saturday collected 100 random samples from Ward 13 in Muchibazar. 


