Civil hospital gets new, upgraded Covid wing
2020-04-21
LUDHIANA: The upgrading of the Covid-19 wing at the civil hospital has been taken to next level with addition of proper facilities to care of patients. A month back, the civil hospital used to treat patients at out-patient departments (OPDs) and emergency, which have been converted into a complete Covid-19 wing. 

With the help of three top officials, including Sanyam Aggarwal, who is the nodal officer of Covid-19, Ludhiana district, SDM (east) Amarjeet Singh Bains, who is facility in-charge, and senior medical officer Geeta Kataria, the wing has been converted and dedicated as Covid-19 building. Now, the health department and district administration are working in full swing to further upgrade the civil hospital. 

150- bedded isolation ward 

Lord Mahavir Civil Hospital authorities have converted the emergency and OPD wing of the hospital with hardly 50 beds into a 150-bedded isolation ward in view of the increase in the number of people with Covid-19 symptoms. Certain small wards and departments have been expanded to a 150-bedded building with operational oxygen supply on 30 beds. 

Food menu has been standardised

Health department has tied up with an NGO, Anjal Sewa Trust, to ensure that the patients, both suspected and confirmed, are getting food. The authorities concerned have made a special diet plan for patients with the help of a dietician. Patients are served three-time meal, milk and fruits. Tea and biscuits at 7am is followed by breakfast, including tea and parantha at 8.30am. At 11am, they are served seasonal fruits and at 1.30pm they are served lunch, including vegetables, dal, rice, raita and chapattis. Again after evening tea, patients are served dal, rice and chapattis in dinner and the day ends by serving turmeric milk at 10pm. Shivram Saroy, president of Anjal Sewa Trust, said, “Now, they are given healthy and hygienic diet free of cost.” 

Divided into red and blue zones 

Covid-19 wing has been divided into two zones, red and blue. They have installed a glass between red zone, where positive patients are admitted, and blue zone, where suspected cases are admitted for checking spread of aerosols. The blue zone has over 50 ventilators in various wards to create negative pressure so that aerosol do not go out. In red zones, proper PPE kits and safety measures are taken care of. However, in blue zones the staff wear green gowns and take proper precautions.

20 vehicles for dropping suspects

Covid-19 wing has tied up with five ambulances of IMA, Ludhiana chapter, five city buses and 10 Ola cabs. These are for suspected patients, who were earlier left stranded and sought public transport for dropping them back home or had to call someone from home to pick them up. Five city buses have been reserved for the patients who have been admitted in the isolation ward. They have to wait till the time report of throat swabs come. The patients who will test negative will be dropped back to their places and if tested positive, then they would be admitted to a ward or some hospital, as per the requirement. 

Nursing station to have 16 ACs 

Nursing station has been made up where doctors and nursing staff have to wear PPE kits. As the temperature is rising, it is difficult for staff of isolation ward to wear PPE kits. Thus, for their convenience 16 ACs will be installed but they will be limited to single rooms only. 

Counsellors sessions in isolation wards 

Covid-19 wing has counsellors for both suspected and positive Covid-19 patients to boost them. They are being counselled on regular basis by staff of de-addiction centre. They are also available on call whenever needed. 

Leisure activities 

Leisure activities will also be provided to the patients in isolation wards as they are admitted for longer time. For this, the hospital authorities and administration have planned to install LED TVs, music system and provide them books in isolation ward for entertainment. However, there will be certain restrictions on magazines and books. 

Aesthetic infrastructure upgraded

 Potholes roads and unmaintained parks too will be maintained this week. Authorities have deployed persons to re-carpet roads within hospital premises as there were too many potholes. Also, landscaping of parks will be done and to given an aesthetic look to the hospital. Besides, choking of sewer has been removed and bins have been installed. 

More needs to be done 

Norms of social distancing is not being followed in the flu corner. No 1m social distancing marks have been made in waiting areas and separate chairs have been installed. Patients have to wait and made to stand outside the flu corner. 

There should be additional facilities for testing here and report should also be given here itself. Ludhiana is a big city and geographical center of the state. It is easy for the patients to reach here. The staff in the hospital, including doctors, nurses and other paramedical staff and class IV employees should be provided with protective equipment. Moreover, oxygen supply and suction pumps should be provided on all beds. Separate Covid-care wards with all these facilities to meet the demand in case of surge should be prepared. Besides, civil hospital is under-staffed.


