Coronavirus scare in Pune: Civic body to use its properties as quarantine hubs
2020-03-11
PUNE: The increased international arrivals and demand for quarantine has prompted the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) to look up houses on rent across the city. 


The civic administration is currently using vacant municipal properties as quarantine facilities. Nearly 3,000 travellers can be accommodated at the residential facilities during the observation period. The visitors will be asked to stay put at the houses as a precautionary measure to avoid the spread of coronavirus. 

“The PMC has zeroed in on 10 municipal facilities, including halls and residential flats that are in the possession of the civic administration. The civic body will check the demand and increase the number of properties that can be converted into quarantine facilities,” said Rajendra Muthe, head of PMC’s land and estate department.

Muthe added that the vacant properties are maintained and made useful for residence. Beds and other facilities will be provided at these places so that suspected patients and international travellers can be shifted here.

Civic officials also plan to approach private property owners if the need arises. Currently, however, the demand has been fulfilled by civic properties. The municipal hospital at Rajyog Society and a municipal building near Sanas Ground has been equipped with medical facilities as well as beds. Nearly 200 citizens can be accommodated here for observation.

PMC has already roped in private hospitals for augmentation of the observation facility for coronavirus. Quarantine rooms, ICUs and screening facilities have been set up at the hospitals.

“The quarantine and screening facility have been set up at Naidu hospital, where 100 citizens can be quarantined. We have also made arrangement at civic properties. If the number increases, they will be shifted to these rooms,” said a senior official of PMC’s health department. 

The decision of sending every foreign tourist visiting Pune into quarantine has not been taken as yet.


