Ahmedabad: Civic body to use pooled testing in Covid-19 free areas
2020-04-18
AHMEDABAD: To ready itself for challenges that will emerge once the lockdown is lifted, the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation has decided to conduct pooled testing to scan for Covid-19 presence in areas from where no cases have been reported. Municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra, who announced the decision said samples from 20 pools will be taken from each such Covid-free zone. Nehra said AMC is trying to isolate as many cases as possible before May 3, when the lockdown ends, and a spike in spread of infection can follow.

“Once people start moving freely in the city for their work, the rate of spread of infection will again see a spike. Hence at this moment, we want to identify all cases before May 3, in order to reduce the challenges ahead.”

Nehra said that in pooled testing, which was a strategy followed in Germany, 100 people will be selected at random from an area and broken into 20 groups of five persons each. Then again, samples will be taken at random of any one from a 5-member group and thus 20 samples will be sent for testing a 100-member larger pool. “If the sample from the selected individual of a 5-member group turns out negative, we will assume all five members of the group are negative. If the sample is positive, then the rest four members of the concerned group will be tested individually,” Nehra said. Nehra said that new findings on the pandemic are arriving daily. “Much information received earlier is being proved wrong. In January, the World Health Organization had said that the virus will not have human-to-human transfer, but this was proved wrong. Again, it was said that the virus was not airborne, but later experts cleared that the micro-droplets can remain present in air for hours. There was also confusion over wearing masks in the initial phase.”

The municipal commissioner once again appealed to the people of the Walled City to stay indoors. “Women are permitted to get out to get vegetables and milk in areas under curfew, but large numbers of women are overcrowding the streets and not maintaining social distancing. Life is more precious than getting fresh vegetables daily,” said Nehra. He said that the AMC was not getting adequate support from the Walled City area and hence he called upon the religious leaders, politicians from the area and socially influential people to appeal to the people to stay indoors and not get out of the house without any reason. He said that in order to maintain law and order police is being deployed and they too are getting infected. “If people observe restraint then police will not be required and hence they too can be saved from infection,” he said.

In all 23,818 people from Walled City were screened at the 13 check-posts and from them 12 persons showing symptoms were referred to AMC health teams.


