Ludhiana Civil hospital gets 250 disinfectant body bags for Covid-19 patients
2020-04-08
LUDHIANA: The state health department delivered 250 disinfectant body bags to the civil hospital on Tuesday, a day after issuing a show cause notice to the hospital’s isolation ward for allegedly failing to shift the body of a suspected Covid-19 patient to the mortuary.


The health authorities have also issued to the hospital staff certain safety guidelines while dealing with bodies of Covid-19 patients. The mortuary staff have been told to quickly dispose of the bodies in disinfectant bags, so that the virus is not transmitted to family members of the victims. Also, linens should be disinfected by the cleaning staff without wasting any time.

Before joining their duties, cleaning staff have to wear necessary protective gear to safeguard their lives. Sanitisation of the mortuary and isolation ward should be done regularly, and immediately after any death.

The Covid-19 wing of the civil hospital has already been divided into two different zones of red and blue. In the red zone, medical staff wear PPE (personal protective equipment) kits for dealing with high-risk patients, and in blue zone, medical staff carry the N-95 mask and other safety measures in blue colour for the rest of the work.

Health authorities informed that the guidelines must be implemented by all the staff of the hospital’s isolation ward, so that in case of any emergency, each member can pitch in. Apart from this, training sessions were conducted for Class IV employees to deal with the process of covering the bodies in disinfectant bags.

An employee of the isolation ward informed, “Earlier, medical staff were struggling with lack of disinfectant bags for bodies of Covid-19 patients, as Class IV staff were in deep fear, and could not perform their duty of shifting the bodies to the mortuary. The same fear was the reason for Monday’s incident, due to which a show cause notice was issued to the hospital staff.” 

Chief medical officer (CMO) of Ludhiana, Rajesh Kumar Bagga, has confirmed the receipt of 250 disinfectant body bags. “We have issued certain guidelines to all medical staff of the hospital’s isolation ward and mortuary on how to handle the bodies without wasting any time. We are fully prepared now to deal with any emergency, as we have installed a bunch of freezers in the mortuary.”


