Chennai civic body not testing neighbours of Covid-19 patients, say residents
2020-05-29
CHENNAI: The number of Covid-19 cases in Chennai may be going up but the government seems to have abandoned the idea of testing family members and neighbours of the people who have Covid-19, and disinfect their premises. If at all steps are taken, it’s done at the insistence of people who can pull some strings.


Residents of Krishnappa Agraharam Street near Mint are a worried lot. The street is crowded though a senior citizen couple had tested positive five days ago. The couple who stay alone tested positive on May 22 and were admitted to a private hospital. But staff from Greater Chennai Corporation or from the health department have neither disinfected the house nor have they tested the neighbours.

B S L Prasad, who knows the family, said, “They are living alone as their children are outside the state. The woman caught a fever and later she began coughing. They decided to get tested and called a private for collection of samples. The test results sent on their phones showed that they have Covid-19.” However, corporation staff are yet to disinfect the house. “There is no sign of anyone coming to test the neighbours who might have had come in contact with them,” said Prasad.

On Raj Street in Ayanavaram, a 67-year-old woman has tested positive. But no attempt has been made to test her family members who lived in the same house and also those who live in adjacent flats. No one has come to disinfect the house and the building. There has been no attempt to trace the contact of the woman who tested positive.

However, this is not the case if an influential person lives in the same neighbourhood as is the case with Varadha Muthiyappan Street located near Seven Wells. The street stretches across two divisions - 55 and 57 – of the corporation and have a few positive cases.

“The stretch in division 55 was not disinfected despite a few people testing positive. But the other part of the street was disinfected and residents were screened after people tested positive because someone with political connections resides in the area,” said a resident.

Vasanthi Kannan a resident of Kodambakkam tried reaching sanitary officials of her ward to inform about a resident with Covid symptoms. But an official chided her saying everyone will show symptoms. When she insisted that they were at risk and it was the corporations job to ensure the virus didn’t spread, the official said she would send someone. “I’m not sure whether they actually sent. They are becoming complacent and not taking any steps to contain the virus,” she said.

Corporation officials said according to the guidelines, tests are done only if the contact of a Covid-positive patient shows symptoms.


