Coronavirus outbreak: Cleaning of metro and buses stepped up; Delhi government says fully equipped to tackle crisis
2020-03-10
NEW DELHI: With chief minister Arvind Kejriwal giving the directive to disinfect all metro trains and DTC and Cluster scheme buses as a precautionary measure against infection by the novel coronavirus, the process of cleaning and disinfecting the city’s public transport fleet has been intensified.


Every day, 30 to 32 lakh commuters use Delhi Metro, while more than 42 lakh people travel by the DTC and Cluster buses.

 
 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) said that it adopted the practice of cleaning all its trains at the depots before putting them into passenger services every day. However, as a precaution against the spread of novel coronavirus, DMRC has strengthened the exercise.

“Special emphasis is on locations like hand railings, train doors, passenger emergency alarm buttons, which are constantly contacted by hands etc. Cleaning of elevators, escalators and staircases has also been intensified,” said Anuj Dayal, executive director (corporate communications), DMRC.

Without divulging the type, DMRC said that it was using the prescribed disinfectants. 

A DTC official said, “All our buses are now being thoroughly disinfected in the morning before ‘outshedding’ starts and some buses are being disinfected at night after operations for the next day. We are disinfecting each bus once every 24 hours.”

A DIMTS official said that all Cluster scheme buses were being stringently disinfected prior to outshedding. “We are using disinfectants that are part of the prescribed list of the Environmental Protection Agency,” he said.

“After the state-level task force meeting on coronavirus, Delhi government has started the disinfection drive in all the buses and metros. The government has started displaying the advisories in ISBTs, bus depots and DTC and cluster buses, showcasing the symptoms, mode of transmission of coronavirus and dos and dont’s for the same. A 24X7 control room has also been set up at the DGHS headquarters to deal with every query,” a Delhi government statement said.

“Our government is fully equipped to tackle this crisis. We are taking proactive measures so that the virus doesn’t spread in public. We are making sure that all the buses and metro trains are being disinfected on a daily basis,” transport minister Kailash Gahlot added.

“Following the four cases which were confirmed here, Delhi government is taking precautionary measures at several levels, and especially in public transport system,” the statement added.

In India, a total of 44 people have been infected with the virus till date.

Dr KK Aggarwal, former national president of Indian Medical Association, said that disinfecting common surfaces like floors, door knobs, etc., is a common practice in hospitals, which keeps many infections at bay. “This is also done whenever there is an epidemic threat, and in fact, should have started two months ago,” he said, adding that when a place is sanitised early, commuters don’t transmit or carry the infection. “This should now continue regularly,” he stressed.

