Close watch on home-quarantined people who returned from Mumbai, Pune
2020-03-28
KOLHAPUR: District guardian minister Satej Patil on Friday said that they are keeping a close eye on 41,000 odd people who returned to their native places in the district from Mumbai and Pune.


“We are keeping a close eye on them as it has been almost a week now since their return, and, if anyone carries any kind of symptoms, it will start to develop now. We will heave a sigh of relief only when they are told to be safe and safely pass the quarantine period of 14-days,” he told TOI.

He said that the administration is on high alert after two positive patients from the district were identified on Thursday night.

According to Patil, they are planning to shift all the existing patients admitted to the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya (CPR) to private hospitals so that CPR could be entirely used for Covid-19 patients.

Patil told the citizens not to panic. “We can get over with this as long as everybody gives extends their support to the administration.”

“Many private hospitals and staff members are helping us along with the government staff members. I can assure you that we are fully prepared to tackle this virus,” he said.

Minakshi Gajbhiye, dean of Rajarshi Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj Government Medical College and CPR, said that a male patient who has tested positive for Covid-19 had a travel history from Pune. 

“We had sent his swab sample to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune on March 25, the results of which were received on March 26, confirming the infection. We have immediately put all his close contacts under institutional quarantine. We have also sent around 30 swab samples to NIV for testing,” she said.

According to Gajbhiye, in view of current situation, the administration is working on increasing the number of isolation beds and the quarantine facilities in the city.

She said that the TB ward in CPR, which was lying unused, has been renovated and a 25-bed isolation facility will be made available in the ward soon.

“With this, we will have the institutional quarantine facility as well as a ward for Covid-19 positive patients,” she said.

State minister of health Rajendra Patil-Yadravkar said that the administration is trying hard for setting up of a testing lab in Miraj so that it can help in detetcting positive cases in Sangli and Kolhapur regions.

Meanwhile, Kolhapur Municipal Corporation commissioner Mallinath Kalshetti said that disinfection activity was organised in the morning and residents in the said area were asked to strictly adhere to home quarantine.


