Closing of red light areas may cut 72% of new Covid-19 cases: Experts
2020-05-17
NEW DELHI: India can add 17 days of additional delay in reaching the peak of novel coronavirus cases, and prevent 72% of projected new cases by closing down its red light areas till a Covid-19 vaccine is developed, scientists said.

Based on modelling studies, the researchers — including those from Yale School of Medicine in the US — said closing down these places of sex work may reduce projected Covid-19 death toll increase in India by 63% after easing of the lockdown measures.

The scientists said that the findings have been shared with the central government and with various state governments. They have recommended a continued closure of red-light areas beyond full nationwide reopening.

According to the National Aids Control Organisation (NACO), India has close to 6,37,500 sex workers, and over five lakh customers visit the red-light areas on a daily basis, the scientists noted in a release.

The research by scientists of Yale School of Medicine and Harvard Medical School said that if the red-light areas start operating, the disease will spread extremely quickly and infect a very high percentage of sex workers and customers.

The scientists said the high transmission rate is because social distancing is not possible in sexual interactions. Infected customers can spread the disease to lakhs of other citizens, the scientists warned.

The report highlighted the impact of red-light areas across India, and in five Indian cities which are currently in the red zone.

These cities, the scientists said, account for some of the largest red-light areas in the country with large numbers of sex workers.

According to the scientists, the measure may also reduce Covid-19 cases by a fifth in Mumbai, by 27% in Pune, and 31% in New Delhi.

Covid-19 deaths may reduce by 28% in Mumbai, 38% in New Delhi, and by 43% in Pune, the scientists added.

“Our study findings show that there is a strong effect of the red-light area closures, especially immediately following the lockdown,” said study co-author, Jefferey Townsend, professor of biostatistics at the Yale School of Medicine.

Citing examples of other countries where similar interventions were implemented, the scientists said, strip clubs and brothels were the only businesses that are delineated as indefinitely closed in Australia’s reopening plan. They said Germany and the Netherlands have also closed their brothels to protect citizens from Covid-19.

The scientists added that Japan did not close down red-light areas in time, and saw an ‘explosion’ in cases because of a red-light area which left local hospitals “overwhelmed”. Co-author of the report, Sudhakar Nuti from the Harvard Medical School said, “The continued closure of red-light areas will build on the successes achieved by the government in lockdown.”


