Closed care homes, hostels to turn quarantine camps
2020-03-18
Thiruvananthapuram: The district administration and the corporation have begun converting care homes, hostels and hospitals lying closed in the city into quarantine camps as a precautionary measure to house passengers arriving in Trivandrum and have to travel long-distance either to another district or to neighbouring states like Tamil Nadu.

The first such quarantine camp began functioning at a care home at Kadakampally in which passengers who arrived at Thiruvananthapuram and were set to depart to Malappuram and Thanchavur would be housed. The district administration is making sure that they do not use public transport and remain under strict quarantine for 14 days. The authorities are co-ordinating with the corporation for the supply of food and water for them.

Sources said IMG hostel at Bartonhill, Youth hostel at Veli, vacant buildings of two private hospitals at Kunchalumoodu and Kochulloor are also being prepared to house passengers.

According to authorities, by housing passengers from Covid-hit countries in quarantine camps they can effectively prevent any kind of exposure of locals to the virus. The district administration is also taking preparatory steps in accordance with additional travel advisory for Covid-19 issued by the Union government.

In continuation of the travel advisory issued on March 11, the Union ministry issued an additional advisory expanding compulsory quarantine for a minimum period of 14 days for passengers coming from/transiting through the UAE, Qatar, Oman, and Kuwait. This will come into effect from 1200 GMT on March 18, 2020 at the port of first departure.

With the new advisory coming into effect from Wednesday evening, the administration has also identified 5,000 beds. Airport officials said the number of passengers coming to Thiruvananthapuram from European countries and even China are very nominal on a daily basis, however with the inclusion of UAE, Qatar, Oman and Kuwait, they are expecting a huge inflow of passengers.

If the state government decides to implement the advisory, they will have to be taken via a special corridor directly to quarantine camps. No direction has been issued by the state government on this regard as on Tuesday. The airport authorities said a call will have to be taken by state health department on how it can be done.

The fourth Covid-19 patient in the district, the doctor who had travelled from Spain, had exposed 27 passengers on board the QR506 flight from Doha to Thiruvananthapuram on March 2 to risk. Though there were 183 passengers on the flight, 27 who had sat near the patient have been identified as high risk.

On Tuesday, the district administration released the flow chart tracking the movement of the person from March 2 to March 3. He visited Hotel Bismi at Kumarapuram at 6pm on March 2 and 3. At 7.30pm on March 3, he visited Hotel Ambadi Kannan at Medical College Jn. At 6pm on March 5 and 5pm on March 10, he was at Hotel Thamarassery Churam, Medical College Jn. From 7.30pm to 8.30pm on March 8, he was at Kunnil Margin Free Market, Medical College Jn and from 5pm to 6pm on March 11, he was at Hotel Kochi Peedia at medical college Jn.


