Maharashtra: Close contacts to be quarantined at home, tests only if symptoms show
2020-05-28
PUNE: The Maharashtra government is considering a complete stop on testing of symptomless close contacts of positive patients. 


The state, so far, has been testing all close contacts of people found positive for Covid-19. But studies show nearly 60% of these contacts have remained free of symptoms. Officials now believe doing away with testing of people who have shown to be largely asymptomatic or free of symptoms will allow them to boost tests among at-risk individuals and reduce the burden on government labs that are analysing samples.

According to the proposed new protocol, close contacts of patients will now be home quarantined and monitored for symptoms.

If the decision is made, Maharashtra will become the third state — after Punjab and Telangana — to adopt the new testing strategy. 

The new testing plan is a deviation from guidelines set by the Indian Council of Medical Research, which has recommended mandatory testing of all immediate close contacts — symptomatic as well as asymptomatic. 

“But we have to prioritise resources at this stage,” said Subhash Salunke, the technical advisor to the state government on Covid-19. 

“We presented the revised testing protocol to deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar during a meeting in Pune on May 22. There is no point in testing asymptomatic close contacts. They can be home quarantined and monitored. We now want to focus on those above 40, people with comorbities and the elderly. We will do that through syndromic surveillance. These at-risk people need to be identified, tested and treated immediately,” he said. 

Senior epidemiologist Amitav Banerjee said: “We have a young population with a large proportion of asymptomatic people. Recent research indicates that asymptomatic individuals do not transmit Covid-19 infection. So testing them will only result in wastage of limited resources.” 

But will this change in testing protocol amount to violation of ICMR guidelines? “Not, exactly. The asymptomatic contacts will be home quarantined and monitored daily. Restricting their movement in this manner will check whatever little chance these individuals may have of transmitting the infection. We can take this call since we have resources to closely monitor and test them if people turn symptomatic,” Banerjee said. 


