Closure of district borders, lockdown reduce migration
2020-03-27
Kolhapur: The Centre’s decision to implement 21-day lockdown and the Maharashtra government’s move to seal the borders of all districts has brought down the number of people returning to their native villages in western Maharashtra.

Statistics available with health departments of Satara, Sangli, Kolhapur and Solapur indicates that the number of people, who arrived in their jurisdiction, is on a decline as compared to last week. 

The government has made it mandatory for all those moving towards their native villages to register their names with local authorities. In addition, village-level committees have also been instructed to keep a watch on the movements of guests.

Officials involved in this exercise said that stoppage of public transport, including ST buses and railways, had indicated to people that they had to stay put wherever they were. Screening at all entry points and police action has curbed temporary migration.

In many villages, people have blocked the roads by putting up barricades or boards, sending strong message that guests were unwanted in the village. Such incidents, even though not welcome, have had impact, said the officials.

Administration, however, is concerned as it is a tough task to monitor the movement of thousands of people, who have shifted to their native places. In Kolhapur district alone, more than 41,000 people have registered themselves. All of them were taken to the nearest primary health center and those with symptoms were further admitted to hospital.

People coming from outside Kolhapur district have been asked to stay in home quarantine for 14 days even if they do not show any symptoms of COVID-19. Health teams were putting stamp of home quarantine on their hands so that they can be easily identified to ensure social distancing. In 89 villages of Gadhinglaj taluka of Kolhapur district, 5,671 people have been registered till Wednesday night. Kagal, 30 km away from Kolhapur and close to Karnataka border, as many as 3,500 people have been identified in the category. Around 3,000 people in Shirol taluka have registered their names with local authorities.

In Mahabaleshwar, district administration has set up a separate cell considering large number of people coming for medical checkup. Many people from Jawli and Wai are settled in either Mumbai or Pune for employment and majority of them have returned.

Solapur municipal corporation has started a facility under which guests can fill their online information. Kolhapur municipal corporation has also started an app for the convenience of such people.

In Panhala, an offence has been registered against a man and his son for defying home quarantine order. They were found moving in a village. Ratnagiri police traced a couple, who was asked to be in home quarantine in Mumbai, but came down to Ratnagiri. The couple has been kept in isolation in Ratnagiri.


