Cloud on Covid-19 deaths among Bhopal gas victims
2020-06-08
BHOPAL: How many gas tragedy victims have died of Covid-19 in Bhopal? The administration has no clear answer. Top officials quote varying figures but nowhere close to what activists say is the correct number.


While officials say a little over a dozen have died, activists claim at least 70% of Bhopal’s toll of 64 are gas victims.

On April 23, TOI had reported how all first 10 Covid-19 patients to die in Bhopal were gas victims, an indication of how vulnerable this community is to the virus. When Bhopal’s toll hit 20 a couple of weeks later, 17 of them were gas victims. And on May 12, TOI reported about the 20th gas victim to die of Covid-19.

On May 19, the Madhya Pradesh government issued an order, following MHA directives, not to disclose the identity of Covid-19 patients. Rightly so. It made it difficult to keep track of gas victim deaths in the city’s toll but activists say that by the time the toll touched 47, the number of 1984 survivors had already risen to 32.

When TOI asked chief medical & health officer (CMHO) for gas relief, Dr Ravi Saxena, on Saturday how many gas victims had died of coronavirus, he said: “Thirteen so far, according to verified data.”

Pointed out that it was 17 when Bhopal’s toll was 20, Dr Verma said: “We have the verified list, with IDs of people who died. There may be more, but we are verifying it.”

Member of Supreme Court-Monitoring Committee for gas victims, Purnendu Shukla, rejected the number quoted by Verma. “It is absolutely wrong. When it was easy to access information on people dying of coronavirus infection, I knew that 22 out of 29 deaths were of gas victims,” he told TOI.

Bhopal Group for Information & Action( BGIA) an NGO that has been warning the administration repeatedly that gas victims are more vulnerable to Covid because of their weakened immunity, co-morbidities and higher prevalence of cancer maintains that 70% of coronavirus patients who have died in Bhopal are gas victims.

“I have information of about 51 deaths and 36 of them are gas victims. We had said gas victims are five times more susceptible to coronavirus, but it is even higher,” said BGIA convener Satinath Sarangi.

A senior doctor of a state-run gas relief hospital told TOI that it’s easy for the administration to keep count of gas victims admitted to Covid-19 care centres and those who have died. “The first thing a 1984 tragedy survivor tells a doctor wherever he goes for treatment is that he is a gas victim. This is for two reasons – on the hope that their treatment will be free, and to let the doctor know that they have co-morbidities and their immune system may be weak. They all have ID cards identifying them as gas victims. So, it isn’t difficult to track them,” he said on condition of anonymity.

Besides, there are two arms of ICMR in Bhopal exclusively for gas victims -- Bhopal Memorial Hospital & Research Centre (BMHRC), to provide them free medical care, and National Institute of Research on Environmental Health (NIREH), to carry out research on health implications of gas victims’ exposure to MIC. These institutes are mandated to maintain data of gas victims and their health status, but NIREH doesn’t seem to have a list of those who died from coronavirus infection.

NIREH director Dr R R Tiwari said: “The administration must know (about the list). Covid-19 is not our mandate. We are an institute of environmental health. Health consequences of exposure to MIC is our mandate, but not Covid-19.”

Asked if BMHRC has such a list, its senior official Mazharullah said he no longer handles PR and asked TOI to contact the director. The person who took the call for BMHRC director Dr Prabha Desikan on Sunday night said she couldn’t speak at the moment and asked TOI to call back in the morning.

Spokesperson for the district administration, Arun Rathore, said they are not disclosing identity of coronavirus patients under government policy.

