Covid-19 scare in Kolkata: Clubs take preventive steps but put responsibility onus on members
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: The Covid-19 pandemic has left the top brass of several city clubs battling a dilemma on how to approach fellow members and ask them to refrain from visiting the club if they have recently travelled abroad. Though clubs have taken a slew of measures announced by the government, including closure of swimming pool and gymnasium and putting in place deep cleaning protocol, senior committee members admitted the virus could only be blocked through responsible behaviour of members and not extensive sterilization efforts.

Following the advisories from the Centre and state govenrment, Tollygunge Club has suspended reciprocal affiliation with clubs across India and rest of the world that allows members of other affiliate clubs to walk into Tolly and enjoy the facilities here. But it has been unable to bluntly ask members who have travelled recently to stay out for at least a fortnight. A large section of the club’s members are senior corporate executives and businessmen and many travel overseas frequently. 

“All our members are educated and established individuals. Naturally, one expects them to be responsible citizens. We have through a mailer made the concern of Covid-19 infection known to the members and expect those who have travelled abroad in recent times to stay away for the time being,” said Tolly Club chief executive and managing director Anil Mukerji. 

Celebrating its 125th year, The Tolly has bad to cancel a jazz fest organised by Alliance Francaise and a cultural and heritage festival to mark 400 years of Bengal, shut down the swimming pool and gym. The kitchen has been fumigated and a rigorous housekeeping regimen put in place to keep the virus at bay. 

At Calcutta Rowing Club, secretary Chandan Roychowdhury listed out a slew of measures that had been taken including cancellation of DJ nights and weekly programmes. But he conceded there was no way to ensure a member who had travelled abroad didn’t visit the club unless the member acted responsibly. “We can only request members to keep the club safe; not monitor their travel itinerary. On our part, we are doing everything to secure the premises,” said Roychowdhury.

CRC and Lake Club have decided to suspend rowing activities. Sources said that while rowing was a non-contact sport and allowed enough social distancing to keep the virus from spreading, the change rooms used by rowers were a matter of concern. 

At CCFC, committee member Saugata Nandi, too, admitted the high profile of members made it difficult to employ screening activities that corporates could employ in offices. “A club is a place to socialise. We cannot police them. We have requested those who have travelled abroad to stay away for 15 days and hope they do so,” said Nandi, adding that the club has advanced the final match of the merchants’ cup cricket by three days to Wednesday to finish off sporting engagements at the earliest. 

Calcutta Club, too, has cancelled a tennis tournament, drama and other programmes scheduled to be held later this month. “The club’s revenues are taking a hit but there is little one can do in these hard times,” said A Basu, former president of the club.

