Clueless docs, gloveless staff serve those quarantined at MLA Hostel
2020-03-18
Nagpur: From the threshold of block number 22 of MLA Hostel, a girl in her twenties flaunts her wrist to her sister standing at a distance, almost like she is showing off a tattoo.

She has been stamped ‘Corona 17-3-2020’ on her hand after she landed at Nagpur on Tuesday morning. “I have kept the sanitizer inside the bag,” says her father, who has also come to drop her lunch. The girl cannot cross the threshold. As the conversation gets longer, a state government official asks her to get back to her room. The family refused to divulged her name.

Since March 13, passengers coming from seven countries tagged as ‘corona affected’ have been kept in the MLA hostel block. So far, three have been released after initial tests and 11 remain at MLA hostel, said sources here. A state government press release has said so far 13 have been quarantined.

A press release issued from the divisional commissioner’s office said facilities to board as many as 1,500 quarantined persons are being created at Nagpur, including at Vanamati and Nag Bhavan.

Alleged uncertainty about their fate was among the major complaints TOI got while talking on phone to two of those quarantined. Some NRIs have also complained of the lack of proper facilities.

Akashsingh Rathore, a finance professional from Germany, reached Nagpur on Qatar Airways’ flight via Doha 36 hours ago. “My colleagues in other cities have been quarantined at home after initial tests. I am perfectly healthy and ready to stay isolate myself at home. I can be stamped and let off, There is no clarity, and even doctors here do not have a clue,” he says.

Thirty-year-old Rathore, whose family is from Chandrapur, has been quarantined along with his wife. His colleague Shashank Pataudi is next door, and has to go to Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh. “I have asked my parents not to come to Nagpur or get stressed. I am more worried about my work, which has come to a standstill,” he says.

Both Rathore and Pataudi were already working from home in Germany after the coronavirus outbreak. They decided to come to India and continue working from here. Lack of internet connectivity at MLA Hostel has affected their work, they say.

One inmate is also slated to get married in some days and still stuck here, they said.

Officials at the district collectorate managing the affairs said the decision to release a person is of the civil surgeon. However, civil surgeon Dr Devendra Paturkar passed the buck to the divisional commissioner’s office.

Even as the quarantined passengers are interacting with each other, their only view of the world outside is from the balconies. Their food comes from the MLA hostel canteen.

“There is a table outside their rooms. We just leave the food there and go away, and do not wait for them to come out,” said a canteen worker. 

“Our life is at risk too, but except a mask there is hardly anything else in the name of safety gear. I don’t even have gloves so I cover my hand with a napkin to ring the door bell or even touch the door,” said a worker engaged in serving food.

The food is sent in cardboard packs. “We have not cleared the dustbins even once yet,” said one of the staffers.

The passengers arrive at MLA Hostel straight from the airport. A team of doctors is present before the immigration counter, where the countries they are coming from are ascertained. They are asked to board a bus under the protection of Disaster Relief Force personnel and taken to MLA hostel.

“They were helpful indeed but I saw that the disaster relief personnel did not even have gloves,” said a relative of one of the passengers.


