Pune: Cluster containment plan to check spread of coronavirus
2020-03-11
Pune: State health officials will implement the cluster containment strategy in the city to check the spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19). 


Four of the five positive cases of Covid-19 found in Pune are from two housing socities on Sinhagad Road. The strategy entails carrying a survey of people living within a 3km radius of the housing society where the couple and their daughter, who tested positive for Covid-19, live on Sinhagad Road. Another co-traveller, who tested positive for the contagion, stays in a another housing society on the same road.


 
 
Agra was the first city in India to implement the strategy after six residents contracted the infection from their relative who had returned from Italy. The five positive cases of Covid-19 in Pune — four travellers and a private cab driver — in two days have underscored the need to curb the spread of the virus in the community in the city as well.

Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday called upon states to adopt the cluster containment strategy making district collectors more accountable and laid emphasis on contact tracing and strengthening district surveillance teams to avoid widespread community transmission.

"In the cluster containment approach, we immediately start checking and sensitising every household within the 3km radius of the house of an infected person and also those who have come in contact with the affected to prevent the community spread of the virus. We will implementing the strategy in the city through the Pune Municipal Corporation’s (PMC) health officials,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate told TOI.

“The couple and their daughter, who tested positive for the contagion, live in a housing society on Sinhagad Road in Pune. The PMC health officials will carry out house-to-house surveillance of all the households falling within the radius of three kilometers around the society,” he said.

A team of paramedics hasbeen formed to carry out the survey. ‘Every team will have a doctor, along with four paramedics. If a resident is found to have influenza-like-illness (ILI) symptoms, he or she will be assessed and treated. If need, the person can be isolated and tested them,” a civic health official said.

“The cluster containment strategy is aimed at containing the virus within a defined geographic area by early detection, breaking the chain of transmission and thus preventing its spread to newer areas,” said senior public health expert Subhash Salunke, former director general of the state health department.


