Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray appeals to retired medical staff to join Covid-19 battle
2020-04-09
MUMBAI: Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray on Wednesday appealed to retired army personnel, nurses, ward boys and others trained in medical services to come forward and help the state in its war against coronavirus.

“We have created an email ID. Please register with us on it if you wish to help the state. Maharashtra needs you,” said Thackeray in a video address to the state. The email ID is covidyoddha@gmail.com. 

Thackeray further said people who leave home must wear a mask or a clean piece of cloth to cover their faces. “This should become a habit, not only for now but for the next few months,” he said.

The chief minister said people should ensure used masks are disposed of properly too. “These masks should be burnt by finding a safe, open place and the remains thrown in the dustbin. We have to ensure that masks are disposed of properly or else that too could lead to a bigger crisis,” said Thackeray.

He apologized for the inconvenience caused to the people due to the lockdown and other restrictions. “We had to take these steps as we had no other option. This too shall pass,” he said. 

Thackeray said people who have health issues such as diabetes, hypertension and obesity should watch their food habits while at home and do some light exercise.

He said the government had taken a decision in Tuesday’s cabinet meeting to provide rice and wheat at subsidized rates to people with saffron ration cards in the state. 

“I have been asked why are we not giving ration for free when the Centre has already announced it. That's because the Centre has only announced rice is to be given free and that too to people covered under the National Food Security Act, which doesn’t include saffron ration cards. We will soon start giving free rice and also cover the middle class in the scheme,” he said.

Thackeray further said separate clinics for cough, cold and fever will be set up in every ward and ‘Covid hospitals’ will also be set up to ensure there is no transmission.


