CM announces relief for poor, free treatment to Covid affected
2020-03-26
BHOPAL: In a relief to the people of the state, Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Wednesday announced a relief package for those affected by Coronavirus assuring treatment at government expenses, besides announcing financial assistance to poor and students.

Chouhan also warned of strict action against black-marketing and hoarding of essential commodities during the crisis period.

“The government will provide two months advance to all beneficiaries availing social security pension and announced Rs 1,000 as assistance to the labourers. We have also instructed the officials to deposit Rs 156 crore to the accounts of 65.91 lakh students under the mid-day meal benefit scheme,” said Chouhan in special address to the public, on Wednesday. 

The chief minister also stressed to observe complete lockdown in the state in view of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's advice. He said 46 lakh pensioners will get Rs 600 per month under social security pension which amounts to Rs 275 crore per month. The government will also provide Rs 1,000 each to labourers and Rs 2.20 lakh to Saharia, Baiga and Bharia tribals as advance to help them meet their expenses, he said.

“We will also treat corona positive cases in the government hospitals and medical colleges. The government will also ensure payment to private hospitals under Ayushman scheme," he said. Voluntary organisations will be involved to distribute food packets to the affected destitute people, he said.

Chouhan directed for a complete ban on organising meeting, gatherings and festivals. Guidelines of social distancing will be followed strictly and said social vigil to trace suspected corona affected cases be maintained in each locality so that the district collectors and authorities are informed about suspected patients. 

The chief minister further said the government will ensure proper supply of essential commodities and medicines through municipal corporation and panchayats.

Earlier the chief minister held video conference with district authorities instructing proper security to medical staff, supply and logistics and unabated supply of essential goods. He said responsibility of senior officials be fixed to ensure flawless working and management.

Chouhan also announced sops for the farmers and assured that arrangements will be made for the proper procurement of Rabi crops, supply of fertilizer, seeds, urea and other necessary things will be maintained.


