Madhya Pradesh CM asks officials to prepare lockdown phase-out plan
2020-04-28
BHOPAL: The state government will forward a model on how it proposes to normalise life in the state after the lockdown period ends on May 3. Prime Minister had asked all the state chief ministers in his video conference with them on Monday to send a model on lifting the lockdown restrictions, particularly dealing with resuming economic activities, restoring supply chain, ensuring health care to everyone.

After the video conference with Prime Minister Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah, chief minister, Shivraj Singh Chouhan, asked the top officials to chalk out a phased exit plan from the lockdown as directed by the PM.

Sources said Chouhan government is planning to extend the lockdown in MP till May 20, especially in the districts under red zone— worst-affected by coronavirus and not showing consistent improvement. Bhopal, Indore, Jabalpur, Khargone, Raisen, Hoshangabad and Dhar could be the districts where the lockdown would continue without any relaxation.

Districts where no coronavirus positive case has been reported in past two weeks could be given major relaxations in the lockdown, but schools, colleges, malls, cinema halls would remain closed. Not all shops would be allowed to open either. Pan, tea kiosks, salon, beauty parlours may not be allowed to open for now.

The district crisis management committee headed by district collector may take a final call on the issue.

The third category — cities and towns under green category, where there has been not a single Coronavirus case may open up largely, but people from infected areas would not be allowed to come there and vice-versa.

Earlier, chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Monday morning took part in a video conference held by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi with the chief ministers of the states regarding the coronavirus control and situation arising out of the crisis. Nine states participated in the discussion on Monday. Minister for public health and family welfare minister Narottam Mishra, chief secretary Iqbal Singh Bains, director general of police Vivek Johari, additional chief secretary, health, Mohammad Suleman and other officers were present on the occasion.

The Prime Minister discussed with the chief ministers, issues about prevention of Coronavirus infection, delivery of essential commodities as well as providing other civic amenities in the containment areas and necessary preparations after May 3.

After the video conferencing with the Prime Minister, chief minister Chouhan held discussions with the chief secretary and other officials. He directed the officials to prepare the proposals for Corona treatment, preparations after May 3 and for conducting economic activities as per the instructions of PM. He also asked them to take necessary steps to prepare models for the coming days. Chouhan said that after receiving detailed instructions from the Centre, action will be taken by the MP government.


