CM bats for strengthening quarantine facilities up to panchayat level
2020-05-14
Jaipur: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Thursday said the quarantine system should be strengthened from the districts up to the panchayat level to prevent the spread of Covid -19 in rural hinterlands. He said this was the key in controlling the pandemic in the urban areas. 

Gehlot said migrants who had come to the state should not face any inconvenience but at the same time strict monitoring system should be put in place. He was holding video conference with district and SDOs. 

Gehlot said the quarantine centres had to be systematically run with the help of MPs, MLAs and public representatives up to the panchayat level. He suggested that villagers also had to be taken in to confidence while setting up institutional isolation centres and home quarantine.

Gehlot said those who were coming on trains should be taken to the quarantine centres by bus after screening. He said if possible, the administration should make arrangements for tea and snacks at the railway stations and food packets and water provided in the bus. 

He said special care had to be taken at Jalore, Sirohi and Pali districts as the number of migrants were in large numbers. 

Similarly border districts of Dungarpur, Banswara and Bharatpur have to be careful and make special arrangements for the inflow of migrants from UP and Gujarat. 

Gehlot stressed to augment testing facilities at the district level especially in western Rajasthan where migrants are expected to come in large numbers. 

He said if any migrant was found walking on the road, they should be given transportation facility to the next relief camp. The chief minister said services of NCC, NSS, Scouts and Guides could be availed to help the administration. 

Chief secretary D B Gupta said registration and screening of migrants was very essential. He said those who have symptoms of Covid- 19 should be sent to care centres. He said those who were in quarantine centres should not be subject to any ill treatment but social distancing should be maintained.


