CM bats for partial easing of lockdown in green zones
2020-04-12
Vijayawada: Chief minister Y S Jaganmohan Reddy pitched for partial easing of lockdown during Saturday’s video conference with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, saying it should be restricted to areas identified as red zones and hotspots for the spread of the virus.

Jagan said while taking measures to contain the spread of the virus, it is important to ensure that the economic wheel is kept rolling, at least to an extent of meeting the daily needs of people, if not at its full speed. 

The enforcement of complete lockdown has put a halt on all economic activities, the CM said, adding that there is a threat of recession if it continues for a longer period. He also expressed his concern over the effect an extended lockdown would have on farmers, farm labourers and workers in industries.

“With the supply chain being disrupted, lakhs of families dependent on agriculture and allied sectors have been dealt a serious blow, with no buyers for agriculture and horticulture produce. Horticulture farmers are affected the most due to the perishable nature of produce and lack of sufficient storage facilities in the state. There is an urgent need in the state to procure paddy, corn, chilli, tobacco, banana, papaya and other vegetables. With transportation facilities being affected, it is not possible to procure all these crops for local consumption,” the CM said.

He also expressed concerns over the mounting financial burden on the state with revenues plummeting and increased pressure for expenditure on welfare and relief measures. While extending support to any decision taken by the PM in the larger interest of the country, Jagan urged him to consider other possibilities, such as easing the lockdown in areas where virus spread is not there or is under control to enable the restarting of economic activity. 

Explaining the classification of mandals based on the virus’ spread, the CM said out of 676 mandals in the state, 37 are in red zone, 44 in orange zone, while 595 mandals are in green zone. “As there is no effect of virus in the green zone mandals, the lockdown may be confined to areas in red and orange zones. It can be lifted in green zone areas, while taking necessary precautions such as closing down of malls, movie theatres, schools and places of worship to avoid congregations and by observing social distancing,” he suggested. Jagan added that the state government’s course of action would depend on the Union government’s stance.

Explaining his government’s containment measures, Jagan said they have been tracking 1.4 crore families through 2.61 lakh village and ward volunteers, 40,000 Asha workers and 20,000 ANMs. 


