Uttarakhand CM, cabinet opt for quarantine as tourism minister tests coronavirus positive
2020-06-01
DEHRADUN: Chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat and his cabinet colleagues have put themselves in self-quarantine after tourism minister Satpal Maharaj was found Covid-19-positive on Sunday. Maharaj had on May 29 attended a cabinet meeting in which CM Trivendra Singh Rawat and other senior ministers and top bureaucrats including urban development minister Madan Kaushik, agriculture minister Subodh Uniyal, forest minister Harak Singh Rawat and chief secretary Utpal Kumar Singh were also present among others.


Maharaj’s Covid-19-positive diagnosis came a day after his wife Amrita Rawat had tested positive. Besides Maharaj, his younger son, two daughters-in-law and six-year-old grandson also tested positive for the novel coronavirus on Sunday. Seventeen members of the minister’s household including his staff members were found positive as well. A total of 41 samples had been taken from Maharaj’s household on Sunday and tested in a private lab in the city.

Talking to TOI, chief medical officer of Dehradun Dr BC Ramola said that the health department has now started tracing the first contacts of all those who have been found positive.

The chief minister’s OSD Abhay Rawat meanwhile confirmed that the CM had cancelled his meetings scheduled on Sunday after Maharaj’s diagnosis was confirmed and had isolated himself in his residence. Secretary (health) Amit Negi told TOI that the CM and other cabinet ministers are “low-risk contacts and they will continue working from home.”

Meanwhile, Dehradun district magistrate Ashish Srivastava said that Maharaj’s family members had been shifted to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Rishikesh, while the others from his household were being admitted at Government Doon Medical College (GDMC).

“We are shifting all those who have tested positive including the minister and aides to AIIMS and GDMC on the basis of availability of beds,” said the DM adding that further contact tracing is being done on the basis of the protocol set by the Centre. 

