Rajasthan CM demands probe by SC judge into Tablighi Jamaat meeting in Delhi
2020-04-08
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Tuesday demanded an inquiry by a sitting or retired Supreme Court judge to fix responsibility for the Delhi congregation of Tablighi Jamaat.

He said nobody should be targeted on the ground of religion because any person from any caste or community can commit a mistake and only those at fault should be punished not the community.

“An inquiry by a sitting or retired Supreme Court judge should be conducted in the Nizamuddin episode to make clear who all are responsible. Those who are at fault should be booked and punished. It will also make clear whether there was any mistake on part of the administration,” said the chief minister.

“Timely action should have been taken by the administration in the Nizamuddin incident. It should also be looked into the administrative lapses if any. Therefore, an inquiry is needed into the matter,” he said.

“The entire country is united in the fight against coronavirus. The state governments have said they are with the Centre, Congress president Sonia has also wrote to the Prime Minister expressing party support and willingness to collaborate with the Union government to ensure the containment of the pandemic,” he added.

The chief minister said the society should not be divided on communal lines in such times.

He said, “People should not be accused on the basis of religion. Tablighi Jamaat members have committed a mistake, but why should other people of the community bear the brunt? Why should we divide the population on the grounds of religion?”

Gehlot said the congregation of Tablighi Jamaat members at the group’s Markaz (headquarters) in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area has emerged as a major issue in the country. The areas to which the Tablighi Jamaat members travelled after attending the congregation are facing problems.

So far, thousands of Covid-19 cases across the country have been found to be linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation held in Delhi last month.

Over 25,500 Tablighi members and their contacts have been quarantined in the country after the Centre and the state governments conducted a ‘mega operation’ to identify them, a senior Union health ministry official said on Monday.


