CM denies fudging Covid-19 death data
2020-06-12
Salem: Chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami on Thursday said the state government was not hiding Covid-19 deaths. 

“It is impossible to hide Covid-19 deaths. There is no need for the state government to hide the deaths, be it in Chennai or elsewhere in the state," Palaniswami told reporters in Salem after inaugurating the two-tier flyover built at a cost of Rs 441 crore. 

“We have been updating the actual number of deaths and informing the media regularly. There is no secrecy in it,” he said. The CM also said there was so much awareness among the public that it would be impossible to hide the cause of death. “If anyone dies of Covid-19 and if their details do not figure on the state government list, their relatives will immediately approach the media and expose it,” he said. At the same time, EPS said many people died of other health complications such as diabetes related complications and heart ailments. “We should not attribute those deaths to Covid-19,” he said.

The CM's statement comes in the wake of TOI report on Wednesday that a team of health department officials from the Directorate of Public Health (DPH) had visited Ripon Buildings and verified the death records maintained by the Greater Chennai Corporation. They found 236 more Coivid-19 deaths.

EPS reiterated that there was no need for the state government to hide Covid-19 deaths. “A few private hospitals in the state failed to submit their death related reports to the state health officials,” he said, adding that, the health minister had ordered officials to check with the concerned private hospitals for not sending the death reports to the state government.

The state government had tested 6.09 lakh people so far. Of them, 36,841 tested positive and 19,333 people got discharged from the hospital. “A total of 326 people died of Covid-19,” he said. 

Further explaining about the preparedness of hospitals, Palaniswami said at present, the Salem government hospital has been equipped with 2,000 beds and additional of 5,000 beds could be increased depending on the situation. “All the hospitals across the state are prepared with more bed facilities,” he said, adding that the state has 3,384 ventilators, which is high in the country, when compared with other states. 

The CM said there was no community spread in the state. “Chennai has narrow streets and small houses in which plenty of people were living and this was the reason for increasing Covid-19 patients,” he said. 

Answering about further relaxation, he said he had already given enough relaxations and it’s the responsibility of the people to follow government’s guidelines to prevent themselves from Covid-19. 


