Madhya Pradesh CM extends lockdown till June 30, but unlocks services
2020-06-01
BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh government has decided to extend the lockdown in the state till June 30, as per the recommendations of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs. However, keeping in line with the unlocking guidelines, the state government will be extending greater relaxations and facilitating opening of malls, business establishment and temples and religious centres from June 8.

 Making the announcement in an address to the state, chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that all government and private offices in the state except for those in Bhopal, Indore and Ujjain districts will function at 100% strength. For offices (govt and private) in Bhopal, Indore and Ujjain they will function at 50% strength for now.

Chouhan also announced the scrapping of check posts on borders and need for passes for travel in and out of the state. Public transport facilities in the state would be started at 50% capacity while markets would be allowed to open in phases at 33% strength.

Referring to schools, colleges, coaching centres and educational institutions, the chief minister said that a decision would be taken after consultation with all stakeholders including parents and guardians of the children. Under no circumstances these institutions would open before June 30. The government would decide on opening these institutions as per the prevailing situation in July after review, he said.

He however said that schools and colleges would open for conducting examinations as per the schedule announced by the boards and universities and advised for maintaining social distancing norms and proper sanitisation facilities at these centres.

Meanwhile, in a relief to the industry, Chouhan announced that fixed charges on electricity consumption for establishments would be suspended from April, May and June. He also announced 50% relief for three months to domestic electricity consumers by providing relief to those getting bills under Rs 100 per month while those who received bill of Rs 100 in Match and later received higher bill in April and May will have to pay on Rs 100 per month.

Use of mask will be compulsory at public places while farmers will be extended loan facility at 0% interest and procurement of wheat and pulses where ever is remaining would be extended, said Chouhan. He also announced creation of a portal having details of unskilled and skilled workers from where industry can pick them up as per their needs.

