Government to bear treatment cost of coronavirus patients: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar
2020-03-17
PATNA: The state government will bear all the expenditures to be incurred on the treatment of patients found infected with novel coronavirus (Covid-19) in Bihar, chief minister Nitish Kumar said in the legislative assembly on Monday. He also said the government will pay ex gratia of Rs 4 lakh to the next of kin of the person in case of his or her death due to Covid-19.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

He said the money required for the treatment of the coronavirus-infected patient would be provided from the CM Medical Fund, while the ex gratia payment will be made from the CM Relief Fund.

“Till now, no one has tested positive for coronavirus in Bihar. There is no need to panic. The government will do everything possible to combat the situation,” the CM later said outside the state assembly. 

Nitish also said the state government has not been taking any chances and, accordingly, Hotel Patliputra Ashok on Beerchand Patel Marg was being developed as a quarantine centre to keep in isolation the tourists and travellers arriving here from abroad. “One or two senior officials would be present at the airport during the screening of travellers coming from abroad as more than 148 countries had been affected by coronavirus,” he added.

“People should also get adequately informed about coronavirus and the required preventive measures,” the CM said.

Nitish also said healthy persons did not require to wear masks. “Masks have to be worn only by infected persons or the doctors and nurses treating them. Further, a mask once put on has to be either destroyed by burning or buried after eight hours,” the CM said.

In the state assembly, Nitish dwelt at length on the need for preventive steps. He said the government was creating awareness on a mass scale in the state after coronavirus impact had been reported from bordering Uttar Pradesh and Nepal.

Noting that the teachers and government employees would be given proper training, the CM said the presence of group C and D staff in the offices had been rescheduled. As part of maintaining “social distance”, people have been warned against proximity, besides being asked not to gather around at public or private events and places, the CM said, adding that several educational and other institutions as well as markets and malls had also been closed as precautionary measures.

Meanwhile, outside the state assembly, health minister Mangal Pandey said a diagnostic centre for coronavirus had been opened at Rajendra Memorial Research Institute and Medical Sciences in Patna. Such a facility would soon come up at Patna Medical College Hospital (PMCH) and Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS). Of the 57 persons on whom diagnosis had been done in the state, the samples of 54 had tested negative and one sample was taken improperly. The results of two samples were awaited, he added. 


