CM Pramod Sawant has failed to understand Covid-19 impact, says GFP
2020-05-19
PANAJI: The spurt in the number of novel coronavirus cases in Goa and chief minister Pramod Sawant’s decision to permit the Hazrat Nizamuddin Express, but not the Rajdhani Express, to halt at Goa, exposes the government’s failure to understand the Covid-19 pandemic, Goa Forward Party GFP said on Monday.


GFP said the state’s BJP-led government has adopted two different yardsticks for Goan seafarers who are overseas and stranded people arriving from Delhi. GFP president Vijai Sardesai accused the BJP of trying to create a “false narrative” about non-resident Goans being carriers of Covid-19.

“We have trains bringing back not just Goans, but all and sundry to Goa, especially those having connections with the high and mighty affliated with the ruling party in Delhi. Some are also sneaking in here and enjoying themselves,” the former minister said. 

“Meanwhile, we still don’t have a clear plan from the government as to when exactly the airport or seaport will open for rescue flights or ships,” Sardesai said. 

Taking potshots at Sawant for saying that the Hazrat Nizamuddin Express will continue to stop at stations in Goa as no coronavirus cases had been detected on those trains, Sardesai said, “This is an expression of hollowness and lack of application of mind by the chief minister of the state. The train isn’t the issue, it’s where it originates from that is the issue, and in both cases, it is New Delhi.” 

GFP also questioned why seafarers who test negative have to be put up in paid quarantine facilities while those arriving by train are allowed to be home quarantined. Further, they said that the state should not charge any Goan for quarantine facilities and medical tests. 

 “The government is delaying the repatriation of Goans from around the world, especially seafarers, because it wants the maximum deal possible by arm-twisting their companies, who are resisting,” Sardesai said. 

And with Covid-19 cases in the state on the rise, GFP has demanded that all tourists and residents of other states be prohibited from entering Goa. 


