CM hails MPs’ role, takes feedback to frame post-lockdown strategy
2020-04-07
Lucknow: Hours before people switched off lights on the call of PM Narendra Modi and lighted diyas and lamps to support the fight against Covid-19 pandemic, chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday sought feedback from the MPs across party lines to frame future strategy once the lockdown is lifted on April 15.

Speaking to MPs through video conferencing, the CM sought suggestions to ensure enforcement of social distancing after the lockdown is ended. “There is a chance that large scale gathering of people may impact the steps taken by the state government in preventing the spread of virus,” said Yogi. The MPs who attended the video conferencing included BJP’s Mahendra Nath Pandey, Hardeep Puri, Rita Bahuguna Joshi, Santosh Gangwar, Smriti Irani, SP MP Reoti Raman Singh and BSP MP Ritesh Pandey.

The CM said the suggestions given by the MPs will help the state government in deciding which area and how much relaxation will have to be given after the lockdown is lifted. “We will continue to face the test even after the lockdown is over,” Yogi said, adding that spreading awareness about social distancing, especially in public places, would be the state government’s top priority.

Yogi praised the MPs for taking forward the preventive steps taken by the state government to combat the coronavirus. “We all need to bail people out of the crisis over the next few days of the lockdown,” he said.

The CM said he was aware of the people’s representatives’ expectation from the state government in dealing with the situation. He specially mentioned the state government decision to appoint senior IAS and IPS as nodal officers for taking care of UP natives stuck in other states. Yogi said he was also in contact with the state governments whereever it was needed. 

“People of the state are grateful for the efforts taken by the MPs and central ministers in their respective constituencies,” he said. Yogi said that taking appropriate steps not only helped the state government but also improved the image of MPs in the times of crisis. Emphasizing on ‘Gareeb Kalyan’ package announced by PM Modi, Yogi said it is being hailed across various sections of the society.

Yogi said that nearly 3.5 lakh labourers, who arrived in UP from other states, do not have either a ration card or a bank account. “We need to identify such people and help them in getting Rs 1,000 each. For this, the help of people’s representatives needs to be imminent,” he said.

Meanwhile, briefing newspersons, additional chief secretary, home, Awanish Awasthi said the government distributed over 10 lakh food packets to the needy on Saturday which was a record. Awasthi said that nearly 4 lakh people have been been quarantined in the rural areas and about 35,000 in the urban areas. 


