CM Vijay Rupani holds meeting to finalise Ahmedabad’s Covid control plan
2020-05-17
GANDHINAGAR: Chief minister Vijay Rupani held a video conference with elected and administrative leaders of Ahmedabad city to finalize an action plan to control the spread of Covid-19 in the city. A massive health check-up and surveillance programme will be conducted in ten wards of the city over the next 15 days.

The CM interacted with the mayor, deputy mayor, chairman of the standing committee of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, the leader of the ruling party in the AMC as well as ACS Rajiv Gupta, who has been specially appointed to control the spread of Covid-19 in the city, and municipal commissioner Mukesh Kumar. Other civic body officials also joined video conference, which was aimed at ensuring “containment-free zones, corona-free wards”.

Using mobile medicine vans, intensive health checks and surveillance activity will be taken up at 160 locations in ten wards that have been worst hit by the pandemic. 

These medical teams will repeatedly visit these wards to ensure that people with common ailments are provided medicines, while suspected Covid cases are tested.

The mobile medical vans will be accompanied by a team of comprising an allopathic doctor, an AYUSH doctor, lab technicians, pharmacists and paramedical staff. Each van will be deployed at four points every day for the next 15 days. The van will focus on testing as well as treating people with common cold and fevers. In addition, homeopathic and ayurvedic medicines that boost immunity will also be distributed.

Under this action plan, the chief minister gave instructions to carry out intensive health check-up campaigns at 160 locations. Six are in Central zone, two in South zone, one in East zone and one in North zone by forming different teams through 40 mobile medical vans or Dhanvantari Raths. 

The chief minister made it clear that the fight against Covid-19 is to be intensified to ensure that the maximum number of infected patients recover in time.

