Delhi CM lauds Covid heroes for putting duty before selves
2020-05-28
NEW DELHI: Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal has described as heroes, among others, the doctors, nurses, bus marshals, civil defence volunteers who have been caring for Covid-19 patients and assisting Delhi government in looking after the needs of people during the lockdown. On Twitter on Wednesday, Kejriwal said these people were #DilliKeHeroes and thanked them for their bravery, telling them that they were the capital’s biggest strength in fighting against the novel coronavirus.

“Most of us were locked in our homes during the Covid epidemic. But some Delhiites were serving the people of the city and the country. The entire Delhi salutes these #DilliKeHeroes,” the CM tweeted. Community kitchen cooks, civil defence volunteers, teachers and principals engaged in ration distribution, police personnel, ASHA workers, doctors, paramedical staff, bus drivers, conductors and marshals are risking their lives to keep the virus at bay.

Saying he would share the stories of these heroes on social media, Kejriwal posted a video of Vijay, a cook at a hunger relief centre in the city. “Our cooks in the hunger relief centres are working for a noble cause and feeding the people in this pandemic. They feed around 10 lakh people daily,” he said in his tweet.

Describing his work during the lockdown, 36-year-old Vijay Yadav said that he remained busy most of the day with only a few hours for himself, being among those who cooked to feed 10-12 lakh people daily under the Delhi government scheme. "Our families have been calling us home, but we have to think about all the people. If we return home, who will feed 30,000-35000 people who need help every day?" he asked.

Civil defence volunteer Rajendra, posted at a hunger relief centre, was also doing his bit. “I am responsible for ensuring that people follow social distancing norms and that food distribution is done in a proper manner,” he said.

Dr Ajit, a nodal Covid officer at Rajiv Gandhi Super Specialty Hospital, revealed that the CM held a zoom call with doctors during the lockdown and arranged the best possible staying arrangements for them in hotels when it became clear that commuting daily would be a problem for them. The doctor, who hasn’t met his family for some time now, said, "My wife is a doctor too and she understands, but my kids start crying whenever I talk to them on the phone or video call.”

Similarly, life has been challenging for Asha, 34, a nurse at Lok Nayak Hospital, since the Covid outbreak. “We are required to work for continuous shifts for 14 days, morning, evening and night,” she said. “Leaves are out because we are on duty for 14 straight days and then go into quarantine for the next 14 days." 


