Unlock 1: CM Vijay Rupani lifts more restrictions
2020-05-31
AHMEDABAD: Removing odd-even formula for operations of businesses, Gujarat chief minister Vijay Rupani, in a late announcement on Saturday night, cleared the path for uniform operations of shops, establishments and offices across Gujarat. Hours after the ministry of home affairs published guidelines for the month-long Unlock-1 phase, June 1 to June 30, the Gujarat chief minister released guidelines for the state, effective June 1.





The decision comes as a major relief to traders and businessmen. “Extending operational hours for shops and offices and removal of the odd-even formula will help traders cater to businesses for longer hours. This is indeed a welcome decision. However, taking a cue from Delhi and Mumbai, the relaxations must now also be extended to shops and establishments within containment zones. The easing may be time-bound but needs to be given so that economic activity resumes there,” said Jayendra Tanna, president, Gujarat Trader Federation (GTF).

Tanna specifically mentioned that one of the largest wholesale markets in Ahmedabad, is closed due to restrictions within the containment zone and stock worth crores is left unsold.

Apart from shops and establishments, malls, hotels and restaurants will finally be allowed to resume operations from June 8, in accordance with the MHA guidelines. “The decision is indeed a welcome step as the hospitality sector was among the worst hit due to Covid-19. One week will be enough time for hoteliers to sanitize their premises and train staff members on the upgraded standard operating procedures,” said Narendra Somani, president, Hotels and Restaurants’ Association (HRA), Gujarat.

The easing of the curfew has further relieved restaurants and eateries, which were losing most of their business due to timing restrictions. 

Liquor stores have also been allowed to resume operations. Mall owners are gearing up to resume operations as well. “We will sanitize the premises and put in place a strict protocol to limit the entry of people to ensure the safety of all persons. Once the government gives guidelines, it will give us better clarity on operations,” said Aditya Shah, CFO, Gulmohar Mall in Ahmedabad.

The chief minister has made it clear that wearing masks will be mandatory in public places and any violation will attract a penalty.


