Let lockdown continue, but with malls, gyms, eateries open: Goa CM Pramod Sawant
2020-05-30
PANAJI: Chief minister Pramod Sawant on Friday said that he hopes the Union government accedes to his request to allows the state to open malls, gyms and restaurants if the lockdown continues beyond May 31. Sawant made the request to the Centre during a telephone conversation with Union home minister Amit Shah. 

“We want the Union government to consider our request, but let us see what relaxations they give,” Sawant said. “The MHA guidelines will come out on Saturday, and we will accordingly decide (what opens), but we have not taken any decision yet.” The CM also said that his government would take the call after consulting with industry.

Sawant told TOI that the government wouldn’t allow hotels, bars, and pubs in the state to open. He said the proposal to open restaurants is in the interest of the public. “When most establishments are open, where will they (employees) eat? Hence, we want to allow restaurants and tea shops to open, but follow social distancing norms.” Bars and pubs, however, will not be allowed to open, he said.

Sawant said that as per his conversation with Shah, it appeared that the lockdown as it stands now will continue for another 15 days. “Looking at the rise on Covid-19 cases, I think there should be an extention of lockdown,” he said.

Sawant said that at present, all establishments in Goa are open except for malls, restaurants, hotels and gyms.

He said that a lot of people are now requesting that gyms and malls in the state be allowed to open. “We have requested the MHA to let us open these,” Sawant said. 

“But let us see... based on MHA guidelines, we will come out with our own guidelines.”

Also, when asked if there would be any relaxation in the current 7pm to 7am restriction on movement, Sawant said that that was for the MHA to decide.

Before Lockdown 4.0, the state government had suggested to PM Narendra Modi that the interstate movement of people should continue to be restricted. He said that if interstate public transport is allowed, there is a possibility of many Covid-19 positive cases entering Goa. 


