Uttar Pradesh CM orders 10,000 pool testing every day, 1 lakh covid beds
2020-05-18
LUCKNOW: Amidst a massive influx of migrants into the state, chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday issued directives to raise daily pool testing of samples from 6,500 to 10,000 per day to check spread of coronavirus. He also sought increasing covid-19 beds from 75,000 to 1 lakh for infected patients during a high-level meeting with Team 11 at his office-cum-residence in Lucknow.

Additional chief secretary, home and information, Avanish Awasthi, said, the CM approved the health department’s two-pronged strategy to battle the virus amidst a record 1.5 lakh arrival of migrants on Sunday, taking the count to 16.5 lakh since reverse migration kicked off.

“The CM directed that every person be administered quality treatment in the first stage,” Awasthi said, while admitting a possibility of spike in covid-19 cases following arrival of lakhs of migrants. At least 522 Shramik special trains have brought around 6 lakh migrants to the state. He said, another 87 trains are expected to reach the state in next couple of days. Of this, 11 trains are expected from Delhi alone. The CM also asked the field officer to establish communication with officials of other states from where migrants are being brought back.

Chief minister’s turf Gorakhpur alone received 79 trains that brought 90,000 people home. Likewise, 45 trains have reached Lucknow till date with 52,000 migrants. He said, 250 trains have chugged into the state from Gujarat and 121 trains from Maharashtra till date.

Awasthi said, the CM urged people not to travel on foot and instead take the facility of railways and buses. The state government, said Awasthi, would soon be paying another tranche of Rs 20 crore to Railways by Monday after paying Rs 6 crore in the first phase.

Yogi also directed officials to rope in private vehicles to bring back migrants through swift approvals from district magistrates. Awasthi said, this would be over and above the facility of 10,000 UP State Road Transport Corporation (UPSRTC) buses, which have been deployed to bring migrants home.

In another decision, Yogi asked officials to facilitate purchase of wheat and conduct regular inspection of wheat purchase centres. The officials should also inspect public distribution ration shops and help provide subsidised food grains to the needy. The CM also sought simplifying rules to draw investment and provide employment to the people.


