Rs 50 lakh from each legislator’s fund to be used to fight Covid-19: Bihar CM
2020-03-28
PATNA: The Bihar government on Friday constituted Corona Eradication Fund (CEF). The Planning and Development Department would deduct the minimum amount of Rs50 lakh from the MLA and MLC local area fund to help the health department in fighting against the Covid-19.


Coronavirus live updates

CM Nitish Kumar said the health department would open a separate bank account for the CEF and necessary modifications have been made in the guidelines of the Mukhya Mantri Kshetra Vikas Yojana (MMKVY) to facilitate the transfer of amount from the state legislators’ funds. “The amount will be utilized for purchasing medicines, mask, kits and equipment to fight against the corona epidemic,” CM said.

Each MLA and MLC in Bihar is authorized to make recommendation for spending Rs3 crore per annum on development works in his or her constituency under the MMKVY. With the modifications in the guidelines, the minimum amount of Rs50 lakh from their funds will be deducted as contribution to the CEF.

The CM asked health department’s principal secretary Sanjay Kumar to open the bank account at the earliest. “If a legislator wants to contribute more than Rs50 lakh, s/he is free to do so,” Nitish said.

Minister of Planning and Development Maheshwar Hazari told TOI that the decision was taken in the wake of requests by several legislators that they wanted to contribute from their area development fund for the government’s fight against corona epidemic, Hazari said. His department controls schemes under the MMKVY.

Bihar currently has 316 legislators. “If minimum Rs50 lakh is deducted from each legislator’s fund, it will create a corpus of Rs158 crore,” a health department official said.

Nitish further asked the officials to run disaster relief camps at different places to provide shelter and food to the people who are stranded in different cities due to the sudden lockdown. 

Disaster management department’s principal secretary Pratyaya Amrit informed the CM that camps were functional in all districts. 

Former chief minister and HAM(S) chief Jitan Ram Manjhi said he would contribute Rs60 lakh to the CEF . Manjhi said he and his party was with the state government in its fight against corona.

