CM Y S Jaganmohan Reddy tells officials to track contacts of all Covid positive cases in Andhra Pradesh
2020-04-01
VIJAYAWADA: In view of the sudden spurt in Covid-19 positive cases in the state, chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy called an emergency review meeting on Tuesday with chief secretary Nilam Sawhney, DGP Gautam Sawang and higher officials of the health department.


At the meeting, the officials informed the chief minister that the 21 new cases that have been reported have been identified as those who attended a religious congregation in New Delhi from March 15 to 17.

The CM directed officials to gather information about the people who attended the religious congregation and all possible secondary contacts. Since the virus has a tendency to spread rapidly from person to person, the CM asked officials to trace all potential contacts on war footing and quarantine them to contain further spread of the virus.

DGP Gautam Sawang told the chief minister that the administration had gathered information from various sources, including the railways and the organisers of the congregation, and most of the participants have already been quarantined.

The chief minister appealed to those who travelled to New Delhi to come forward voluntarily and undergo necessary tests for the safety of their family and the society at large.

Further, the chief minister directed officials to intensify the door-to-door survey in urban areas to identify potentially infected people who have travel histories to Covid-19 affected areas.

The CM asked officials to provide means of communication like website and phone numbers so that people can come forward to report their health condition.

While reviewing the distribution of essential commodities in urban areas, the CM suggested that the distribution of essentials including vegetables be decentralised. He also asked officials to take stringent action against those who jack up prices. He said that officials should ensure that every shop displays the price chart to curb overpricing of essential commodities.

CM Jaganmohan Reddy further asked officials to ensure that farmers get minimum support price (MSP) for all crops including tomato and banana. He said that necessary steps need to be taken for perishable goods.

Officials told the CM that they are allowing farmers to sell fruits and vegetables in front of shops so that they can increase retail sale. The CM told officials that apart from taking temporary measures, officials should also look for permanent measures by creating area-wise ‘janata markets’ according to demand.

Officials informed the chief minister that export of aqua products to China and USA has resumed. Out of 69 processing units, 41 have resumed work with limited staff. Control rooms have been set up to resolve issues pertaining to aqua farmers.

He said that all pending bills under Arogyasri have been cleared for network hospitals and that district-level officials should ensure proper healthcare facilities are made available at all hospitals.


