West Bengal CM to meet trade representatives for views on longer lockdown
2020-04-09
KOLKATA: Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee has decided to meet representatives of industry bodies, the hotel and hospitality industry, the tourism sector and MSMEs on Thursday to take their feedback after Prime Minister Narendra Modi hinted at an extension of the lockdown beyond April 14.

Banerjee said she empathised with the public, particularly daily wage-earners, who have been hit hard by the lockdown, but stressed the state government would abide by the Centre’s decision. “I understand the hardships faced by the people during the lockdown,” she said at Nabanna on Wednesday, a day the total number of active Covid-19 cases in the state rose by two to reach 71. “I will put across my views if the PM consults the states before announcing anything. If the Centre takes a decision, we have to abide by it.”

The state government has also set up a task force — called Restriction and Relaxation Task Force — headed by the chief secretary to give relief to sections of the public without compromising the fight against the pandemic. The task force will periodically review the situation and take decisions accordingly. 

Banerjee said she has been getting calls from states, aski-ng for gunny bags for the supply of food. “The chief ministers of Punjab and Telangana rang me up, asking for gunny bags for the supply of foodgrain,” she said. She also said that the government had relaxed the supply of essential commodities — such as food and milk — during the lockdown.

“We have also relaxed the flower market and the supply of betel leaves and bidis,” she said. “Most medicines are available in the market. There is a dearth of quinine, used to treat arthritis, among others. We are keeping a stock of quinine for the treatment of Covid-19 patients because they are our priority now.”

She reiterated the importance of adhering to social distancing norms. “I urge people to follow social distancing while going to shops and ration shops,” she said. Taking up the cue, the Kolkata Police directed ration dealers to issue not more than 20 ration coupons at one go. 

The government has also set up a Finance Task Force, under the finance secretary, to devise stimulus packages for vulnerable sections at a time the International Labour Organisation has predicted huge job losses. An Enforcement Task Force under the home secretary has been formed to plug hoarding and black-marketeering.

Banerjee did not rule out chances of the virus spreading in the fourth and fifth week since the beginning of the lockdown. “Experts have been saying that the virus reaches its peak in 49 days from the start. Going by the advice, we need to be cautious till May 19. Keep safe distance even while having lunch at home. If you don’t get masks in the market, make it with handkerchiefs, towels that are there at home,” she said. 

The chief minister said that Bengal, like other states, was waiting for a special financial package from the Centre to tackle the unforeseen situation. “We have written so many letters to the Centre. My finance minister has talked to the Union finance minister about this. We are waiting and watching,” she said.


