Andhra Pradesh CM tells officials to remain on high alert to fight coronavirus threat
2020-03-21
VIJAYAWADA: Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Friday asked district administrations to be on high alert to tackle Covid-19 situation.

He said their aim should be to spread the narrative ‘no to panic, yes to precaution’ and take measures making best use of village secretariat system (VSS). 


Coronavirus in India live updates

During a video conference, Jagan said so far only three positive cases were recorded in the state and the patients are foreign returnees. He asked district collectors to monitor the situation and spread the message of social distancing in an effective manner. 

Referring to the people in some cities and towns are rushing to stock up on essential items, Jagan said that there is no need for panic buying as the shops will remain open. “Public needn’t panic and hoard provisions on a large scale. The shops are not going to be closed, and there will not be any disturbance in day-to-day life or in the availability of essential commodities,” he added.

“Through village volunteers, Asha workers and ANMs, the government has been conducting door-to-door surveys to identify foreign returnees and the contacted persons of the foreign returnees and their conditions. Action will be taken against those inflating prices of commodities due to coronavirus scare,” said Jagan.

“There is strict vigil over the foreign returnees. They have been asked to stay isolated at home. We will take action against those who flout the rules and create panic among public,” said Jagan.

As a precautionary measure, the government has closed all educational institutions and stopped mass gathering at all places till March 31. 

Based on the Centre’s directions, 21 medicines prescribed by WHO and ICMR including paracetamol and antibiotics are kept in stock. 

A total of 966 passengers were identified for observation in Andhra Pradesh, out of which 677 are undergoing isolation and 258 have completed 28 days of isolation. In addition to these 31 more are under hospital observation, Jagan said. 

