CM tasks super-specialty hospitals in Vijaywada to tackle coronavirus situation
2020-03-07
VIJAYAWADA: Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Friday directed the officials to set aside Rs 200 crore to meet any emergency and Rs 60 crore to set up special wards in Vijayawada and Anantapur to deal the coronavirus situation.


After reviewing preventive measures to tackle the possible spread of coronavirus with officials of thehealth department on Friday, the CM asked super-specialty hospitals in Vijayawada and Anantapur to handle coronavirus cases.

Ambulances have been kept ready to carry suspected coronavirus cases to hospitals and the vehicles would completely be sterilized once the patient is dropped at the hospital. All those returning from abroad are being asked to be under observation for 14 days.

The CM cautioned the officials not to create panic among people but to inform about the precautions that need to be taken to prevent the spread of virus and to set up a a call centre to immediately take up preventive measures. He also directed the officials to involve village secretariats in creating awareness among people about the virus.

The officials said the virus can be prevented by hygiene and personal care. It has been found that only 5% of the positive cases turn critical more so when a person is already suffering from some ailment, the officials said. At least 6,927 persons who arrived from abroad were screened at Visakhapatnam airport till March 5. This apart, 790 persons who landed in Visakhapatnam port, 469 in Krishnapatnam port in ships and 60 persons at Gannavaram airport have been screened. The state doctors are being trained to handle the screening tests, officials said. 

They also said that 351 beds have been kept ready, 47 ventilators, 12,444 personal protective equipment and 1.10 lakh masks acquired to meet any exigency. Similarly, orders have been placed to acquire 12,000 personal protective equipment and 50,000 masks. Isolation wards are being arranged away from all the major hospitals. Chief Secretary Neelam Swahney, principal secretary (Health) K S Jawahar Reddy and special secretary (CMO) PV Ramesh were among those present on the occasion.


