CM Naveen Patnaik urges returnees to follow quarantine rules
2020-05-05
BHUBANESWAR: Chief minister Naveen Patnaik on Monday appealed to those returning from other states to strictly follow the government’s quarantine rules and warned action against the perpetrators amid stray incidents of violations in some places.

Stating that lakhs of people are working tirelessly, many beyond their call of duty, to combat this unprecedented situation, Naveen said people returning to Odisha must also discharge their responsibility with similar dedication and sacrifice.

“People of Odisha returning from other states must undergo quarantine and strictly follow all the protocols/advisory issued by the government for the safety of themselves and their families. In case of any violation, the sarpanch shall bring the same to the notice of district administration. Stringent action will be taken against the violators,” a government statement, attributing it to Naveen, said.

The chief minister’s advice comes a day after around 100 people tried to jump quarantine in Ganjam district and seven others in Bhadrak violated the social distancing norms.

Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan also urged the returnees to cooperate with the state government rules. 

“I appeal to all the returnees with folded hands. You must obey the government guidelines in your own interest and in the interest of your families and society. We must have patience. You have already reached home. Things will be fine,” he said.

DGP Abhay warned returnees that hospitality should not be mistaken for leniency towards negligent conduct. “Any conduct endangering the safety of others will be strongly dealt with as per law. I appeal to all returnees to follow the laid down norms while in quarantine,” the DGP tweeted.

In Bhadrak, police registered a case against seven persons for violating social distancing norms in the quarantine centre at Bhatapara and uploading a video on Tik Tok. “We promptly registered a case on the basis of a complaint lodged by Swarnamaye Jena, sarpanch of Bhatpada gram panchayat. The accused have been booked under appropriate sections of IPC and disaster management Act,” SP (Bhadrak) Rajesh Pandit said.

Keeping the influx of migrants in mind, the government has made arrangements for 9,536 temporary medical centres in 6798 gram panchayats with a total number of 3.30 lakh beds.


