Coronavirus scare in Pune: CM advises to visit malls if absolutely necessary
2020-03-14
PUNE: Five new cases of coronavirus — two in Nagpur and one each in Mumbai, Pune and Ahmednagar — were reported on Friday, taking Maharashtra’s count of infected individuals to 19. 


The state government invoked the Epidemic Diseases Act on the day and chief minister Uddhav Thackeray ordered the closure of cinema-halls, gymnasiums and swimming pools in Mumbai, Thane, Navi Mumbai, Nagpur, Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad till March 30. The order came into effect from Friday midnight. 

Schools and colleges in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad will remain shut till further orders. “Since the number of cases in Pune is the highest (10), it has been decided to shut schools and colleges in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad area till March 30. The ongoing 10th and 12th board exams will go on as per schedule,” Thackeray said. He clarified that there was no need to shut schools and colleges in any other city as of now.

The 21-year-old Pune student who tested positive on Friday lives on Mangaldas Road and had returned to Mumbai from Seattle via Frankfurt on a Lufthansa flight on March 10. His close contacts were being tracked.

The Ahmednagar man was isolated at a state-run hospital in his city on Thursday. State health officials said he was part of the 40-member group that had visited Dubai from February 23 to 29. A woman in Mumbai also tested positive on Friday. She is the wife of a 64-year-old man who was admitted to the ICU of a hospital after testing positive.

In Nagpur, the 43-year-old wife of a man who was diagnosed as the city’s first case and his 45-year-old colleague tested positive. The two had returned from the US via Doha on the same flight on March 6.

Meanwhile, Thackeray clarified that malls and restaurants were not being closed but people should not visit there unless absolutely necessary. He also urged private sector companies to allow employees to work from home.

Event organisers have been asked not to hold social, political and religious gatherings, Thackeray said, adding that permissions granted earlier stand cancelled. He also urged people to avoid unnecessary travel but said bus and train services cannot be stopped as they are essential services.

The Pune district administration has readied 510 beds to be used in isolation facilities — 370 in Pune city and 140 in Pimpri Chinchwad.

“There is no need to panic as there is no local transmission. Containment measures are being carried out in areas from where people have tested positive,” divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said.

Apart from 10 positive cases in Pune, three cases each are from Mumbai and Nagpur, and one from Thane. Of the total 17 cases in the state, 15 were people who had returned from places like Dubai, France and the US. Nine of the 10 patients in Pune were people who had travelled abroad, Mhaisekar said.

As per the Centre’s advisory, passengers coming from China, South Korea, Italy, France, Germany, Spain and Iran are quarantined whether or not they show symptoms of coronavirus.

Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram said data received from the house-to-house drive and tour operators showed that 170 people were out of the country in the last one month. “We are checking whether they had travelled to high-risk countries. The administration has also reached out to nearly 8 lakh mobile operators to ensure that they send out messages giving general information and on reporting foreign travel to the authorities,” he said.

Mhaisekar said that on Friday, a Sangli woman was admitted to the Naidu hospital with her one-year-old child after she said she was not well and that she had travelled to Dubai. 

Mhaisekar said a notice would be issued and action would be taken against shops found hoarding or charging extra for masks and sanitisers or even providing substandard ones. He urged people to avoid panic buying and hoarding.


