CM welcomes lockdown extension, calls for more stringent enforcement
2020-04-15
Ranchi: Jharkhand chief minister Hemant Soren welcomed the extension of the nationwide lockdown till May 3 on Tuesday. 

Soon after the PM’s address, Hemant in a statement said, “Extension of the lockdown is important for the fight against coronavirus which has been declared as a global fight. We all have to follow and enforce it more rigorously. On our end, the state government is working all measures to help public both within the state and those stranded outside. Soon, we shall roll out financial help for the stranded migrants through direct benefit transfers.”

On Monday, the state cabinet approved the government’s plan of providing Rs 1,000-Rs 2,000 directly into the bank accounts of around seven lakh migrants who are stranded outside Jharkhand as a part of an immediate economic relief. Hemant said, “Identification and verification of the data is underway and money transfers shall begin soon based on the recommendations of the local legislators from their constituencies.”

State finance and food and public distribution minister Rameshwar Oraon also supported the lockdown extension. Oraon, along with state health minister Banna Gupta, on Tuesday visited Lohardaga district to take stock of the situation. Oraon said, “Lockdown will be enforced more stringently now. At the same time, we are ensuring that no one remains hungry. Foodgrain allotments have already been dispatched to all the districts. We are also working out plans to further strengthen the supply chain of essentials and extend all possible relief to farmers by procuring their produce at from their door steps. Plans are being worked out for this.”

Oraon’s party — Congress — on the other hand criticized the PM for not clarifying about the relief to farmers. Congress spokesperson Alok Dubey said, “We support the lockdown extension, but we also expected the PM to speak in more details on ways to extend relief to farmers, daily wagers etc to help their livelihoods as it matters most of the people in a poor state like Jharkhand.”

On the other hand, the cabinet secretariat and vigilance department on Tuesday formed a four-member cabinet sub-committee to monitor and recommend action to prevent the spread of Covid-19. A total of 24 Covid-19 positive cases, including two casualties, have emerged so far.

As per the notification of the sub-committee, Oraon is tasked to coordinate with the governments of other states to resolve the problems faced by stranded labourers and ensure arrangements of relief material to them besides steady supply of food to all needy in the state. State labour department minister Satyanand Bhokta will be responsible for coordinating with various departments to resolve the problems. Transport minister Champai Soren is assigned the responsibility to maintain the supply chain of essentials while health minister Banna Gupta has the responsibility of coordination in the sub-committee for smooth execution.


