CM Ashok Gehlot wants private hospitals to accept coronavirus patients
2020-03-21
JAIPUR: Amid the fear of coronavirus spreading to communities in Jhunjhunu and Bhilwara districts, chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Friday directed officials to make arrangements to quarantine 500 people in each district. He also directed officials to ensure that private hospitals do not refuse treatment to any patient.


In a press statement released on Friday, the CM said, "Till two days ago, the situation of coronavirus infection was under control, but our concerns increased with the few more cases coming to light (Bhilwara and Jhunjhunu) as the state is passing through the phase of possibility of community transmission.” 

Addressing the media, health minister Raghu Sharma said, “When doctors get infected (as in Bhilwara), the situation takes a serious turn as it poses the danger of community spreading.” 

The CM chaired a review meeting on coronavirus situation with district collectors, SPs and medical officers through video conferencing on Friday. He held meeting with NGOs also to seek their cooperation in the fight against the disease. 

Gehlot directed senior government officials to strictly enforce home isolations, prohibitory orders under IPC section 144 and curfew in the affected areas. He said identifying and screening each individual who came into contact with corona positive patients is mandatory.

The CM said the district collectors are the nodal officers for controlling corona and they should review the situation day today basis by holding meeting with all departments. He asked officials to ensure that social distancing is adhered to and gatherings of people not allowed. “Our topmost priority is to save the lives of people. It is the responsibility of all of us to ensure this task. In this time of crisis, everyone must work much more seriously,” Gehlot said.

He ordered setting up of an isolation cell in jails also so that prisoners are not infected by the virus. He directed police to cancel all festivals, processions and gatherings for the next one month and give wide publicity to preventive measures. 

Chief minister asked officials to be extra vigilant in the districts where tourist inflow is higher. Keep tabs on tourists coming from other states as well. Raising awareness regarding precautions against spread of the pathogen in small towns and villages must be done on a war footing, the chief minister said.

He warned of strict action if anybody was found indulging in hoarding and black-marketing of medicines, medical equipment and other essential items. He also directed the officials to keep a strict vigil on the health of people who have returned from abroad and even after their screening.


