Madhya Pradesh: Labour reforms in lockdown spark praise and protests
2020-05-09
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan’s recent labour reforms have drawn mixed response. Demanding immediate withdrawal of the “anti-labour initiatives”, the RSS-backed Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS), the left-wing Centre of Indian trade Union (CITU ) and Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) have registered a strong protest against these ‘reforms’. The industrialists, on the other hand, have welcomed it.

Speaking with TOI, the BMS state general secretary, KP Singh said, “Whether it is pay cuts or long duty hours, these are anti-poor decisions and have been taken only to appease the industrialists. These are pro -capitalist pro-industry initiatives. I talked directly to the CM and urged him to withdraw them. Our central leadership will organise a meeting in Delhi and will decide the next course of action.”

In a joint statement, general secretary of CITU in Madhya Pradesh, Pramod Pradhan, state president of INTUC, RD Tripathi, state vice president of All India trade union congress( AITUC) Roop Singh Chouhan, general secretary of Bank employees’ association, VK Sharma,and joint secretary of insurance employees association, Pushan Bhattacharya, termed the new labour initiatives of the state as ‘jungle raj’ and a permission to ‘loot the poor.’ “Following the guidelines of social distancing, 10-15 minutes demonstrations will be held across the state on May 11 to oppose the anti -labour decisions,” reads the statement.

State chief of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) Dinesh Patidar, however, thanked the CM for the initiative. He issued a statement, which said, “The reforms will further strengthen ease of doing business in the state and will play a key role in attracting new investments. They will also smoothen the operations of the current industries. Our workforce will benefit from these measures and there will be huge scope in creation of new job opportunities. The CM has also laid emphasis on MSMEs with provisions that are beneficial for them.”


