CM’s task force: Ease lockdown to save Punjab economy
2020-04-28
CHANDIGARH: The 20-member task force, constituted by the Punjab government to suggest measures to deal with Covid-19 pandemic has recommended that in view of the largescale impact on the state economy, there was no other option but to ‘methodically and gradually’ ease the lockdown.

 


The task force said since there is no certainty on the behaviour of the epdemological curve, it is near impossible to to predict the ideal time frame to ease the lockdown. “What is certain, though, is that the lockdown as a strategy cannot be permanent as it has devastating effect on the livelihood of the citizens,” reads the 46-page report submitted on Monday.

 


The task force has recommended that operation of all categories of industries should be allowed and not restricted to those listed in “Para 15 of the MHA consolidated revised guidelines dated April 15 and GoP order dated April 18.” It reasoned this is critical to ensure that the manufacturing chain, especially of MSMEs, is not broken.

The task force also recommended to consider freeze on wage and dearness allowance (DA) for around 3.7 lakh state employees for the current year. As Haryana pays its employees salaries equivalent to the central government employees, Punjab pays about 25% more. Therefore, the task force has recommended that the 7th Pay Commission should keep this aspect in view while recommending pay revision.


Rs 6,000 crore revenue loss/yr due closed liquor vends

There is a strong case for extending the deadline for the Goods and Services Tax (GST) compensation to the states beyond June 2022, till the time GST revenue stabilises. Otherwise, the Punjab government will be staring at an annual loss of over Ra 10,000 corer.

The borrowing limit of the state government needs to be enhanced at least to 4% of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for the current and next fiscal year, as per the task force. The Punjab government has also been advised to project the additional expenditure on Covid-19 during financial year 2020-21 and 2021-22 to the Union government and insist that this be monetized and made available to Punjab by RBI through the Repo window.

Punjab is facing Rs 6,000 crore annual revenue loss due to closure of liquor vends. “The irony is that, the liquor is being sold, but the state government is not getting any revenue. This source of revenue needs to be safeguarded, before it is lost,” reads the report.

As Punjab's MSMEs have been hit badly due to Covid-19, therefore, it is a triple whammy after demonetisation and introduction of GST. The task force has noticed that most of the subsidised industrial power supply goes to a few large power-guzzling units due to the given industrial tariff structure. Thus this distortion needs to be corrected to provide relief to MSMEs.

To meet the credit requirements of MSMEs, RBI, through the Union government can be requested to provide a Targeted Long-Term Repo Operations (TLTRO) window to MSMEs through Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).

It has been recommended that the hospitality industry is one of the biggest employment generators and the lockdown has hit them the hardest. Therefore the hospitality industry should be charged industrial tariff rather than commercial tariff as at present.

The Punjab agencies are required to square up the gap in cash credit limit (CCL) of the previous crop before the CCL for the ensuing crop is sanctioned. Thus it burdens the state's budget by at least Ra 1,500 crore per annum. “As procurement is a no-profit-no-loss operation, the Centre may be requested to relieve the state of this undue burden,” reads the report.

Currently, Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL) is carrying a debt of over Ra 30,000 crores without substantial assistance from the Punjab government and it may totally lack wherewithal to ensure adequate power supply in the ensuing peak demand season. Therefore, it has been recommended that state government must come out to clasp support.

