CM’s Covid-19 fund gets Rs 266cr donation
2020-05-14
Jaipur: Corporations, NGOs and individuals have so far donated over Rs 266.25 crore to Rajasthan CMRF Covid-19 Mitigation Fund to help the state government fight the coronavirus pandemic. 

Thanking the donors on Wednesday in a tweet, chief minister Ashok Gehlot appealed the people to contribute generously to save mankind and uphold human values. 

Companies have come forward despite the fact that the contributions to the CM relief fund is not covered under CSR activity. 

Last week, Cairn India and Hindustan Zinc, the Vedanta Group companies, donated Rs 10 crore to the CM relief fund. This is the highest contribution after Reliance Industries chairman Mukesh Ambani’s Rs 5 crore donation 

But there are many companies who have opted for taking up social cause to meet the challenges the pandemic has thrown up. 

Some corporates said, “We are more interested in taking up social initiatives under our CSR operations to help the state government in this moment of crisis. But cash contribution to the CM fund is smaller because that money will not be covered under CSR activities.”

Companies are mandated to spend 2% of their net profit in the CSR activities and they are comfortable to use that money for donating to the CM fund as it will not put extra burden on their balance sheet.

Last month, the chief minister had written to the Centre about the inclusion of the donations under the CSR head but the clarification was contrary to the state’s expectation.

However, a retired official who served under various ministries at the centre said that the clarification is definitive meaning that the donations to the CM fund should qualify under the CSR spend.

Like many state governments, Rajasthan is also struggling to tie up funds to fight the long battle against coronavirus pandemic. The tax revenues have almost dried up following the shutdown of industries, mining and lower crude prices resulting in drastic drop in royalties.


