CMS & 13 docs among 39 health workers shifted to quarantine facility after ‘action’
2020-05-03
Agra: A day after Mathura police registered an FIR against 13 staffers of Government District Combined Hospital who fled from a quarantine centre in Vrindavan, all medicos, including the 13 doctors and chief medical superintendent (CMS), were shifted from the hospital to a quarantine centre on Saturday. Earlier, all of them had refused to go to a quarantine facility and had insisted to stay at the district hospital instead. According to health officials, around 25 health workers, including nurses and ward boys, 13 doctors and Vrindavan’s CMS KK Gautam had come in contact with one of the district combined hospital’s ward boy who had tested positive for Novel Coronavirus on April 28 and a woman patient who died in the hospital. Samples of all health workers, including doctors, have been taken for Covid-19 test.Mathura district administration has also issued a notice to the doctor who was found roaming outside the hospital where he was supposed to be in quarantine. Video of the incident went viral on social media. In the footage, policemen could be seen calling out to the doctor to go back to the hospital but he kept walking. When the cops tried to follow him, he started running. However, he was caught after a brief chase. When policemen threatened to complain against him to the chief medical officer (CMO) and the chief minister, he identified himself and claimed that he had gone out to purchase butter. He also said that he had tried to escape as he was scared of being stopped.Talking to TOI, DM Sarvagya Ram Misra said that the health department has issued a notice to the doctor and further action will be taken after getting a reply. He added that the administration has tightened lockdown restrictions in the old city areas from where maximum cases have been reported. “I inpect the hotspots along with the SSP twice a day to assess the situation,” he said. He said that on Saturday, the administration received 4,657 migrant workers who came in special buses from various districts of Rajasthan. Of these, 3,000 have been sent to their districts in the state after thermal screening. Meanwhile, three more persons, including two men aged 58 and 32 and a woman, 58, tested positive for Covid-19, taking the total tally to 27 in the district. The woman is the family member of one of the patients who had tested positive earlier. 