Co-flyers of Covid-19 positive teen traced, all advised home isolation
2020-03-20
KOLKATA: The state government has traced 17 passengers who had travelled with the Covid-19 positive teen in the Etihad Airways flight via Abu Dhabi to Kolkata on Sunday. It has also given Jharkhand the passenger details after it was learnt that some passengers were from the neighbouring state. All passengers have been advised an immediate medical check-up and home isolation. Meanwhile, two maids who worked for the patient’s family in their home have tested negative for coronavirus. 


According to sources, two immigration officers who had interacted with the teenager at the airport have been asked to go on home isolation. 

The 18-year-old Covid-19 patient’s mother, a senior bureaucrat, his father, a child specialist, and their two drivers have already been sent to the Rajarhat quarantine facility for a fortnight’s isolation. The two maids will also be sent for a 14-day isolation. Beliaghata ID Hospital sources said the teenager has been responding to treatment and his condition is stable. “He has only complained of mild cough. He has no other problem,” a source said.

The apartment owners’ association of the condominium, where the family lives, on Thursday submitted a list of nine people to the state health department who have recently returned from abroad and have made them stay in home isolation. “None of them still has any symptom but we have submitted their details to the state government,” said the secretary of the owners’ association.

“No one is now owning up to have visited the patients’ apartment in the last few days or having met them. We have knowledge about few of the neighbours who had even spent some time inside their home but if they do not own up, we cannot force them,” said another member of the association.

From Thursday, KMC has begun fever surveillance by visiting homes and complexes at boroughs 11 and 12, comprising areas in south and east Kolkata, covering Patuli, Garia, EM Bypass, Naktala, Baghajatin, Jadavpur, Santoshpur and areas off EM Bypass.

“We have been receiving a number of calls from these areas about people who have come from outside. Some of them are suffering from fever and other symptoms of coronavirus. Hence, we have been undertaking a survey and will submit the report to the state health department,” said a senior KMC official. 


