‘Cold, fever due to weather change is not covid-19, but don’t ignore it’
2020-03-19
Nagpur: The sudden change in weather due to thundershowers on Tuesday night may develop symptoms like cough, cold and fever in many. In the present scenario, people may mistake it as covid-19 and panic. Doctors have advised citizens not to fear but also not to ignore these symptoms.

“Every cough, cold and fever cannot be covid-19. Most of them are local infections due to weather change and can be treated by your family doctors,” said pulmonologist Dr Sameer Arbat.

“But no one should ignore these symptoms in the present scenario. Consult your doctor, and get yourself treated immediately. Most importantly, follow the social distancing practices strictly until you have these symptoms,” Dr Arbat said and added that many citizens are still taking covid-19 casually.

“Despite several guidelines and instructions, many are still not avoiding public gatherings. These restrictions are for our own safety. Sudden change in weather has increased risk of viral infections. We can’t afford any viral infection to spread,” he said.

In Vidarbha, covid-19 has been detected in only those having travel history or those who came in close contact of positive patients. “Local transmission of coronavirus is not yet detected in Nagpur which is a good news,” said Dr Pritam Agrawal, infectious disease specialist.

“Three of the four positive patients in Nagpur have travel history while the one is wife of a positive patient which means the person in close contact. Similarly, three positive patients in Yavatmal have direct travel history to Dubai. No one from their families is affected so far. 

“So, if you get cough or cold due to this sudden weather change, don’t think that you have covid-19. Most cough and cold due to weather change get cured with general medicines within four to five days,” she said.

Similar weather conditions are going to prevail for the next 48 hours at least, states IMD. Orange alert has been issued for thundershowers in Gadchiroli, Gondia, Bhandara and Chandrapur on Thursday. There are chances of light rains in some places in Nagpur for next two days.

“Protecting yourself from viral fever is the best remedy. Avoid going out in rains, follow hand hygiene, follow restrictions on movement, and those who develop symptoms should follow social distancing,” Dr Agrawal said. 

Don’t panic but take care

It is important not to panic due to symptoms like cough, cold and sore throat

Common cold and flu begins with a running nose, followed by cough and fever

If someone only has a sore throat, then it cannot be a symptom of coronavirus

Currently, only those who have travel history to suspected nations are at covid-19 risk

Secondly, those in close contact with the positive patients are at risk

Those having flu like symptoms should start practicing social distancing for sure

Consult doctors immediately and stay away from others until your symptoms recede


