Patna: Collegians seek psychiatrists’ help amid Covid-19 scare
2020-04-10
PATNA: With the rapid rise in the number of Covid-19 cases and corresponding deaths, a steep rise has been witnessed in mental illnesses in the city in the last one fortnight, claim psychiatrists and mental health professionals.


Although most patients are not in a position to visit clinics or mental well-being centres due to the lockdown, they contact the doctors online and seek their advice to cope with anxiety and mental stress.

“The lockdown has created a massive impact on the lifestyle of people as they are staying indoors with limited resources. Hence, they are suffering from anxiety, mental stress and panic attacks,” psychotherapist Dr Mukesh Kishore, who runs a counselling centre in North S K Puri area, told this newspaper. 

“Senior citizens and lonely women are the worst victims of depression and mental disorders. A number of middle-aged people and some college students have also sought medical advice from me,” added Kishore.

Another psychiatrist Dr R N Chaturvedi claimed that people were calling him up and asking questions about the pandemic and the lockdown. “People are stressed about their financial situation and the boredom resulting from the time spent at home,” he said.

Patna University (PU) psychology department former head Prabha Shukla pointed out, “People still don’t know when the lockdown will end and there is a lot of uncertainty. Visiting parks and meeting friends, which were previously coping strategies for anxiety patients, are now restricted. Besides, people with pre-existing mental health conditions are feeling threatened with the overload of information about coronavirus.”

A number of students are contacting PU’s Institute of Psychological Research and Service. Its director Priyadarshini Narain said, “We are planning to issue helpline numbers for safeguarding the mental health, psychological concerns and well-being of our students. We will also monitor them regularly and help them remain calm and stress-free.”

“The University Grants Commission has asked universities to create help groups headed by hostel wardens and senior faculty members for students,” Narain added.

