Covid-19: College, university exams in Mumbai postponed till March 31
2020-03-17
MUMBAI: Buckling under pressure from students, parents and teachers, the state government on Monday decided to postpone all college and university exams till March 31. Ongoing Class X and XII exams, though, will continue. 


The government has called for a temporary shutdown of arts, science, commerce, engineering, polytechnic, management, pharmaceutical colleges, much to the relief of lakhs of students and their parents worried about the spread of Covid-19.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Several city colleges held their first exam on Monday and by afternoon decided to call off the rest. Entrance exam and admission activities carried out by the state’s CET cell will be rescheduled too, mentioned the government circular. Mumbai University exams, which were to commence on March 23, are also postponed till further notice.

 
 
The state has asked all hostels to shut for the next two weeks. By evening, students from other states studying in city colleges rushed to book tickets to go back home. “Since there is no clarity on how long this lockdown will continue, we are unable to plan our return too. Some are worried about flying back home, considering the lurking fear at airports. While others from neighbouring cities are opting for trains,” said a student. 

The government has allowed teachers to work from home during this period. Vice-chancellors, pro-vice-chancellor, registrars, principals, directors and administrative staff, though, will have to report to office for any emergency. A principal said no one is immune to the virus and there are no emergencies that cannot be handled over phone or mails. “What will lab assistants and technicians do when labs are shut?” asked a principal, adding fear of commuting by public transport applies to everyone.

The state asked educational institutes in rural areas to close too. While higher and technical education minister Uday Samant said teaching, non-teaching staff and principals can work from home till March 25, the circular extended the benefit only to teachers. The state will take stock of the situation post April 1.

A CET cell official said the process of verification of documents for postgraduate medical admissions that was to start from Tuesday will now be postponed. While MCA entrance exam is scheduled on March 28, it is most likely to get postponed. A final decision will be taken on Tuesday.

Even before the government ordered postponement of exams, some colleges such as Jai Hind, K C and Kelkar had taken a call to reschedule them by Monday afternoon. 

Rajendra Shinde, principal of St Xavier’s College, was happy the government passed a resolution in favour of the student community and to control the spread of the virus. “Since exams are postponed, students can make use of the time to prepare well,” said Shinde. TISS also deferred its admission activities from March 16. IIT-Bombay students started vacating hostels.

