Collector invokes disaster management act in district amid coronavirus outbreak
2020-03-12
PUNE: Collector Naval Kishore Ram has invoked the Disaster Management Act, 2005, in the district, under which 18 private hospitals have been roped in for any emergency amid Covid-19 scare.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The move came in the wake of eight people testing positive for Covid-19 infection in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad till Wednesday evening.

“Under the act, we have directed 18 empanelled private hospitals, including eight in the Pimpri Chinchwad area and 10 in the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) area to keep rooms and bed ready for emergency. On an average, 200 beds are being kept ready for isolation of patients,’’ he told TOI.

Besides, the district administration is also taking steps to check hoarding of medical equipment or articles. “We are checking medical shops regarding hand sanitisers and masks. All private practitioners have been told to keep the history of patients ready, including foreign travel, and report it to the health authorities,”he said.

The collector confirmed that there were no directives for schools and colleges to stay shut for now. “Having said that, no mass gatherings will be allowed. Strict action would follow against those flouting the guidelines,” he added

Under the Disaster Management Act, the collector, who is also the chairman of the district disaster management authority, appointing district civil surgeon Ashok Nandapurkar as the ‘incident commander’ and district health officer Bhagwan Pawar as the joint controller for better planning and execution of the rules and regulations.

Nandapurkar and Pawar will be responsible for coordinating with various departments and implementing ‘104’ toll-free number (for information related to coronavirus). They will also help in providing health services at airport and other crowded places, besides creating awareness among public through various means. They will also make sure that medical stores don’t overcharge people for masks and medicines. 

The act helps the administration in better utilisation of the available resources and manpower in the public as welll as the private sector. 


