Collector for throat swab testing lab in Nashik dist
2020-04-12
NASHIK: District collector Suraj Mandhare on Saturday underlined the need for a dedicated throat swab sample testing laboratory in Nashik district to fight the Covid-19 infection, which has already entered the community transmission phase in the Malegaon town. 

“Within a span of 48 hours, Malegaon has reported 11 cases including one death. The confirmed Covid-19 patient who died in Dhule government hospital is also from Malegaon. We can assume that there is community transmission as because neither did the deceased person have any travel history, nor did people move out of the town,” said Mandhare. 

The district collector warned people in Malegaon town against needlessly venturing out of their homes. “Even at this point, if people continue to move out, the number of confirmed cases will increase manifold,” said Mandhare. 

Ever since the lockdown came into effect, Nashik district did not report a single confirmed Covid-19 case. “A sort of complacency settled among the people due to this reason. The result was the manifold increase in the number of positive cases in Malegaon, whicn is going though a crucial phase,” he said.

“Citizens in Malegaon, known as the powerloom hub, already have weak lungs. Despite warning, they continued to go to mosques, markets or ventured onto the streets in groups without caring about the social distancing norms,” said Mandhare in a video message now making rounds in social media.

“Citizens here get water through taps and bakeries are the major food joints. Besides the mosques, these are major spots in Malegaon from where people may have contracted the infection,” he said. 

In order to arrest the spread of the infection, the district administration requires a dedicated laboratory so that the load of testing can be handled faster, more cases can be detected and the spread can be curbed. “I have spoken to senior officials expressing the the need for a laboratory to curb the infection spread in Malegaon town. This will increase the rate of testing and also help identify more patients quickly,” Mandhare said. 

Intense screening is now being carried out in the town, especially in the localities from where the positive cases were reported. “Even the screening staff is being advised to stay in quarantine so that they accidentally don’t transmit the infection if by chance they have contracted it,” said Mandhare.

Sub-divisional magistrate Vijayanand Sharma has announced complete lockdown in Malegaon city. 100% lockdown was already in effect in the containment zones declared by the Malegaon Municipal Corporation where only medical shops were kept open. 

“There should be no movement of people even in lanes and bylanes of the town. All the shops involved in the sale of essential goods are exempted from the prohibitory orders under section 144 (1), (3) of the Criminal Procedure Code,” said Sharma. 

The SDO also has also issued a separate order stating people would have to wear masks in public places and strict action would be taken against those violating the norms.


