College students come up with Covid-themed home furnishing
2020-06-08
COIMBATORE: The Covid-19 pandemic has fired the imagination of a section of students pursuing creative courses in Tirupur.

After designing sarees, T-shirts, wearable art, nail art and denim apparels that are themed around Covid-19, students of Nift-Tea College of Knitwear Fashion in Tirupur have now come up with home furnishings such as bedspreads, curtains, window blinds, pillow covers and bolster covers around the same theme.

Faculty members and students said they first hand sketched the designs, which were then converted into digital format. Boopathy Vijay, an assistant professor with the college, said screen printing technology and knitted fabric were used to make the prototypes. “Usually, home furnishings such as curtains and bedspreads would be made of woven fabric. We wanted it to be different. As Tirupur is known also for knitted fabric, we used that.”

Pointing out that fabric paint would not be durable for home furnishings, he said they have used screen printing, which would be more durable and washable, for the prototype.

P Vignesh, a third-year garment designing and production student who worked on the project, said, “We knitted the fabric ourselves for the prototype. The home furnishings have already created an interest and people have started inquiring about the same.”

They said it was viable to produce the home furnishings commercially and sell them at affordable prices. They also have plans to market the products post lockdown, when industries and markets resume operations.

Boopathy said they were planning to do a series of creative works that were themed around the pandemic. “After wearable Covid-19 art, face art, nail art, we are also working on a large embroidery artwork on Covid-19 and visual art pieces for police personnel.”

Last month, the college students had designed an attire using denim fabric, conveying the importance of staying at home, wearing masks and blood tests pictorially. They had done value addition to the denim fabric by way of fabric painting, applique work and patch work. The students had to do the entire work as printing units were not open due to the lockdown. 


