Bihar: Colour-coded lockdown from Monday
2020-05-03
PATNA: The colour-coded zones with their respective guidelines for restrictions and relaxations during Lockdown 3.0 till May 17 will come into effect from Monday. Five districts in the state, including Patna, come under the red zone, 20 in orange zone and the remaining 13 district fall under green zone.


While some respite has been given to people in green and orange zones, districts in red zones, especially urban areas, will continue to face strict curbs. All activities, except for the movement of people for supply of essential goods, services and medical emergencies, will remain prohibited in the containment zones.

State Covid-19 nodal officer Dr Ragini Mishra said all 38 districts in the state have been categorised into zones as per the Centre’s guidelines. “While districts with 25 or more Covid-19 cases have been categorised as falling in red zone, districts with no positive cases in last 14 days have been categorised as orange zones,” she said.

As per guidelines of Union ministry of health and family welfare, certain activities are permitted with restrictions in districts categorised as red zones. Activities that have been allowed in red zones outside containment areas in urban locales, include movement of people or vehicles if necessary, opening of standalone shops selling essential and non-essential commodities in neighbourhood and residential complexes, construction work, manufacturing of essential commodities, functioning of private offices with 33% strength and functioning of government offices.

In the green zones, all activities, except those prohibited throughout the country, are allowed in these districts. Regarding vehicular movement in all three zones, the guidelines state that buses and bus depots are allowed to operate with 50% capacity only in districts categorised as green zones.

Industries minister Shyam Rajak said work at industries in rural areas as well as in the Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority areas have already started. “Based on the zones, guidelines have been issued to the industries. As of now, 2,200 industries are functional and more than 26,000 workers are working. In order to keep a check on the workers, general managers of the units have been asked to report about the updates on a daily basis,” he said.

Professionals in the private sector are elated as they will finally be able to resume their offices with 33% strength. “It’s quite a happy moment for people in the private sector who after an interval of more than a month will be able to resume their works,” said Anup Gaurav, employee at a private company in Exhibition Road.


