Comfortable quarantine cells developed for Covid-19 patients
2020-05-02
VADODARA: A group of architects, designers, engineers and students has developed quarantine cells to help Covid-19 patients, which can also be used as instant shelters for migrant labourers and thousands of people stranded due to lockdown in the country.

These cells are not only cost-efficient, but can be easily deployed and built in less than half an hour. The first set of 100 such quarantine cells will be deployed at Gujarat’s coastal town - Khambhat - which has emerged as a hotspot in central Gujarat with over 60 Covid-19 positive cases recorded until Thursday.

A student startup foundation – Centre for Human Habitat and Alternate Technology (CHHAT) – has developed this non-profit design solution. 

“The design of the cell is such that it can be replicated easily to form a cluster and placed both indoor as well as in shaded outdoor conditions,” said professor Nirav Hirpara, director of School of Architecture at Vadodara Design Academy and founder of CHHAT.

“The isolation cells can be prepared using bamboo, PVC pipe and steel scaffolding. With support from Rotary Club of Anand Round Town, we have prototyped quarantine cells with bamboo and high-density fabric at a cost less than Rs1,500,” said Anand-based architect Sapan Hirpara, who has coordinated the project with core team from Hyderabad, Indore, Mehsana, Ahmedabad, Surat, Porbandar, Vadodara and Goa.

“Currently, at government quarantine facilities, Rs5,000 is spent just on partition for each isolation unit. Using our design, one can create three such units for the same cost,” he said.

“At Khambhat, with support of Anand MP, Mitesh Patel, these cells will also be used as portable OPDs where medical teams can carry out their screening and sampling activity under trees or shaded outdoors. Since, they can be easily dismantled, the cells can also be transported in ambulances or mobile vans,” he said.

The foundation has capacity to build 200 plus such cells a week. “We are also raising funds so that we can help thousands get shelter and comfort during isolation,” said Hirpara.


