Comics help take minds off Covid-19 gloom
2020-04-02
MANGALURU: Those bored by the endless number of memes that the Covid-19 pandemic has spawned, can now take a break. PDF files of age-old classics such as ‘Sad Sack’ and ‘Phantom’ are doing the rounds on social media, with comic enthusiasts sharing their collection with others to kill boredom and lighten the mood that the 21-day nationwide lockdown has triggered.


Happy to relive the past with these comics is Praveen Bhat, an information analyst with IT firm Bellwether. “It was a pleasant surprise to see these comics in PDF format in one of the WhatsApp groups that I am in,” Bhat said. “Having grown up with a heady dose of action that comic characters such as Phantom brought to life for us in our childhood, it was a trip down memory lane,” he said.

For Nithin Kamath, another comic buff, who grew up on a diet of Bahadhur, Mandrake, Tarzan and Zorro, WhatsApp forwards were a God send. “The lockdown is getting on to everyone’s nerves, and amidst the constant endeavour to come up with something new to address boredom, these comics gave a big sense of relief,” he said. Having forwarded the same to his friends, Nithin says the #CoronaLockDownChallenge he posed now, is to share more comics.

Some of the vintage comics that are being shared are Tarzan from March 1948, Sad Sack from July 1979, Phantom series 312, no 17, 71, and more. For Jyotsna, a homemaker, these forwards took her on a trip down memory lane to the late 1970s and 1980s, when their house was flooded with these comics. “I still have some of these original comics published by Indrajal Comics with me, and read them whenever time permits,” she adds.

Nithin admits that he was about to clear the chat of the WhatsApp forward of the comics in one of the groups. “But for the auto download that happened due to the Wi-Fi connection, I would have perhaps done so. The familiar outline of Phantom that I received enthused me to check the other forwards,” he said, adding it was far more enjoyable than sifting through the mindless and morbid projections and theories abounding about Covid-19.


