Community radios in Uttarakhand prepare locals to fight coronavirus
2020-03-31
Dehradun: Several Uttarakhand-based community radios are preparing the locals in their fight against Covid-19. The community radios are running different types of shows through which they are making their audience well-informed about the deadly virus.

One such radio is 'Henwalvani Community Radio' based on the outskirts of Tehri district. Station manager Rajinder Negi told TOI on Saturday that they are updating their audience regularly with Covid-19 specific news. “Our main focus is on providing daily updates regarding the lockdown and what all essential services are available. We are regularly updating our listeners with the announcements of the district administration. If there is some scheme or service being provided by the district administration, we are promptly passing in on to the people,” Negi said.

“We record interviews of doctors and health experts and use them in our shows. Their points are informative and help our audience to be more aware of Covid-19. We also take questions from our listeners and try to answer them in our programmes. Currently, most of our programmes are related to Covid-19, but in between, we do insert some 
entertainment shows as stress-busters,” Negi added.

Another community radio named ‘Kumaonvani Community Radio’ based in Nainital district is playing a similar role. The radio’s station manager told TOI that they are making sure that their listeners are not becoming victims of fake news on social media. “A lot of fake news related to Covid-19 is being circulated on various social media platforms. The sad part is that a lot of people believe in it. They don’t cross-check. This leads to a lot of panic. We are trying hard to bust such fake news and have asked our listeners to read authentic information being provided in the newspapers,” said Mohan Karki, the station manager. When asked about the condition of revenue in such trying times, Manvendra Negi at 'Mandakini Ki Awaaz Community Radio' in Rudraprayag district said, “Private advertisements have completely stopped. It was natural since the local shopkeepers are not operating much. But, the good part is that there has been a little increase in the advertisements from the state government. All of their ads are directly or indirectly related to Covid-19 and we expect that they will keep coming during the lockdown period.”


