Committee on unlocking religious places to submit report by June 25
2020-06-09
Jaipur: The state home department on Monday constituted committees in all districts under the collectors to decide on the modalities of unlocking the places of worship in the state. The central government allowed opening of places of worship from June 8 with due precaution, but the state government has decided to go slow on this matter.

Chief minister Ashok Gehlot, at a meeting of religious leaders convened on June 6 to deliberate on the opening of religious places, had decided to constitute committees under respective district collectors. The district-level committees would suggest modalities of allowing devotees at religious places according to local conditions.

The order of the state home department said a committee headed by the district collectors will consist of district police superintendent, MLAs from the district, CMHO, additional district collectors, religious leaders, chairmen of trustees of important places of worship. They will have to submit their reports by June 25.

The committee has been asked to suggest activities to be allowed at various religious places of different religions taking into consideration their respective religious practices and traditions and the precautions to be followed based on the detailed standard operating procedure (SOP) issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare (MoHFW) on June 4.

The committee was asked to prepare separate list of places of worship where only local devotees come or places of worship where devotees from other districts or other states also converge.

The committee had to suggest a system of management of the place of worship and fix accountability of the management, both inside place of worship by the trustees and outside by the local administration and the police.

The outside management should consider the entire activities outside the place of worship including shops and business establishments, parking etc. The state government will take a decision based on the reports received from the districts, said the order.


