Common toilets at VNIT hostel worry quarantined inmates
2020-05-01
Nagpur: Over 120 Satranjipura residents late on Wednesday night complained about lack of hygiene at Visvesvarya National Institute of Technology (VNIT) hostel number 2 where they were placed under institutional quarantine by the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC).

They were among the 400 residents out of over 1400 quarantined from the city’s Covid-19 hotspots. Some of them have been put up at Symbiosis campus at Wathoda, MLA Hostel and Ravi Bhavan.

After officials allegedly refused to heed to their pleas, the inmates came out of rooms and sat on a protest until small hours of Thursday. The inmates also posted videos and photos of unclean toilets on social media. 

“NMC administration brought us here but now they are not cooperating. All this while, they were accusing entire Satranjipura of not cooperating. We have been living in a sealed area for over a month. We know most of us are not infected now. A family of a positive patient has been put up in hostel number 2. It is using the same toilets, bathrooms, and wash basins. Others are fearful they may get infected,” said some of the inmates. 

The inmates said around 48 people have been given just four bathrooms and toilets and one water cooler for use on each floor. “People are using as per their style. After we raised the issue, cops gave a lock to each family. Still, we are eight families. As of now, we decided two families will use one bathroom, toilet and wash basin. But all are crowding for filling up water. We pray that Allah protects us,” they said.

NMC had brought 87 families to VNIT on Wednesday evening. Before that VNIT hostel number 1, 2, 10, and 12 had been acquired by the district administration for institutional quarantine. The officials have accommodated suspects in vacant rooms while many are allotted to students, who have since lockdown returned home. 

Sub-divisional officer Shekhar Gadge said every floor has 12 toilets. “For every 10 persons, the hostel offers one toilet and one bathroom. Those on other floors too are available for use. But separate toilet and bathroom can’t be given to each person. These are common toilets,” he said. 

Regarding compliance of guideline for isolation and providing separate bathrooms, Gadge said, “Now, it is not possible.” 

Asked about the reason for protest, Gadge said, “They were demanding rooms with attached toilet-bathroom. We told them they can use bathrooms on other floor too.”


