Commissioner, quartet lead BBMP’s fight against pandemic
2020-04-11
BENGALURU: Four officials on the ground are steering the BBMP’s strategy in containing the spread of Covid-19. They have been at it since January 22, when BBMP commissioner BH Anil Kumar chaired the first meeting to get Bengaluru ready for the crisis. Under their guard, Bengaluru’s share of Karnataka’s Covid-19 cases has come down from 61% (39 of 64) on March 27 to 35% (71 of 207) on April 10. TOI zooms in on the four bureaucrats.


Ravikumar Surpur: The strategist

After helming some of the biggest BBMP projects and overseeing 83 primary health centres, Ravikumar Surpur, special commissioner, major projects and health, says he finds his new responsibilities exciting as well has challenging.

Surpur has trained nearly 500 officials in anti-Covid-19 operations and put in place the first response mechanism in case of outbreak in any locality. “They immediately activate the containment protocol, beginning with isolating the primary and secondary contacts and ensuring their health is monitored daily,” he explains. 

The surgeon-turned-bureaucrat’s day begins much before he leaves home in his car. Calls from his officials keep him tuned in to the happenings on the ground 24x7. Surpur says his biggest challenge is to keep his team motivated and positive. “Often, medical staff themselves fear contracting the infection. Boosting their confidence is most important. After working together for over 2 months, they are now my extended family,” says Surpur. 

D Randeep: The taskmaster

When Bengaluru witnessed Covid-19 cases and shut down, everyone thought BBMP’s solid waste management could be its Achilles’ heel. But, the SWM machinery has not only risen to the occasion but is also working proactively in Covid-19 containment programmes.

Helming BBMP’s SWM operations is D Randeep, special commissioner, who starts work at 6.30am. That is the hour when the legions of his footsoldiers – 17,000 pourakarmikas, 5,000 waste collectors and hundreds of other health workers – are sweeping the city and spraying disinfectant in every nook and corner to ensure the SARS-CoV-2 virus has no chance to spread.

“My entire team has not taken a day’s break since March 1 and doesn’t intend to do so till the pandemic is eradicated,” he says. Randeep, whose three-month-old son and 10-year-old daughter are staying away from him as a precautionary measure, says, “My daughter considers me a superhero, which gives me more confidence.” 

Lokesh M: The sentinel

My family is worried I may be a carrier of the virus. But work is worship and they respect my priorities,” says Lokesh M, special commissioner, finance, and surveillance officer. 

After beginning his day with a walk to purchase milk, Lokesh plunges headlong into his surveillance duties. “My task is to monitor the city and ensure everyone in home quarantine adheres to the protocol,” he says. As on April 9, over 4,500 primary and secondary contacts were on the BBMP radar and most of them were in home quarantine.

Lokesh says his biggest challenge is to keep the morale of both quarantined citizens and doctors high. “Some doctors get paranoid about house-to-house visits,” he says. Lokesh visits at least 20 homes a day to keep people motivated. His biggest regret is that many people in quarantine refuse to understand the gravity of the matter.

Hephsiba Rani Korlapati: The warrior

IAS officer Hephsiba Rani Korlapati, managing director, Smart City Bengaluru Limited, is in charge of BBMP’s Covid-19 war room. 

She sits in the war room from 7am to 11pm, deconstructing data from the field, coming up with projection models to help fine-tune the strategy and disseminating information. 

Box: BH Anil Kumar: The helmsman

If the Covid-19 incidence in Bengaluru is nowhere near cities like Delhi and Mumbai, the credit goes to BBMP. Heading the Palike’s efforts is its commissioner, BH Anil Kumar, a 1987 batch IAS officer of Karnataka cadre.

Kumar spends most of his waking hours coordinating between various departments of the government and his rank and file working round the clock. From monitoring international travellers and contacts of the infected to ensuring supply of food grains to stranded migrants and coordinating with police on isolating Tablighi Jamaat delegates, he’s in the thick of it all. 

“Sometimes, my special commissioners are worried I may contract the virus and infect them. They keep forcing me to take a break,” says Kumar. BBMP’s Covid-19 war room to monitor the incidence, spread and trail of infection was his brainchild. The nation’s first such endeavour has been appreciated by PM Narendra Modi himself.


