Covid-19: Community screening to begin soon in Kerala
2020-03-19
KOCHI: Kerala government is in the process of starting random community screening in the state. This was discussed at the high-level meeting chaired by chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Tuesday and the health authorities are in the process of preparing a protocol for the same.


As per the plan, government will set up sentinel surveillance centres, involving primary health centres and taluk hospitals where all random fever and cough cases with no history of contact with any Covid-19 cases and also those from abroad will be tested.

The sentinel surveillance centres, besides testing people in the community, will be responsible in analyzing collected data to check any increase or decrease in Covid-19 cases or if things are normal. Though the locations of the sentinel surveillance centres are yet to be finalized.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Since all Covid-19 testing centres in the state are overloaded, the state government has roped in Rajiv Gandhi Biotechnology Centre, Thiruvananthapuram, for conducting these tests in the community. Though initially, the health department plans to do nuclietic tests to confirm Covid-19, they are also in talks with companies for cheaper options like antibody tests that are widely used in the community by coronavirus-affected countries like China, Singapore and South Korea. 

“We are in the process of starting random screening in the community and the protocol for the same is being prepared,” said Kerala State Planning Board member Dr B Eqbal. 

So far, only Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has done 500 random sample tests in the country to see if there is evidence of any community outbreak. Now, Kerala government is also thinking on similar lines, with increasing agreement within the state government that early steps and identifying areas with Covid-19 presence, can help them take stern steps to prevent it from turning into an epidemic (fourth stage). Currently, Covid-19 infection is at stage 2.

“We should start testing at the community level and keep monitoring. I understand that Kerala government is looking on those lines,” said healthcare expert Dr K P Aravindan. 

So how will this help? “This will not only help assess the risk to the community but also to identify an area with Covid-19 infection. The government will be able to take quick policy decisions on whether to cordone off the high-risk area or activate the healthcare facilities in that area to prevent spread of disease,” said a health department official. 

Further, the state Indian Medical Association, with around 800 MBBS student volunteers, plans to set-up district surveillance system in each district, with each team visiting one area in district each day. “If there is a sudden spike in such cases, the health department will be informed. We have launched a pilot project in Thiruvananthapuram,” said IMA vice-president Dr N Sulphi.


