Community transmission of Covid on the anvil
2020-03-21
With a mere 223 positive cases within a population of 1.3 billion, there is a burning question in the minds of many experts whether India is under-reporting.

There are strict conservative criteria for Covid-19 testing. Currently, only people with travel history in the last 14 days with symptoms suggestive of coronavirus and those who have come in contact with confirmed cases are being tested. Patients admitted with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospital admission without any travel and contact history are not being tested. This, however, contradicts the government’s own definition of “suspect cases”, which includes a category of people who do not have such history. In other words, despite not having travel and contact history, “suspect cases” do not qualify for testing.

Community transmission happens when an individual tests positive for Covid-19, with no trace to the source of infection. Testing must be extended to people having flu-like symptoms & to “suspect cases” on a large scale involving the ICMR approved and NABL accredited laboratories. Logically, unless a significant number of “suspect cases” are tested, one cannot come to a reasonable conclusion that there is no evidence of community transmission. 

Why is it vitally important to know if there is community transmission? Firstly, accurate diagnosis would help in precisely identifying those that are sick so that appropriate care is provided to them. Those in the community who have been tested positive with mild symptoms could be advised self isolation, which would go a long way in minimising the exponential spread of the virus. Secondly, if an individual has been tested positive, one can diligently trace the contacts (“contact tracing”) and test them, and if they turn out positive, they could be isolated as well. Thirdly, testing the “suspect cases” gives an opportunity for hospitals to be better prepared regarding the likelihood of how many cases they could expect.

Currently, India has tested only 14,000 people. This is in striking contrast to a small country like South Korea which has a population equivalent to Tamil Nadu) that tests 12,000 – 15,000 people every day. Countries such as Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, China and indeed South Korea have been able to “flatten the curve”(ie, measures that keep the daily number of disease cases at a manageable level for medical providers) through innovative ways of diligently testing in the community.

Currently, only seven states have closed down all the public places in an attempt ensure “social distancing”.

Although the virus is asymptomatic and associated with mild infection in the vast majority, 5% of patients require ICU care. India does not have even one hospital bed per 1,000 people and has a dismally small number of some 70,000 ICU beds that cater to some 5 million patients that require ICU admissions every year. God forbid, should the community transmission transform to fully blown epidemic, India would barely be in a position to deal with the catastrophic dimensions of an impending crisis. 

(Dr. P. Raghu Ram is the director and consultant surgeon - KIMS - Ushalakshmi Centre for Breast Diseases)


