Coronavirus: Community transmission stage not reached yet says Gujarat CM
2020-03-22
AHMEDABAD: Urging the public to be vigilant and take preventive steps, chief minister Vijay Rupani on Saturday assured that there was no need to panic as the Covid-19 virus spread is yet to reach community transmission stage in which the virus is transmitted rapidly.


“We are between stage two and three and have not yet come to community transmission stage,” he said and appealed to citizen to adhere to preventive guidelines and go for social distancing.

He added that the people who were tested positive for the virus mostly belong to Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, Vadodara, Rajkot and Surat. Rupani claimed that he will personally monitor the situation in Ahmedabad-Gandhinagar, deputy chief minister and health minister Nitin Patel will oversee Vadodara region. Education minister Bhupendrasinh Chudasama will monitor the situation in Rajkot while Ganpat Vasava and Kishor Kanani will oversee administration’s Covid-19 preparedness in Surat.

CM said that the state government is equipped to fight the virus epidemic. “Government is ready to face the worst situation. We have decided to create special isolation treatment facilities at hospitals to treat Covid-19 patients, one each in Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Rajkot and Surat,” Rupani said and added that the newly built 1,200-bed hospital complex at Ahmedabad Civil Hospital will be dedicated to treat Covid-19 patients.

“Government has divided the state into four zones for fighting this epidemic and four senior IAS officers have been given responsibility to oversee preparedness in these zones. Four senior ministers will also oversee the preparedness,” Rupani said.

He said that additional chief secretary(ACS) Pankaj Kumar has been given additional responsibility as the nodal officer for Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar, Surat director of municipalities M S Patel for Surat, education secretary Vinod Rao for Vadodara and industries commissioner Rahul Gupta has been given responsibility to monitor preparedness in Rajkot. “All four officers will continue their additional responsibility till further order,” Rupani said.

