Lockdown3.0:  Commuting an issue, private offices largely empty in Delhi
2020-05-05
NEW DELHI: Though Delhi government has allowed private offices to operate with 33% staff, very few offices saw resumption of work on Monday. Most of the offices were empty of people.

The Central Plaza of Nehru Place, one of the busiest commercial and office complexes in the city, was deserted on Monday. There wasn’t much sign of life in the many office ‘towers’ at the sprawling complex either.

“Some of our colleagues are working from home and those living in NCR areas have been exempted from coming to office. Among staff living in Delhi, only those who have cars or two-wheelers will be able to come,” said Amit Verma* who works for a private insurance company.

On Monday, he walked till his office in Nehru Place from his Ambedkar Nagar residence. “We are mainly clearing backlog at the moment,” he added.

Many offices were getting sanitised. “From floor to furniture, everything is being sanitised. We have been told that some staff members will start joining work from tomorrow,” said Baburam, housekeeping staff at an export house.

At the entrance of the building where the office is located, security guards have been armed with thermal scanners to check every visitor.

The office buildings at Bhikaji Cama Place were looking even more desolate. Apart from people coming to the banks and the MTNL office, a few hopefuls were looking for a wine shop in the area which was closed.

At Connaught Place, the office buildings lining Barakhamba Road and Kasturba Gandhi Marg were also largely empty. Only a few bank branches were operational.

Sumeet Raina, owner of Radius Systems Pvt Ltd, said they resumed operations on Monday with around 7-8 people. The premises was sanitised first and only people from Delhi who had private vehicles were called to work. “We aren’t using centralised air-conditioner and the staff members have been asked to use masks and regularly sanitise their hands,” Raina added.

Ambuj Tiwari, a 25-year-old lawyer who was called to work on Monday said the premises was being sanitised when he reached. “Since ours is a litigation firm, there is not much work right now and it can be managed from home,” said Tiwari, who reached his office in Jangpura Extension from Mayur Vihar.

Koushik Banerjee, owner at Smart Web Solutions in Janakpuri–an IT company, however, said that they were planning to wait for a few more days before taking a call on returning to the office.

“We have to figure out how to manage social distancing and hygiene. Employees may also face problems in commuting,” he added.

(*Name changed)


