Lucknow command centre set up to monitor coronavirus battle
2020-03-25
LUCKNOW: UP medical education minister Suresh Khanna opened a command centre at Jawahar Bhawan on Tuesday for efficient monitoring of coronavirus outbreak and the preparedness in Covid Hospitals in state’s medical colleges and announced a slew of measures for upgrading the medical infrastructure and preparedness for handling corona cases. Khanna told TOI that personal protective equipment (PPEs) and ventilators are being procured on emergency basis and the government has relaxed its procurement policy and specifications to ensure their availability in good numbers.


The government has also decided to hire doctors from private nursing homes and ex-defence personnel of medical wing for manning the isolation wards in Covid Hospitals. The department is also engaging tent suppliers for setting up makeshift Covid hospitals if required.

The command centre set up at the directorate of medical education in Jawahar Bhawan would be headed by an IAS officer as coordinator and would take feedback from Covid Hospitals and medical colleges treating coronavirus patients.

Hailing PM Narendra Modi’s declaration of a 21-day lockdown across the nation, Khanna said, “Prevention is the best cure in this case so people should follow PM’s directions in true letter and spirit.”

Khanna also announced to give his one month’s salary for the battle against corona and said the state is fully prepared to face any situation and there is no need to panic.

Khanna, who also holds the portfolio of finance ministry, also assured there would be no paucity of funds in facing coronavirus challenge. He said the stiff target of having 11,000 isolation beds has almost been achieved in private and government medical colleges.

Principal secretary, medical education, Rajnish Dube said integrated committees have been set up at district level to monitor situation.

In view of shortage of anesthetists and other experts, Khanna granted permission for hiring trained and experienced professionals from private nursing homes and hospitals, Dube added.


