Maharashtra: Commute at a standstill to curb Covid-19
2020-03-23
PUNE: Citizens of Pune and the rest of the state will not be able to travel by local or state transport buses, or trains easily to any place until March 31. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

All trains, including mail, express and local, have been suspended by the Central Railway till the month-end to contain the spread of coronavirus. 


 
The Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML) authorities on Sunday said only 10% of the PMPML buses, between 100 and 150, would ply from Monday till March 31. PMPML’s traffic manager Anant Waghmare said the buses would be only for government officials.

“The state government has clearly said citizens should remain indoors and work from home. Hence, the services of PMPML, during the said period, would only be for government employees who are bound to come to work and for authorities of the emergency services. The buses will not ply beyond the PMC and PCMC limits,” a PMPML official added. 

PMPML authorities said all pass centres would remain shut. “Night buses that ply from Pune station will stop as no trains are plying,” another official told TOI. 

All long-distance buses, including those from the Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation, and private ones, plying between cities in the state or outside the state, have been cancelled, the authorities said.

“All buses leaving from Pune to different cities in the state or plying to cities outside the state have been cancelled until March 31. Also, if at all any buses ply, it will be for emergencies which the district collector will decide,” Yamini Joshi, divisional controller of the MSRTC, Pune told TOI. 

Around 2,000 state transport buses ply each day from Pune to different places in the state and to other states like Goa. 

Prasanna Patwardhan, president of the bus and car operators confederation of India said no private buses from Pune will ply. He estimated the losses between Rs 35 and Rs 45 crore. 

“Our buses halted operations from Saturday. they will stay off the roads till March 31 as directed. There are around 800-900 private luxury and semi-luxury buses going from Pune to different districts and cities like Mumbai and Indore. We are looking at heavy losses running into crores of rupees,” Patwardhan, who is also an advisor at the Pune district luxury bus owners association, told TOI. 

Babasaheb Khadekar, the president of the association, said the losses are expected to touch Rs 4 to Rs 5 crore per bus. 

Officials at Pune rail division of the Central Railway told TOI that with all the trains cancelled they expect another wave of people at different stations, including Pune, coming to cancel their reserved tickets. 

“Those who have got tickets from the counters will get refunds. They must not panic and be assured that they will get their money back. A full refund of all cancelled train tickets can be availed till June 21,” Pune rail division’s public relations officer Manoj Jhawar told TOI. 

There was some worry despite these announcements. “My family of six was to travel to Kolkata by Duranto Express later this month. We cannot afford flight tickets. We don’t have any choice now,” a Baner citizen said. 

People travelling between Pune and Mumbai every day are particularly tense. “I work in a small company in Navi Mumbai and we are not working from home. I take the train every day. I cannot afford to go to Mumbai by cabs,” a middle-aged man told TOI. 

Dilip Datta, who has booked an ST ticket to Nashik said, “ ST officials must tell us about how we can get refunds.” 


