Complete lockdown in 10  Himachal Pradesh hotspots
2020-04-14
SHIMLA: To break the chain of coronavirus spread, complete lockdown has been imposed in 10 hotspots identified in Sirmour, Solan, Chamba and Una districts of Himachal Pradesh. Chief minister Jai Ram Thakur said no relaxation in curfew would be provided in hotspot areas and added that essential commodities must be provided there through home delivery system. He said plying of vehicles must also be banned in areas declared as hotspots and all public places therein sanitised. 

Additional chief secretary (health) R D Dhiman said hotspots have been identified in areas where positive cases were seen.

Three hostspots have been identified in Una district - area around Nakdod mosque in Gagret block, area around Kutheda Khairla in Amb block and area around Chowki Maniyar village in Bangana block. Sirmour hotspots include Misharwala and Lohgarh, Solan's are Jharmajri and Nalagarh Radyali, while in Chamba these include area around Saho panchayat, area around Galaid panchayat in Tissa sub-division and area around Deur panchayat in Salooni sub-division. 

 
Songs by folk artists 

To spread public awareness about coronavirus and teach the importance of washing hands, social distancing and wearing masks, many folk singers of the state have come up with songs on the issue.

Dev Jaspa from Lahaul-Spiti (a district which has not reported a single Covid-19 case so far) has composed a song 'Corona corona, China Wuhan aaya corona, desh videsh aaya corona, ghabrana mat ghabrana, gaj bhar duri rakhna, nahi hona tave corona' (Corona has come from China Wuhan and it has spread to different countries, one should not be afraid of it but should maintain one-metre distance). In this song, Jaspa uses Lahauli dialect to talk about the importance of washing hands and wearing masks.

In Kangra, Karnail Rana's lyrics go like this - Coronavirus ne asaan mil juli ladna jaroor, apna bachao karna, rakhna sabhi to dur' (we all will fight coronavirus together, will protect ourselves by social distancing). In the song, he also urges people not to shake hands and to maintain a 3-foot distance from others, washing hands with soap and wearing masks.

Another singer from Rampur, Raju Suman has composed a foot-tapping Naati song 'Bhaiyo corona dur bhagana, hatha dona sabane bhaiyo, munhe mask laana' (Brothers, we have to shoo away corona by washing hands with soaps and wearing masks).

Kullu's Thakur Dass Rathi has composed a song in Hindi, while another folk singer from the district, Digamber Thakur has composed 'China te aaya corona, ghar ghar sabhi rehna' (Corona has come from China and all should stay indoors).


