Compulsory evacuation when Panchaganga water touches 43 feet, temporary shelters to have quarantine-like facilities
2020-04-29
Kolhapur: With the coronavirus crisis likely to continue for some more time, the district disaster management machinery is working to ensure that people who may need to be evacuated during possible floods in June and August later this year can practice social distancing and have access to quarantine-like facilities.

District guardian minister Satej Patil has directed that all arrangements be made for the compulsory evacuation of people from flood-affected parts of the district the moment the Panchaganga water level touches 43 feet. The district authorities claim that when the water reaches the 43feet-mark, some villages in Karveer tehsil and parts of Kolhapur city are affected and more than one lakh people must then be evacuated. The officials said that though their efforts to curb the coronavirus-spread has paid off, the crisis is likely to continue for several more months.

Prasad Sankpal, the district disaster management officer, said, “We are planning to develop quarantine like facilities at temporary shelters set up during the floods. We will ensure that people maintain distance from each other at such shelters. We have to evacuate people from the villages in Karveer tehsil when the river water reaches 43 feet. Last year, the floodwater level rose beyond 50 feet, which led to the inundation of many villages, especially in the Shirol. All arrangements will be in place keeping in mind the coronavirus threat this year. It will be a dual challenge for us if the Covid-19 cases continue during monsoon.”

The district disaster management department is going to draft a detailed report to fight the dual challenge of coronavirus and flooding. Currently, the quarantine facilities in the district have a total capacity of around 900. This is likely to be maintained for now, but maybe increased to accommodate people evacuated during the floods.

Local agencies usually convert public buildings into shelters during floods. People are provided food, clothing and sanitation facilities at these shelters. In the city, areas such as Sutarwada get submerged when the water rises to 43 feet. People are then shifted to the nearby shelters identified by the Kolhapur Municipal Corporation.

The minister has asked the officials to ensure all the establishments in the flood-prone areas have rescue boats repaired and ready before the monsoon. Every residential society and the hospital located in these areas should have at least one boat each.

“We are going to start radio service dedicated to flood-related communication. The community radio services existing in rural parts will be bought to use,” added Sankpal.


