Complete lockdown in city after spike in Covid-19 cases
2020-04-07
Kanpur: After spike in number of coronavirus positive cases, which has reached to ten, the district administration, in an attempt to break the chain of the deadly virus, has imposed complete lockdown from Tuesday. Kanpur Nagar and its Ghatampur tehsil has been put under the total lock down.

The restriction which came into force from 11 am on Monday itself, will continue till further orders.

"There will be a total ban on venturing out of homes," said district magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari in his order released on late Sunday night.

Under the new measures, all non-essential businesses will remain closed but hospitals and other medical facilities will continue to function. The employees of various departments and institutions, who have been roped in to prevent spread of the deadly virus, besides the units producing essential commodities, will be allowed to move with their identity cards and passes issued by the district authorities.

All other institutions will, however, remain shut, and all public gatherings have been completely banned. Clinics, medicine shops, dairy and milk shops will remain open. Vehicles transporting food related items and essential commodities have been allowed to move. The grocery shopkeepers are allowed to do only doorstep delivery services. "Even supply of milk and bread would be done by provision store owners through home delivery," the DM said and added that wholesale vegetable markets at Naubasta Mandi and Chakkarpur Mandi will remain open.

The district authorities gave time to the residents of the city to make purchases on Monday itself so that they could not feel problem during the total lockdown. They had made it clear that the lockdown would remain in force in the city till next orders.

The DM stated in his order that since ten persons have been identified as corona positive, therefore, in order to break the chain of Covid-19 virus and to control its spread, a total lockdown was the only wayout.

Anyone found flouting the new orders may attract two years imprisonment and a heavy fine, he warned.


