Jaipur: Condition of Covid-19 positive Italian tourist improves
2020-03-06
JAIPUR: The condition of 69-year-old Italian tourist who tested positive for coronavirus (Covid-19) has improved, the Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital claimed on Thursday. 

He was admitted to SMS hospital on February 29 with difficulty in breathing and fever. He tested positive for Covid-19 on March 3. “His condition has improved but he is still on BiPAP machine. We are planning to remove it soon. He is responding well to the treatment,” said Dr D S Meena, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital. 

The doctors are providing him medicines, which are useful in treatment of malaria, swine flu and HIV, and some antibiotics. However, his wife, who has also been tested positive for Covid-19 is stable. “She is stable and is not on ventilator support. They are undergoing treatment in isolation hospital,” said Dr Meena.


 
A day after 18 Italian tourists reached Jaipur from Agra, who were asked to remain inside their hotel rooms, six more Italian tourists were quarantined at three different hotels in Jaipur on Thursday. The health department has asked them to get in touch with their embassy in Delhi over phone. So far, 24 Italian tourists are quarantined in four different hotels of Jaipur, besides the couple getting treated for Covid-19 at SMS Hospital. “They are staying in three different hotels. We have conducted their screening and quarantined them in their hotels,” said a health department official. 

Moreover, a German woman was admitted to SMS Hospital with fever, cold and cough on Thursday. Her screening test has been done and she has tested negative for Covid-19 in the first test. However, the hospital will conduct one more screening test as per the protocol before discharging her from the hospital. Apart from the German woman, four Italian tourists and one each from Japan and Hong Kong, are already under observation in isolation hospital at the SMS Hospital for the past two days. They were tested negative in first screening test. “We will conduct second screening test at the SMS Hospital before discharging them from the hospital,” said a senior hospital official. Moreover, two British nationals have been quarantined at Jodhpur, who were suffering from influenza-like illness. “While screening of foreign tourists for Covid-19, we found two British nationals staying at a hotel were suffering from influenza-like illness. We immediately admitted them to MDM Hospital. They have been kept in isolation and samples have been taken for conducting Covid-19 test,” said a senior health department official. They came to Jodhpur while travelling from Jaipur. 


