Condoms, contraceptives & pregnancy test kits top buying list during lockdown
2020-04-17
Chennai: The average Chennai guy forgot his hand wash while the one in Mumbai forgot to carry a pack of condoms. Women in Hyderabad were cautious and asked for the i-pill (contraceptive) and those in Bengaluru and Pune wanted their pregnancy test kits door delivered or Dunzoed. 

These were the key findings for March by delivery firm Dunzo based on its customer usage patterns. Thermometer and sanitary napkins were among the top orders placed and delivered from pharmacies in Delhi NCR. Clearly life under lockdown also requires an eye on the thermometer. 

“Though we do not offer home delivery service, we do not discourage customers who place orders and get it delivered through online delivery partners,” said a store manager of Apollo Pharmacy.

Hyderabadis showed their love for their Biryani as much as Chennai citizens rooted for their beloved Idlis. “Despite a drop in overall demand for home delivery orders, orders for Idlis is going up every day. Mostly elderly people directly call us and place their orders, which is mostly ‘Mini meals’ for lunch,” said a Chennai-based restaurant chain. 

Street food snacks like the Missal Pav was the top order in Pune, while the Dosa reigned in Mumbai and Bengaluru. Interestingly, despite being a Chaat hot spot, it was the Pizza that topped the list of food orders in Jaipur. At a time when online grocers failed to take or deliver orders even after receiving government approval, Kirana stores were the sole saviors as they allowed online delivery platforms to pick-up and drop-off of items or parcels for their customers.

Under the grocery category for home delivery, tomatoes were the most sought after vegetable in Bengaluru, Jaipur and Pune, while onions were the most in demand in Chennai, Delhi NCR, Mumbai and Hyderabad. As 33-year-old Hari Ganesh said, “Our street has been locked down by the Corporation officials for the last two weeks. So, I purchase groceries and vegetables without the need to step out of my house and get them delivered. We prefer to purchase from small Kirana stores, in this case there is no waiting period unlike the online retailers, who may even cancel our order later.”

Hungry children and dirty dishes ensured that Maggi and Scotch Brite ruled in the fast moving consumer goods category alongside dishwashers. 

All three topped the list of products ordered to be home delivered in all the major metro cities.


