Conduct sero-survey to track Covid spread: ICMR to states
2020-05-31
NEW DELHI: Looking to devise public health strategies to manage Covid-19 cases as the lockdown eases, the Indian Council of Medical (ICMR) has asked states to conduct sero-surveys — blood-based diagnostic tests — to measure the coronavirus exposure in varied sections of the population to track any wider spread of the disease for prevention and cure.


ICMR has said these tests could possibly be carried out in key populations that include vendors and owners as well as staff working in grocery shops, pharmacists, restaurant staff, employees of banks, posts, couriers and telecom offices and air travel staff. Also those staying in slums, old-age homes, orphanages, homeless shelters, hostels, prisons, drivers, bus conductors, staff in municipal bodies as also farmers visiting large markets, migrant workers, journalists, police personnel and health care workers could be tested.


Drawing a wide arc for the sero-survey, ICMR has said individuals in containment zones and patients with HIV, tuberculosis, Severe Acute Respiratory Illness, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disorder, those on dialysis and others will also be covered. “Sero-surveys help understand the proportion of population exposed to SARS-CoV-2 infection including asymptomatic individuals. Depending upon the level of sero-prevalence of infection, appropriate public health interventions can be planned and implemented for prevention and control of the disease. Periodic sero-surveys are useful to guide the policy makers,” the Council said in a letter to states.

The Council added that such surveys in high risk or vulnerable populations also help track those who have been infected in the past and have now recovered. To conduct the sero-survey, ICMR has developed an IgG ELISA test and recommended states to use the specific antibody test kit. To ensure adequate availability of the kits, ICMR has also shared the technology with several pharma companies without an exclusivity clause.

Highlighting that these kits are not useful for detecting acute infection, ICMR said IgG antibodies generally start appearing after two weeks of onset of infection and last for several months after the individual has recovered. Therefore, the IgG test is helpful only to indicate episode of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the past.

The states must decide the number and frequency of tests they would want to carry out depending on requirement and situation in that particular area. ICMR has stated that the indigenous kit it has developed has high sensitivity (ability to correctly identify actual positive cases) and specificity (ability to measure healthy people who do not have the antibodies against the virus).

