Covid-19 scare in Kolkata: Condominium on sanitisation overdrive to check virus spread
2020-03-19
KOLKATA: The apartment owners’ association of the residential complex off EM Bypass from where the city’s first Covid-19 positive was reported is preparing a list of residents who got in physical contact with any of the family members of the infected patient in the last three days and will ask them to get themselves tested and remain in home isolation thereafter.


The owners’ association has also requested each of the apartment owners to disclose if any of their family members will fly back to Kolkata or has returned from novel coronavirus-affected nations in the last two weeks. On the basis of the disclosure, it will make a separate list of residents at risk and will submit it to the state government.
 
 
“We have come across a few residents who had visited the patient’s home after he had returned from the UK. We have informed the state health department about them and are also asking the residents to get themselves tested and stay in home isolation for the next few weeks,” said the association secretary.

On the list of “residents at risk” based on their travel history, the secretary said: “We have learnt from the example that people are not following home isolation advisory and hence we have pleaded to all the apartment owners to disclose details of those who have returned from virus-affected nations in the last few weeks and if anyone is scheduled to come from abroad in the next few days. Once the list is ready, we will submit it to the state government,” said the secretary.

A meeting of the board of managers of the residents’ association was held at the complex at 11pm on Tuesday to decide on “emergency measures” that need to be taken. It was decided that all residents will avoid moving out of home as far as possible. Most have chosen to stay and work from home, barring even kids to go out and play in the greens or the club.

“None of us knew that we had lived with a corona-positive neighbour till that late. We were racking our brains to think who amongst us might have been in touch with the family. Soon, it looked like an impossibility because there are 565 flats and many of us share maids, nurses and caregivers,” said one of the residents.

The owners’ association on Tuesday started a clean-up drive from midnight itself. “As part of the process, we have been disinfecting the entire common area of the building, including staircase handles, lifts, lobby and its furniture and all other places. “Apart from that, we are also taking some immediate preventive measures, like mandatory handwash of everyone entering the complex, procurement of infrared thermometers for temperature check, keeping all doors and windows of lobby open so that people need not touch the doors. All social gatherings have been cancelled,” said another official, adding that they have even closed down the complex’s club and gymnasium till March 31. Also, public address systems are being employed to spread awareness about the do’s and don’t’s that residents are expected to follow.

Meanwhile, KMC has identified the domestic help who used to work at the infected patient’s home and got her admitted to Beliaghata ID Hospital for necessary tests. “The woman lives at a slum in the Panchasayar neighbourhood and we have sent her to the hospital for necessary tests. We have also started a clean-up and disinfection drive along with an awareness camp at the neighbourhood where the woman lived,” said Ananya Banerjee, the councillor of ward 109.

