Conduct rapid antibody tests for Covid-19 surveillance: HC to state
2020-05-03
Nagpur: Expressing disappointment over Maharashtra government’s reluctance to use rapid antibody test kits, the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court sternly directed it to at least conduct them for the surveillance purpose, since the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) has recognized their utility to contain spread of coronavirus.

“Their usage becomes all the more significant, considering that their results are said to be quick and hence of assistance to the government in deciding its strategy to deal with areas where there is rapid spread or apprehension of Covid-19 virus,” Justice Manish Pitale said.

In response to HC’s earlier directives, collector through additional government pleader (AGP) Deepak Thakre informed that the government received 71,000 rapid antibody test kits for distribution in the Covid-19 hotspots across the state and those could be best used for the surveillance purposes.

Quoting the letter by Pune-based Director of Health Services on April 20, AGP said it prohibited usage of rapid antibody test kits till further orders and hence, their allotment couldn’t be undertaken. Further referring to the ICMR’s letter of April 27, he said all states were directed not to conduct these tests.

However, assistant solicitor general of India (ASGI) Ulhas Aurangabadkar contended that ICMR’s letter didn’t indicate any policy decision on its part to do away with these tests. He pointed out that those could certainly be undertaken for the purposes of surveillance, although the best test for Covid-19 diagnosis continued to be the RT-PCR swab test.

“In view of the specific statement on ICMR’s behalf, this court is of the opinion that the government is not justified in refusing to distribute rapid antibody test kits and in not conducting them for surveillance. In view of the imminent danger of uncontrolled spread of coronavirus, surveillance could certainly be an important part of the strategy to control this pandemic,” justice Pitale said.

The directives came while hearing an intervention filed by Dr Anup Marar through counsel Tushar Mandlekar, who pointed out that rapid antibody test kits of only two Chinese firms were returned to them due to faulty results. He also submitted a list of companies providing these kits that included Indian ones.

“In view of ICMR’s letter, the government can certainly undertake rapid antibody tests using kits of companies, except two, as their products were found too unreliable. The government should file an affidavit regarding steps taken for undertaking these tests with reliable kits,” the judge said before adjourning the hearing till May 5.


