Coronavirus lockdown: Confusion over flight operations at Delhi airport
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: With Delhi government and the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) having issued contradictory statements about flight operations on Sunday, the flyers at the Indira Gandhi International Airport were a confused lot on Monday. 


Unsure about whether the Delhi airport was still operating domestic flights, most flyers ended up either calling the helpline numbers of the Delhi International Airport Limited or reaching out to airlines to know the status of their flight. For others, reaching the airport with no public transport on the road was an added challenge. 

Announcing the decision to issue a lockdown in the capital from Monday, Delhi government on Sunday said even domestic flights won’t be allowed to land at or take off from IGIA until March 31. DGCA then clarified that domestic flights would continue to operate on Monday.

A DIAL official said the DGCA instructions were clear, but “flyers got confused. People calling our helplines were directed to the airline concerned. We have also posted on social media and are responding to queries”.

An IndiGo spokesperson said the airline had been regularly reaching out to its passengers since Sunday via social media and through SMS. 

Many passengers took to Twitter too. “Is Delhi airport open for domestic flights? Today I want to come back from Dehradun,” tweeted Sanjeev Kumar. 

Several flyers expressed apprehensions about how to reach the airport amid the lockdown. Demanding a refund, Rahmat tweeted, “I am unable to reach IGI because of lockdown, I booked my ticket yesterday night. If there is no mode to travel to airport, then how you are open to book tickets, I should get my refund (sic).” 

An airport source said all domestic airlines operated normally but faced logistical difficulties. “With the lockdown in place and public transport shutting down, ferrying crew members became a challenge for many airlines. However, no flight was halted,” he said.


