Confusion prevails on first day of lockdown, police register 402 cases
2020-03-25
Thiruvananthapuram: Confusion over the term ‘essential goods’ prevailed widely on the first day of state-wide lockdown, with many trying to find loopholes and police trying to enforce the lockdown order. On day one, police registered 402 cases across the state for violations, with Thiruvananthapuram city leading the chart with 121 cases. As many as 47 cases were registered in Ernakulam city. 

In the capital and many other parts of the state, people came out citing purchase of essential goods, while several shops opened for customers including roadside tea shops, citing that they are selling essential goods like fruits and milk.

Though state police chief Loknath Behera came out with clarifications about the instructions laid out in the order, the ambiguity over which shop would be categorized as those selling essential goods and which are not, prevailed in many places. 

However, he clearly said that the use of autos and taxis will be limited only for procurement of essential goods. "There are several instructions laid out in the order including social distancing, opening of certain shops alone. There are several exceptions also. But use of taxis and auto for procuring essential goods or medical requirements alone can be permitted as said in the order," he said.

Behera said that police will issue passes for those who are working in the essential category, which will permit them to go to their respective work places. "For exempted category, we are issuing a pass which is not required for media persons and government servants. Objective is to reduce the possibility of transmission (of Covid-19)," he said. The passes will be issued by all the district police chiefs in their respective districts.The police have also introduced a condition that those using their own vehicles for going out will have to give a declaration. "We are issuing another order, using private vehicle, coming out of the house has to give a declaration that I am going out on such a specific purpose. We will verify it, and if it is found false, there will be action against them," he said.

Later in the day, the state police chief asked all the police officials across the state to come out in the public to strictly enforce the lockdown that has been declared by the state government. He also said that no public should come out in the public without any specific purpose, violating which strict action will be taken against them.


