Confusion over sample, woman with ‘precious’ pregnancy moved to Covid ward
2020-05-14
Nagpur: A woman with ‘precious’ pregnancy was shifted on Wednesday morning to GMCH Covid ward after some swabs collected during a special ante-natal check-up (ANC) camp at Mominpura tested positive.

The pregnant woman and her relatives claim that she was a case of mistaken identity, and the corona positive report shown to her was not recorded in her name.

NMC health officials admitted errors in entries of not just one woman, but a couple of others too at the ANC. Surprisingly, NMC officials said they picked up the woman on an assumption. “We know the sample belongs to her though the name has a mistake,” they said.

A relative said only the first name matches with the pregnant woman while the age and surname are different. “They are testing many persons. There must be hundreds of women with the same first name. She is 30 while the age in the report says 36 year old. The mobile number is also different,” the relative said, adding that officials were also able to reach the other mobile number.

The woman has had two miscarriages, and therefore had a tightened OS, the opening on the innermost side of the canal near the baby, for the third pregnancy. Because of this it is called a ‘precious’ pregnancy.

The Covid mix up put intense stress on the woman, who went into labour pains, forcing GMCH doctors to open the OS. The upheaval may pose a risk to the unborn child, say relatives. Also, the woman has now been exposed to the virus.

They said her swab was taken again after the goof up. “She spent a whole day inside the Covid ward with positive patients. How will we know if she was infected before or after admission,” the relative said. Her first test was done on May 11.

The woman’s husband and mother-in-law have been placed in institutional quarantine after the death of the city’s 2nd casualty at IGGMCH.

The relative said the woman had just entered the ninth month and there were still 20 days to go for estimated date of delivery. “She is alone. We just want her to be shifted to labour ward, since she has been visiting GMCH itself for regular check-ups,” the relative said.

The relative also said the botch up may cause separation of the mother and baby in case she tests positive.


