Confusion galore: How many Tablighis in the Delhi Tablighi list?
2020-04-03
Nagpur: The Nagpur-Chhattisgarh Markaz on Thursday countered Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s (NMC) claim that it had information about 54 Tablighi members who had participated in the controversial Delhi meet early in March.In a press note and a video, NMC chief Tukaram Munde had claimed to have got details of 54 people who had allegedly attended the Tablighi congregation from March 7 to 9.Incidentally, a list of 52 Tablighis camping in the city since February was handed over to Munde on Wednesday by the Markaz office-bearers.Markaz secretary Abdul Bari Patel said 44 Indians and eight Myanmar nationals (all Tablighis) arrived in different batches in Nagpur via Delhi between February 28 and March 7, when no travel restrictions were in place. “Tablighi Jamaat of eight more Indians arrived on March 17 from Jabalpur. Like this, there are 60 Tablighis, including 52 coming via Delhi. A batch belongs to Manipur, which came from the national capital. The Delhi arrivals seem to have confused them,” he said.NMC had a list of 68 while the one submitted by Markaz has 60. But, after scrutiny, NMC was left with 48 while six more had travelled with some of them. In the Markaz list, eight are not linked to Delhi. The close tally in the 50s, beside the name Tablighi led to the confusion.Another alleged blunder by the civic body was not taking the date of arrival into consideration. The meet took place from March 7, while the last Tablighi batch from Delhi arrived here the same day.In response to a TOI query, Munde and his staff clarified that not all 54 were Muslims, thus ruling out the Tablighi link. However, the NMC didn’t issue a public clarification for Munde’s video, though the NMC list itself doesn’t say do.TOI asked Mundhe if NMC has confirmed names or details of 54 people from Nagpur who allegedly visited the controversial congregation on March 7, 8 and 9. Munde said, “Not all 54 are Muslims. I am not saying that all 54 were at the meet. These include even those who may have come in contact with positive people (patients).”NMC officials said the list is of close contacts of people found Covid-19 positive in Delhi. “There is no duration when these people came in contact with positive patients. The list also doesn’t convey if all are high risk or low risk. Several lists are being prepared by the Delhi government. The Union home ministry sent the list to the state government, which gave us 68 names. Of these, 16 don’t belong to Nagpur and four are untraceable. When we went to pick up the rest 48, six more were found to have travelled with some of the people to Delhi. All have been quarantined,” they said.