MP: Congress targets Jyotiraditya Scindia over Covid-19 relief items
2020-05-11
BHOPAL: State Congress on Sunday came down heavily on former Union minister Jyotiraditya Scindia who in March had left the party and joined BJP with 22 former Congress MLAs as well as ministers. 


On Saturday, the state Congress first posted a video claiming that Scindia got his supporters to remove the tag of Reliance Foundation from the relief rations sent by the company and replaced it with tags which had his and Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s photographs on them. 

Along with the video, state Congress tweeted, “Chindi-chori (petty theft) of Reliance relief materials. Reliance Relief Fund sent materials and rations to Ashoknagar district. Scindia pasted his photo and became the fake donor.” 

The video claimed that the relief had come to Ashoknagar, which is part of Guna Lok Sabha constituency, which he lost for the first time in May 2019. It claimed that the huge pile of relief materials came to Ashoknagar last week and was kept in the municipal corporation office. Here, the tag of Reliance Foundation was removed and PM Modi and Scindia’s photographs pasted. 

Senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh tweeted, “Maharaj (Scindia is maharaja of the Gwalior royal family), your ancestors have left so much and you have so many private trusts through which you could have given relief during these critical times. How fair is it that you remove the tag of Reliance Foundation and replace it with the photos of PM Modi and you.” 

By Sunday afternoon, Digvijaya’s son and former minister in the Kamal Nath government, Jaivardhan Singh joined the fray against Scindia. He tweeted, “On this day, the torch of country’s first Independence struggle was lit from Meerut.” He was referring to the 1857 uprising against the British, which started from Meerut on May 10. 

“Had the ambition of a Maharaj not come in the way, then the immortal sacrifices of Mangal Pandey, Bahadur Shah Zafar, Rani Laxmibai, Tatya Tope and our freedom fighters would have written independence history in 1857 itself,” Jaivardhan tweeted, reminding that Rani Laxmibai had gone to the then Maharaja of Gwalior to join the uprising against the British but he declined. 

Replying to the Congress party’s allegations, Scindia spokesman Pankaj Chaturvedi tweeted, “Some persons today are questioning Scindiaji for helping and supporting people in these times of coronavirus crisis. The biggest question to these persons is, what did they do to help the people? The Scindia family has stood by the common man. It is surprising that even during an epidemic, people are doing petty politics.” 

