MP Congress alleges ‘atta scam’ in lockdown ration distribution
2020-04-20
BHOPAL: State Congress on Sunday alleged a scam in the distribution of ration to the poor during the Covid-19 lockdown period. Senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh wrote a letter to chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan and alleged that atta (whole wheat flour) packets being distributed to the poor are far short of the weight mentioned on the packets.


“When the entire society is helping the poor during these crucial times, government ration shops are stealing atta from the packets,” Digvijaya alleged.

Former LoP Ajay Singh also issued a statement on Sunday making the same allegations and claimed the scam is no less than Rs 60 crore. Ïn the first month of the BJP government, we have yet another scam,” Ajay Singh said. There are 70 lakh packets of flour that are being distributed. Each packet claims it contains 10 kg of flour. But, Congress issued photo evidence of how these packets contain much less than the claimed 10 kg of flour.

“The state is asking industrial houses to give financial assistance. And people are generously contributing seeing the crisis situation. But is the Chouhan government getting this financial aid to perpetuate a new scam?” Ajay Singh asked.

The matter came to the fore when Congress MLA from Gwalior South constituency Praveen Pathak was supervising the distribution of relief ration on Friday. When weighed, it was found that each packet had far less the amount of flour than what was claimed on the packets. 

“I went to supervise the distribution of rations in ten wards in Gwalior. We found that the wheat packets which were supposed to contain 10 kg of atta, either had 6 kg or 7kg or 8 kg,” Pathak said. “These packets meant for BPL card holders are being distributed through the PDS (public distribution system). Government is paying for full 10 kg of atta per packet. And when 70 lakh packets are being distributed, this is a huge scam,” he claimed.

 Pathak wrote a letter to Chouhan and informed about the issue to the leaders of his party. Digvijaya also wrote to Chouhan stating, “When food is being stolen from the poor even during these emergency times, this kind of corruption is inhuman, unethical and an example of sheer bad governance. I request you to find the culprits of this scam and register FIRs against them.” 

Digvijaya also asked Chouhan to take necessary steps and ensure that the right amount of ration reaches the needy across the state.

