Cong, MGP’s disqualification plea to resume after lockdown
2020-05-25
Panaji: The hearing in two different disqualification petitions filed by Congress and Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) against their former MLAs is likely to commence after the lockdown is lifted. Lockdown 4.0 will continue till end of this month.

A senior officer said that the last hearing could not take place due to the lockdown. The officer said that after the lockdown is lifted, speaker Rajesh Patnekar will take a decision on conducting the hearing based on the situation at the time.

In May 2019, senior MGP leader and former deputy chief minister Ramkrishna Dhavalikar filed a petition before the speaker of the Goa legislative assembly seeking disqualification of deputy chief minister Manohar Ajgaonkar and PWD minister Deepak Pauskar, who quit MGP to join BJP in March 2019.

 MGP challenged their claim that two-thirds of the MGP party has merged with BJP. MGP had three MLAs in the 40-member House, which has since reduced to one.

Dhavalikar had said that the 10th schedule of the Constitution does not postulate such a merger by which members of the legislature party would meet at midnight and claim that a merger has taken place even of the original political party.

In August 2019, Congress filed a disqualification petition against its 10 rebel MLAs who quit and joined the BJP in July 2019. State Congress president Girish Chodankar, who has filed the petition before speaker, had sought that the 10 MLAs be restrained from attending assembly proceedings and holding constitutional posts till the case is decided by the speaker.

On July 10, 2019, rebel Congress MLAs led by deputy chief minister Chandrakant Kavalekar joined the BJP claiming that the Congress legislature party had split. The remaining nine MLAs were Isidore Fernandes, Nilkanth Halarnkar, revenue minister Jennifer Monserrate, Antonio Fernandes, Francisco Silveira, Wilfred Dsa, Clafasio Dias, water resources minister Filipe Rodrigues and Antanasio Monserrate.

Congress wanted its 10 MLAs to be disqualified under Article 191 (2) para 2, and the tenth schedule of the Constitution. “In the present case there is no merger of the Indian National Congress. The party still exists and is duly recognised and consequently there cannot be claim of valid merger as contemplated under tenth schedule,” Chodankar had said.


