Madhya Pradesh: Congress, BJP spar over Covid-19 crisis
2020-04-19
BHOPAL: A Twitter war has erupted between Congress and BJP over coronavirus, with stalwarts of both parties blaming each other for the crisis.

CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan’s statement, holding the preceding Kamal Nath government responsible for the spread of Covid, triggered a barrage of tweets from Congress, accusing Chouhan of “mishandling” the crisis.

Chouhan retorted only once: “Aap bas rajneeti karein, mein bas kaam karta rahunga (You keep doing politics, I’ll keep working).”

On Wednesday, the CM had blamed “ill-preparedness” of the Kamal Nath government and its “delay” in taking action to contain the virus for the pandemic assuming alarming proportions in MP. In response, state Congress media in-charge Jitu Patwari tweeted a detailed account of steps taken by the Kamal Nath government to combat coronavirus. He pointed out that a meeting of principal secretaries was held on March 4 on the Covid-19 threat, several key events and meetings were cancelled, the Nath government ordered closure of schools, colleges, malls and cinemas halls and the assembly was adjourned on March 16 in view of the threat.

“Till that time, you were calling ‘Corona’ as ‘Darona’, and making rounds of Delhi, Bengaluru, and Bhopal. It is only after taking oath as CM that you felt concerned about coronavirus and held a meeting on the pandemic,” Patwari, a former minister, said.

The official handle of MP Congress joined the attack, tweeting: “If this man had suppressed his lust for power for some more time, there would not have been a single coronavirus death in MP.” 

The CM retorted: “You keep doing politics, I’ll keep working.”

Patwari retaliated by tweeting: “What you wanted to achieve through politics, you have. Now, please save people of the state.”

Former minister Sajjan Singh Verma, a close confidante of Kamal Nath, joined the battle, tweeting: “On a single day, there were 250 coronavirus patients in Indore. People can see what you are doing. There is no health minister, no minister in-charge of Indore, nor a minister for technical or medical force.”

“Aap Superman ki tarah, sab kaam karna chahte hain, yeh murkhta hai (You want to do everything as if you were Superman),” Verma added.

 Nath tweeted: “Whatever tall claims Shivraj ji may make on the coronavirus situation in MP, the truth is for everyone to see. Health services are in poor shape, people are not getting treatment and even seriously ill patients have to run from pillar to post to get treatment.”


