Gujarat: Congress MLA tests coronavirus positive hours after meeting CM & deputy CM
2020-04-15
GANDHINAGAR: Top political and administrative leadership of Gujarat leading the battle against Covid-19 in the state found the sword of the highly contagious virus hanging over their heads after a Congress MLA tested Covid positive hours after he met with CM Vijay Rupani, DyCM Nitin Patel and MoS, home, Pradipsinh Jadeja in Gandhinagar on Tuesday. 

 Government sources said the meeting involving three Congress MLAs lasted for over 30 minutes as the CM discussed the proposal of clamping curfew in these constituencies which are all Covid-19 hotspots. 

Pictures of the meeting in Gandhinagar triggered panic as the CM was not seen wearing a mask while the MLA's mask was seen hanging on his chin. 

Rupani, however, insisted there was no need to panic as social distancing norms were followed in the meeting. “The MLA was sitting about eight meters away from me. There is no need to panic as we have been taking all precautions. There is also no need to be quarantined,” said Rupani. 

Ashwani Kumar, secretary to CM, said that all meetings of the CM are expected to be held through video conferencing as per schedule. “However, final decision will be taken as per medical advise,” a release issued late on Tuesday night stated.

After this meeting, government announced to clamp down in the areas, all coronavirus hotspots, from April 15, 6 am to April 21, 6 am in a bid to arrest virus spread in Ahmedabad which has recorded 373 or 57% of the total 650 positive cases recorded till Tuesday evening. 


Death toll in state reaches 28

Of the total 78 new cases, 53 were detected in Ahmedabad. Two more deaths were recorded, taking the death toll to 28. Only women will be allowed to step out to buy essentials and medicines daily from 1 pm to 4 pm. 

The news of the Congress MLA testing Covid-19 positive unleashed tremors of apprehension across the political and bureaucratic class as the MLA, active in enforcing lockdown in minority areas along with fellow Congress leaders, is also reported to have met city police commissioner Ashish Bhatia and Ahmedabad municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra over the past few days.

The case, however, became the talking points in political and bureaucratic circles as the Congress MLAs kept attending high profile meetings and meeting people despite having given his sample for testing for coronavirus a few days ago. His colleague MLA Gyasuddin Shaikh said, “When we met the CM in the afternoon, his report was still awaited. He had given sample for testing a couple of days ago after running fever. I have no symptoms and hence have not opted to get tested. If required, I will get tested.”

Danilimda MLA Shailesh Parmar said while he travelled separately in a car while the MLA and Shaikh used the same car to travel to Gandhinagar. “We maintained social distancing norms in the meeting with the CM and Dy CM,” said Parmar.

As on Tuesday evening, Gujarat has carried out 15,984 tests out of which 650 were positive and 15,334 were negative. Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health), said that in past 24 hours Gujarat conducted 1733 tests out of which 78 were positive. “Testing has been extended to all the areas of the state including 13 districts from where no positive cases have been recorded so far,” she said.


