Congress MLAs screened, covid-19 test likely for other MLAs too
2020-03-16
BHOPAL: The 86 Congress MLAs who returned from Jaipur were screened at a Bhopal hotel for covid-19, said Bhopal chief medical and health officer (CMHO) Dr Sudhir Dheriya, here on Sunday. 


“Everyone returning from covid-19-affected places will have undergo medical check-ups and screening,” said Dheriya, a day ahead of a possible floor test in assembly. “All are in the clear and swab samples were not taken,” he said.

“We have to screen or test any person who has visited locations affected by the virus or come in contact with covid-19 infected persons. We have made necessary arrangements at Vidhan Sabha,” said Dr Dheriya. All those entering the state assembly would have to wear respiratory masks, use hand sanitizers and undergo body heat temperature screening,” he added. If anyone is suspected of contracting the virus, they may be quarantined at JP Hospital and health department training centre in Idgah Hills.

“We do not conduct random screening. The medical check-up (of Congress MLAs) was conducted after a phone call to covid-19 helpline,” he added. Rebel Congress MLAs, who visited Bengaluru, and BJP MLAs who travelled to Delhi are expected to be screened, too, by the MP health department. A complete report of the health condition of the elected representatives will be submitted to the government, he added.

Sources said that AIIMS-Bhopal covid-19 test lab has been instructed to follow protocol and conduct tests, if needed. Magisterial powers have been vested in CMHOs and civil surgeons under Madhya Pradesh Public Health Act, 1949.

MP health and finance minister, Tarun Bhanot said, “There are two national situations that are being dealt with by the Congress government. One is to combat spread of COVID-19 and another is saving democracy. Report from health experts on health of MLAs is awaited.” 

A March 5 letter to state governments/UT by health and family welfare ministry’s under-secretary Rajender Kumar says, “Experts around the world have advised to reduce mass gatherings to avoid spread of COVID-19. In the above view, is it advised that mass gatherings may be avoided or possibly be postponed till disease spread is contained.”


