Conjunctivitis could also be a symptom of Covid-19, say doctors
2020-04-28
BENGALURU: Cases of conjunctivitis or redness in the eyes are no longer being treated as mere eye infections. Such patients are now being taken to a separate triage and checked for travel history. Conjunctivitis can also be a symptom of Covid-19 infection, say doctors. 

Narayana Nethralaya has seen close to 200 cases of conjunctivitis in the last 40 days and all precautions have been taken to triage such patients to a different OPD and screen them further. “Covid-19 infection can enter the human body through the eyes too. We take the travel and contact history of those who come with conjunctivitis. Our staff treating such cases wear PPEs and take all precautions. So far, all the cases we have seen have responded to treatment and hence they aren’t Covid-19 positive. But the chances of positive cases in future cannot be ruled out,” says Dr Bhujang Shetty, chairman, Narayana Nethralaya. 

Dr Shetty says some of the first coronavirus cases reported in China were of eye infections in the form of conjunctivitis. “Dr Li Wenliang, the Covid-19 whistleblower from China, was an ophthalmologist. He succumbed to the infection and had treated such cases,” he points out.

At least one person who tested positive for Covid-19 in Karnataka had developed redness in the eyes as an initial symptom. The 32-year-old man from Bengaluru, who returned from the US on March 8, ignored it thinking it was due to lack of sleep. The man tested positive for Covid-19 on March 17. 

At Dr Agarwal’s Eye Hospital too, patients with conjunctivitis are being treated in a separate triage. Dr Sanjana Vatsa, consultant ophthalmologist, says ocular manifestation of Covid-19 is possible. “As per studies, there are patients who have Covid-19 and conjunctivitis. The reported statistics say that out of 30 patients, one or two will have the virus in their tear secretions as well,” says Dr Vatsa. 

Covid-19’s manifestation is still revealing itself, says Dr Deepak Kumar UG, nodal officer for Covid-19 ward, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases. “There are also manifestations on the skin (seen in Korea), where patients have had patches and rashes as the first symptom,” he adds. 

