Covid-19: Consultations on online platforms see 50% increase
2020-03-22
NEW DELHI: As more and more hospitals restrict visits for non-emergency services, the demand for online portals offering teleconsultation with doctors is on the rise.


Practo, Apollo Telehealth and other such platforms said that the queries on the platforms has gone up by 50%. Many corporate hospitals are also firming up their own teleconsultation and video-consultation services to cash in on the demand.

“Online consultation is witnessing an average increase of close to 20% week-on-week since March 1. Most of the queries are related to infection by the novel coronavirus,” Dr Alexander Kuruvilla, chief healthcare strategy officer of Practo — a start-up that offers tele-consultation, said.

According to Dr Kuruvilla, people are scared of visiting hospitals because they fear they might contract Covid-19 from other patients. “Virtual healthcare or tele-consult allows one to reduce exposure while receiving affordable care at the comfort of one’s home,” he said.

The metro cities from where most of the queries are coming from are Bangalore, Delhi-NCR, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Pune, and Chennai (in that order). In the Non-metro cities, Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, Bhubaneshwar, and Indore are posing the most questions, the Practo official said.

Vikram Thaploo, CEO, TeleHealth-Apollo Hospitals, said they have witnessed a 100% surge in patients’ queries from top tier cities over the past few days. “Our telehealth centres are screening patients and offering them consultation and advice through video links”, he said.

Fortis, Paras, Artemis and other corporate chains also said they were strengthening their tele-consultation services for patients who require consulting doctors for chronic conditions or post-surgery follow-up.

“The demand for video-consultation has shot up by 25-30% in the last four days as people are preferring not to come out of their homes and strictly following social distancing,” said Dr Sameer Kulkarni, facility director, Paras Hospital Gurugram. TOI had reported on March 13 how private hospitals were witnessed up to 40% drop in OPD and routine surgeries due to Covid-19.

A doctor at Sir Ganga Ram Hospital said people were hesitant to come to Delhi for planned surgeries or follow-ups as they had heard about the viral cases in the city. “Last month, too, many patients postponed routine surgeries and follow-ups due to the riots. Now people don’t want to travel due to the threat of infection by the novel coronavirus,” said Dr Amrendra Pathak, a senior urologist. “I used to see at least 50 patients daily. But it has dipped by nearly 40% over the past two-three days,” said another doctor. 

Vivek Srivastava, CEO of Healthcare at Home, said they have launched a helpline — +918047482373 — for coronavirus-related queries. “If the number goes up in coming days, we are prepared to provide home care to those recovering from the disease,” he said.

