Constable tests positive in Jaipur, 14 cops sent to quarantine
2020-04-11
JAIPUR: A constable posted at Manak Chowk police station in Walled City here tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday. He was suffering from fever and had symptoms similar to the virus that led him to give his samples. He was engaged with a medical team conducting door-to-door survey in Ramganj area where at least 100 people have been infected. This is probably the first case in the state in which a policeman on duty has been infected. 


Police said the constable was staying at the barracks and complained of fever a couple of days ago. “Since he had other symptoms, he gave his samples for the testing,” said a senior officer of Jaipur police commissionerate. 

Soon after, 14 other policemen posted at Manak Chowk police station who were in close contact with the affected cop were sent to quarantine. 

“Manak Chowk police station and its barracks have also been disinfected. Our men have been asked to be extra careful while performing their duties in the affected areas,” said police commissioner Anand Srivastav, who was camping at Ramganj police station area to ensure smooth screening of residents of the area.

Panic prevailed among policemen on duty in the curfew-hit area after the news of their fellow policeman getting infected broke. In order to boost the morale of policemen, the senior police officers of Jaipur police commissionerate on duty, including the commissioner, additional commissioner of police (law and order) Ajay Pal Lamba and other officers held one-to-one talks with the policemen on duty at the seven curfew-affected areas in Walled City. “I would like to repeat my appeal to Jaipurites to stay at home,” said Lamba. 

Manak Chowk SHO Jitendra Singh Rathore said policemen on duty with medical staff engaged in screening, are provided 3-layered masks, shield cap and gloves along with sanitisers. 

“We have got the police station disinfected and our men have been told to be extra careful and cautious while performing their duties,” he added. 


