Constant vigilance helps Haveri district stay clear of pandemic
2020-04-26
HAVERI: North Karnataka, after an initial lull, witnessed a veritable torrent of Covid-19 cases and the authorities have had to scramble to contain the spread of the infection in their respective jurisdiction owing to the inter-connectivity between the many districts in the region. However, a few districts in the region have successfully withheld the intrusion of the novel coronavirus, and Haveri is one of them. 

Neighbouring Dharwad district has recorded nine cases, and the officials there have not had an easy task in enforcing the lockdown and sealing off containment areas. However, Haveri, which was a part of undivided Dakshina Kannada district not many years ago, has, owing to the concerted and coordinated efforts of the various departments in the district administration successfully remained in the green zone. 

Among the reasons Haveri successfully warded off the infection was the decision to seal all bylanes and interior roads that connected Haveri with other districts. This move, coupled with rigorous examination at checkposts has helped the district administration keep a close check on those entering and leaving Haveri. 

Residents of Haveri are understandably pleased with the efforts of deputy commissioner Krishna Bajpai and superintendent of police KG Devaraj, and have expressed their appreciation on various social media portals. 

As many as 13 checkposts have been set up at various points across Haveri, primarily to prohibit inter-district movement of vehicles. These checkposts are manned round-the-clock with personnel working in long and tiring shifts. 

Bajpai said, in addition to keeping a close watch on inter-district vehicular movement, police personnel have cracked down on those moving within Haveri without a valid reason. “We have been raising awareness about social distancing among the people, and educating them about the safety measures they need to adopt to ensure they do not contract the infection,” Bajpai said. 

The DC said that the district administration had made all the arrangements to deliver essential commodities to the residents’ homes, not just in the towns but in the rural areas as well. “We will continue to remain vigilant to retain the Covid-19 free tag for the district,” Bajpai added. 


