Contract employees refuse to work at Covid Hospital fearing infection
2020-04-11
Milton.lawrence@timesgroup.com/TNN 

Mysuru: District administration leading the fight against Covid-19 in the district are facing an uphill struggle pooling in staffers especially paramedics and group ‘D’ employees in the battle against the pandemic.

According to the authorities, nearly 50% of the staffers, a majority of them group ‘D’ employees — providing sanitation, nursing, security, para medical, and patient care services — are contract employees and have expressed unwillingness to continue with their work in the wake of rising number of Covid-19 cases in the district fearing infection. 

Recently, several employees engaged in cleaning and sanitation at the Mysuru Medical College and Research Institute (MMCRI), when directed to work at the Covid Hospital on KRS Road, threatened to quit their jobs. 

Admitting the challenges, MMCRI dean and director CP Nanjaraj said: “Some of our group ‘D’ employees have expressed unwillingness to work at the Covid Hospital, but we have been deputing staffers regularly as it’s a medical emergency. We are ensuring that our staffers extend all assistance to the health department.”

“Of the total 240 group ‘D’ employees at the KR Hospital, nearly 90% are on contract or outsourced. Many of them do not have vehicles to commute to work in the absence of public transport, while others fear contracting infection if they continue to work here,” disclosed an official.

“Health department officials are trying their best by deputing staffers on payroll. As of now we’re managing with what we have, but we are not sure about the situation in future,” an officer explained.

Speaking to TOI, district health officer Dr Venkatesh said, “All workers of health department — whether on contract or on payroll — have to work at assigned place. Besides, they cannot refuse to work during an emergency like this. Though we have several workers on contract here, we haven’t encountered any difficulty so far. But, we have to remain cautious with rising number of positive cases in the district.” 

Currently, 41 patients undergoing treatment for coronavirus infection at the 250-bed Covid Hospital.


