Containment or not, virus hotbeds continue to be under scanner
2020-04-29
Hyderabad: Despite the number of containment zones coming down from 131 to 112 in Hyderabad police commissionerate limits and from 42 to 19 in Cyberabad and Rachakonda, police are maintaining strict security at these places, preventing potential suspects from meeting others, so that Covid-19 cases will not increase. Even at places where containment has been lifted, police are ensuring primary contacts remain under home quarantine and pickets put in place to prevent gathering of people. 

To prevent the spread of Covid-19 cases, the authorities had started cordoning off Covid patient’s house or his/her frequent places of visit. If more than one positive case is from a specific locality, the entire lane is being cordoned off, naming them as containment zones. No inward or outward movement of people is allowed at containment zones. Even movement of people within the zone is prohibited. Authorities have been delivering groceries and vegetables at the doorstep of people in containment zones. But the number of containment zones in the city have come down during the past few days. 

“At one point, there were over 130 containment zones in the city. In the last three days, the number of red zones has come down and currently we have 112 containment zones in the city,” Hyderabad police commissioner Anjani Kumar said. Majority of the containment zones in the city were in west and south zones.

In south zone, the containment zones have come down from 54 to 45, while in west they have come down from 48 to 40. In central zone, the containment zones came down from 24 to 14. Most containment zones in south and west zones were at Kanchanbagh, Charminar, Asif Nagar and Goshamahal divisions. “We have been removing barricading at the containment zones after getting clearance from health and municipal authorities after the mandatory period (now 28 days) after a positive case is detected,” a Hyderabad inspector said. 

Cyberabad and Rachakonda commissioners VC Sajjanar and Mahesh Bhagwat also said the number of containment zones have come down. In Cyberabad, the number of containment areas have come down from 42 to 19, while in Rachakonda the current containment zones were just 15 from the earlier 20-odd. “Even after containment is over, we are keeping a watch on the areas to prevent mob gathering. We along with health, revenue and municipal authorities also check those who are under home quarantine,” Cyberabad commissioner Sajjanar said.


