Containment-zone spike to control Amphan impact on virus spread
2020-05-26
Kolkata: The city’s containment list now has 286 zones, 19 more than the earlier list. However, the Kolkata list, unlike that of Salt Lake, is not graded along the green, orange and red zones. Mapping Kolkata into orange and green zones has been delayed as the Kolkata Police is focused on mitigating the impact of Cyclone Amphan, sources said.

“The containment zone list has been prepared according to case prevalence in specific localities. This will be extended based on the orange, or buffer, zones and the green, or clean, zones,” a senior official said. 

On Monday, Firhad Hakim, chairman of the board of administrators (BOA) governing the KMC, said, “We are conducting as many as 10,000 Covid-19 tests every day. While Burrabazar has registered a decline in Covid-19 positive cases, the deadly virus is spreading in some other areas. We are bringing those areas under micro-planning zones.”

According to an earlier state notification, Kolkata has allowed shops and retailers to resume business in green zones from May 21. From May 27, more exemptions will be in place, including for autos and hawkers. These, according to plans, will be allowed in orange and green zones.

“Several new places in south Kolkata now figure on the containment map. These include Alipore Road, Sunny Park, Lake View Road and Kasba. There are 43 KMC wards which have two containment zones,” a source said.

Health experts feel the worst impact of Amphan on Covid-19 containment measures in the city is yet to come. The surge in number of infected people is expected to spike rapidly in about a week or two. “The impact of the cyclone on essentials, like food, electricity and water, has taken the upper hand over the fear of Covid-19 — even in people who were otherwise quite conscious of the preventive measures. We will start feeling the impact of this violation of social-distancing norms in the next two weeks,” said paediatric intensivist Prabhas Prasun Giri of Institute of Child Health.

Doctors said that incubation period of the virus ranges from 1-14 days, with a median estimate of five to six days. Sources at the health department said they were expecting samples from suspected patients to rise abruptly in the next few days. “We were already aiming to ramp up the number of tests to 10,000 a day. Now, in the aftermath of this cyclone, we may need to increase it further. We are preparing to press all laboratories to full capacity,” said a health department official.

Of the 33 functional laboratories for Covid testing, 18 are in Kolkata. A few more laboratories are expected to get permission in the next few days. 

(With inputs from Saikat Ray)


