Contracting Covid-19 not end of the world: Survivor
2020-04-04
BHUBANESWAR: The second coronavirus patient of Odisha, who had tested positive for the virus after returning from the UK, was discharged from AIIMS Bhubaneswar on Wednesday night. 

Once out of hospital, he appealed to people to not panic and stay calm to beat the life-threatening respiratory disorder. 

The 19-year-old is the first cured patient among the six who tested positive for coronavirus in the state. Sharing his ordeal with TOI, he said people need to be optimistic and have faith in the doctors and healthcare workers. Contracting Covid-19 is not the end of the world, he said. 

A first-year student of bachelor in mathematics and computer science at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, this young man left the UK on March 16 and arrived in Bhubaneswar on March 18. “My father had asked me to self-isolate myself in our house and not touch anybody over phone. When I reached home, I confined myself to a room and did not meet any of my family members. After I started showing symptoms like mild fever and cold, my father took me to AIIMS Bhubaneswar,” he recalled. 

The hospital authorities put him in the isolation ward immediately. They took his throat swab for test. In the evening, the authorities told him that his sample had tested positive for Covid-19. “I could not believe the test result initially because I had shown mild symptoms, but that was the truth and I had to deal with it. To be honest, I was not scared. I was sure of being cured of it soon,” he smiled. 

He experienced mild fever, headache, body aches and a little bit of cough for five days. “I could not even pick up my phone owing to the acute body ache. Fever and headache gave me sleepless nights. The receptors of my taste bud were not working and I could not tell one food from another as I lost the sense of smell. But the problems started decreasing from the sixth day onwards. The fever was gone and so was the excruciating body pain. I slept most of the time during the period of treatment,” he added. 

The survivor said he started feeling well after the tenth day. “There was no fever, headache, body pain and cough on the 11th day. I am fortunate enough that I did not get respiratory problems since Day 1. But the symptoms vary from person to person. On the 13th and 14 day, the hospital authorities took two of my samples for testing. After my samples tested negative the second time, I was discharged from the hospital,” he added. 

While undergoing treatment, he was reading online materials of his university and working on his homework for at least one hour a day. “I watched 20 movies on my mobile phone during this time. I love classics and American film director Stanley Kubrick is my favourite. I loved his ‘2001: A Space Odyssey’. I also listened to a lot of music to keep myself relaxed in this difficult time,” he added. 

He said the most important thing for a Covid-19 patient is balanced diet. It will help energise the body and fight the virus. “People should not stop eating because they can’t feel its taste. Another important thing is drinking sufficient water during period of treatment to keep yourself hydrated. A positive mindset, good sleep, proper treatment and proper food will help you beat the virus,” he added. 

He also expressed his gratitude to the health workers and doctors of AIIMS Bhubaneswar. “I am grateful to the doctors and health workers of the hospital. The professionalism of these frontline health workers is commendable. I must also praise the government for taking steps to contain the contagious disease. I remember people were partying and roaming in the UK when they witnessed 2,000 positive cases, but our government locked down the country before the cases touched 1000,” he added. 

He wondered if his roommates back in the hostel are infected. “I think I got infected while travelling in air,” he said, adding, “I request everybody that stop victimizing any coronavirus positive patient. Please support him and pray for him to recover,” he added. 

He is still in isolation after being discharged from the hospital. “I will stay in quarantine for a few more days,” he added. 


