Bhopal: Contactless home delivery of food is the new normal in Covid season
2020-06-02
BHOPAL: As the restaurants, cafes and bakeries of the city start reopening, one after the other, the delivery partners of restaurants as well as the chefs in the kitchens have been given special guidelines to follow while preparing and delivering food to the customers in the safest possible way to prevent the spread of coronavirus. Contactless food delivery options are also becoming popular.




Restaurants of the city are now taking extra care to clean the vegetables, meat and dairy products before use and giving special attention to hygiene while preparing the food. "District administration has given specific guidelines for restaurants, bakeries and cafes for preparation and handling of food. From cleaning vegetables with vegetable wash, keeping fish and meat in lukewarm water and thermal checks of all the chefs, we have instructed all the restaurants to adhere to the guidelines, as even one negative experience can shut down the entire business. Restaurant owners are also taking all the possible measures," said Tejkul Pal Singh, president of the federation of restaurants and hotel association of Bhopal. 

General manager of a restaurant said, “We have implemented strict guidelines We conduct a temperature check of the delivery men before accepting delivery.”

"We had realised that new normal scenario will have stricter guidelines so, all our chefs have been staying on the hotel premises for the past two months, without coming in contact with even one person from outside the hotel. Even then we keep monitoring their health and check their temperature every few hours. They have all been given masks, caps and gloves that they have to wear while preparing the food," he added. 

Hussain, outlet manager at Bake n Shake, a restaurant cum bakery said, "We have installed a sanitization station outside the bakery and everyone from customers to chefs, managers and delivery boys have to sanitise their hands and feet before stepping inside the bakery. While we are cleaning the vegetables with veggie-wash , we put meat and fish in lukewarm water to kill the germs. All the surfaces and food parcels are also sanitised with surface sanitisers.”

The food security department conducted a thermal check of around 2000 delivery men of the city a few days ago, providing them with online training for the guidelines they need to follow while picking up and dropping the food parcles. Chief Food Security Officer D K Verma said, “We are conducting the thermal checks and supervising the management of the delivery partners at their outlets. We also asked all the delivery boys to download Arogya Setu application so that we can monitor their health closely. The restaurants as well as the delivery partners are also keeping a record of all the customers the delivery men served, so that it is easy to track and quarantine them if the need arises.”

Amit Rajani, area sales manager of Swiggy said, "All our delivery men have been given mask, gloves and hand-sanitisers that they have to mandatorily use every time they make a fresh delivery. We have also asked them to ensure social distancing at the restaurant waiting area and make contactless delivery possible."

A spokesperson of Zomato, Bhopal said, "We are encouraging more and more cashless transitions as well as contactless deliveries. While delivering the parcel, the delivery person also keeps the packet outside the doorstep of the customer and the customer receives the message on the phone that the food has been delivered. This is one of the safest ways of delivering food.”


