Containing virus spread in villages after migrants return big task: Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot
2020-05-13
JAIPUR: Preventing the spread of coronavirus in rural areas following the return of lakhs of migrants will be the next big challenge for the state government, chief minister Ashok Gehlot said on Tuesday.

During an interaction with MLAs and MPs of Jaipur and Ajmer divisions through a video link, Gehlot said nearly 19 lakh migrants have registered to return home. 

Calling on the lawmakers to make sure migrants are welcomed, he said they would have to be quarantined after their return to ensure the virus does not spread to villages.

Gehlot urged MLAs to help the local administration in arranging quarantine facilities for the labourers besides providing some sort of employment, which will be the next big challenge, he added.

The chief minister said it was also time to focus on livelihood. He said in some states even paying salary of employees had become difficult. He said Rajasthan was comparatively better as it had not yet availed overdraft facilities. 

The MLAs raised the issue of drinking water scarcity and farmers facing difficulties in transporting vegetables and milk. The mandi tax subject was also raised. Some MLAs demanded waiver of power and water bills which has been deferred. They stressed that the economic activities must be revived so that the government gets revenue and the people get income. 

Jaipur MP Ramcharan Bohra raised the issue of inconvenience caused to workers as the ESI hospital at Sodala has been converted in to a quarantine centre. He said because of that, ESI beneficiaries were finding difficult to avail OPD facility. The chief minister said the quarantine centre is being shifted from the ESI hospital. 

Opposition leader Gulab Chand Kataria said because of the 2% mandi cess, the farmers in the Udaipur region are shifting towards Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh to sell their produce which threatens the survival of grain mandis there. 

Congress chief whip Mahesh Joshi suggested distribution of fortified atta and oil to people to take care of their nutritional requirement while at the same time calling for amending the municipal law to restrict the number of people to be given on rent. He said in some places 100 to 150 people were living in a rented accommodation making it difficult at the time of pandemics.

Rajsamand MP Diya Kumari demanded permission for marble transportation should be given immediately to the local businessmen in the district. 


