Containment on as virus strikes in north Nagpur
2020-03-29
Nagpur: The 10th Covid-19 positive patient, who resides in north Nagpur, had been to his workplace in south-west Nagpur for just three hours when he is believed to have contracted the virus from his employer, who had returned from Delhi on March 18 in Telangana Express.

The infection was already passed on from the 43-year-old employer, who runs a footwear business, to his wife, mother, son and manager. This was confirmed on Friday. The 10th patient, in his 30s, was working as a helper in his shop and would travel on a two-wheeler to work. The manager’s daughter too has tested positive, making her cities’ 11th Covid-19 patient. 

On Saturday morning, NMC containment team and health department officials rushed to north Nagpur and identified five family members and nine neighbours of the 10th patient. They were taken to Mayo hospital for testing. 

The family members include his elderly father, the patient’s wife, and two daughters. The patient’s elder brother, who suffered a paralysis attack two days ago, is admitted at GMCH and his swab would be sent to lab from there.

The elder brother lives on the upper floor of the ground+1 house located in a busy area having a flour mill right opposite their home, a bustling kirana shop next door and general store nearby. The area is socially and commercially active and therefore many people came in contact with the affected family.

A neighbour, who lives at a gap of four houses, told TOI he is scared now. “After the lockdown, we were not mingling but the elder brother suffered a stroke. Since there was no help available , we rushed to his home to help,” he said.

As the helper turned out to be positive for Covid-19, the test on these 14 are keenly followed by the neighbours, who wanted themselves to be tested on Saturday itself.

The neighbour said, “He (the 10th patient) was reluctant to go but his employer insisted he come for just three hours. That brought the virus here.” 

After shifting the suspects to Mayo hospital, NMC containment team sealed the lanes on all sides of the 10th patient’s house. 

“On Sunday, we will survey all homes in 3km radius. Additional people will be needed. The teams will work in layers of 1km each. In first layer of 1km, our teams each having 2 officials will go. They will check travel history, contact with positive patient, and complaints of fever, cough or cold. If needed, people will be quarantined,” an official said. 


