Coimbatore: Contests go virtual to keep children, youth engaged during lockdown
2020-04-30
COIMBATORE: Packed schedule of classes, exams and extracurricular activities and weekends of visiting friends, sports and watching movies consisted the lives of children and youths before the lockdown kicked in. They are the most affected by boredom by staying within their homes. 


To beat the blues, several organizations and government bodies have started conducting a series of virtual competitions, including book reviewing, painting, solo dance, shadow boxing and silambam, to keep them engaged during the lockdown period.

The revenue administration of Pollachi is organizing a series of competitions tilted ‘Colours of Pollachi’ with a tagline ‘house to home’. Participants, especially school and college students, are asked to submit their entries in various categories like painting, poetry writing, house decoration, waste to wealth and book review through online mode before May 2. 

“The motive of organizing these competitions is to raise their morale and help them cope with the lockdown. The competitions might also bring out hidden talent of participants,” said R Vaithinathan, sub-collector of Pollachi.

Pointing out that several youths are continuing to step out of their home unnecessarily, the sub-collector said the move will help them concentrate and keep them occupied in their houses. Winners of the competitions would be honoured post lockdown, he added.

Similarly, the Tamil Nadu All Rural Games Organization (TARGO), a private sports association, has asked practitioners of silambam, dance and shadow boxing to submit a video showcasing their performance through their trainers or parents. 

K Sivagnanam of the organisation said such competitions will help practitioners to hone their skill. “During summer holidays, several competitions would be conducted and a lot of students would participate in them. This year, we had received requests from the public asking us to conduct the competitions to keep the spirit of the participants up,” Sivagnanam said, adding as of now, we had received over 500 entries for silamabam and the number is expected to go up to 700.


