Cooking up a storm: Lockdown turns Lucknow housewives into food bloggers, culinary pros
2020-06-15
LUCKNOW: The lockdown spurred Rimmi Arora, 49, a homemaker to turn her passion for cooking into a profession. Of course, her daughters were an inspiration.

“I was happy being homemaker and preparing special dishes for my family, but when my daughters motivated me to think big about the culinary world, I began dreaming of becoming a professional,” said Rimmi, who loved cooking since teenage years and received appreciation from family and friends, particularly for her Banoffee Pie. During special family occasions, she would churn out favourite dishes of each family member.

Rimmi’s daughters coaxed her to share her skills on social media during the lockdown and — My Flavour Table by Rimmi Arora — began trending on Instagram.

Rimmi began preparing easy-to-make food for beginners and started sharing her recipes — from healthy menu to lip-smacking sweet dishes. “I am learning the art of food blogging. Now, she’s planning to start her own restaurant or eatery in the city,” she said.

Once a techie, Geeta Bhargava, 49, started her Instagram page — Gateway to Treats — a year ago, but her followers soared during the lockdown. And she began receiving orders while giving wings to her passion for baking.

Initially, she only made cakes and cookies with minimum artificial colour. Now, with her fare selling like hotcakes, Geeta graduated to special bakery with a dash of Indian flavour like Rasmalai Cake and Biryani-themed cake. Her page is replete with cake designs, orders, and reviews from customers.

“I worked as a software engineer, but, after marriage and kids, I took a break in 1996. In 2019, I participated in local cooking competitions and won prizes. The same year, I auditioned for a reality show, Masterchef India, but couldn’t clear the second round. However, it boosted my morale and I began making cakes at home. The lockdown gave me ample time to experiment and reach out to people through social media. Soon, her phone was abuzz with calls for delivery of cakes for birthdays, anniversaries, Mother’s Day. With an extra push from family, Geeta began home delivering her fare. “The overwhelming response energised me to pursue the profession seriously,” she said.


Food for jobYoung entrepreneurs in the city too are busy dabbling in cuisine. Parul Gaur, 24, is a home-baker who plans to open a cafe in the city. She handles 8-10 orders a day. “Due to the pandemic, people are reluctant to visit eateries, but they do trust home-made stuff as it is fresh, safe and hygienic. I even baked a doctor-themed cake,” said Gaur.

