Mohali: Cop posted at DSP Kharar office tests coronavirus positive
2020-06-07
MOHALI: A policeman posted at the DSP Kharar office tested positive for novel coronavirus on Saturday.

Mohali civil surgeon Dr Manjit Singh said samples of the 20-year-old constable were taken as he was to proceed for police training. It is mandatory to conduct a Covid test on cops going for training. The Kurali resident was to go for a basic training course at Police Recruits Training Centre, Jahan Khelan, near Hoshiarpur.

The civil surgeon said, “We have shifted him to an isolation ward in Gian Sagar Hospital, Banur. Now, we are tracing his contacts and the source of infection. We will be testing all the officials posted at DSP Kharar office and the family members of the constable.”

Senior superintendent of police (SSP) Kuldeep Singh Chahal said, “I have just now been told that one of our constables has tested positive for Covid-19. We will be directing DSP Kharar to get all his staff tested for the virus and cooperate with the health department.”

The total positive cases have risen to 128, with 17 active cases.

On Friday, three members of a single family residing in Sector 70 out of four people had tested positive for Covid-19.

The civil surgeon said, “We have traced 13 contacts of the Sector 70 residents and took samples on Saturday. We will get their reports within two days. More contacts are being traced. All patients have been shifted to Gian Sagar Hospital. All of them are responding well to the treatment and are stable.”

As many as 6,050 samples have been taken in the district so far.

Deputy Commissioner Girish Dayalan said a Covid-19 patient was cured and discharged from Gian Sagar Hospital on Saturday. He belongs to Zirakpur and had returned from Oman.

The civil surgeon said they had cautioned when last Covid-19 patient was discharged from Mohali on May 21 that the threat of coronavirus was still there. After four days of being declared Covid-19 district, a patient had surfaced in Mohali on May 26.

With 108 out of a total 128 people recovering and three deaths, Mohali has a recovery and fatality rate of 83.5% and 2.34%.

BOX

MOHALI COUNT

Total | 128

Active | 17

Cured | 108

Deaths | 3


