Bihar: Cop-turned-poet wows all with piece on Covid-19
2020-05-17
PATNA: On the field he is considered a tough task master. Off duty, he is a literary writer.

Meet Rajesh Kumar, a 2003 batch IPS officer, whose poem on Covid-19 pandemic is doing the rounds on social media these days. Posted as DIG of Begusarai range, Kumar turned so emotional after going through the sufferings of people that he penned a poem recently.

The lyrics of the poem goes like this, ‘Corona bhi na jane kya karne laga hai, aadmi ab aadmi se darne laga hai. Shahar hain viran se, gaon hain sunsan se, har taraf na jane kyun marghaton sa maun hai, jeevan kitna bemani sa lagne laga hai, aadmi ab aadmi se darne laga hai’.

Kumar got inspiration to pen his poem during the first phase of lockdown announced by PM Narendra Modi on March 24. “Since Begusarai figured on the list of Covid-19 affected districts in the initial days of the pandemic, I had to visit places where people were kept in quarantine. I came across several such people whose lives became a source of inspiration for me as a writer,” he said.

The poem also deals with significant changes in the nature during the lockdown. Describing the changes, the poet says, “Par panchhiyon ki kalrav kyo sunne lagi hai, hawa kyon mastani si dikhne lagi hai, nadiyan ab kuchh khulke kyon bahne lagi hai, kuchh achha bhi anjaane hi hone laga hai, kyon aadmi se aadmi darne laga hai.”

Through his poem, Kumar has also tried to create awareness among people about the far-reaching consequences of the pandemic. Referring to the dangers posed to the humanity by the deadly virus, the poet says, “Wajood ab khatre mein hai aaj hamara, jeevan ko bachana hi hai uddeshya hamara, ab saath milkar aao corona ko hara den.” 

The poet says the people have to maintain social distancing and self-discipline to defeat the virus.

A native of Haryana, Kumar has a penchant for writing poems since childhood. “I have been reading and writing poems since my childhood,” he said.

This is not the first time that 1976-born IPS officer has composed a poem. Last year, CM Nitish Kumar had released his collection of 62 poems titled ‘Jee Le Zara’.


