Cop who tested +ve for virus had a free run for three days
2020-06-03
Coimbatore: The public health department has traced around 150 primary contacts of the cop on probation who tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday evening.While 50 people have already been tested, health officials are planning to screen another 50% of her contacts soon. The contacts have been asked to remain in quarantine for a week.The probation officer, who reached the city on Wednesday (May 27), joined the duty at the district collectorate on Thursday. She then moved freely around the district, visiting a public-sector bank at Saravanampatti and her probation office branch in Pollachi, for three days till Sunday.Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said, “The cop, who is jovial and talkative, has mingled with around 40 people in the collectorate, including 25 people in the first floor where she worked and 15 people in the second floor. We have ordered to close all the offices in the first floor for disinfection.” However, when TOI visited the collectorate, there wasn’t any sign to indicate that the first floor was closed. The official said they were still testing a few people in the prisoners’ quarters, where the probation officer lives with her family. “There are 17 families. We have tested 50 people so far and asked others to volunteer for Covid-19 test,” the officer said.Another health officer said the cop had met five people in Pollachi and 14 others at the bank at Saravanampatti. “We have asked the bank manager and others to remain in quarantine for a week and not even interact with their family members. We may also test the manager and a few of others.”Meanwhile, the five New Delhi returnees, who tested positive for the virus, were found to be from Mangalpuri area. On Friday, three transgenders, also returnees from New Delhi, from the locality tested positive for the virus. The five-member family was part of a group of 18, who had driven down from New Delhi, for a marriage function. The groom was also part of the group and their plan was to return with the bride on Tuesday after the wedding on Sunday.As the groom also tested positive, the families have agreed to postpone the wedding. The groom has to be hospitalized for 10 days and quarantined for another 28 days.The deputy director of public health said, “Eight out of the 18 who entered the district borders had no interaction or contact with anyone in Pollachi. They were monitored all the way from Dindigul-Pollachi border.” Meanehile, a 62-year-old transgender and a 24-year-old man, who landed in the city on Monday from Bengaluru, tested positive for Covid-19. 