Cop makes youths walking for hours to reach home crawl on road for violating lockdown, probe ordered
2020-03-27
Bareilly: After the video of a constable making youths who had been walking for hours to reach their homes crawl and do frog jumps went viral on social media on Thursday, Budaun senior superintendent of police (SSP) ordered a probe into the incident.

Sources said a group of five youths who were marching from Madhya Pradesh’s Gwalior towards their native place were made to crawl and jump by a constable at Nawada crossing of Budaun district on Wednesday morning for allegedly violating the lockdown. In the viral video, two persons could be seen crawling while carrying their bags on their back and a constable who was armed with two lathis could be heard telling them to jump. Three more youths crawling at some distance could be seen in the video. 

“A group of youths who are in their 20s came from Gwalior and were humiliated by a constable on duty. The youths who were migrant workers were walking towards Bareilly city,” said a police official.

Budaun SSP Ashok Kumar Tripathi said, “The incident occurred at Nawada crossing, which connects five roads, under Civil Lines police station of Budaun. An under-training constable, who is also under probation, posted at Civil Lines police station did it. Apart from this constable, a few senior constables and sub-inspectors were also on duty there and were checking other vehicles at Nawada. When these senior cops learnt about the constable’s act, they scolded and stopped him and removed him from duty.”

He added, “Being police chief of Budaun district, I feel sorry and am ashamed because such an act should not have been done. The SP (city) will probe the matter and action will be taken accordingly.”

Like these group of youths, many migrant workers, mostly daily-wage labourers, are forced to walk hundreds of kilometres to their native villages after nationwide lockdown. Most of them are walking on an empty stomach in the heat. On Thursday, 17 migrant workers who covered a distance of over 300 kilometres on foot from Ghaziabad and reached Shahjahanpur beating hunger and restrictions laid down by police. However, their journey is still long as they have to cover a distance of nearly 400 kilometres to reach their hometown in Basti.

Vijay Kumar Gautam, 23, who started marching on Tuesday, told TOI, “After our factory got closed following lockdown, we had no food and no medical facility near our premises. It is better to fight against the pandemic disease with our family members rather than living alone and dying of hunger.”

He added, “During our journey, we receive mixed treatment from police as we were welcomed with batons at someplace while we were offered bananas and biscuits at a few locations.”

Another worker Rajesh Kumar said, “We didn’t get much help on way here as a a few people thought we might be infected with novel coronavirus because we came from Ghaziabad.”

Later on Thursday afternoon, this group entered the border of Lakhimpur Kheri district where police provided them lunch and ensured their medical check-up with the support of medical teams.

Lakhimpur Kheri CMO Manoj Agarwal said, “We have screened all the migrant workers and no suspected case was found so far. We are screening all the labourers who have recently reached to make sure that no one is carrying the symptoms of the pandemic.”


