Coping with Covid-19: Netizens churn out memes, TikTok videos
2020-03-11
BENGALURU: Compelled to work from home because of the Covid-19 scare, a techie asked his friend: “When will this end?” Perplexed, the friend asked why he was yearning to return to office. Pat came the reply: “We are having so many fights at home that we might bash up one another before the virus does.”

This is one of the many Covid-19 jokes doing the rounds on social media as people have taken to rib-tickling memes to keep calm amid the scare. From introverts looking forward to quarantine and no-human contact to amusing videos on how to wash hands, the internet is flooded with funny content on coronavirus.

Meme creators have not even spared famous artworks. For instance, one of the popular memes is a hilarious take on the fresco on Sistine Chapel’s ceiling — The Creation of Adam by Italian artist Michelangelo. While the original work shows god giving life to Adam with a touch of his finger, the meme shows god in gloves, scared to touch Adam. There is also a portrait of Mona Lisa donning a gas mask and rechristened Corona Lisa.

With news of exams having been suspended, people are sharing messages like these: “I am left wondering that it took 25 years for god to answer my prayers. Where was this virus when I was a kid?” Another one reads: “Can coronavirus take me before I give my finals? I can’t waste my last days writing exams before the planet is wiped out because of a plague (sic).”

Some memes call the virus a dream of Thanos (a villain in Marvel’s Avengers series, where he plans to wipe out half the world’s population). The virus is also being hailed as the dream of several millennials who question the futility of life, while wishing for an end and a better planet. A video of a child licking a metal divider in a public space has gone viral with the caption: “People with coronavirus need to stay for a few weeks without any contact with another human being.”

Memes in Kannada and Tamil, which use movie scenes to send across the message, have also become a rage. For the past two days, meme creators have been training their guns on the long public message played before every phone call. “With these long messages, people may or may not be safe from Covid-19. But they might end up in a mental asylum,” read a Facebook post.

TikTok videos are taking it a step further with elbow shakes, foot shakes and at times, even both. 

Karthik Keramalu, a writer and a popular meme creator on social media platforms, says the jokes are a healthy coping mechanism and help share awareness as well. 

Rupali Bhalerao, a second-year degree student who creates and shares memes almost every day, said be it Covid-19 or any other pressing issue, the idea is to spread awareness while adding some humour.

Some also say that meme makers and youngsters need to know where to draw the line while creating funny content as racist jokes are also being shared.

