Cops barricade arterial roads to check movement of people during lockdown
2020-04-20
Nagpur: Police have now erected barricades at important junctions on arterial roads, to create bottlenecks and slow down traffic to allow stricter checking. NMC too has deployed a drone for aerial surveillance of the city roads and nakabandis.

With rising violations of lockdown norms, and increasing Covid-19 patients and suspects in the city, cops have decided to block stretches of several arterial roads with barricades at both ends, making free flow of vehicular traffic through them almost impossible. 

Apart from the containment areas, city police have resorted to blockading several main junctions, like Ram Nagar, Ambazari-Futala turning, Dhantoli, Variety Square, LIC Chowk, Old Katol Naka Chowk, Kamal Chowk, Indora, Bole petrol pump chowk, Bajaj Nagar Chowk, Mayo Hospital Chowk and several others, including on the fringes of the city, to slow down flow of traffic. 

The hectic police barricading at places like Ram Nagar and Ambazari on Saturday had also triggered widespread rumours about corona positive patients being traced to such places. 

Senior PI of Ambazari Vijay Kare said the barricading has nothing to do with patients being found at such places. “At Ram Nagar chowk, around seven roads converge. We had to deploy barricades to stop people from fleeing when they are stopped. It’s happening everywhere and now we are not permitting anyone to cross the barricades without police permission,” he said.

Kare, who seized two cars on Sunday, said he had to clarify the doubts of many residents through social media about police decision to step up checking and restrict movements as part of strategy and not because anyone with corona was found here. 

Joint CP Ravindra Kadam said the barricades have been placed across the roads in such a way that there is lesser chance of avoiding being checked on the roads. “Police are going to be stricter now. Citizens are violating norms to come on the streets. We are registering offences and more actions would be initiated,” he said. “Police had almost 1,000-1,500 barricades but another 300 have been rented to replace the bamboo ones,” said the Joint CP. 

 “If such measures stop residents from venturing out on the streets then we would silently support it,” said a PI. 

Meanwhile, Zonal DCP Neelotpal’s squad cracked down on a high profile gambling den at Oberoi Palace at Yashodhara Nagar.

More tha Rs 52,000 were seized along with nine mobile phones and four cars. Total seizure was more than Rs 26 lakhs. The businessmen were taken to Yashodhara Nagar police station to register offences against them. 

City police on Sunday registered 76 offences against violators of lockdown norms and also detained 45 persons.


