Cops attacked for enforcing lockdown in Kolkata's Metiabruz
2020-04-13
KOLKATA: Three cops and a civic volunteer were injured after being attacked by a 25-strong mob when trying to enforce lockdown in Metiabruz’s Rajabagan on Friday night. The footage of the incident revealed the four were assaulted and pelted with stones and chased by the group. A bike used by the cops was also damaged. Till Sunday afternoon, cops arrested seven persons for allegedly being involved in the incident while 14 have been detained for questioning. 


Sources said SI Golam Gaus Khan, assistant SI Shahidullah Safui, constable Upen Chandra Burman and civic volunteer Tankur Makhal were treated at the Garden Reach State General Hospital.Police have identified the accused as Nasir Gazi, 33, Sk Abdur Rahim, 28, Md Hashim alias Hensue, 52, Nazim Gazi, 19, Sk Adbul Jafar, 21, Sk Aktar Hossain, 36, and Sk Abdur Rehman alias Hrithik, 19. All seven are local residents. 

According to officers, the four from Rajabagan police were returning to the police station after completing a round of information gathering in the area around 10pm. “On Slaughter House Road, they noticed a person on a scooter near the U-block. They stopped and asked him to explain where he was going. The man, however, misbehaved with the officers and began to make some wild allegations. A crowd gathered around the group and, in some time, around 20-25 locals started pushing the cops around. They even pelted stones at the officers, forcing them to retreat,” said an officer.

“Once the police station got information about the incident, a large contingent arrived at the spot and conducted multiple raids in the area to nab the accused. Seven persons were arrested. We have taken the accused into police custody to ascertain the role of a few others. The situation is peaceful at present,” said DC (Port) Syed Waquar Raza. A case has been registered under IPC sections 143, 147, 148, 149, 353, 332 and 188, and sections 3 and 5 of the PDPP Act.

“The accused formed an unlawful assembly with deadly weapons, like bricks and bamboos, and used criminal force upon SI GG Khan, ASI Shahidullah Safui, constable Barman and civic volunteer Tankur Makhal to deter them from discharging their duty of patrolling for awareness about the order promulgated by the government of Bengal. The accused also assaulted them with fists and blows and also by hurling bricks, resulting in injuries to their persons. The accused also damaged a motorcycle used by Rajabagan police station,” the FIR stated. 

Police sources said they have increased their presence at the spot. This is the second incident of attack on cops after lockdown was implemented in city, the first being reported from Entally. “We had carried out extensive raids within hours of the incident. Anyone not following the rules and assaulting cops will be nabbed,” said an officer. 

