Cops add to woes of HIV+ people in Bihar amid lockdown
2020-04-17
PATNA: The lockdown due to the coronavirus pandemic has thousands of people living with HIV/AIDS across the state facing a harrowing time trying to get their medications to maintain prescribed dosage.

During normal times, people living with HIV  or PLHIVs pick up the monthly quota of their medicines from their respective antiretroviral therapy (ART) centre in every district. Those who cannot visit the ART centre, volunteers from the PLHIV community, contact them through phone and ensure the delivery of medicines at their meeting points or, in some cases, at the patients’ home. Though a majority of PLHIV prefer not to receive their medicines at home in order to protect their identity in the neighbourhood.

But after the lockdown, they are facing harassment by police personnel on the ground while trying to reach the ART centres to pick up the medicines. There are instances of several PLHIVs either being thrashed or shooed away by cops and most of them do not register any complaint as they find it difficult to reveal their identity. Woman PLHIVs are the worst sufferers.

In some cases, police did not allow them to reach the ART centre even after revealing the identity of being HIV positive as well as showing the ART Green Card (prescription card). This happens as many constables are not aware of the green card or the medical urgency of PLHIVs. Some community volunteers were harassed while venturing out to deliver medicines at the patients’ contact address during lockdown.

“On Wednesday, a police officer imposed a fine of Rs 500 on a PLHIV in Hajipur when he was going to the ART centre on his four-wheeler to pick up his monthly dose. Police officer did this despite the PLHIV man revealing his identity and urgency behind visiting the ART centre. It is a horrible situation for the PLHIV,” Pooja Mishra, state project officer of Vihaan, told TOI on Wednesday. Volunteers of Vihaan deliver medicines to those PLHIVs who can’t visit the ART centres.

“A few days back, four woman PLHIVs of Patna district’s Athmalgola area were humiliated and shooed away by the police at Bakhtiarpur in the name of lockdown while they were coming on foot to Patna-based RMRI ART centre to collect their medicines. Policemen were not ready to hear their plea about shortage of medicine. Ultimately, the rural women returned to their village,” Gyan Ranjan, secretary, Bihar Network for People Living with HIV/AIDS Society (BNP) told TOI on Wednesday.

Ranjan himself was hit with a baton by a police officer near Gud Ki Mandi in Patna City last Sunday when he was returning home after delivering medicines to a PLHIV. “The police officer hit me with a baton, even without asking the reason for my venturing out on road,” Ranjan said. He added that he has information about 20 such incidents of police harassment.

Mishra says, she and other leading volunteers have informed senior officials of the Bihar State AIDS Control Society (BSACS) about police harassment being meted out to the PLHIVs. “We have also sought their intervention and a proper coordination with the police department,” she said.

“The state government should conduct an orientation programme for lower rank police officers and constables as they are not aware of sensitivity and urgency of HIV/AIDS patients,” said Dimple Jasmine, Vaishali district coordinator of Vihaan project.

Bihar has around 60,000 PLHIVs. Of them, 56,000 are above the age of 18 years, while the rest 4,000 below the age of 18 years. 

Meanwhile, ADG (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said the police personnel have been asked not to harass people coming out of their homes for medical reasons. “The police Headquarters has so far not received any complaint regarding harassment caused to the HIV+ people,” he added. 


