Rajasthan: Men in khaki go bald to avoid coronavirus, save time
2020-04-17
KOTA: Over 65 policemen of various police stations of Kota and Jhalawar districts — the red zones for coronavirus infection in Hadauti with 86 and 17 positive cases respectively — have shaved their heads and gone bald to protect themselves from the pandemic and to save the time spent on washing and tending to one’s hair.


Sunel police station of Jhalawar district tops the list as 39 out of the 40 policemen of the police station including SHO Dharmaram have shaved their heads and gone bald to save time for their daily 12-hour hectic duty. As many as 15 cops in Pedawa police station, the hotspot in Jhalawar district, where 17 persons have tested positive so far, have joined the bald-headed army in the fight against Covid-19, followed by six cops each in Jhalawar Sadar and Gumanpura police stations of Kota city. 

The cops say that they couldn’t wash or keep their hair clean regularly due to the tough duty hours and since they visited potential virus hotspots daily, touching one’s hair repeatedly could lead to spreading the infection. They cite a video message by a doctor on social media that says the coronavirus stays on hair for nearly 3-4 hours and while taking bath, it rolls down into the eyes and over other parts of the body, so the cops decided to shave their heads, circle in-charge, Pedawa police station Mahesh Singh said, who has himself joined the bald brigade. 

‘I as well as five other cops of the police station, have gone bald as we believe it would help guard against the coronavirus infection on duty and would free us from the task of washing and disinfecting hair, that may have gotten infected due to being exposed in open on long duty hours,” said Manoj Singh Sikarwar, circle in-charge, Gumanpura police station of Kota city, who has also shaved his head. 

Also, unavailability of the services of barbers was cited as another reason for the move by the cops. Police is a disciplinary force that does not allow long and unruly hair and also due to the fear of spread of infection amid long duty hours, the decision was taken, said circle in-charge, Jhalawar Sadar police station Sanjay Meena, who has also chosen to go bald along with seven other cops of his police station. 

“There is no scientific data supporting transmission of virus through hair and that a shaved head can secure one from infection. However, common sense recommends shaved head saves time,” Dr Manoj Saluja, associate professor, medicine, Kota Medical College said and added that coronavirus survives longer on clean and smooth surfaces than the rough ones and its survival has nothing to do with hair.


