Cops receive CM pat for lockdown work
2020-06-13
Bhubaneswar: Continuing his pep talk with frontline Covid warriors, chief minister Naveen Patnaik on Friday appreciated the lockdown enforcement by the state police. In a video-conference with the range deputy inspector generals (DIGs) and superintendents of police (SPs), Naveen said the police showed its humane face during the lockdown and helped many poor migrants. 

The chief minister praised the police force for coming to the rescue of thousands of poor migrant workers, who were spotted walking on the roads to reach their homes in the state and outside, during the lockdown. “My appeal for zero walking inside Odisha for interstate migrants was implemented in letter and spirit. Police worked with so much restraint and showed a dignified conduct during the lockdown. People saw a humane face of the police,” Naveen said in a statement. Adding that the Covid battle is not yet over, Naveen said he expects the same degree of commitment from the cops in the future. Naveen’s appreciation came against the backdrop of a few stray incidents of police high-handedness at some places that led to subsequent disciplinary action against the uncouth cops. 

The chief minister asked the director general of police Abhay to prepare an action plan in 15 days to deploy more manpower in police stations and improve the services to the complainants. Abhay, who was present during the video-conference, informed the chief minister that at least 24,587 migrant workers, who were found walking on the roads, were sent to their states in vehicles. Abhay said steps were taken to prevent domestic violence during the lockdown. The DGP also said at least Rs 1.25 crore fine has so far been collected from people caught without face masks across the state. Police have so far collected nearly Rs 11.74 lakh fine for violation of social distancing norm, Rs 3,000 fine for violation of weekly shutdown norm and Rs 1.03 lakh for flouting the night curfew across the state. 

Naveen also extended his appreciation to the personnel of Odisha fire services and the Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF) for their post-Amphan restoration work in West Bengal. “I would like to mention that despite the threat of Covid-19 virus, our fire services and ODRAF personnel faced the situation boldly and helped the people in distress in Kolkata. Your service will be an inspiration for others,” Naveen’s statement read. 


