Cops on toes as lockdown gives Maoists a ‘free run’
2020-04-07
PATNA: The nationwide lockdown has come as a blessing for the Maoists as police are busy enforcing it. The shift in the state police’s focus on containing the spread of Covid19 has allowed the red rebels to move around freely in the remote areas of districts near the Jharkhand border.

DIG, Munger range, Manu Maharaaj on Monday said the Maoists were trying to take advantage of the situation arising out of the Covid19 outbreak. “We are cautious and have foiled their attempts to cause damage to the security forces during the lockdown,” he added.

On Sunday, the security forces detected explosives in Jamui’s Chakai police station area, close to the Jharkhand border. “The powerful explosives were meant to target the security forces and loot their weapons. However, timely detection of the explosives foiled their plan,” the DIG told this newspaper over phone.

Altogether four container bombs and 97 gelatine sticks, batteries and iron nails in huge quantities were seized at Garurbad and Barsolia villages in Jamui district. The bombs were to be used to blow up vehicles carrying security forces. 

The Chakai area is considered to be a safe hideout of the Maoists, who sneak in from Giridih in Jharkhand. “Pintu Rana, a self-styled area commander of the banned Naxal outfit, holds sway in the entire region,” CRPF’s assistant commandant Ajay Kumar said.

Tahir Mia, a local resident, is stated to be the local link of the Maoists. Bhelwaghat police outpost in-charge M J Khan said Tahir was booked for providing logistical support to the extremists in the region. “He is at present evading arrest,” Khan said.

Two days ago, four bombs, 35 detonators, iron pipes and other materials were seized during a search operation in Baskatwa forest in Gaya district. Three bombs weighing 5kg each and one bomb weighing three-kg were later defused by the bomb disposal squad.

These apart, a huge quantity of explosives were recovered from Madan police station area in Aurangabad district. According to the CRPF DIG, Sanjay Kumar, the seized explosives, including over 60 landmines, were meant to attack security personnel.

“At least three attempts to attack the security forces have been foiled in the last two weeks in Jamui, Gaya and Aurangabad districts,” a senior police officer at the police headquarters said.

However, Maoists too are facing hardship due to disruption in the supply of food and other essentials in the remote areas due to lockdown. March and mid-April are considered to be the period when the rebels stock-up on food as they don’t prefer to venture out of their forest hideouts during Monsoon.


