Cops feed the poor, supply essentials to needy people amid lockdown
2020-04-13
AURANGABAD: With the lockdown in place and restrictions imposed on the movement of people, police have turned into good samaritans by arranging for food and dry ration kits for countless poor people, destitutes, stranded migrants on the highway as well as for those residing in slum pockets and remote places. 


Senior officials like municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey and his wife Mokshada Patil, who is also the superintendent of Aurangabad rural police, have already donated a month’s salary for the needy people. Commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad has donated 250 dry-ration kits, each containing enough elements for a family of four to sustain for a month, from his personal savings.

Under the community policing initiative of the city police, assistant inspector Ghanshyam Sonawne has already roped in a few NGOs like Payam E Insaniyat, Aurangabad First, Dhaval Kranti Foundation, Aurangabad Educational and Welfare Society, Islamic Research Centre Education and Welfare Trust, Al-Farhan Welfare society for distributing food packets, ration kits and other products related to personal hygiene among the poor people. 

ISKCON as well as industrialists and police officers have been going out of their way and making individual contributions. An industrial house has come forward and donated about six lakh soaps weighing 100g each for distribution among the poor people. 

Sonawne said that on an average, 1,200 food packets and at least 100 dry ration kits were being distributed among the poor and needy people in different parts of the city. The city as well as the rural police have kept their toll free number (100) open for receiving calls of those in need and connecting them to those who are willing to offer any help or assistance. 

In Aurangabad rural, each police station has identified the number of people belonging to the below poverty line (BPL) category, especially the tribals, backward communities, destitute, single women and senior citizens. Apart from making their individual contributions, local traders and NGOs have also been roped in for catering to this people.

Patil said that since the imposition of the lockdown, her team had managed to help over 7,000 people with dry ration kits as well as food packets. “I find that there is no dearth of those who want to help in any way but don’t find the appropriate avenue. There are those who need help of every kind during times of distress. The ration kits usually given consists of grains but not oil, spices and salt, which is central to Indian cooking,” said Patil. 

“We bridge the gap between those who want to help and those who are in need. Helplines are being extensively used by people in the rural areas, especially by women and those with disabilities. Our personnel have gone out of their way to help destitute women, pregnant women, single women as well as senior citizens,” said Patil. 


