Trichy: Cops on vigil to prevent domestic violence during lockdown
2020-04-17
TRICHY: Unconfirmed reports of women being subjected to violence and harassment at home during the Covid-19 lockdown have pushed Trichy range police to embark on a move to keep a tab on around 15,000 victims of domestic violence in five districts in the past to check whether they still suffer in silence.


A couple of weeks into lockdown since April 24, social media were abuzz with messages regarding harassments against women from their husbands and in-laws. Though the messages were laced with humorous memes, Trichy range police took it on a serious note and jumped into action few days ago.

Police said that there may be incidents of alcohol addicts venting their anger towards women due to the unavailability of liquor. There could be several reasons for the angry outburst of the men towards women. They may not come to light owing to the abnormal situation right now.

Police pulled out files of 14,930 domestic violence cases from 2017 till March 2020 in the jurisdiction of 15 All-women police stations (AWPS) in Trichy, Pudukottai, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur. They got cracking the cases wasting no time. Most of them were solved cases.

“One of the reasons of taking this task is the messages of domestic violence during the lockdown. Whether it is true or not, we want to verify it by calling the victims directly,” deputy inspector general (DIG) of police V Balakrishnan told ToI.

Police personnel in the 15 AWPS police stations were given the task of calling up the woman complainants and check with them whether they have any issues related to domestic violence from husband and in-laws.

The DIG also said, “People, especially women are not coming out during the lockdown. If we call them, the victims will gain confidence and perpetrators may have a sense of fear.”

Police personnel have been told to handle the issue carefully so that it does not create any fresh trouble to the women in the family. They have prepared a questionnaire including general verification questions about Covid-19 prevention measures such as wearing mask, social distancing and questions about domestic violence. “We are very clear that our effort will not affect the harmony in the family,” he said citing harsh reactions from some victims.

The victims will also be asked to answer if the lockdown period caused any rift between the husband and wife. They will also be advised to contact medical helpline 104 and 108 in case of any medical need related to Covid-19 or any other health issues. Police would also ask whether they need any police protection while stepping out.

For those who are not picking the calls, police will go to the address and check with them casually. “In case of any issues, we will take legal action against the perpetrators,” said the DIG.

Appreciating the proactive move, lawyer T Jayanthi Rani suggested police to check with the women whether there is any child sex abuse. “There may be cases of child sex abuses by the perverts in the house. The lockdown may have aggravated their perversion. Women may be afraid of revealing it,” said Jayanthi Ranee.

