Nagpur cops facing dual challenge: Covid bundobust and crime
2020-04-24
NAGPUR: Deteriorating law and order situation in Sakkardara is posing a dual challenge to city police, who are already burdened with strenuous lockdown duties in view of the coronavirus outbreak.


The latest attack on a history-sheeter Bunty Thaore by his rivals Shubham Satpaise and Nehal Nagose in Bhande Plot area on Wednesday has added to the already heightened tension in the locality following a murder just a day ago.

Thaore, who had recently returned after serving imprisonment under Maharashtra Prevention of Dangerous Activities (MPDA) Act, was attacked over old enmity. Satpaise and Nagose are out on bail in a triple murder case. After walking out of jail, the two had teamed up to dominate the localities in and around Bhande Plot, but Thaore was a hurdle in their plan.

Sources say possibility of a group clash cannot be ruled out if the police do not act immediately.

It’s learnt that a couple of days ago, Thaore had roughed up Satpaise over a trivial issue following which Sakkardara police had registered a non-cognizable offence.

In the latest incident too, Sakkardara police were in no mood to register stricter offences against Satpaise and Nagose initially, but had to invoke attempt to murder charge following intervention of senior officials.

A little over 24 hours ago, Bhande Plot area had witnessed murder of a 45-year-old businessman Haridas Savarkar over an old enmity by Bunty Khan and his father Noor Khan. Riot Control Police (RCP) and additional manpower had to be deployed in the locality to maintain law and order.

The nearby Tajbagh locality too has been becoming a hub of goons dealing in narcotics apart from mushrooming of several gambling dens.

The area had also witnessed firing incidents in broad daylight around a month ago wherein several rounds were fired from two firearms in a dramatic chase-and-fire manner.

Zonal DCP Nirmala Devi said she is keeping tab on the law and order situation and also stepping up drive against anti-social activities. “We are taking all due precautions,” she said.


