Pune: Cops ease restrictions in severely affected Covid-19 areas
2020-04-24
PUNE: The additional restrictions imposed on severely affected Covid-19 areas in the entire jurisdiction of Khadak, Samarth, Faraskhana and Kondhwa police stations and in select parts of six other police stations would be relaxed from Thursday midnight, said the city police.


“All shops selling essential commodities like groceries, fruits, vegetables, milk and dairy products, chicken, meat and eggs will remain open from 10am to 12noon in the severely affected areas, while the same in the less affected areas would remain open from 10am to 2pm,” joint commissioner of police Ravindra Shisve told TOI after issuing the latest order under Section 144 (1) [3] of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code on Thursday night. 

 


He said, “Delivery boys of e-commerce sites will be allowed to operate from 10am to 6pm, while those working for online food delivery platforms will operate from 10am to 3pm and 6pm to 10pm. Medical stores will remain open for 24 hours.”

Shisve said, “The additional restrictions have been relaxed to enable people have a fair time to purchase essential commodities like vegetables and grocery from the local market.”

Kondhwa resident Akbar Pathan said, “The relaxation in the restrictions is a welcome move as it will enable Muslim community members to purchase essential commodities in bulk before the holy month of Ramzan, which is likely to begin from Saturday.”

Another resident, Tanaji Lonkar, said, “The police should give two days’ time to people to make purchases and then close all shops for few more days for effective implementation of the lockdown because Kondhwa is one of the hotspots for positive cases.”

The police had first imposed several restrictions on April 7 in areas under the Faraskhana, Samarth, Khadak, Swargate and Kondhwa police stations, declared as containment zones. On April 14, the restrictions were extended to many other containment zones under 15 police stations across the city. On April 19, the Pune Municipal Corporation declared the entire city as containment zone and sealed all exit and entry points to the city. 

It prompted the police to issue fresh orders on April 20, imposing curfew across the city to contain the spread of coronavirus. Only essential commodities’ shops, medicine and milk outlets were allowed to operate in prescribed timing. 

On April 21, the police imposed additional restrictions in the severely affected areas under 10 police stations from 6am on April 22 till the midnight of April 23 by allowing only milk outlets to operate for two hours and medical shops for 24 hours. It had led to anxiety among residents in the severely affected areas. 

