Cops rely on mobile app to track people in quarantine
2020-03-29
Vijayawada: As most of the Covid-19 positive persons identified are foreign returnees, the Andhra Pradesh police have come up with a mobile application to keep them under constant surveillance.

The government has identified more than 29,000 foreign returnees who are now under either home or hospital quarantine.

The police are now tracing all the foreign returnees and making them install the special app designed to keep a tab on their movements so that they do not move out of the quarantine zone. The app was launched on Friday and cops have traced more than 8,000 foreign returnees and uploaded their data by making them to install the app on their phones.

The mobile app will geo-tag the location of the foreign returnees and the central monitoring system will monitor them on a continuous basis. If any person supposed to be in quarantine moves away by 50 meters an automatic alert will be generated through the app and ground level staff will be alerted.

DGP D Gautam Sawang said the app will let the police know if anyone stepped outside who are otherwise should stay under isolation or quarantine. “We have tracked about 8,300 persons already and the tracing of remaining foreign returnees will be done in next one or two days,” said the DGP.

The cops have identified 236 persons through the app who violated the quarantine rule and stepped outside the zone. Cases have been booked against them under Section 188 of IPC.

The police are adding other features to the home quarantine app through which citizens will get an alert if a person under home-quarantine is within a radius of five metres from them and people can alert the police about violators.

In Kurnool, where the app was launched on Saturday, police said they have already installed it on the phones of 722 persons who had returned from abroad. “The app will now help us keep a vigil on the movement of these foreign returnees”, said Kurnool SP Kaginelli Fakeerappa.

A total of 945 people have returned to the district recently.

Meanwhile, the Disha app has been getting calls about persons stepping out of quarantine. 

A senior official in the police technical wing told STOI that people are using the SOS option in the app to raise an alert about foreign returnees who are supposed to be under home quarantine but are out on the roads. “We have received about 180 complaints and all of them have been addressed,” said the official.


