Cops home quarantined in shifts to beat stress
2020-04-19
Trichy: Home quarantine is not meant for Covid-19 patients alone as even the city police are keeping one-fourth of the force confined to home for a week before deploying them for law enforcement. The system, which is intended to give a break to police officers and personnel involved in the fight against the coronavirus, has been in force since March 24. 

There are 1,760 personnel in the city police out of which 300 were kept apart for essential duties and 980 deployed for law enforcement. They were divided into three teams to be deployed in three shifts – 8 am to 2 pm, 2 pm to 10 pm and 10 pm to 8 am. The remaining 480 will be asked to follow home quarantine for seven days. 

Starting from April 1, two teams went through the quarantine so far, the first from April 1 to 7. They joined duty on April 9 after doctors screened them on April 8 and all of them were seen to have had no symptoms. 

Another 437 personnel including assistant commissioners, inspectors and constables including home guards were cleared on Tuesday before joining duty on April 16. The team in quarantine from April 15 to 20 will be screened on April 21 while another will be screened on April 28. 

Commissioner of police V Varadharaju said that quarantine gave the policemen time to relax. “They are screened for symptoms of the viral disease and for lifestyle complaints like diabetes etc. They feel satisfied taking rest at home. Their stress level also comes down,” he told TOI. 

A team of trained commandos has also been deployed near the isolation ward at Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH). They have been provided with personal protective equipment (PPE) kits which they will don if they have to enter the isolation ward to help the health team. The CoP said the city police had stocked up about 300 PPE kits for the policemen. Besides police personnel, 70 NCC volunteers, 72 traffic wardens, 260 home guards and private volunteers were also involved in law enforcement. 

Unlike previous years, the distribution of lemonade or butter milk to the policemen on field duty was missing in the city due to the Covid outbreak. Yet, the city police provided a pack of biscuits, dates and two 250 ml lemonade to the police once this week. 


