Cops trace Tablighi trajectory from Delhi to 5 UP districts
2020-05-11
LUCKNOW: Uttar Pradesh Police has traced the trajectory of foreign missionaries with Tablighi Jamaat from their touchdown in India to their entry into Uttar Pradesh after visiting the Nizamuddin markaz in Delhi. At least 170 foreign Jamaatis, who arrived on tourist visa, have been sent to temporary jails in UP. Their movements have been mapped by Lucknow Police commissionerate along with district police of Sitapur, Sultanpur, Moradabad and Bahraich. This includes 23 foreign nationals arrested in Lucknow, 17 in Baharaich, 11 in Sultanpur, seven in Moradabad and three in Sitapur.


Other districts where foreign Jamaatis were arrested include Saharanpur (54), Bijnor (8), Jaunpur (15), Prayagraj (16) and Bulandshahr (16). Police brass of these five districts is also in the process of mapping their movements since their arrival in Delhi.

Joint commissioner of police, law and order, Naveen Arora told TOI that during investigation, it was found that of 23 foreign missionaries arrested in Lucknow, 10 were Bangladeshis who touched down in India between March 3 and 4, while seven others reached on March 14. Four others from Kazakhstan and one each from Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan arrived on March 13 and 14.

SP Sitapur LR Kumar, said three Bangladeshis visited the Nizamuddin markaz on March 5, before reaching Sitapur the next day. Likewise, seven Indonesians reached Delhi on January 27 and then proceeded to Moradabad on March 11.

In Bahraich, seven Thai missionaries visited India on a tourist visa on March 3 and stayed at the Nizamuddin markaz between March 4 and 8, while another contingent of 10 Indonesians visited India on February 5 and stayed at the markaz from February 15-21. Police have also traced their local contacts. 

Eleven Bangladeshis arrested in Sultanpur had visited India in the first week of March before moving to the district. SP Sultanpur, SH Meena, said investigations will be completed soon.

