Cops on toes as many cross borders defying lockdown
2020-04-24
Thiruvananthapuram: Inter-district travel and movement across state borders during lockdown are causing headache for district administration and health wing forcing authorities to keep such persons under institutional quarantine. Two pairs of couples, aged 19-20 were brought to a Covid care home at Nalanchira after city police had come across them travelling through the city. The authorities suspect that one of the couples had eloped from their native village in Tamil Nadu and they met with the other couple at Kanyakumari. 

Following lockdown, they managed to reach the district and now they are being kept at the care home. The health team is puzzled over such unexpected cases being brought to care home as it defeats the very purpose of covid-care centres. The officials said that the swab samples have been taken and sent for testing and they would be kept in the care home for a period of 14 days. “They are healthy, we have kept them at hostels. They told us that they reached here by bus, but we believe they came by walking along the rail track. They might have run away from parents. As of now we have no other option but to keep them here. They are not symptomatic,” said an official. Following the communication with the couples, the officials have learnt that they were staying at Kanyakumari and were employed at a mobile shop. Two of them hail from Balaramapuram and others are natives of Tamil Nadu. 

A family engaged in making of pickles had boarded a vegetable laden truck and Karamana police intercepted the vehicle and took them to Covid-care home. Another family comprising four members drove by car and managed to cross the border and they have also been sent to institutional quarantine. In the past five days, the authorities also came across a vehicle carrying labourers who were reportedly here for maintenance work in a government institution. It later came to light that four of the labourers who had boarded the vehicle had disembarked on their way and others didn't know about where they had gone. “This kind of movement is raising serious concerns. Despite increased surveillance, people manage to cross borders and reach here. Inter-district movement is also being monitored,” a senior health official said. Two members of a family who tried to cross the border at Kaliyikkavila were also brought under institutional quarantine.

In March, the authorities had taken a Madurai native, who had walked along the rail track, to Covid care home . He had completed the quarantine period and was later let off.


