Kochi: Cops arrest 366 lockdown violators
2020-03-26
KOCHI: In a dangerous trend observed in the district, several persons continued to violate lockdown on Wednesday as the Rural police arrested 242 persons for the offence. As many as 233 cases were registered and 170 vehicles were seized, police said. 

With this, the total number of cases registered in Ernakulam Rural for lockdown violations reached 438. Police said that they are conducting strict monitoring to enforce the lockdown.

Ernakulam Rural SP K Karthick on Wednesday said that strict action is being taken against those who are found to be misusing the relaxations in the lockdown. He said that that even as there were no restrictions on procurement of essential commodities like groceries, people who travel long distances for purchasing such commodities are violating the lockdown and they will have to face the consequences. 

“You cannot be 10km away from your home and then say that you were out to buy milk. I travelled to almost all towns in the district on Tuesday and I’m sure that there is no shortage of any essential commodities. So, buy your groceries from the nearest retailer. Don’t go for a round in the city on the pretext of buying groceries,” said Karthick.

He said police are getting all sorts of responses from those who are on the streets. “We urge the residents to understand the reason for the restrictions and to cooperate. Going to a friend’s house or to a relative’s house just like that is not a sufficient reason to be on the road. We will have to resort to FIR registration and seizure of vehicles if such actions are spotted,” said the officer.

Varapuzha police seized around 20 vehicles for violating lockdown. In Chembarakki, there was a scuffle between two youths and policemen on patrol after the latter stopped the youths. The duo was arrested and removed from the spot.

Kochi City police registered 124 cases and arrested 128 persons on Wednesday. City police seized 120 vehicles and registered one case for spreading fake news on distribution of essential commodities. “Policemen on the highway had a tough time managing those on the street. Action were initiated against those moving around without sufficient reasons,” said a city police officer.

On Tuesday, City police had registered 58 cases till night and arrested 54 persons for various crimes in connection with the Covid-19 spread. One case was registered for violation of quarantine, 49 for assembly of people against the government directive and eight cases for spreading rumours, fake news or fake advertisements.


