Cops crackdown on citizens flouting lockdown, detain vehicles
2020-03-24
Vadodara: Hundreds of vehicles were detained and offences were registered against people who flouted the police notification and ventured out on the roads for leisure amid lockdown on Monday. Police said that they will act strictly against the citizens who move around in public places without any plausible reasons for next couple of days.The cops kept barricades on the main roads in Dandia Bazaar, Karelibaug, Sayajigunj, Rajmahal Road, Alkapuri and walled city areas on Monday morning. After the success of janata junta curfew on Sunday, police were expecting that Barodians would show a sense of discipline and responsibility. “But many people came out in large numbers on Monday morning. The police teams asked them why they were out of their homes and 80% of them had ventured out for no reason,” said Anupam Singh Gahlaut, city police commissioner.“It’s shocking that people are still not taking coronavirus pandemic seriously. A police notification too has been issued but many flouted it so we began detaining vehicles and filing offence against reckless citizens,” Gahlaut told TOI. Every shop, except medical stores, and offices remained closed on Monday.The entire police force of 2,500 personnel has been diverted to implementing lockdown and two companies of state reserve police (SRP) too have been brought in. The police said that nearly 3,000 persons arrived in the city from different foreign countries in last two months. “Though it’s bit difficult to track each of them, we are making efforts find those who came in March and stamp them,” Gahlaut added.The police have also begun using CCTVs to monitor the walled city areas where locals gather in groups and while away their time on the roads. “If we spot people sitting in groups, police teams will shoo them away,” a senior police official said.42 picketing points in cityThe cops have put barricades and made 42 picketing points across the city. A team of policemen posted at every point is intercepting those who venture out on the roads. Also, entry roads to the city have been sealed and only Barodians are being allowed to enter after producing necessary identification.No penalizing commutersThe police department has decided not to charge commuters with any traffic penalty amid the lockdown. “People are not venturing out on the roads. And even if someone does flout any traffic rule, cops come in human contact with him or her while taking penalty. So we won’t be taking any traffic penalty during the lockdown,” said a senior police official.Citizens penalizedZone Vehicles detained1 922 303 654 111