Coronavirus lockdown: What prompted Delhi cops to cordon off Nizamuddin
2020-03-31
NEW DELHI: Delhi Police has locked down the entire area surrounding Nizamuddin dargah after several religious preachers, who had attended a yearly Tablighi Jamaat congregation, tested positive for Covid-19 in the past few days.


Drones are being used to scan the streets around Alami Markaz, the headquarters of Tablighi Jamaat, to prevent anyone from stepping out of their houses until the entire area is sanitised.

“We have isolated the building where the gathering took place. We are assisting the health department in taking people for check-up. In the last two days, around 200 people have been taken for check-ups,” said a senior police officer.

Meanwhile, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Monday ordered the registration of an FIR against a maulana for leading the Tablighi Jamaat congregation, sources said. Delhi government will launch a house-to-house mapping exercise in two nearby colonies on Tuesday to check for novel coronavirus cases.

During an inquiry by police, it was found that about 1,500 people, including some foreigners, were residing in the area. Of these, 105 were immediately shifted to Lok Nayak Hospital, while another 34 were shifted on Monday morning. Police were informed about the visitors by the organiser, Moulana Yousuf, on Saturday. The scholars who had attended the programme till March 23 had stayed back as lockdown came into effect that midnight.

Asked how the programme was allowed at this time, police said no permission was sought by the organisers. The gathering had taken place within Banglewali Masjid because of which there were no count of the number of participants. “When we came to know about the congregation, we issued a notice to the organisers after which the programme was stopped,” said DCP (Southeast) RP Meena. However, the visitors continued to stay in guesthouses around the mosque without informing anyone.

Nearly 300 participants from countries like Bangladesh, Malaysia, Afghanistan, Kyrgystan, Sri Lanka and Maldives had attended the programme, police said. The congregation is also under the scanner of intelligence agencies.

A health camp has been set up to scan every resident before evacuating them. Shopkeepers and guesthouse owners are being questioned to find out whether the suspected patients visited other areas.


