Coranavirus grips China, Gujarat feels economic ripples
2020-02-16
Manufacturing sector in Gujarat is dependent on China both for importing raw materials and exporting finished goods. TOI’s Niyati Parikh, Melvyn Reggie Thomas, Nimesh Khakhariya and Kalpesh Damor take a snapshot of the impact caused by the situation change in China across Gujarat’s key manufacturing clusters.

Ahmedabad: The widespread outbreak of coronavirus in China, and the consequent change in patterns of commerce with that country, is making itself felt in most industries in Gujarat, for better or for worse. Manufacturers in certain sectors which are heavily dependent on China for raw materials are worried about their production pipelines, rising costs and availability of resources. This includes manufacturers in segments like chemicals, dyes and pharmaceuticals. On the other hand, in market segments where the Chinese have the upper hand, or give a stiff competition to Indian manufacturers, our industries are set to gain as global players are turning their attention to India.

Salt exports down by 1.5 lakh tonnes

The exports of salt from Gujarat declined by 1.5 lakh tonnes in January and the declining treand is likely to extend into February. China imports 35 lakh tonnes of salt every year from Gujarat, which is 40% Gujarat’s total salt exports. “The exports declined in January and it will continue to reduce in February,” said Shamji Kangad, vice-president, The Indian Salt Manufacturers Association (ISMA). Salt exporters and makers in Kutch receive orders for 6 lakh tonnes every month from China.

The issuance of letter of credits (LCs) were stopped in China till February 9 and further extended to February 15. “No fresh LCs were issued, so we worked to execute old orders. Now, gradually issuance of new LCs have started from Friday, so we expect to get orders again. However, it will take some time to get everything streamlined,” Kangad added.

Diamond industry staring at huge losses

The outbreak is set to take the sheen out of the world’s largest diamond cutting and polishing centre in Surat. Industry experts estimate that the export of diamonds and jewellery to Hong Kong, which is the gateway to China, is likely to decrease by over Rs 10,000 crore as most offices owned by Gujarati diamantaires in Hong Kong have been shut.

The export of polished diamonds to Hong Kong is pegged at over $8 billion per annum. The CEO and managing director of Asian Star Company Private Limited, Vipul Shah, said, “The outbreak in China is set to decrease the export of polished diamonds by almost 30% in the coming few months. Most of the diamond offices in Hong Kong are shut.”

Recently, the two biggest gems and jewellery events held every year in March in Hong Kong have been postponed till May. The Hong Kong government has officially declared a monthlong vacation due to the coronavirus outbreak.

Nilesh Bodki, a diamond exporter to Hong Kong said, “We have shut the office in Hong Kong due to the coronavirus outbreak. The majority of our export from Hong Kong is to China.”

Textile, garment makers to benefit

The country’s largest man-made fabric (MMF) hub is upbeat as the import of cheap fabrics from China is set to nosedive with the coronavirus outbreak, and the Centre announcing revision in the Foreign Trade Policy (FTA) and the rules of origin in the Union Budget-2020-21.

Bharat Gandhi, chairman of Federation of Indian Art Silk Weaving Industry (FIASWI) told TOI, “The import of cheap fabrics from China was hurting the domestic powerloom industry. We expect the imports to decrease in the coming months due to the virus scare, and give domestic weavers an edge.”

While yarn makers are losing business, textile and garment manufacturers stand to gain. “With exports from China to other countries getting halted due to the epidemic, global giants are turning to India for procurement. In fact, inquiries as well as the volume of orders received by Indian manufacturers have already increased,” said Chintan Thaker, co-chairman, Assocham – Gujarat.

Raw material prices shoot up, chemicals production hit

With chemicals production at Chinese factories affected by the coronavirus threat, import of chemicals to India has reduced, because of which, prices of many chemicals used as raw materials have shot up. “Prices of H-Acid and Tobias Acid, which are widely used in manufacturing of dyes in India, have shot up at least by 25% over the past fortnight; increasing the cost of production,” said Bhupendra Patel, chairman - Gujarat region, Chemexcil.

Recently, Gujarat Dyestuff Manufacturers’ Association (GDMA) apprehended that 25% of more than 600 units may have to shut down due to delayed shipments from China and the spike in raw material costs.

Bulk drug prices rise since the outbreak

Around 70% of bulk drugs or active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), key raw materials of drugs, come from China. At present, the imports have come to a grinding halt. As a result, the prices of APIs such as Paracetamol, Azithromycin, Ceftriaxone, Ciprofloxacin, Ibuprofen, Norfloxacin have jumped substantially since the outbreak of coronavirus in China.

API makers in China have stopped taking new bookings and uncertainty is looming large over the production scenario of drugs manufacture in India. Several pharma companies are running on the APIs inventory available with them. If the situation does not improve by March, it is going to negatively affect local production, say industry sources.

Loss and gain for ceramic industry

The ceramic industry is hopeful of eating into China’s share in the international market if the production disruption in China prolongs. However, vitrified tile makers may also have to bear the brunt of the coronavirus outbreak in China. “We import abrasives for polishing vitrified tiles from China. We have enough stock. However, around 125 units in Morbi may have to shut for want of abrasives if the crisis in China continues for 3-4 months,” said Mukesh Ughreja, president, vitrified tiles division, Morbi Ceramic Association (MCA).

Auto component production may plummet

Delayed imports of spares and raw materials from China is indeed becoming a concern for automobile and auto component manufacturers in Gujarat. “Manufacturing of automobile components can come to a standstill if the import of spares becomes difficult. Despite a great degree of localisation, several manufacturers are dependent on import of spares and smaller components, especially in electronic auto parts, from China. With uncertainty looming over the imports, domestic players may suffer,” said an industry source.

Cotton yarn prices decline, exports hit

Cotton exports to China have come to a standstill as there is no demand from that country, which is currently battling the deadly coronavirus. “At present, no cotton shipments are being made to China. There is still a great deal of uncertainty about resumption of exports,” said Nirav Patel, an Ahmedabad-based cotton exporter. About 60% of the total export of cotton yarn manufactured at spinning units in Gujarat goes to China. However many textile manufacturing units in China are shut. “Due to this, the demand for cotton yarn has shown a sharp decline. Prices of cotton yarn have already fallen from Rs 206 per kilogram to Rs 200 per kilogram,” said Dr Bharat Boghara, chairman, All Gujarat Spinners Association (AGSA).

Photo Quote

“After the Hong Kong protests, the coronavirus outbreak in China has come as a major disappointment for the gems and jewellery industry. It is estimated that the industry will lose business to the tune of over Rs10,000 crore in the next two months.” Aniruddha Lidbide, diamond industry analyst

“The powerloom weavers in Surat have increased their manufacturing capacity after the coronavirus outbreak in China. The daily production of polyester fabric has gone up from 3 crore metres to 3.5 crore metres per day.” Ashok Jirawala, president of Federation of Gujarat Weavers Association (FOGWA)

“With yarn prices going down, the input cost of production for textiles, garments and made-ups will go down, giving manufacturers better cost-competitiveness.” Chintan Thaker, co-chairman, Assocham – Gujarat.

“Shipments from China are expected to resume from February 18, however, delays in shipments are expected. This can have an added adverse impact on industries in Gujarat.” Bhupendra Patel, chairman - Gujarat region, Chemexcil.


