Corbett, Rajaji gear up to track tigers for Covid-19 symptoms
2020-04-07
Dehradun: Following a tiger contracting coronavirus at Bronx Zoo in New York, Union ministry of environment, forest, and climate change on Monday sent orders to Uttarakhand and all other states which have tiger ranges regarding the steps to be taken to protect big cats from the fatal disease. 

According to Harak Singh Rawat, state forest minister, the directions state that tigers should be observed for Covid-19 symptoms such as respiratory signs, nasal discharge, coughing etc. The order also lays emphasis on tiger mortality and directs taking “extremely careful measures” while conducting regular inspection of tigers in consultation with veterinary experts. 

However, wildlife experts said that it would be a tedious task for officials to check tigers, especially wild ones, for Covid-19 symptoms. “It is practically impossible to keep a watch on wild tigers. Leave aside tracking them for cold and cough, spotting them in general is a big thing itself,” said an Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer requesting anonymity. 

Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR), which has a population of around 250 tigers, has eight thermal cameras and its authorities claim that drones are also deployed to track wild animals. “We have around 800 staff members. Among them, 500 members are daily wagers, 200 are permanent staff, and the remaining are personnel of the special task force. We will ensure hygienic conditions at all levels and reduce interaction of wild animals with humans to keep the virus at bay from wild animals,” CTR director Rahul told TOI.

Meanwhile, Central Zoo Authority, in its communication, to state has also directed zoo authorities to be on “highest alertness” at all times. And every fortnight samples of all the unwell animals are to be sent to any of the three Centre-authorised laboratories at Bareilly, Bhopal, and Haryana for Covid-19 test. The staff is advised to go close to any sick animal only after wearing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).

Notably, Uttarakhand stands at the third spot in the country in tiger estimate with around 442 big cats.


