Corbett staff member suffering from fever quarantined
2020-04-21
Dehradun: A staff member of Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR) deployed in Kalagarh area was kept in isolation on Sunday after he complained of fever. His samples have been sent for Covid-19 test and he has been quarantined in Kotdwar in a government facility.

Sources told TOI that the man was undergoing self-medication and he had gone to a private clinic in Kalagarh about a week ago. However, his condition didn’t get any better despite taking medicines.

“This is a matter of concern for us. We may have to put the entire team at Kalagarh under quarantine if the health department instructs so. If that happens, there would be a huge staff crisis. This has already happened in one of the facilities in the country where all the members of a range were put in isolation,” said Rajiv Bhartari, chief wildlife warden of Uttarakhand.

It is worth mentioning here that a significant number of forest staff members have been deployed with respective district administrations to aid the enforcement of lockdown. Therefore, if an entire range is isolated, it would be a problem for not just the forest department but also for the particular district.

At present, the CTR management is awaiting test reports of the employee to decide further course of action. “The suspected person doesn’t have any travel history in the recent past. So, there is a high possibility that the man doesn’t have Covid-19 infection but he has been quarantined according to the guidelines of the health department,” Rahul, CTR director, told TOI.

Meanwhile, the forest department has urged its staff members to remain very careful of their health especially those who are patrolling the two major tiger reserves — Corbett and Rajaji.

Notably, Uttarakhand has already sent samples of a leopard and an elephant calf to Indian Veterinary Research Institute in Bareilly for Covid-19 test as a precautionary measure. This has been done to ensure that none of the wild animals are infected by coronavirus. 

Earlier, the National Tiger Conservation Authority and Central Zoo Authority had asked all tiger ranges and zoos to remain on high alert after a tiger kept in Bronx Zoo in USA was tested Covid-19-positive. The officials of such facilities were also instructed to conduct routine medical checkup of all their staff members who directly or indirectly come in contact with wildlife.


