Coronavirus: 10-bed facility ready at GH; airlines, airport step up safety measures
2020-01-26
Chennai: As coronavirus infection continues to spread in China and cases surface in Southeast Asia and the Far East, the state government has laid out a protocol to manage patients detected with the novel strain.

All passengers arriving at airports in Tamil Nadu from China and Hong Kong are being screened using thermal detectors to watch out for influenza-like symptoms in order to pick possible cases of new coronavirus identified in China. Airlines which fly to destinations where cases have been detected have told their crew to look out for passengers with symptoms of fever and report them to the authorities. If there are patients who are suspected and tested positive, they will be taken to the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital in the city.

The hospital has 10 isolation beds and it can be increased to any number in multiple hospitals if necessary, said Dr K Kolandaisamy, director of public health.

A multidisciplinary team comprising a public health expert, clinician and microbiologist will reach Chennai to review end-to-end preparedness for management and control of the virus - thermal screening and transferring of patients to hospitals for isolation. It will also visit tertiary hospitals attached to airports for reviewing the isolation wards and availability of personal protective equipment (PPE) and masks etc.

The team will review whether infection control, surveillance and other guidelines are being followed and will coordinate with the government to support and strengthen preparedness, said a statement from the Union government.

Though airports at Hong Kong, Singapore, Tokyo, Kuala Lumpur and Bangkok are screening passengers, airlines are also taking steps to ensure that passengers and crew are safe. Flights from the infected destinations are being fumigated and crew has been told to watch for passengers who show signs of fever. Chennai has direct flight link to Hong Kong and Japan where cases of the virus have been detected. There are around seven flights on weekdays and nine flights on weekends between Chennai and Singapore.

Singapore Airlines said, “A health advisory notice by Singapore’s Ministry of Health is being distributed to passengers. We have in place standard operating procedures to handle inflight medical emergencies, including potentially infectious diseases. Any unwell passenger will be attended to by the medical authorities immediately after the aircraft lands. As an added measure, inflight announcements regarding coronavirus will be made on all outbound and inbound flights to Singapore. Surgical masks will also be made available to our crew who operate to affected stations.” 

In a statement IndiGo airlines, which operates flights to Chengdu and Guangzhou in China, said, “Our crew are taking appropriate precautions. There have been no cases reported yet in our Chinese points, which are around 1,000 km from Wuhan, the centre of the outbreak, nor indeed in India. We are in close touch with the government authorities and will advise of any alterations to our schedule, as and when they occur. Meantime, we have many thousands of forward bookings and are serving those customers as normal.”

An airline official said China has stopped all tours of its citizens headed abroad and Cathay Pacific’s subsidiary Cathay Dragon has suspended flights between Wuhan and Hong Kong. “This has come as a relief as it will cut chances of the infection spreading.”

Earlier, health minister C Vijayabaskar said airports will continue routine thermal screening of arriving passengers. If patients arriving in Chennai from China show symptoms of flu, they will be taken to the government hospital for treatment. Warning signs for the new strain, like other influenza viruses, includes fever, cough and breathing difficulties, while more advanced cases could lead to pneumonia, kidney failure and death. We always reserve 10 beds in the hospital for quarantine. They will be taken there,” he said.

The state has also sent available educational material on the virus to doctors’ bodies to ensure they identify cases early. Tests for the new virus will be sent to National Institute of Virology lab, officials said. 


