Coronavirus adds to misery of Delhi riot victims
2020-03-27
NEW DELHI: A month after Mohammad Akhtar’s house was set ablaze in Shiv Vihar during the Delhi riots, the 52-year-old returned to his neighbourhood this week. Coming back to the charred remains of his home was the only option available to him as the tent that served as his temporary shelter was dismantled. Akhtar had been living at the Eidgah relief camp in Mustafabad which housed at least 600 riot-displaced victims.


“We weren’t forced to leave. But the camp was running out of ration supply. The caterer had already packed up. There was nothing left there,” said Akhtar, who once reared buffaloes to eke out a living. He has no source of earning now, and is apprehensive about the future.

Fear over Covid-19 has forced the administration to look for alternative shelters for those displaced by the riots. Delhi Waqf Board, which was managing the site, confirmed that at least five tents have been dismantled. It claimed that the residents are being shifted to rented properties in the neighbourhood. But many of these families claimed that they have nowhere to go and little to eat.

“We prepared our last meal at Eidgah today. The authorities have asked us to leave. For the last two days, we were struggling to prepare food because essentials like oil and milk were hard to come by in bulk,” said Aqueel Ahmad, the caterer who was in-charge of the kitchen at Eidgah.

Fear of the contagious disease has also led a few people to leave on their own.

Akhtar was among the two petitioners who had moved Delhi high court on March 20 asking the government to set up a medical camp to screen people for Covid-19 by thermal scanners. The high court passed an order on March 23, asking the government to set up the camp within 48 hours. But even before the deadline for compliance ended, the Waqf board began to dismantle camps.

“This is a clear violation of the court’s order. The government can be held accountable for contempt of court if it’s making people leave without screening them,” said a lawyer who had represented Akhtar at the high court.

Wasim was among those who left because of coronavirus fear. “We left two days ago because people started saying it wasn’t safe to live with so many people as the disease could spread,” he said. The 30-year-old has taken up a rented house, but there's no work for him. “Some volunteers gave us money for three months rent, but we don’t know how we will eat now,” he added. 

Even as the displaced stare at a bleak future, all they pray for is peace. “We hope that this does not happen with anyone. Our lives changed overnight because of the riots. And then it changed again when we had to leave the camp at such a short notice. We don't have a plan for survival, but we know we have to try,” said Akhtar.

“If we had money or sources of regular income, we could have fed at least 10 more people in these times of fear. But right now, we don’t even have the clarity about what we will be eating next,” he added.


