Coronavirus scare pushes prices of essentials up
2020-03-26
BHOPAL: The corona scare in Madhya Pradesh is driving up the prices of essential commodities — adding to the pressure of household budgets. Prices of fresh vegetables have doubled and that of staples like pulses and flour have gone up by almost 25%, complain residents.

On Monday, when Pankaj Sharma had gone to purchase fruits and vegetables from the nearby market, the prices were reasonable. But on Wednesday, the same hawker charged him double. When Sharma asked the hawker to reduce the prices, he told him, “We are not trying to cheat you. We are ourselves getting vegetables at a higher price.” 

Left with no option Sharma bought potato at Rs40/kg, tomato at Rs50/kg and bottle gourd (lauki) at Rs80/kg. 

What is strange is that vegetables and fruits are available at half the price at supermarkets — but things go out of stock there within minutes. On Wednesday itself, a supermarket in Trilanga was selling potatoes at Rs22/kg, tomatoes at Rs25/kg and onions at Rs27/kg — but everything was almost sold out by 10:30am.

Despite the claims and assurances of government and district administration that there would be a smooth supply of essential commodities, black marketing of items like flour, edible oil, pulses (toor dal), rice, poha and sabudana have begun. These commodities are always “out of stock” and if one persists, you get it in black.

“Prices of grocery items are up by at least 25%. Since people have been stocking up over the last few days, many staples are in short supply — because of which they are being sold at inflated prices. Aata which was earlier available for Rs625 per 25kg is now being sold for Rs850 per 25kg ... The prices are expected to rise,” said Vinod Shrivastava, a merchant. 

Ever since the janata curfew was announced, Bhopalis have been coming out in large numbers to buy grocery items, medicines and other goods. After the PM’s address on Tuesday, residents lined up outside markets to prepare for the 21-day lockdown in India. This buying spree has led to crowding in market areas, raising concerns. As many as 200 persons had reached a supermarket in Kolar on Tuesday, forcing the manager of the store to close the entry, even as the people jostled with the staff members. It was only after police announced that whosoever doesn’t leave will be arrested that the crowd dispersed. 

Shop owners are taking all precautions to prevent the spread of the virus. Many of stores have made it mandatory for customers to wear masks in their shops. “We have given instructions to all the traders not to allow crowding of people at their shop. They can take phone numbers of the customers and either call them when there are no people in the shop or deliver their order to their homes. Crowding at one place must be avoided, it is the very purpose of a lockdown,” said Bhopal collector, Tarun Pithode. 

Answering a question on blackmarketing of essential goods, Pithode said, “We have talked to traders and things should normalise in next one or two days."

Pithode's assurance notwithstanding, prices of sanitisers and masks — which were the first to start rising following detection of coronavirus cases in India — continue to soar despite the administration enlisting self-help groups, prisoners and distilleries to provide adequate stock of the two commodities in the market. 


