Coronavirus: No facility at Chennai airport to handle infected flyers
2020-01-29
CHENNAI: Chennai airport may be taking steps to screen passengers for coronavirus symptoms, but the airport lacks a well-equipped and isolated quarantine centre to handle people with infection.


A plan which was floated to set up a quarantine and isolation centre outside the terminal during the Ebola breakout in 2014 has not materialised yet. Land has been identified near the airport terminals by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and Airport Health Organisation (APHO) under ministry of health and family welfare. But construction is yet to begin.

The airport has now set up a quarantine room at the international arrival terminal to handle passengers who have influenza-like symptoms because coronavirus is spreading in China.

The new building that was to come up near the terminal was supposed to accommodate Airport Health Organisation officials, isolation ward for infected passengers and a quarantine area to observe healthy passengers who need monitoring to find out if they would develop symptoms for infectious diseases (example for yellow fever).

“The idea is that the building should be away from the main building and should not have common air conditioning or common sewage link,” said an official.

Sources said the construction was stuck because APHO, which comes under ministry of health and family welfare, and AAI, which comes under ministry of civil aviation, are unclear about who should build it. Though it is meant for passengers at the airport, it will be run by APHO. 

“There are no cases of coronavirus yet. But if some passenger is found to be infected, they cannot be kept at the terminal for long because the air conditioning is common,” said an official.

Dr Roshni Arthur senior regional director regional office of health and family welfare said, “Land has already been identified to build a centre for the airport. But it has not taken off because of some problems regarding construction. It is difficult to say when it can be completed. Now, we use Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital.”

Passengers who come from countries with a risk of yellow fever without vaccination are sent to the quarantine facility at general hospital where they are observed for three to five days and are allowed to go if they do not develop symptoms.

“There is a difference between quarantine centre and isolation centre. Quarantine is to keep the healthy people to see if they will develop symptoms like in the case of yellow fever while for coronavirus the need is for isolation of the passengers with symptoms,” Dr Roshni said. 

A quarantine facility is not needed for coronavirus because people with symptoms need to be isolated and a facility has been created at general hospital, she said.

Airport director C V Deepak said, “The land was identified so that APHO office can be moved from the current location along with quarantine centre so that it can be taken up for development. They have to take a call on who should build and decision has to be taken at the ministry level. If the health ministry decides that we should build then the ministry of civil aviation needs to decide.”


