Coronavirus in Bihar: One more tests +ve, 4th patient recovers
2020-04-05
PATNA: A 65-year-old Bhagalpur native tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, taking the total number of such cases to 32 in the state. Principal secretary (health) Sanjay Kumar said the sexagenarian had returned from the United Kingdom on March 18. He belongs to Naugachia in Bhagalpur district. 

Sources said his wife, son and daughter-in-law had accompanied him from the UK and their test reports were awaited. Bhagalpur DM Pranav Kumar said the family travelled from Manchester to Kolkata via Dubai. "We are tracing their travel route and those with whom they had come in contact," said Pranav.

Meanwhile, a Covid-19 positive person undergoing treatment at Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH) was released from the isolation ward on Saturday after her two consecutive tests were found negative. The 21-year-old worked as a nurse in a private hospital on Bypass Road where the Munger man had undergone treatment before his death at AIIMS-Patna on March 21. She was admitted to the NMCH on March 28 after being tested Covid-19 positive. NMCH superintendent Dr Nirmal Kumar Sinha said the woman was fit now and had no Covid symptoms.

Two other employees of the same hospital had also tested positive for the virus. While the second report of one of them is negative, sources said another staff had tested positive for the virus even for the second time.

The nurse is the third person to be relieved from the NMCH after recovering from coronavirus. Earlier on April 1, two youths were discharged after their two subsequent tests were found negative for Covid-19. One was a 25-year-old Phulwarisharif resident with travel history from Scotland while another was a 29-year-old Patna City resident, who had returned from Gujarat.

Dr Sinha said test reports of four Siwan natives with travel history from the Middle-East countries have also come negative on Friday. "We will wait for their another test," he added.

A 45-year-old Digha woman admitted to AIIMS-Patna was the first person in Bihar to be cured and relieved. 

Meanwhile, chief secretary Deepak Kumar has asked all the DMs to screen all those people who reached the state from abroad besides Mumbai, Pune, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Delhi after March 22. Officials have been given six days to get screened around 1.8 lakh such immigrants who entered Bihar amid lockdown. 


