Corona virus lockdown may create hiccups for Motown
2020-02-05
Chennai: The lockdown in Wuhan province of China due spread of Coronavirus could disrupt the production schedule of Indian vehicle makers — both petrol/ diesel as well as electric.Currently stock levels are tight due to the BS4 to BS6 changeover and the Chinese new year. Added to that, say parts sourcing officials in OEMs including Mahindra, Maruti and Toyota, if the lockdown continues beyond the February 9 deadline, production of vehicles may get affected.Wuhan is a hub for electric and electronic parts and even though Indian car or bike makers may not be directly sourcing from them, tier-1, tier-2 or tier-3 component suppliers do have strong Chinese supply links. China is a huge part of the global sourcing network and the current blockade will begin to pinch once the existing stock in shipments, factories or dealerships start running out. The electric vehicle industry will be worse affected because it is more import — and China — dependent particularly for lithium ion cells.“Right now Wuhan is completely shut down. Other provinces like Wuxi, Shenzhen and Guangzhou are supposed to open from February 9. So companies that have suppliers in any of these places are stuck. Wuhan is not likely to open up before February 16. And when it opens, there will be such a crush that getting materials out of China will be a problem with the ports clogged,” said Hemant Sikka, president-CPO, Powerol & spares business, M&M. Mahindra, is covered till February 15. “The trouble is if you need 4,000 parts for a vehicle and only 2 of these are unavailable, your assembly line gets stuck,” said Sikka. “Most of the imports from these provinces are electronic parts like chips or the PCB. “We have enough stock for one more week but the trouble is the window is only for two weeks after which we have to switch to BS6,” said Sikka. “So a lockdown like this creates more problems.” Of course most companies are in wait and watch mode right now. “Our tier-I and tier-II suppliers are not yet effected, however we are continuously monitoring the operations of tier-III and tier-IV suppliers to grasp any possible slowdown that may come forth,” said Naveen Soni, senior VP, sales & service, Toyota Kirloskar Motor.Electric vehicles makers will be worst hit.“Considering the fact that the Indian EV market is not evolved enough to sustain an end to end manufacturing of all components, manufacturers are compelled to import certain parts from China and other markets. Corona virus has spread beyond China and has also affected Taiwan, Korea and other southeast Asian countries resulting in disruption of export at major ports,” said Naveen Munjal, MD, Hero Electric.“Due to the Chinese new year, heavy shipments were supposed to begin from January 31, now it will come in March,” said Sohinder Gill, director-general, Society of Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles. Beyond that, the biggest road block will be lithium ion cells which are all imported, said Gill. 