Coronavirus fallout: Palace on Wheels set to cancel 3 trips
2020-03-07
JAIPUR: The royal luxury train Palace On Wheels (POW) is set to cancel three journeys of the season as the fear of coronavirus has triggered large-scale cancellations and impacted its bookings, an official of its Central Reservation Office in Delhi said.


The train runs once in every week from Delhi during the tourist season (September to April) and currently eight more trips are left. The official said that they have to cancel three journeys due to higher cancellations and fewer new bookings. The bookings for the rest of the trips that are on as of Friday do not have high occupancy.

An official in Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation, which operates the train in partnership with Indian railways, said that at least an occupancy of 41 seats out of the total 82 is required to break even the journey financially. After an occupancy 81% last season, which is a record in the past 7 years, optimism was high for this year as well.

“We don’t have much control over these unforeseen developments (corona virus). What best we can do is to ensure that preventive procedures are strictly in place which we have done in the March 4th journey. At present, the prevention and guest safety is our only priority,” said Bhanwar Lal, managing director of RTDC. 

About 80% of the passengers in the train are foreigners or NRIs who are screened at the airports and the booking official said that nationals from the countries against which advisories have been issued are not allowed to board the train.

Mostly travel agents book the cabins in the train paying in advance. Since passengers are cancelling, the agents want the government to at least shift the trips to next year, as in that case they will not have to book losses. “Only the Board of the Directors can take a call on that. As of now, there is no decision on that and the prevailing refund rules are followed,” said the official. 

The tariffs for the 7 nights and 8 days trip range from Rs 2.73- 7.56 lakhs, inclusive of everything that includes food, sightseeing, safari, etc. After starting from Delhi, POW takes tourists to Jaipur, Sawai Madhopur (Ranthambore), Chittaurgarh, Udaipur, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur, Bharatpur, and Agra before returning to the national capital.


