Coronavirus cripples Bijnor’s handloom industry
2020-03-15
Bijnor: The outbreak of the novel coronavirus and subsequent restrictions on export and import in its aftermath has adversely affected the handloom industry in the district.

According to sources, production has virtually come to a halt in the recent days as most textile fibres, mainly Rayon, are imported from China. The import delay has also pushed the prices of the fibres up by around 15-20%. Similarly, the prices of cotton-based products have also nosedived as its export has almost ceased. According to local traders, the industry was already in crisis due to demonetisation and introduction of GST, and coronavirus has worsened their prospects.

Nehtaur in the district has its place in the annals of history for hand-woven products like shawls, scarves and bedsheets that are exported to various European countries and the US. The estimates of the textile association suggest that the annual turnover of the industry in Nahtaur alone was over 250 crore, of which exports were to the tune of Rs 50crore till recently. Sources said that the recent slump has now reduced the industry’s total turnover to around Rs 50 crore. 

There are over 125 units in Nahtaur and its surrounding villages including Seda, Basera and Garhi, on which over 15,000 workers are dependent for livelihood.

Talking to TOI, Maksood Ahmed, president of weavers’ association, said, “Coronavirus has spread across the world. Markets have crashed. Imports and exports have come to a standstill. We make shawls, scarves and the like. Around 50% of these products used to be exported to the US, Europe and gulf countries through agents. However, there is now uncertainty over the market because of the infection. We have deferred all our travel for business-related purposes.”

Elaborating on weavers’ grievances, another Nahtaur-based handloom unit owner Nadeem Ahmed said, “Earlier, our business was affected by demonetisation. Then it was GST. Apart from these, government had reduced the subsidy on electricity too resulting in a rise of the cost of production. We somehow braved all these, but coronavirus has now crippled our business.”

“We used to import rayon thread from China to make scarves and shawls which has now stopped resulting in a rise in prices by 15 to 20%. There is little prospect of exporting our products abroad. Domestic markets have also dwindled. The business has come down by around 60 to 70%. Even the export of cotton products have stopped. It is very hard to meet day-to-day expenses. Our business is on the verge of collapse. If such conditions persist for long, we will be forced to down shutters.”


