Coronavirus scare in Karnataka: 12-hour ordeal for 60 passengers from Paris
2020-03-16
BENGALURU: In a 12-hour ordeal, 60 passengers who landed in Bengaluru on an Air France flight from Paris late on Saturday were bundled off to a Devanahalli hospital where they were shepherded into a single room and made to wait hours to be screened.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Passengers complained of filthy toilets, absence of masks and sanitizers and a total lack of adherence to quarantine guidelines at Akash Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre where they were held. They alleged conditions at the facility were ripe for spreading infections instead of containing it.

The passengers said they were not provided food or beds and there was no clarity on when they would be screened.

In her first tweet announcing the passengers’ plight to the world at 7.11 am on Sunday, @bali-sneha, a passenger, tweeted, “Flight Air France landed in Bangalore on 14th March 11:40pm, we were taken to a so called facility in Devanahalli apparently as per a new rule of quarantine. The hospital is shambles, no water no bathroom.”

She later tweeted, “The quarantine situation is very bad with everyone walking about, no masks, no sanitizer, the bathrooms are so bad and we are supposed to wash hands as often as possible! We haven’t been to the loo since 10 hrs.”

In another tweet, she said, “The wards stink of urine. We were detained without any clarity, we are awake the entire time, walking outside the hospital. No food has been provided, no officials are here at 7:09 am. Nobody is taking responsibility.”

The passengers’ travails ended only in the afternoon. “We are finally out of the hell hole, they took about 12 hours to figure out how to screen. This is the government we have,” she tweeted around 12:30 pm.

Amar Gowda, vice-chairman of Akash Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre, a 650-bed hospital, insisted it was a “stray incident”.

“Until yesterday, only passengers classified high-risk by WHO, and who arrive from the seven high-risk countries were sent to our centre. Yesterday, in a first, they sent 60 passengers of all age groups. No prior information was provided. The decision was made suddenly,” Gowda said.

Asked about the subpar facilities, he said, “We are a teaching hospital that caters to the underprivileged. We cannot function at corporate standards. While all passengers left in about 12 hours, one of the passengers showed symptoms and was sent to RGICD.”

State health commissioner Pankaj Kumar Pandey said all asymptomatic passengers were taken to the quarantine facility since they arrived from France, one of the seven high-risk countries.

“Symptomatic patients are sent directly to the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD),” Pandey said, adding hundreds of such designated quarantine facilities have been identified near airports in the state and that these facilities were chosen based on “distance and availability”.

On the facilities at Akash Institute, Pandey said “We have provided all basic facilities. We have now provided newspapers and deployed more officers.”

Contrary to Pandey’s claims, guidelines in force as on Saturday when the aircraft arrived stated only asymptomatic travellers aged 60 or above and coming from the affected countries were to be quarantined for 14 days.

