Coronavirus outbreak: 14 put under isolation in Allahabad
2020-02-15
ALLAHABAD: Fourteen Allahabad residents who who travelled to Asian nations like China and returned to the city in the past one month have been put under observation as part of the district administration’s precautionary measures against the novel Coronavirus (nCoV) outbreak. 

According to health department data released on Friday, 36 residents had returned to Allahabad after visiting China and other neighbouring Asian countries like Hong Kong, Thailand and Singapore between December 1, 2019 and February 14. Of these, 31 were put under observation under the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) December 1 onwards. A person returning from China or an adjoining country has to be kept under surveillance of IDSP for at least 28 days during the three-month period. 

They had been put under observation in special isolation wards at Motilal Nehru Medical College and Colvin Hospital, and at their homes. While none of the passengers showed any symptoms of the deadly virus, but the move was seen as a precautionary measure.

District epidemiologist Dr. Anshu Vaish said, “The department is maintaining a database of travellers arriving in the city from nCoV-affected countries since December 2019. There were 36 such passengers who had arrived in the city since December 1, 2019. They were put under observation and five of them had visited other cities like Jaunpur and Kolkata.”

Vaish said that 22 of them were released after being isolated for 28 days. “The remaining passengers have been put under isolated conditions at their homes.” He also said that a dedicated ambulance has been deployed at the Bamrauli Airport to rush any passengers who might exhibit novel Coronavirus-like symptoms.

“Apart form coordinating with state IDSP unit and World Health Organisation (WHO) officials, we have also been carrying out sensitisation campaign at airport and railway stations to educate people about n-CoV,” he added. 

Vaish said that residents are being briefed about the precautions which might reduce the risk of them contracting n-CoV. 

Novel Coronavirus has claimed as many as 1,300 lives in China, the epicentre of the contagion, over the past two months. The country has reported over 15,000 cases leading to several airlines restricting operations to China. The Indian government recently evacuated. A man in Kerala was the first novel Coronavirus patient to be diagnosed in India in January. 


