Coronavirus: UP tourism issues alert on arrival of two Chinese nationals in Agra
2020-02-02
Agra: UP tourism department issued an alert to travel fraternity in Agra and Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Agra circle, to immediately inform the health department about visits of any Chinese tourists anywhere in the city. The move comes days after the first positive coronavirus case was reported in Kerala.According to the alert advisory, as per information provided by Mukesh Kumar Vats, the chief medical officer (CMO), Agra, “one or two Chinese nationals were likely to visit Agra from Patna on Saturday”. However, no one could be traced till evening, said officials.The officials added that their passport details have been sent to travel agents and hotel association members across Agra for identification. ASI officials have also been directed to alert their staff and to inform the district authorities immediately, if some Chinese nationals visit Taj Mahal or any of the tourist places under ASI purview.The CMO told TOI on Saturday that his department had received information about the arrival of two Chinese nationals from their office in Lucknow on Friday and he had immediately alerted people in the tourism sector. He, however, said they have not been traced so far.He added two Chinese nationals, who had visited Agra last month, were found medically fit after being thoroughly screened by doctors. He also said that there is no need to panic as doctors and health officials are all on alert.Superintending archaeologist (Agra circle) Vasant Swarankar, said, “I have directed my team to check identity of foreign tourists. If they spot any Chinese national they will immediately inform the district authorities along with the health department.” He added that Agra needs to be on alert as it is a major tourist destination and lots of Chinese nationals visit the Taj and other monuments.Vice-president of Tourist Guild Association, Rajiv Saxena, said that everyone should be on alert. He, however, said that many Chinese tour groups had already cancelled their trips to India for the month of February. “This dangerous virus would badly impact our tourism sector in Agra,” he claimed.