Coronavirus scare: Telangana shuts down till March 31, key services to be kept open
2020-03-23
HYDERABAD: Telangana was placed under complete lockdown till March 31 to prevent the spread of novel coronavirus, but essential services such as milk, vegetables, groceries, and pharmacies would remain open with some regulation. Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao appealed to all citizens to remain indoors until further orders are issued after a review meeting on March 31 while directing that all inter-state borders be shut.


“Save yourself, thereby saving your family, society, state, country and entire humanity. Don’t take this lightly. This is a time of crisis and let’s prove to the world that we are united and can face any epidemic,” KCR said.

 
 
As part of relief measures, government would supply free 12 kg rice per person, sufficient for a month, to 87.59 lakh white ration card holders (totalling 2.83 crore people) in Telangana. Also, Rs 1,500 cash would be given per white cardholder towards purchase of edible oil, dal, vegetables and other essentials for family consumption along with rice supplies. The CM announced immediate release of Rs 2,417 crore including Rs 1,103 crore for rice distribution and Rs 1,314 crore towards cash distribution. This would be done in next three to five days and the modalities would be spelt out in a detailed government order.


Exam papers evaluation on hold; workers to get salary
Earlier, in the meeting with all chief secretaries held on Sunday, the Centre has requested the respective state governments to ensure that essential services such as hospitals, telecom, medicine shops, milk supplies, provision stores, etc will remain open. Establishments and factories engaged in manufacturing and distribution of essential commodities like medicines, sanitizers, masks, etc. would be exempted from the lock down restrictions.

“No one should venture out of houses,” the CM said and without using the word “Section 144” he directed that not more than five persons would be allowed to assemble in one place.

“Only one member of the family would be allowed to go out and purchase essential commodities. Even this one person must maintain a distance of 3 feet from others,” he told reporters. The CM said that the media will be exempted from the lockdown. He also said that the evaluation of exam papers has been suspended along with all education activity.

“It is essential that we take all care and introduce measures to ensure that the virus does not spread in the state. Hence, the state government has taken this decision to lock down the state up to March 31 under the Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897 and a notification has already been issued,” KCR said.

He said with the suspension of all international flights and none entering the country from the sea route, the threat of importing the infection had been minimised, but there was need to contain the spread.

“No vehicles including public and private transport buses and also private vehicles, including cars, autos, will be allowed into the state. Only trucks carrying essential commodities like milk and vegetables among other essentials would be allowed to enter the state. Also, buses and autos would not be allowed to ply in the state,” he said. All government employees of essential services departments such as electricity, water supply, health, and medical department need to attend to their duties during the lockdown period, the chief minister said, while employees of other departments would work on 20% rotation everyday and remain working from home with paid leave. All exam paper valuation has also been stopped.

“All daily wage earners, industrial workers, and construction labourers should be paid for the locked-down period up to March 31. The government will pay its share and the employers have to pay the wages. This is the time of crisis and employers have to pay as per the Act or else serious action will be taken,” the CM added. He announced the closure of Anganwadi centres and all non-emergency surgeries have been put on hold in government and private hospitals. A list of pregnant women in the state is being prepared and Amma Vodi vehicles would bring them to hospitals.

