Coronavirus lockdown: Garbage generation reduces 25%
2020-03-26
NAGPUR: The lockdown necessitated due to coronavirus scare has reduced the city’s garbage generation drastically. Against approximately 1,185.23 metric tonne garbage generation per day, the city is generating almost 300MT less garbage post lockdown.


Data compiled by Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s solid waste management department shows the city is generating around 894MT garbage every day after March 15 as against 1,185MT a day before that, confirmed a senior official from the Bhandewadi dumping yard.



 

AG Enviro is lifting door-to-door garbage from zone numbers 1 to 5 which include Laxmi Nagar, Dharampeth, Hanuman Nagar, Dhantoli and Nehru Nagar, while BVG India is collecting waste from Gandhibagh, Satranjipura, Lakadganj, Ashi Nagar and Mangalwari zones.

All the garbage generated from the city is being transported to Bhandewadi dumping yard where NMC owns around 77 acre land, of which 52 acre is being used for dumping garbage while 25 acre is for sewage treatment plant. The dumping areas are already full to its capacity.

“Post coronavirus scare, all the 10 zones have witnessed drastic drop in garbage being generated by households. Nehru Nagar zone has witnessed sharp decline in garbage collection. Against 134.89MT of garbage per day, the residents of this south Nagpur locality are generating around 43.37MT waste a day now,” the data revealed. It was followed by Mangalwari zone. It too has witnessed decline in door-to-door garbage collection. Against daily collection of around 107.20MT, the private agency is lifting only 67.20MT waste per day, the officer explained.

Even the zones with commercial areas have also witnessed drop in garbage collection. Gandhibagh zone, which has most commercial establishments, too generates lesser waste of almost 35.98MT a day now, down from 131.22MT per day earlier.

The official attributed the lesser garbage generation to the lockdown. “With all business hubs closed, garbage generation from commercial markets like Itwari, Sadar, Gaddigodam, Jaripatka etc has been zero. We are now getting garbage from household residents only,” the official said.

Environment expert and founder or Green Vigil Foundation Kaustav Chatterjee said: “Humans are the only waste generators. We are in ‘quarantine’, shops are closed, construction activities have stopped. Thus the garbage being generated is domestic waste only.” 


