Coronavirus lockdown: Stranded at camps in Patna, people long to go home
2020-04-05
PATNA: It's an anxious wait for a young Uttarakhand couple with a two-year-old child, who arrived in Patna on March 24, but got stranded as the nationwide lockdown came into effect. 

The couple, 28-year-old Ishtiaq Alam, his 26-year-old wife Rukhsar Begum and child, are among more than 700 people who have been kept at the 60-odd quarantine centres-cum-community-kitchens being run by the Patna district administration.

Ishtiaq, who runs a grocery store in Dehradun, said, "We are just waiting for lockdown to end so that we can return home immediately. We are getting food twice a day but it's little tough for my son. Somehow I managed to get biscuit for my son a day back but no milk." The couple have been put up at Bankipore Girls' High School.

A district administration official later said they didn't know about the child's requirements. "We will make arrangement for milk today itself," he said.

 The family had gone to Araria to meet a friend who had lost his minor daughter. "We reached Patna, but got stranded. Initially we stayed at a hotel near the bus stand but left it after exhausting all our money. Unfortunately the debit card which I am carrying, is blocked," Ishtiaq said. 

There are scores of others, mostly stranded migrant workers, who have been put in these quarantine camps and are anxious to return home. Around 300 people are staying in the camps in the urban centres, while 400-odd are at the centres in the rural areas.

TOI visited the quarantine camps at the Bankipore school and the Miller High School on Saturday. Cleanliness, sanitisation and social distancing norms are being maintained at the centres.

Akhilesh Kumar Singh, Radheshayam Singh and Raj Babbar are migrant workers from Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh who were working at a cement factory at Daniyawan in Patna and got stranded after lockdown. They managed to reach the quarantine centre at Miller High School on Beer Chand Patel Path on April 1 after failing to get any transportation for Mirzapur.

Akhilesh said, "If we reach Mirzapur now, we might again get quarantined as co-villagers will complaint to the administration."

He added, "We have nothing to do here. We are provided food twice a day which is of good quality and are confined till the corridor outside our rooms."

 Another camp inmate, Sukumuni Munda, who is from Ranchi, said she just listens to song on her cellphone daylong. "I used to wash dishes at a hotel near Patna junction. I used to get Rs 250 per day. I am just waiting for the lockdown to end," she said. 

Meanwhile, officials at these quarantine centres expressed apprehension about the huge gathering of people from neighbouring areas who come for the free food twice a day as they are not maintaining social distancing norms.

"We are handling them as best as we can amid fear of infection. It would have been better if the government had provided them with ration for a fortnight instead of making arrangement for cooked food," an official said. 


