'Coronavirus harder to contain than SARS': All you need to know
2020-01-27
NEW DELHI: The coronavirus outbreaks has shown no signs of abating. As per the latest reports, 80 people have died in China and as many as 2,744 people have been confirmed with the deadly virus across the nation.




 How is Coronavirus different from SARS?The new virus has created alarm because much about it is still unknown, such as how dangerous it is and how easily it spreads between people. It can cause pneumonia, which has been deadly in some cases. Unlike SARS, new virus infectious in its incubation period, which can range from 1 day to 14 days, making it harder to contain. This was not the case with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) making the new coronavirus harder to contain. At a press briefing in Beijing on Sunday, the head of China's disease control agency, Gao Fu, said it was "not as powerful as SARS," but officials warned it could be getting stronger.
 How fast is the virus spreading?China says the virus is mutating and can be transmitted through human contact. Two scientific analyses of the epidemic say each person infected is passing the disease on to between two and three other people. By Sunday, the pneumonia situation had resulted in a total of 80 deaths, while 51 people had recovered and 5,794 remained as suspected patients, state-run Xinhua news agency said. Almost all provinces in China except Tibet have reported the virus cases. During the past 24 hours, 769 new confirmed cases, 3,806 new suspected cases and 24 deaths from the disease were reported. The condition of 461 people being treated for the virus was termed as "critical". A total of 32,799 close contacts have been traced, the commission said, adding 30,453 among them were currently under medical observation while 583 others were discharged on Sunday. The mayor of the Hubei province capital Wuhan, which has emerged as the epicentre of the epidemic outbreak, said he expects another 1,000 new patients in the city, A high power committee on Sunday said the virus' ability to spread was getting stronger.
 Is the Chinese government doing enough to stem the outbreak?Compared to the very low bar set by the Chinese leadership’s secrecy and inaction during the SARS epidemic in 2002 and 2003, Xi has responded with speed and alacrity to the latest health emergency. But there are also signs that the government, especially at the regional level in Hubei province, the source of the outbreak, was slow to recognize the danger and is continuing to mishandle the crisis. Some public health experts have asked whether the sweeping travel restrictions that have been imposed are leaving people without access to medical care, while many Chinese remain unconvinced the government is being completely forthcoming about the toll of the disease. Even as officials in Wuhan said nothing publicly, government scientists shared information with the World Health Organization on the last day of 2019, isolated the virus and posted details about it on an international database 10 days later. There is evidence, too, that local authorities kept a lid on the crisis in the first days of January so as not to upset the cheerful tone for a provincial legislative session that is a highlight of the local political cycle.
 How many countries are affected by the Coronavirus till now?In addition, 17 confirmed cases were reported in Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions and Taiwan, besides eight in Hong Kong, five in Macao and four in Taiwan. Overseas, confirmed cases included seven in Thailand, four each in Australia and Singapore, three each in the United States, the Republic of Korea, Japan, France and Malaysia, two in Vietnam and one in Nepal.
 What are the governments around the world doing to stall the outbreak?Three research teams have begun work on developing potential vaccines, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations said. Scientists hope to be testing the first possible vaccines in three months time. China is testing the HIV drug Aluvia as a treatment. On Sunday, China temporarily banned nationwide the sale of wildlife in markets, restaurants, and e-commerce platforms. Wild and poached animals packed together in markets are blamed as incubators for viruses to evolve and jump the species barrier to humans. There are severe travel restrictions in Wuhan, with urban transport shut and outgoing flights suspended. China will halt all group tours, affecting tourism both at home and to other countries, from January 27. Hong Kong has barred residents of Hubei province from entering the city. France, Italy, Japan, Australia and the United States have all said they are working to evacuate citizens from Wuhan. Airports around the world have stepped up screening. 

(With inputs from agencies)
