Coronavirus may impact India’s polished diamond exports
2020-01-29
Surat: Spread of coronavirus in China are making Surat diamantaires worried. They aren’t as frightened for the infection itself than they are from the prospect of exports of polished diamond getting hit by the outbreak. The anti-government protests in Hong Kong and the US-China trade war has already impacted the polished diamond exports from India to Hong Kong. With annual export of gems and jewellery pegged at over $12 billion, which includes over $10 billion worth of polished diamonds, Hong Kong is the world’s second largest export market for India after the US. Majority of the exports of polished diamonds to China is done via Hong Kong and now coronavirus may dent consumer demand, said Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion Council (GJEPC), resulting in the dip in exports.Vice-chairman of GJEPC, Colin Shah told TOI, “China is the world’s second largest diamond jewellery market after US. The outbreak will impact consumer demand, resulting in decline in export of polished diamonds.”Shah further said that India was expecting to do good business after the Hong Kong market started to recover from a break in the violent anti-government protests there. “However, with the virus threat looming large, we fear that demand for diamonds may diminish,” he said. According to the GJEPC, the export of polished diamonds to Hong Kong declined 8.45% at $7.41 billion from $8.09 billion between April-December-2019. Industry sources said Chinese consumers are purchasing diamonds between 30 cents to 2 carats, whereas the U.S consumers are buying jewellery of the diamonds in small sizes below 30 cents. Managing director of Dharmanandan Diamonds Private Limited, Hitesh Patel said, “Market looked bright in Hong Kong and China after the US-China trade war and long-standing anti-government protests slowed down. However, now we have a virus to combat. We have asked our employees in Hong Kong not to visit China till things settle down.”