Coronavirus: Hong Kong gems show cancelled
2020-02-10
SURAT: Diamantaires of Surat and Mumbai eagerly await the world’s largest gems and jewellery fair which takes place in Hong Kong in March as it spurs the demand for polished diamonds and jewellery. However, coronavirus epidemic in China has cast a dark shadow over the prospects of the diamond industry, reeling under recession for a long time now. 

Hong Kong International Diamond, Gem & Pearl Show and Hong Kong International Jewellery Show, which were scheduled in the first week of March, have been postponed until May due to the outbreak of coronavirus.

Industry sources said over 300 Indian diamond and jewellery companies from Surat, Mumbai, Antwerp and Hong Kong participate in the gems and jewellery events in Hong Kong. The events attract tens of thousands of international buyers from across the world, which give a fair idea to diamantaires about consumer demand. 

Nilesh Bodki of FamAsia Limited, a diamond company based in Hong Kong, said, “The March events in Hong Kong are a gateway to consumer demand in the world. Since the shows have been cancelled due to coronavirus, it is a wait and watch situation in the diamond industry. This is the year’s first largest jewellery event to spur the diamond demand in the world. Unfortunately, India’s diamond industry is going to be a big loser due to coronavirus.”

Hitesh Patel, managing director of Dharmanandan Diamonds, said, “From Hong Kong shows, we get a fair idea on consumer demand and we manufacture the goods accordingly. For Surat, these are important shows as majority of diamonds displayed are of 30 cent to 1.50 carats.” 

Industry leaders have predicted that coronavirus epidemic in China is set to reduce exports of polished diamonds to Hong Kong by over 20%. Hong Kong is second largest polished diamond export market for India after the US, with annual exports to the tune of over $8 billion. 

Aniruddha Lidbide, diamond industry analyst, said, “The diamond industry was hoping to recover after facing challenging 2019, but cancellation of Hong Kong show is going to have a huge impact in the coming months. Predicting consumer demand has become difficult when China is hit by coronavirus epidemic.”

