Coronavirus vaccine in the works, human trials likely to begin within six months
2020-02-18
Pune: A candidate vaccine is ready for pre-clinical trials, and possibly even human trials within six months, as part of the collaboration by Pune-based Serum Institute of India (SII) and American biotechnology firm Codagenix to develop a preventive vaccine against the novel coronavirus (COVID-19).

While efforts to find a coronavirus vaccine have already started globally, the SII-Codagenix candidate vaccine, developed using a laboratory-made synthetic virus, is an important breakthrough because it could significantly reduce the time taken to build a shield against the virus at the heart of the current outbreak emanating from China.

“Conventional approaches usually take seven to eight years to fully develop a vaccine for use. We have already marched ahead by generating a candidate vaccine in the laboratory of our US-based partner Codagenix. Our vaccine-virus strain is identical to the original virus and can generate a robust immune response,” industrialist Adar Poonawalla, owner and CEO of SII, told TOI in an exclusive interview on Monday.

“We will be ready for human trials within six months, which makes it the fastest ‘Made in India’ vaccine to enter this phase. Thereafter, it all depends on the regulatory clearance from the Union health ministry. Human studies will take another year. We hope to be ready with the vaccine by early 2022. This shows India’s capability to respond to a global pandemic in real time,” Poonawalla said.

When contacted, senior scientist R R Gangakhedkar, chief of epidemiology at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), told TOI, “The approach is exciting in principle. It will be wonderful if it works. But it will have to go through elaborate laboratory and animal studies before being tested in human clinical trials. Using this method, they (SII) may also go closer to produce a generic influenza vaccine as against the current cocktail of three strains.”

The SII-Codagenix project will cost Rs 250-300 crore and vaccine major SII plans to secure external funding through its multiple international partners. “In a month’s time, we will enter into animal studies. By August-end, we will have data on mice and primates to submit to regulatory authorities to enter into the human trials phase,” Poonawalla said. “We are in talks with a number of firms across the globe for potential partnerships. We are also not excluding China as a potential site for our clinical trials.”

Poonawalla, who is also president of the Indian Vaccine Manufacturers’ Association, “Our live-attenuated vaccine against the novel coronavirus is just another demonstration of Indian vaccine industries’ capabilities of developing new and innovative vaccines required globally. Vaccines against typhoid, rotavirus and pneumococcal infections launched recently by Indian firms, including Bharat Biotech, Biological E and SII, have already made an impact worldwide.”


