Coronavirus scare may make Holi off colour
2020-03-06
Nagpur: With less than a week to go for the festival of colours, the city’s markets and shops are flooded with Holi supplies, but citizens are in a dilemma whether to play Holi. While some want to celebrate it in an eco-friendly manner, others believe the Holi festivities with the usual public gatherings should be avoided due to the coronavirus fears.

The coronavirus threat is a real fear for most citizens, and they are sceptical about going to public places and indulging the usual wet Holi. “My family and friends have decided to play dry Holi, using natural colours, since coming in contact with water increases the threat of contamination and infection through eyes, nose and mouth. There is no restriction on playing, but yes the excitement has dimmed because of coronavirus,” said Nirmal Kaur, a student.

People are also avoiding buying Holi supplies and colours that are for sale with the ‘Made in China’ tag, “This festival, and even otherwise, I am going to avoid buying everything that is made in China, and so should others. We won’t be celebrating Holi in crowded places or parties, but may be just have a small celebration with family members,” said Amruta Bansod, a teacher.

For Sajal Orke, who works in health care, says the festival of colours has an emotional significance and he doesn’t want to miss the fun because of the virus fears. “We must not hesitate to celebrate Holi amid all the fear, as it’s one of the most cherished festivals. Yet, taking a few precautions will harm no one. I will avoid going to Holi parties, as one never knows who is suffering from the flu, and it’s contagious. But yes, people won’t celebrate Holi with as much enthusiasm because the coronavirus situation is getting alarming,” he said.

Nikhil Somkule, a lecturer, believes that parents are more worried about their children’s health and will restrict them from playing Holi. “Children add more fun and zeal to any festival, but I suppose this year parents will restrict them from going out in groups to play. One must play with dry colours. Playing Holi a day before in school and colleges with water must be avoided,” he said.

Adding to this, Akshata Nakshine, a law student, wants people to step out of the house only to apply a little gulal or dry colours, rather than playing in groups. “I have ordered masks beforehand, and my family will wear those to celebrate. It will surely dim the excitement of the festival, as fear will overshadow the fun,” she said.


