Coronavirus impact: Govt may defer Census, NPR update
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: The government may explore the option of deferring or advising states to defer the April 1 launch of Census 2021 and National Population Register (NPR) update — scheduled to kick off in central Delhi, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and Meghalaya on this date — in view of the situation arising out of coronavirus.


Such an indication comes even as states have begun writing to the Centre seeking a review of the notified Census timeline. In a letter to the PM on Friday, Odisha chief minister Naveen Patnaik said all efforts of the state machinery were directed towards containment of Covid-19 and mobilisation for Census and concerned activities posed a risk for field functionaries and the people. “I would rather suggest to postpone the scheduled Census and related activities,” he said.

While home ministry officials were tight-lipped on whether Census/NPR schedules were under review, sources indicated a decision may be announced in the next few days. A functionary said even if the starting date was deferred a little to focus on Covid-19, Census houselisting/NPR exercise could well be completed within the September 2020 deadline.

The assessment within the Modi government is that mandatory door-to-door visits for houselisting and NPR put both the enumerator as well as respondents at risk as India deals with rising cases of Covid-19. Also, with the Centre, state governments and local administrations preoccupied with tackling the outbreak and many states having shut down public places, offices and shops, it may be impractical to expect them to spare human resources for the massive field exercise.

Census authorities have notified a window from April 1 to September 30 to complete houselisting and NPR in each state and Union territory. States must notify a 45-day slot within this six-month period to hold the two exercises. “This is meant to offer them flexibility in drawing up a schedule that beats local conditions like extreme heat or monsoon. Given that states/UTs notify their respective schedules, there is always an option of delaying the April 1 start to Census/NPR by a few days or weeks,” a government functionary said.

Many states have expressed apprehensions about NPR update, particularly new questions such as date and place of birth of parents. While Kerala has said no to NPR exercise, West Bengal and Telangana have put it on hold. Many Congress-governed states and even NDA ally JD(U) have suggested that NPR be done as per the 2010 questionnaire.

