Coronavirus fear: Bizmen cancel trip to China
2020-01-26
Ludhiana: With coronavirus spreading its tentacles in certain parts of China, killing 41 people and infecting more than 1,000 others, several Ludhiana-based businessmen have cancelled their trip to the country.

In view of cases being reported in Australia, France, the US and seven Asian countries besides China, several countries have already started taking action to prevent a global pandemic.

The Ludhiana health department too has been directed to keep tabs on the foreign travellers and be ready to deal with such cases in the future.

City businessman Surinder Sharma, who has cancelled his business trip to China, said, “I don’t want to take any sort of risk as it might take some time for the health authorities in China to handle the situation properly.”

Dr Rajesh Kumar Bagga, Ludhiana civil surgeon, said, “The Union government has already installed screening systems at international airports to track people with symptoms of novel virus.”

“According to the state health department, the strain of coronavirus is not much different from swine flu virus. We have got necessary facilities to deal with such cases. We already have isolation wards,” the civil surgeon added.

The health authorities have advised people to avoid close contact with people with symptoms of cough, running nose etc. “The travellers are advised to wear a mask if they have symptoms of respiratory problem,” Dr Bagga said.

The health department in its advisory has asked China-bound travellers to follow some public health measures at all times, like maintaining good personal hygiene, washing hands with soap and covering mouth when coughing or sneezing.

“Passengers heading to China, in particular to Wuhan city, have been advised to monitor their health closely. If you feel sick on flight, while travelling back to India, inform the airlines crew about illness, seek mask from the airlines crew, avoid close contact with family members or fellow travellers and follow the directions of airline crew while disembarking,” said the civil surgeon.


