Coronavirus in Telangana: Chief minister urges calm, says more funds in store if needed
2020-03-15
HYDERABAD: Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Saturday appealed to the people to not panic and assured that the state government is prepared to control the spread of coronavirus (Covid-19) in Telangana. He said that the state is willing to spend as much as ?5,000 crore on measures to keep the spread of virus. The CM had earlied said that ?1,000 crore would be allocated towards containment.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The CM said that 150 rooms were available for isolation units at the Dulapally Forest Academy while 30 suites were available at the tourism centre in Vikarabad. Other places for isolation units have also been identified, the CM said.


 
Over 200 officials from the health department have been stationed at the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport to conduct round-the-clock screening tests. “The virus is mainly spreading from places with international connectivity,” the CM said. Earlier, a high-level committee of senior civil services officers discussed the measures taken by other states, Centre’s directions and measures that Telangana should take. The committee has submitted its report to the cabinet.

The chief minister said that pandemics similar to the current one occur once ever hundred years. “In 1819, the Spanish flu killed around 12 crore people across the world including 1.04 crore in India...” KCR said. He clarified that he had quoted a scientist as having told him that the virus does not survive in temperatures above 27°C and that a paracetamol tablet was enough to treat the ailment. “This does not mean that the state government is not serious or not prepared...I did not want to create panic among people,” the CM said.

“As a responsible government, we have been taking all measures...are working day and night to control the spread of the virus,” he said and added that with Greater Hyderabad being among six major metropolitans in India, it would be a crime for the state government to sit and watch.

