Coronavirus scare: Chinese woman quarantined at Jaipur's SMS Hospital
2020-02-02
JAIPUR: Four persons including a 39-year-old Chinese woman, who had reportedly travelled in the same flight with a person who tested positive for novel coronavirus (nCoV) in Kerala, were quarantined at Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital here on Saturday. 


The Chinese woman’s friend, who hails from Bharatpur, is among those who have been quarantined in the hospital. Both of them were brought to the city by the health department from Udaipur on Saturday. The Chinese woman, who hails from Nanjing, came to India on January 23 with her friend. Her travel history showed she did not visit Wuhan, the epicentre of the virus outbreak. 

“We have taken samples of them and sent them to the National Institute of Virology, Pune, for nCoV test,” Dr DS Meena, SMS Hospital superintendent, said.

A health department official said the Chinese woman’s friend, a 30-year-old man from Bharatpur, had gone to the neighbouring country to learn Mandarin on September 6, 2019 and returned to India on January 23. The Chinese woman accompanied him to India. 

The other two admitted to SMS Hospital are a 27-year-old man from Jaipur who recently returned to India from China and was found suffering from symptoms of fever, cough and body ache. The fourth person, also from here, was found suffering from fever, cough, sore throat and breathlessness after he visited Guangzhou and nearby places from January 14 to 22. 

Two persons, who were admitted to the hospital earlier with fever, cough and body ache, were discharged after NIV Pune’s report showed that they tested negative for the disease. 

Three persons quarantined in Bikaner’s government medical college have also tested negative. The doctors discharged them from the hospital. 

Currently, 30 people in the state are under the watch of the health department officials for suspected Corona virus infection. All of them returned from China recently and the health department is monitoring them as a precautionary measure. 

The screening of patients at Jaipur airport for nCoV continued on Saturday. “The passengers travelling by international flights have been screened for the disease. So far 2,842 passengers of 19 flights have been screened for nCoV,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health), health department.


