Coronavirus less severe in kids, but they may be silent carriers: Doctors
2020-03-30
KOLKATA: With three children — aged nine months, six years and 11 years — from an extended family in Bengal testing positive to Covid-19 on Friday, it seems clear that the disease has now started affecting kids. All three children and their mothers are being treated at ID Hospital. However, though doctors have said the virus is known act less severely on children, they are being flooded with calls from anxious parents on how to keep their wards safe. 

“Since the virus is just about three months old, there is very limited data about its severity on children. But so far, Covid-19 is believed to cause less severity and fatality among children,” said paediatric intensivist Prabhas Prasun Giri.

According to healthcare experts, so far only China has come out with data on children affected by Covid-19, which says out of the 3,000 affected initially, only 2.4% were under 15 and the mortality was at 0.2%. “We do not have any data on children under one, but in general, other coronavirus have spared children largely in terms of infection rate and mortality during SARS and MERS,” said Raja Dhar, pulmonologist at Fortis Hospital, Kolkata.

However, since the virus spreads through the respiratory route and kids’ lungs are immature, doctors said infected children need to be closely monitored. “While caring for infected children, we should keep an eye on the oxygen saturation level and ensure they get sufficient fluids,” said ICH director Apurba Ghosh. 

“Children are susceptible to the virus, but are known to have better prognosis than adults, according to the literature available,” said paediatrician Pallab Chatterjee of Columbia Asia Hospital.

Many children with lung conditions like asthma are also at risk. Experts have advised extra caution for them. Additionally, because kids show less severe symptoms, doctors warn they could act as silent carriers. “They can pass the virus to the elderly in the household,” said Ghosh.


