Corona Yuga: Board game captures lockdown experience
2020-05-27
VISAKHAPATNAM: Defining moments of human experience find expression in a myriad of ways. The near-entirety of humanity is battling an unprecedented crisis owing to spread of the novel coronavirus.

This period of human history has already started making its mark on all creative pursuits. The pandemic has led to apprehension, and more pronouncedly, the governments’ stay-at-home orders, have led to boredom.

It is this boredom that has led a 10-year-old boy from Visakhapatnam, Veer Kashyap, to create a board game that articulates the narrative of human experience of our times. Titled ‘Corona Yuga’— the era of Corona, this board game takes players through the experience of remaining locked down at homes and guarding against the novel coronavirus.

The game requires a printed physical board, dice and pegs. Any number of players can play the game that has a run-time of nearly 45 minutes. In order to enter the game, a player has to roll the number two on the dice to land on the ‘buy mask’ block as wearing a mask is compulsory.

The game then goes on to blocks of washing hands over and over again, sanitising surroundings, buying grocery, maintaining social distance, paying penalties for violating lockdown norms and hospitalisation if tested positive for Covid-19.

There are also other blocks such as ‘do yoga’, wherein players have to perform a yoga posture. There’s also a clapping area, where all players clap together to appreciate frontline Covid warriors for their services.

Veer, the 10-year-old who designed the game is the son of an Indian Navy commander. When the lockdown was announced, Veer got stuck at his grandparents’ place. Bored with playgrounds closed and friends locked at home, this class five student decided to make a board game.

Talking about how he came upon the idea, Veer told TOI, “I was bored and wanted something new to play. So I designed a board game and decided to call it Corona Yuga.” His parents, Vinayak and Sangeeta, who are impressed by their son’s creativity, said that Veer drew out the game using cardboard and instruments available at home.

With the game, having gained a bit of traction, Veer is now trying to gauge concepts of copyright, trademark, patent and manufacturing. He wants to sell the game and contribute the profits from it to the PM Cares fund.

