Coronavirus scare hits  Chinese goods markets of Hyderabad real hard
2020-02-23
It’s a busy weekday morning. But when we pull in to the usually bustling Jagadish market, the go-to destination for the city’s aam aadmi to get their mobiles fixed or snag the latest digital goodies, we’re surprised that we are able to find a parking spot rather easily. As we make our way through the market, we notice the shops are all lying empty; the shopkeepers are either busy playing PubG on their phones, chit-chatting or looking out into the street, bored and glassy-eyed.

For a market that attracts over 30,000 customers every day, this is unusual. Anyone who’s been to Jagadish Market, Hyderabad’s largest wholesale mobile phone market in town, will know it’s almost impossible to hold a vendor’s attention for more than five minutes — such is the rush and demand. And yet today, the cacophony of bargaining customers is replaced by deafening silence. And no, the economy is not to be blamed this time. The reason for the sudden dip in business is as unusual as the sight of a deserted Jagadish Market — coronavirus. 

Shop owners tell us that their business has dipped by a staggering 40 per cent in the last one month. Why? because people believe they might get coronavirus just by purchasing Chinese goods! “Aaj kal logaan aare ich nahi, sabko lagta hai Chinese products se corona waala virus aa jaayega,” Saleem, a shop owner tells us. 
The situation is just as bad at almost all wholesale and grey markets, including Gujarati Galli, Hong Kong Bazar and the many China Bazar stores spread across twin cities. 

Hyderabad Times speaks to reluctant shoppers and dejected shopkeepers to bring you the full story.

 
 

‘Customers are worried that they will get infected with Coronavirus if they purchase Chinese goods’ 
Pehle se ich mera business kharab chalra tha. Par ab yeh corona ke chakkar main bahut zyaada nuksaan hora hai. One month ago, a woman walked up to my store and while buying something she said, ‘Isse woh corona waala virus toh aayega nahi na? Gharwaale mereko Chinese products mat khareedo bolre’. That’s when it struck me why our sales have dipped so drastically in recent times. Many have started avoiding our market thinking they will get infected with coronavirus because of it. On a normal day, 500 people would walk into our store, but now mushkil se some 50 come. Logaan aare ich nahi! – Mohammed Saleem, a shopowner at Jagadish market, who imports his products from Guangzhou ssscity in China


‘Even educated people are falling for WhatsApp messages about the spread of Coronavirus through Chinese goods’
Yeh WhatsApp main logaan galat news dere. Koi bol diya ki agar Chinese products khareed liye toh coronavirus aa jaayega! More than 40 per cent of my business has taken a hit because of such forwards. People look at me with a sense of fear, as if I too have been infected with the virus already and that I will infect more people by selling Chinese products. Padhe-likhe log bhi yeh sab cheeze maanre. Bahut takleef main hai hum logaan. – Aman Abdul, a businessman at the Gujarati Galli
 
 

‘Now, we lie to people that we are importing goods from Mumbai and not China, to cover our losses’
When the news of the virus was creating panic, even we were very scared since we live here amidst all these Chinese products. Jab se yeh coronavirus ka naam aaye hai, logaan China ka naam sunthe ich bhaag jaare. Hum log jhoot bolne lage ki hum woh samaan Mumbai se laaye, China se nahi. Par logaan phir bhi nahi maanre. There are hardly any customers willing to buy from us. For the last two weeks, we have decided not to import from China and depend on Korea and Hong Kong instead, but they are far more expensive. – Ajam Kareem, wholesale mobile spare part shop owner


‘People come wearing masks to my store just because it is called ‘China Bazar’A few days ago, two young women came to my shop wearing masks. When I asked them if they are suffering from the flu, they told me it is precautionary as they are visiting a ‘China Bazar’. Tab mujhe pata chala ki China main yeh coronavirus hua hai. I went into a total panic mode and contacted a doctor since we live here too. When the doctor told me that the virus does not get transmitted that way, I could actually feel myself breathing easy again. Par logon ko yeh cheez samjhaane main mushkil ho rahi hai! China Bazar naam dekkhe ich bhaag jaare hai logaan. Unko lagta hai ki yeh shop se coronavirus aa jaayega. Our sales have taken a huge beating because of this. – Faizal Samad, vendor at China Bazar, Banjara Hills


‘Strange to see customers walk into our stores wearing masks’

Aaj kal bina mask pehne koi hamaara shop ko aata ich nahi. Ajeeb lagta hai jab log mask pehenke hamare paas aate hai. They think this place is a hub of China products, so it might spread coronavirus. People who create and spread such fake news must be arrested by the police. Chupke se logon ke beech main darr ka mahaul bana ke rakh diye. China ho ya America, ek mobile cover se virus kaisa aayega bhaiyya? I hope we can spread awareness about this and tell people that Chinese products cannot give people coronavirus. – Adham Khan, Mobile case shop owner at Jagadish Market

 
 

It is impossible for the virus to enter our country through these Chinese products, say Doctors
Coronavirus can spread only through direct/close contact with an infected person. The water droplets from the body of an infected person when s/he sneezes or talks can transmit the virus. When a person sneezes, the spilling range of the droplets is 6-8 metres and it hardly lasts for an hour. Even if a product with droplets of an infected person is imported through an airline, it more or less takes 12 hours to reach India. So, it is impossible for the virus to enter our country through these Chinese products. — Dr Navodya Gilla, general physician, city-based corporate hospital 


 
It’s ridiculous to think that a virus can be transmitted through products imported from China. Even if, by some remote chance, a product was handled by an infected person, it’s next to impossible for the virus to survive long enough to infect you. So first of all, chuck that fear for good. You are safe as long as you have not had a direct contact with an infected person. What’s actually dangerous for anyone is this irrational fear itself. Everytime you experience fear, your body freezes; then there is a fight or flight reaction. When this freeze happens, your immunity plummets and that’s what actually makes you susceptible to any kind of infection or disease. As for all the misinformation spreading over whatsapp, including those about wonder cures for coronavirus, take it all with a pinch of salt. No one in India has had a chance to understand coronovirus yet, but what your local homeopath can do for you is prescribe some excellent immunity boosters that we have in homeopathy. It will bolster your immunity which will prevent you from catching any contagious infections. — Dr Manoj Kuriakose, homeopath


 


