Coronavirus in Goa: Gulal sales take a hit as virus forces people to stay indoors
2020-03-10
PANAJI: The sales of Holi items have taken a dip in Panaji market as customers are gripped with fear of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19), this year. Small traders who had set up temporary stalls outside the municipal market were seen helplessly trying to sell their stock as customers walked past heaps of gulal and packaged colours. 


 Subhash Naik from Porvorim who has set up a stall at Panaji market said that the colour packets were ordered 15 days in advance before the news of Coronavirus escalated in Goa. "The sales are 20% lower compared to last year," he added. 

Proactively, Sunita Naik, from Panaji had asked her suppliers from Belagavi to send a smaller stock. "Due to the corona outbreak we have ordered lesser products and are trying to sell off everything soon," she said.

Mukesh Naik, a vendor from Chimbel, said that despite these measures, business this year is very slow moving. "Our water guns are from China and so are the liquid colour drops that are mixed in buckets to fill the water guns. There is no craze for Holi this year which used to be in previous years," he said.

Despite news of the outbreak, some were seen enthusiastically purchasing gulal owing to the fact that Goa has not yet had any confirmed cases of the virus.

 "We enjoy playing with colours back home in Assam and this is our first Holi in Goa. The outbreak is not going to stop us from celebrating Holi at the girls' hostel," said Tushita Das, a student of marine biotechnology at the Goa University. 

Rakhi Naik, a resident of Caranzalem, said that she would be limiting her children to within the building's complex and will set a time limit for them to play in water. "It's better not to go out to play Holi but we cannot stop children. I can't send them out with a mask either. But other precautionary measures like time and place restrictions can ensure their safety," she said.

Manisha Muralidhar Desai, who owns a decoration store in Panaji, said that such celebrators are buying only herbal or eco-friendly colours. A majority of the products we sell are made in India, yet people are apprehensive and keep asking if the water guns are from China. We try to convince them but there is little we can do to erase their fears," she said.

