Delhi lockdown news: Today's updates from your city
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: Amid prevalent chaos and uncertainty over access to the essential services and commodities during the lockdown, we bring you the latest updates from Delhi.



Update at 11.12pm: No fresh coronavirus positive case was reported on Sunday in Gautam Buddh Nagar, even as the number of COVID-19 tests saw a sharp spike to cross the 1,000-mark, officials said on Sunday. (PTI)


Update at 11pm: The power consumption load in Delhi dropped by around 726 MW as people switched off electric lights for nine minutes at 9 pm on Sunday and lighted candles, diyas and flashed mobile phone screens to express unity in the fight against coronavirus, discom officials said. (PTI)


Update at 10.40pm: Update at 10.40pm: Residents of the national capital on Sunday night joined people across the country in expressing India's resolve to collectively fight Covid-19, lighting up 'diyas', candles and flashing torchlight from mobile phones in a symbolic gesture of solidarity following the prime minister's call. (PTI)


Update at 10pm: Delhi airportduring #9baje9minutes
#DelhiAirport is shining bright in solidarity with the rest of the nation as #IndiaFightsCorona. #StayHome… https://t.co/rwGm7awKvS— Delhi Airport (@DelhiAirport) 1586101544000


Update at 8.55pm: Of the total cases in Delhi, 18 have been discharged and one has migrated out of the country.


Update at 8.40pm: Gautam Buddh Nagar police extends for another nine days restrictions imposed in the district under Section 144 of CrPC in view of the nationwide lockdown which will continue till April 14.


Update at 8.05pm: Delhi food and civil supplies minister Imran Hussain on Sunday directed officials to check overcharging of essential items by retailers in the wake of the lockdown imposed to combat the coronavirus threat. (PTI)


Update at 7.40pm: Of the 503 positive cases, 320 are from Nizamuddin Markaz, say authorities.


Update at 7.20pm: Number of coronavirus cases climbs to 503 in Delhi; death toll rises to 7, PTI quotes authorities.


Update at 6.40pm: NDMC hospital's 30 staffers who came in contact with Covid-19 positive sanitation worker placed under home quarantine: Officials. (PTI)


Update at 6.20pm: Sanitation worker at NDMC's Charak Palika hospital in Moti Bagh tests positive for Covid-19, PTI quotes officials.


Update at 5.40pm: Police have requested district magistrate to place the 8 Tablighi Jamaat members from Malaysia in quarantine, who were intercepted by Delhi's IGI immigration department today when they tried to board Malindo Air relief flight for Malaysia: Delhi Police. (ANI)


Update at 5.25pm: The Delhi cabinet has given the nod for procurement of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) kits by city hospitals from local manufacturers and suppliers at market rate not exceeding Rs 1,087.47, amid an increasing demand amid the coronavirus spread. (IANS)


Update at 
5pm: 
Homeless people line up for food in Delhi 
 


Update at 
4.35pm: The CISF is 'augmenting' Covid-19 protective gear and healthcare paraphernalia for its over 40,000 personnel who will begin having close physical interaction with lakhs of passengers once airports and the Delhi Metro re-start operations, PTI quotes a top official as saying.


Update at 3.56pm: Delhi LG tells health dept to identify private hospitals that can be taken over by govt to treat Covid-19 patients, PTI quotes sources.


Update at 3.30pm: Our staff is well trained and will make sure that pregnant women undergoing labour pain reach hospital comfortably. So far we have helped 155 such women: Poonam Parik, PCR South Zone Incharge, Delhi. (ANI)


Update at 3.06pm: Chief of Defence Staff General Bipin Rawat on Sunday visited Covid-19 camp in Delhi at Narela and interacted with the doctors, including those from the Army.


Update at 2.38pm: Gautam Buddh Nagar DM Suhas LY orders educational institutes not to collect fee from students of the lockdown period, reports ANI.


Update at 2.36pm: A team of Forensic Science Laboratory has also arrived at Markaz Nizamuddin to investigate the case.

 



Update at 1.58pm: The stoppage of industrial pollutants and industrial waste has definitely had a positive effect on water quality in Yamuna river. We will conduct testing of the water to ascertain the percentage of improvement in the quality: Aam Aadmi Party MLA Raghav Chadha


Update at 1.26pm: The process, to hand over the 8 Tablighi Jamaat members from Malaysia, to Delhi Police is now under way. As per rules, all the members will go through quarantine in India, reports ANI.


Update at 1.01pm: A team of Delhi Police Crime Branch has arrived at Markaz Nizamuddin for an investigation into the case

 



Update at 12.50pm: Man suspected to have contracted coronavirus attempts suicide at Delhi hospital.


Update at 12.19pm: Eight Tablighi Jamaat members from Malaysia intercepted by Delhi’s IGI immigration department today when they tried to board Malindo Air relief flight for Malaysia. They will be handed over to the authorities (Police), reports ANI quoting Immigration sources.


Update at 11.45am: Mental health related queries see 50% spike since lockdown: Indian Psychiatry Society


* Queries on mental health grew by 80% in the metro cities in the last two weeks while consultations in tier 2+ cities grew by 35%. Most of the queries related to mental health were from Delhi NCR, followed by Bengaluru, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, and Chennai.


Update at 11.38am: Delhi Police urge citizens not to come out of their houses to celebrate Shab-e-Barat on April 8/9, amid lockdown; cops also urge cooperation from religious leaders and RWAs in maintaining lockdown.

 



Update at 11.02am: The national capital continues to enjoy a better quality of air with the AQI recorded under the 'satisfactory' category at 82. According to SAFAR, while there is 63 per cent reduction in nitrogen oxides in the city, PM 2.5 has reduced by 49 per cent due to lockdown which has been imposed as a containment measure to curb the spread of coronavirus, reports IANS.


Update at 10.43am: Two more nursing staff of Delhi State Cancer Institute have been tested positive for Covid-19. Earlier, four staff including a doctor were found positive at the hospital, reports ANI.


Update at 8.19am: Total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Gautam Budh Nagar district in UP rises to 58 including 8 fresh positive cases: District surveillance officer.


From next week, ration for even those without cards


* All non-ration cardholders living in Delhi would be able to collect ration at subsidised rates from fair price shops of the city from the middle of next week, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said at a press conference on Saturday.


* “We had already announced that the Delhi government would give 7.5kg free ration to the 71 lakh people who had ration cards. There are around 6.5 lakh people who had applied for the card but did not get it. We have decided to give these people also the benefit of free ration. Many poor people did not have any ration card. We created a website for registering such people. After the registration, we would provide ration to all of them,” Kejriwal said.


Factories shut in Delhi, Yamuna water sparkles

* What years of planning and huge allocations could not achieve has been ensured by a few days of lockdown. Stretches of the Yamuna that had become picture postcards for Delhi’s pollution, showing the toxic foam — byproduct of industrial effluents — were sparkling blue on Saturday. The stench of a decaying river too had receded. The shutting down of industries has made all the difference. The relief is temporary but holds hope for the future if we can draw the right lessons.


* The human assault on the river, though, has not stopped. Sewage through residential colonies that are not linked to sewage treatment plants continues to flow into it. Experts, however, say this is the ideal time to measure pollution levels in the river in order to let the agencies draw up a plan for acting against industrial pollutants in the future.


Noida firm chain reaches JJ colony


* Four more Covid-19 cases were reported in Noida on Saturday — all linked to Cease Fire, the firm to which 67% of the 58 cases in the district can be traced, with the infection chain moving from gated societies to urban villages and a slum cluster.


* Noida is also now one of the 10 novel coronavirus hotspots in the country.


* All of the 39 cases linked to Cease Fire can be traced to one of three suspected sources — two employees who had travelled abroad and an external auditor from the UK. While three of the four cases on Saturday were from Sector 62 — wife (42) and sons (13 and 10) of an employee who has not tested positive yet — the fourth person is a resident of an urban village, Wajidpur.


Govt to give transit passes to foreigners for going home


* Delhi government has decided to issue transit passes for foreign nationals who have been stranded in different parts of the city due to the lockdown and want to go back to their home countries.


* According to the standard operating procedure prepared by Delhi government, after the ministry of foreign affairs endorses the evacuation requests of foreign countries, the district magistrates of the area where the foreign nationals are staying will issue transit pass for vehicles deployed for their movement. The local transport arrangement from the place of stay to the point of embarkation will be arranged by the local embassy/consulate of the respective foreign government. The chartered flight will be arranged by the concerned foreign government.

