Coronavirus pangs for transgenders
2020-04-23
JAIPUR: Priya Sharma, a 27-year-old transgender from Jaipur city, has been surviving on leftover ration in her home since the lockdown. She is one of the thousands of transgenders in Rajasthan who are facing immense challenges during the lockdown. 


Narrating her plight, Priya says, “I used to earn Rs 500 to Rs 1,500 per day from marriages and celebrations, which is now zero. After the lockdown, there will be no marriages this year. Till then, it is very difficult for transgenders to survive as majority of us are daily wagers. We have no support from the government or the society. I have some savings, but after that is over, I don’t know what will happen.” 

Majority of the transgenders in the state do not possess Aadhaar cards or any other identity card, which is making it difficult for them to get ration from government shops. On April 15, Rajasthan High Court said that no discrimination should be done against the transgender community and they should be provided with necessary assistance without any identity proof. 

The community’s members say that the judgement has not been implemented yet. Pushpa, founder of NGO ‘Nai Bhor’, who is working for the rights of transgenders says, “We are still being asked to show identity cards to get ration or any government benefits. Recently, the government announced to give Rs 2,500 to economically backward people but transgenders are not included in that. There are no arrangements to get us checked or provide necessary medicines to us. Our community is already secluded from the society and this lockdown has made it worse.” 

There are around 75,000 transgender people in Rajasthan, majority of whom are daily wagers, earning livelihood by begging, dancing in marriages or through sex work. 

Malini Das, country’s first transgender engineer, explained that most of the transgenders leave home after puberty as they are not accepted for who they are. “Their priority is to live with their identity, and not to think about the documents that time. Most of our people are ignorant about the laws and without any initiative from the government, they are vulnerable. I know transgenders who beg on railway stations and with that money, they recently got their sex reassignment surgery done. Being broke amidst the pandemic, they can barely make the two ends meet,” said Das. 

Pushpa, with her own efforts, arranged for some ration packets but due to the strict lockdown, Jaipur district administration is not allowing the truck to get into the city. “I have made many calls to the collector. With the rising number of cases, we cannot pressurize the government too much, as they are also busy but at the end of the day, the transgender community is suffering,” said Pushpa. 


