Coronavirus: Schools in Indore to promote students to next class without exams
2020-03-18
INDORE: In the time of corona, several CBSE schools across city have promoted students of pre-primary, primary and middle schools to the next class on basis of performance throughout the session.


Following instructions of school education department and administration, schools have already been shut. But as several schools were not done with annual examinations, most CBSE schools have decided to promote children till Class 8. “We have decided to promote students from Class 5 to 8 on basis of overall performance of the year as we had conducted around four to five internal exams throughout the year,” principal of Podar International School, Yogendra Singh told TOI.

While exam of Class 1 to 8 haven’t been conducted yet, Sri Sathya Sai Vidya Vihar is likely to promote students on basis of average performance. “I haven’t yet taken the final decision. We anyway are to promote students of Class 1 to 8 as per Right to Education (RTE) but if the situation comes under control in time, we might take some test,” principal of Sri Sathya Sai Vidya Vihar, Punita Nehru said. There are other city-based CBSE schools too that had not been able to complete examinations and are planning to give average marks.

Delhi Public School (Indore) principal, Ajay Sharma said that there were a couple of examinations that haven’t yet been conducted and students will be given the average marks on basis of their performance. Most schools had conducted examination of Class 9 and 11 in February considering the preparations for boards. Their results will be prepared and declared. ICSE schools have postponed it till March 31 and decision to conduct exam or give promotion will be taken in April depending on circumstances. Despite specific instructions from administration to keep schools shut, two city schools remained open on Monday inviting showcause notice. 

Pink Flower School affiliated to Madhya Pradesh board and Sanmati HS School affiliated to CBSE remained open for exams. District education officer of school education department, Rajendra Makwani said that two schools will be given showcause notice and thereafter action will be taken.


