Coronavirus threat: Civil hospital keeps 15 beds in reserve in isolation ward
2020-03-08
Nashik: Senior officials of the Nashik Civil Hospital have increased the bed-strength of the isolation ward looking at the rising number of suspects returning from coronavirus affected countries. 

On Friday, four travellers were quarantined in the isolation ward after they started suffering from minor health issues. 

On Thursday, a 66-year-old person who had returned from Dubai about five to six days back was admitted at the Nashik Civil Hospital, after he started facing minor health issues. 

According to Nikhil Saindane, additional civil surgeon, Nashik Civil Hospital, the throat swab of the traveller was sent to NIV Pune and the coronavirus test on him came as negative.

He said that there were a total of 23 travellers from the district coming from virus affected countries. While four of them are quarantined at the Civil Hospital, the remaining 19 are quarantined at their respective homes. The concerned government medical officers are keeping a strict vigil on the health of the concerned suspects. 

Looking at the situation, the hospital officials have kept 15 additional beds in reserve, which would be essential if the number of travellers with health complications arrive.

Saindane said that the isolation ward has 15 beds currently with more than 15 beds kept in reserve. The general hospital at Malegaon too has kept an isolation ward with 15 beds on stand by. 

The officials confirmed that currently there are no positive coronavirus cases detected in Maharashtra. “There is no need to worry. Nonetheless, certain precautionary measures have to be taken. The district health department is spreading awareness about the same through different platforms,” said the sources. 

The state government health department has appealed the masses to stay away from people suffering with cold, cough and fever. People are also advised to report to the nearest public health facility if a person returning from abroad recently is suffering from flu-like symptoms. 

The officials said that they are prepared to take up the treatment of any coronavirus positive tested patient. 


