Coronavirus scare: Avoid needless travel or will stop trains, says Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray
2020-03-18
MUMBAI: CM Uddhav Thackeray said on Tuesday that if, despite appeals to the public to avoid non-essential travel, crowds in trains and buses do not lessen, the state would be forced to take the stern decision of stopping trains and bus services.


Thackeray said state government offices would be run with minimum staff strength. Modalities of how this would be done were being worked out and a final decision would be taken in two days, he noted. The state has already directed private offices to work at 50% attendance and held meetings with heads of large companies, asking them to have as few employees as possible in their offices.

“We are not shutting down buses and trains as of now. We are appealing to people to avoid non-essential travel, but if people don’t exercise restraint, we will be forced to shut them down,” the CM said after a cabinet meeting.

There had been a scare in Mantralaya on Monday when an employee showed symptoms of coronavirus. Though he tested negative at Kasturba hospital, in the wake of the incident there had been a demand from state employees to shut Mantralaya.

The CM said government offices doing non-essential work would be asked to function with minimum staff and non-important work pushed back so staff did not have to travel to office. Thackeray said non-essential shops such as those of garments or jewellery should voluntarily shut.

Sources said in the cabinet, some ministers were of the view that trains and buses should be stopped to ensure people stay indoors. But some senior bureaucrats opposed the idea and said this would lead to panic and many essential services would be hit. “Many people use trains for commute to hospital or for other essential activities. Also, vegetables are transported by train in many parts of the city. A lot of things will be impacted,” a senior official said. He said the state should rather focus on ensuring the private sector complies with its work-from-home order Both CR and WR will take a call on Wednesday on whether to run their AC locals.

