Coronavirus outbreak: 2 in isolation, 300 quarantined at home
2020-02-01
Two patients with history of travel to China were admitted to the isolation wards at citybased Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital and Government Tiruvannamalai Medical College Hospital after they showed symptoms of coronavirus (2019-nCov). Besides, 240 people who arrived from China and neighbouring countries were advised to remain in mandatory home quarantine for 28 days. By the evening, that number touched 300.


 
 

As the outbreak of the novel virus continues to spread across several countries, India has put its ports of entry on high alert.

 
 

A 40-year-old woman from China, who landed in Chennai on Thursday, reported to the Chromepet Government General Hospital on Friday with cold. She feared that she may have contracted the viral disease. The woman was referred to the RGGH where she is now in the isolation ward for observation.

 
 
“As of now we haven’t seen major symptoms of the disease. The patient is stable,” said hospital dean Dr R Jayanthi. Another patient, aged 25, who returned to the country before Pongal, went to Government Tiruvannamalai Medical College Hospital. His condition is also stable, doctors said. Health minister C Vijayabaskar told reporters that samples for tests were not drawn from these patients as they did not show symptoms.

Infectious disease experts say the symptoms for the disease mimic flu-cold, runny nose and fever. “We have asked all patients with these symptoms to report to the government hospital,” said director of public health Dr K Kolanda Swamy. As of now, testing facility for the virus is available only with the government.

All private hospitals have been directed to notify suspected cases on admissions. They have been advised to follow standard protocols, including isolation, recommended for all infectious diseases. If tests turn positive they should once again notify the government. The department has sent information about the disease along with standard protocols to all private hospitals and medical bodies, Dr Kolanda Swamy said. Information will also be made available on the health department webpages along with helplines for corporates and establishments, he said.

