Hubballi: Coronavirus scare hits chicken sales; sellers blame social media
2020-02-26
HUBBALLI: Fearmongering on social media about spread of coronavirus from chickens had led to a 60% drop in sales and nearly halved prices, sellers said, while poultry farmers don’t know what to do with the piling stock.

“A video about the spread of coronavirus from chicken went viral on Whatsapp and sales which used to peak in the weekends has dropped for a month now,” said Faizal Khan, who owns a shop in Keshwapur. “Many are believing rumours that chicken is the main reason for spread of COVID-19. Nobody wants to take a chance.”

Fake photos and videos are being circulated online, erroneously claiming that the virus passes from chickens to humans. The government stepped in to quell the rumours and clarify that chicken was safe for consumption but to no avail.

Hubballi has more than 15 dealers who own poultry farms and nearly 300 chicken shops in the city alone. During winter, a kilo of chicken sold for Rs 220 while it has fallen to Rs 150-180 now. In the wholesale market, chicken prices have halved – from Rs 80-90 per kilo to Rs 45-60.

“We are trying to convince people but those who used to buy a kilo are buying half a kilo at best. All sellers are reporting about a 60% fall in sales,” said Asif Khatib of AS Poultry.

“I used to buy more than 3kg of chicken on Sundays but now, family members are scared of the coronavirus outbreak and reluctant to eat chicken,” said Rayan D'Souza, a businessman in Keshwapur.

“Although prices will fall with demand, farmers cannot keep the bird for more than 40 days. They cannot keep feeding the birds and it will become a huge burden. Farmers are selling, even at a loss, to prevent the stock from piling up,” said Khatib.

Sellers recalled that they faced a similar crisis during the H1N1 more than a decade ago but it’s worse this time due to the fearmongering on social media. “H1N1 pushed poultry into trouble. Thousands of birds were culled due to fear but eventually things returned to normal. This time, the fear is more widespread,” said a seller. 


