#CoronaOutbreak: Virus outbreak alters honeymoon plans for couples
2020-03-02
The rise in the number of coronavirus incidents globally has led to rescheduling, rerouting and cancellations by honeymooners as they are dropping their preferred holiday destinations from their itinerary. If you’re looking for holiday destinations after you had to cancel your trip due to the outbreak, be quick, because places like the Maldives and Mauritius are being booked aplenty. 


The Maldives, Mauritius are among new favourite Honeymoon destinations
Tour operators selling packages for European countries are observing a shift to other destinations. Vipul Prakash, COO, MakeMyTrip, says, “Amid travel restrictions levied by countries due to the coronavirus scare, we are witnessing a shift in travel preferences among honeymooners. Overseas, Bali and the Maldives remain popular choices, with Bali witnessing a 40% year-on-year growth and the Maldives seeing a 33% year-on-year growth. Other countries considered by honeymooners in general include South Africa and Greece.” 
Priyanka, who works for a travel agency in Malviya Nagar, says, “Around 70%-80% bookings by honeymooners in the next three months have been for the Maldives and Mauritius. We are getting lots of queries regardless of the destination – should I cancel my trip? Which parts of the world can guarantee no coronavirus outbreak? Are there chances that we will be infected on an airplane? – so, we’re training our staff to be prepared with their replies. We had several bookings for Greece, but after the outbreak of coronavirus in the country, people are wondering whether they should cancel their plan or simply reschedule. Now, we’re not suggesting Greece as an option to honeymooners.”
Travel operators tell us that even for April-May, reservations are being made for countries with no reported coronavirus cases. Bittoo Bagga, who works for a designer in Connaught Place, says, “Famous honeymoon hotspots like Venice are not safe now. I wanted to reschedule our honeymoon from April to December because we wanted to go to Europe. I thought we can go when the situation is under control. But then I settled for the Maldives because of family pressure.”

 
 
 
 
 
 


‘We’re constantly suggesting alternate destinations to couples’ 
Tour operators say they are constantly checking advisories and updates for changes. Daniel D’souza, President and Country Head, Leisure, SOTC Travel, says that among honeymooning couples, there has been a rise in the popularity of tropical destinations like Sri Lanka, the Maldives, and Mauritius. He says, “We are monitoring developments and are in touch with tourism representatives, airlines, and on-ground associates to keep our customers updated. Keeping in mind their safety, we are recommending alternate destinations such as Russia, Switzerland, Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, South Africa, Tanzania, Sri Lanka, and Seychelles to honeymooners.”
Tour operators have confirmed that they have received 100% cancellations for Thailand and Singapore, which are otherwise preferred honeymoon destinations among Indians. A tour operator informs, “We have received 100% cancellations for Thailand and Singapore. Also, European countries generally top the list of honeymooners but due to the coronavirus outbreak, we haven’t received new bookings for European countries. Those who already booked their trips are either rescheduling or opting for other destinations as the trips are expensive and cancellations would cost them a lot in no-refund cases.”

 
 
 
 


Luxury vacays in the Andamans, Rajasthan instead of overseas travel
Couples who are cancelling their overseas plans are opting for Indian destinations like Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Vipul Prakash, COO, MakeMyTrip, tells us, “Many honeymooners are choosing to travel domestically instead of going abroad. Within India, couples are opting for a romantic luxury holiday to explore Andamans, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan.”
Smita Asthana, a merchandise shopper in Gurgaon, says, “We have booked a trip to the Andamans for March-end because we don’t want to splurge and regret by booking a foreign trip. Sadly, we won’t be able to boast about a Roman honeymoon. We can still go to affected the countries that have not banned travel or where no lockdown has been imposed but who wants to feel like a zombie on their honeymoon? Hence we chose the Andamans.”

