Chandigarh lockdown news: Today's updates from your city
2020-05-02
Amid prevalent chaos and uncertainty over access to the essential services and commodities during the lockdown, we bring you the latest updates from Chandigarh.



Update at 11.02
pm: The Chandigarh administration is registering people stranded in the area, in order to help them return home, as the nationwide coronavirus-induced lockdown continues. "The Chandigarh Administration has set up a helpline, and website for people stranded here and outside to register themselves," said Rajiv Tiwari, Nodal Officer for migrant workers, Chandigarh. (ANI)


Update at 10pm: Shops in green, orange zones across Punjab to remain open from 9 am to 1 pm from tomorrow, says CM Amarinder Singh. (PTI)


Update at 9pm: The containment zone in the city will be restricted to the pockets identified and notified by admn. There will be intensive screening and testing of all cases within the containment pockets as per protocol. The sector markets will remain open from 7am to 7pm.


Update at 8.20pm:  Odd-even formula will be applied for opening of shops & use of vehicles. For example on Monday 4th May, only shops and vehicles ending with even number such as 2, 4, 6 will be allowed. The rotation will continue accordingly. 


Update at 7.45pm: Six affected pockets declared as containment zones in Chandigarh w.e.f from May 4.

1. Kachi Colony, Dhanas
2. Part of Sector 30B
3. Part of Bapu Dham colony
4. Part of Sector 38
5. Part of Sector 52
6. Part of Shastri Nagar Manimajra



Update at 7.25pm: Haryana chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar on Saturday appealed to migrant workers in the state not to leave and start working in industrial units that have been allowed to resume operations amid lockdown according to the Centre's guidelines.


Update at 7pm: 187 new Covid-19 cases have been reported in Punjab today which includes 53 cases from Amritsar. Total positive cases in the state stand at 772, ANI quotes health department, Punjab.


Update at 6.32pm: 19 new Covid-19 positive cases reported in Haryana today, taking the total in the state to 376, ANI quotes health department, Haryana.


Update at 5.45pm: I appeal to everyone to follow social distancing norms in shops that will be opened in green zones in the state, says CM Manohar Lal Khattar.


Update at 5.40pm: We have permitted buses in the state to fill 50 per cent seats, says Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar.


Update at 5.35pm: In areas under red zone in the state, traffic activity won't be allowed, says CM Manohar Lal Khattar


Update at 5.30pm: We are in a better position than many states but situation could have been better, says Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar.


Update at 4.22pm: A 62-year-old coronavirus positive woman from Ambala City, with underlying health conditions, died on Saturday, bringing the death count to five in Haryana, a health official said. The woman died at PGIMER, Chandigarh, where she was admitted to last Friday with kidney and liver ailments, Ambala Chief Medical Officer(CMO) Kuldeep Singh said. (PTI)


Update at 3.43pm: The Chandigarh International Airport is prepared to resume commercial operations and is awaiting green signal from the Centre, airport's CEO Ajay Kumar said. He said that all Covid-19 precautionary measures are being followed by the airport authorities and social distancing will be maintained through distinctive markings in the premises. (ANI)

*
Update at 2.45pm: The Punjab and Haryana high court has also announced to extend the lockdown till May 17. With this, all cases slated for hearing between May 5 to 16 has been adjourned till July 17. The urgent matters shall continue to be heard by the special benches through video conferencing. No advocate, his clerk or litigant would be allowed to enter the HC premises during this period. 

*
Update at 2.25pm: The UK has announced seven more flights from Amritsar to fly back stranded Britons due to complete lockdown in view of the Covid-19 pandemic.

*Since the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic, the average daily collection of bio-hazardous waste in Haryana has been 800-1,000kg, said an official

*
Update at 1.25pm: 12 more test coronavirus positive in Haryana. Six each in Gurugram and Jhajjar. Gurugram tops the table with 63 +ve cases while Jhajjar reaches 34. Haryana's total goes upto 369.

*
Update at 1.15pm: Hoshiarpur - 32 patients have tested positive for Covid-19. All are from Hazur Sahib. They were kept at in a private school.

*
Update by ANI at 1.00pm: Punjab: A car driver drags a police officer on car's bonnet in #jalandhar after the officer tries to stop the vehicle amid Covid-19 lockdown


Watch | Punjab: A car driver drags a police officer on car's bonnet in #jalandhar after the officer tries to stop t… https://t.co/0ICPhtCLVT— TOIChandigarh (@TOIChandigarh) 1588404618000
*Following the nod from Union ministry of home affairs (MHA) to run special trains to bring back stranded residents from various states, the Ambala division of Northern Railway has started chalking out plans for Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh.

*Himachal Pradesh: The transport department has made all arrangements to resume operations when the lockdown ends. Nearly 6,300 buses in the state have been sanitised and are ready to ply if the government gives the go-ahead. However, the department has incurred losses worth crores.

*Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh appealed to those returning from other states not to be afraid of getting quarantined as it was just a means to ensure that they do not spread the infection among their families, neighbours or others.

*Punjab: 255 cases were reported between April 28 and May 1, accounting for 43.58% of total cases reported till date. The surge in cases led to increase in districts in red zones and orange zones, based on which the state government has to decide on the post-May 3 relaxations in the lockdown.


Lockdown in Punjab: Coronavirus zones in your city

 

*
Update at 9.24am: Death toll due to Covid-19 rises to 1,218; number of cases climb to 37,336, says Union health ministry 

*
Update by ANI at 8.58am: Ludhiana police garlands people violating Covid-19 lockdown guidelines; police appeals to them to stay indoors. Till now, there are 76 Covid-19 positive cases in Ludhiana district.

 

*After Himachal Pradesh relaxed norms allowing its people stuck in other states to come back, the online portal for making passes received four lakh applications in a month. 

*Punjab, which few days back appeared to be limping back to normalcy, has been hit by another fresh wave of cases — the biggest — completely changing the state’s scenario.

*As the central government is requisitioning trains to ferry migrant labourers to their home states, the Punjab government's records reveal there are around 5.76 lakh migrant workers in 22 districts of the state.

*A few residents of Hallomajra working as security guards in Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, are facing harassment at the hands of volunteers appointed by cops to ensure people stay in their homes despite instructions from the government that all the workers attached with emergency services should not be harassed.

*The Panjab university advisory committee has asked the dean student welfare (DSW) to chalk out a plan so that hostellers could go back to homes by obtaining e-passes from the nodal officers.
