Coronavirus scare in Hyderabad: IT firms, staff told to work from home
2020-03-13
HYDERABAD: Even as state health authorities await reports of three Covid-19 suspects and another suspected case from Warangal came to light on Thursday, information technology firms asked employees to work from home and stepped up security measures in offices. Anyone with a body temperature of more than 99 degree Fahrenheit on the thermal check is being barred from entering offices and some companies are even actively checking with employees if they have any fever or cold.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“I was turned away from office on Monday since I had a cold. Although, I do not have a recent travel history to any of the affected countries, our HR has asked anyone with mildest symptoms to work from home or avail off depending on their condition. This is in addition to other measures taken in our office like sanitation, distribution of masks and sanitisers,” B Shikhar, a software employee working at Hi-Tec City.

While sanitation drives and advisories have become a regular feature in most IT offices, managements were struggling with charting out timelines and plans for managing work from home. “We have a workforce of less than 200 and despite all measures put in place, we are looking at having majority of the people work from home in the near future. The step will be essential to continue our services in case of the spread of the infection,” a CEO of a company said. IT services company Tetrasoft at Mindspace has gone ahead and placed a health desk with doctors and nurses in tow to ensure its employees are safe and sent back home if they display any symptoms.

Meanwhile, the high-powered committee formed to monitor Covid-19 in Cyberabad area has already issued an advisory to firms to mandate all employees returning from foreign assignments to work from home for 14 days. “If returnees show symptoms, ask them to get tested at listed hospitals and work from home (WFH) for 14 days. Employee should join back only after producing a doctor’s certificate,” the advisory added.

