Coronavirus scare: Mumbai schools cancel foreign trips after Delhi shutdown
2020-03-05
MUMBAI: As a preventive step against Covid-19, and going by Delhi shutting some institutions, schools in Mumbai have cancelled or rescheduled foreign trips planned for the near future.


At Singapore International School, Dahisar, all school-organized travel has been cancelled. “A batch of 60 students was scheduled to visit CERN, the European nuclear research organization in Switzerland, in July. A group was to travel to Imperial College, London. We had also scheduled a trip to Nasa in June, and an exchange programme in Madrid. We have cancelled these,” said the school’s director Sharonee Mullick.

 
 

Similarly, Jamnabai International School, Juhu, has rescheduled an April immersion programme in Spain for July. Then, students from Aditya Birla World Academy were to participate in the North-East Asian Mathematics Competition (NEAMC) at Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, which has been rescheduled for later in the year.

Some schools are collecting students and parents’ travel histories. “Not only will it help us keep our children safe, but also help health authorities in case of problems,” said Yogesh Patel, director, Swami Vivekanand International School, Borivli and Kandivli.

Fazlani L'Academie Globale, Mazgaon, is holding information sessions with students. “Our trips for the academic year were over before the global Covid-19 outbreak. Now we are educating students about precautions. We have kept sanitizers in all our classrooms,” said a school representative.

Some schools have planned sessions with parents as well. “Parents have been informed about the school's readiness to allow children to come to school wearing masks if they so desire. We encourage parents to keep children at home if they show symptoms of cold. Staff have been inducted on precautionary measures and self-hygiene,” said Nikhat Azam, principal, Billabong High International School, Santacruz.

The Early Childhood Association has issued an advisory to member schools, discouraging field trips and big events, and advising that surfaces be sanitized regularly.

