Coronavirus outbreak: Quarantined man marries; 1,000 attend
2020-03-21
WARANGAL: Breaking quarantine, a man who returned from France recently travelled about 150 km from Hyderabad to Hanamkonda for his wedding on Thursday. 


Over 1,000 guests attended the wedding at a time when Telangana chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao has told all the people in the state and marriage halls not to invite more than 200 guests. Both the bride and groom are said to be closely related to a politician who holds a post that bears state cabinet rank. 

Besides this, the uncle of the groom is said to be a well-connected lawyer from the district. Among those attending the function were VIPs, including a women’s leader who holds sway in the party governing the state. When officials in the CM’s office found out about the wedding, they had the reception, scheduled for Friday, stopped.

Warangal police commissioner V Ravinder said, “We have ensured that the groom goes back into home quarantine.”Residents of Warangal, however, said the wedding was among many still taking place in the city despite the Covid-19 outbreak. Several large events were reported on Friday as well. The Telangana government has allowed weddings to be held till March 31, with restricted guest lists. All marriage halls have been instructed to shut down at the end of the month. The groom of Thursday’s wedding returned to India on March 12 with a friend and both were supposed to be in home quarantine for 14 days in Hyderabad. A native of Ramannapet area of Warangal city, the youth chose to go ahead with the rituals at Nandana Gardens in Hanamkonda.

Speaking about the numerous weddings still taking place in the city, Pavan Thotha, a local, said, “I attended three weddings on Friday alone. At least one of them had over 1,000 guests.”

Having also gone to a wedding at Kodam Convention in Warangal on Friday, techie-turned-farmer Nambuti Sai Sidhartha said, “There were 1,000 guests invited, but not more than 100 were allowed in at a time.” He added, “A team from Warangal Disaster Response was ensuring that only limited people were there at the wedding and dining halls at any given point of time.”

