Pune: Coronavirus brings nearly 50% of metro work to a grinding halt
2020-03-27
PUNE: The ongoing lockdown has severely affected work on the Pune Metro rail project, causing a delay of at least a month.


More than 50% of the work in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad has ground to a halt. Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MahaMetro) officials said only essential work was underway at select locations.


 

Officials said the Marchend deadline to fully operationalize the 5km priority stretch between the Sant Tukaramnagar and Phugewadi stations, which come under the PCMC-Swargate line.

The other priority stretch, between Vanaz and Garware college, was expected to be completed by June. However, the ongoing lull will push all the deadline by a month to a month-and-a-half, officials said.

“Work had been in full swing till the beginning or March,” one official said. “It then began to slowdown, first because of the coronavirus and then the consequent shutdown. Even plans to start new work have been put on hold till further notice. However, planning and other works related to the project are going on,” the official added.

MahaMetro now hopes to take up the work on a war footing before the monsoon,. “The slowdown’s impact is likely to be felt even in April, as the government has extended the lockdown till mid-April. The most recent prohibitory orders, such as restrictions on assembly of five or more people and social distancing have hampered the work at many locations,” the official added.

Some workers have gone back to their native places, while MahaMetro has put in place safety measures for those that stayed back. “Adequate arrangements have been made in Pune at casting yards and other locations. We are providing all necessary assistance to the workers. Protective equipment is also available for them to avoid contracting coronavirus,” the official said.

As per the original plan, MahaMetro hoped to complete the work on Sant Tukaramnagar and Phugewadi stations by the end of this month. Most of the viaduct work too was expected to be completed by then. “We are working on revising the plan and will expedite the work once the restrictions are eased,” the official said.

MahaMetro had started work on the two lines in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad towards the end of 2017.

The nearly 17km-long Line 1 connects Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation to Swargate. Work on the elevated section had started in 2017, while tunnel-boring machines imported from Hong Kong started digging the tunnel for the 5km underground stretch — between Range Hills and Swargate stations -- in December 2019.

Line 2 would connect Vanaz and Ramwadi iand is completely elevated.

After Prime Minister Narendra Modi, while inaugurating the third line of the Metro -— to be executed by Pune Metropolitan Regional Development Authority -- had urged the officials to ensure the Metro becomes operational by the end of 2019.

While the Metro rakes were placed on the tracks at Sant Tukaramnagar station before December 31, MahaMetro officials had started trial runs on this priority stretch earlier this year.

