Coronavirus: Kerala health department issues guidelines to hospitals
2020-01-25
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The health department has issued a set of WHO-approved guidelines and treatment protocols to all hospitals and medical practitioners to prevent the outbreak of coronavirus in Kerala, said health minister K K Shailaja on Thursday.


Also, three persons who arrived from China have been quarantined at hospitals in Ernakulam and Thrissur as they exhibited symptoms of fever. 

“Preventive steps have been taken, including screening of people coming from China and others who had recently-travelled in the region. Special isolation wards have been set up at all medical colleges, district and general hospitals,” she said.


 
The department has issued orders to sanitize all wards and operation theatres as a precautionary measure. All field workers, paramedical staff and doctors were told to wear protective masks and gloves while treating patients. Kerala Medical Services Corporation was told to provide medicines, masks, gloves, and protective suits. Instructions were also issued to send samples of suspect patients immediately to the virology lab. 

Shailaja said strict vigil was enforced at airports and ports to identify those with preliminary symptoms of coronavirus. If symptoms are noticed, screening team will shift the person to hospitals with isolation wards. For passengers without symptoms, steps will be taken to monitor them at home for 28 days. 

Meanwhile a youth, who arrived in Kochi from China with symptoms of fever was admitted to Ernakulam Medical College’s isolation ward and his blood samples were sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune for examination. Another person is kept in isolation at a private hospital in Ernakulam. 

In Thrissur, DMO Dr K J Reena said seven people are currently under observation at various hospitals. 

“One of them is in an isolation ward in a government hospital. These seven people came from countries with confirmed coronavirus cases. We are following the instructions given by the government,” she said. 

Also, 24 passengers were screened at Cochin International Airport and nobody was reported to be ill. Six more people are being observed at home, said the medical officer in Ernakulam. 

In Kottayam, two individuals who arrived from China and one from Saudi Arabia, were advised to remain at home for 28 days. 

Collector P K Sudheer Babu met officials to take stock of the situation. He said they will be subjected to medical test in government hospitals. 


(With inputs from Kottayam, Kochi and Thrissur) 


