Coronavirus rumours hit poultry industry in Agra
2020-03-08
AGRA: The recent positive cases of coronavirus reported from Agra has fueled false rumours among the public that they would be infected with the deadly virus if they eat chicken, causing a massive decline in sale and price of chicken and eggs in the city.


According to the poultry traders, in the last seven days, the wholesale cost of 1 kg chicken (live bird) got reduced from Rs 100 to Rs 60. The market price of one crate of eggs also declined from Rs 125 to Rs 95.

“False rumours are being circulated in social media that coronavirus can be contracted by consuming chicken. Due to this, there has been a steep drop in the sale. Our profit margins have also dipped. Even after lowering the prices of chicken, there was no improvement in the sale figures,” said Asim Khan, Sultanpur-based poultry trader.

A restaurant owner at Bijlighar crossing said that due to coronavirus scare, people have completely stopped ordering chicken dishes.

“Very few customers are placing orders for chicken now. People are apprehensive of catching the virus. We have witnessed approximately 40 % decline in chicken culinary items in the last one week,” he said.

When asked a resident why she stopped consuming chicken, she said, “I have always been a non-vegetarian. However, after reading reactions of celebs avoiding non-vegetarian food following the coronavirus scare, I have also decided to stop it for some time.”

Meanwhile, health officials have rubbished the rumours, saying that there is no scientific evidence to show that coronavirus can be spread by eating chicken.

“On the basis of rumours, people are wrongly linking coronavirus with swine flu. Majority of the people do not want to take a risk, therefore are abstaining from buying chicken and even eggs. Our teams are ensuring that standard food safety norms are followed in the sale of meat,” said Manoj Kumar Verma, designated office of food safety department said.

Mukesh Kumar Vats, chief medical officer (CMO), Agra said, “COVID-19 is a respiratory virus which spreads primarily when an infected person coughs or sneezes, or through droplets of saliva or discharge from the nose. People can safely consume chicken and other non-vegetarian food, but only after boiling properly.” 

A Chemistry professor at Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Ajay Taneja, also opined, “Poultry products have not been found to be involved in the transmission of 2019-nCOV to humans so far in any report globally. Animals carry different types of viruses. Proper boiling of meat is very important. People should avoid giving raw meat to their pet animals.” 

