Coronavirus scare: Health dept overlooks WHO protocol
2020-01-30
Bhopal: Amid growing concern over deadly coronavirus outbreak across the globe, including India, it seems the state health department officials are not bothered about the WHO protocol. They are busy discussing about ‘mild’ and ‘severe’ strain of coronavirus, even as emerging global threat Novel Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) has claimed over 100 lives so far. Assuming that the suspected patient from Ujjain suffered only ‘mild’ infection, the officials only sent two specimens (swab sample and serum) to NIV Pune.The Ujjain patient was declared negative for coronavirus virus on Wednesday, but the Union government’s National Centre of Disease Control (NCDC) deputy director Dr Suhas Dhandore later said that complete sampling guidelines should have been followed by the MP health department.Thereafter, joint director (disease surveillance) Dr Rajesh Kathal said, “The Ujjain patient will be kept in quarantine for 28 days. I will ask the state surveillance officer for testing protocol received from the Union government.” He admitted that the patient’s blood samples is sent to NIV, if patient is considered critical. “We do not know how the body is secreting the viruses. This is Novel virus. On the basis of information gathered so far, the WHO has recommended that body fluids need to be collected so that could we have correct information,” said NIV Pune scientist B and coronavirus nodal officer Dr Sumit Bhadwaj. Union ministry of health and Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) adopted WHO guidelines for MERS-CoV includes testing of six specimens from suspected patients.The specimens include swab sample, bronchoalveolar lavage, tracheal aspirate, sputum sterile, tissue from biopsy (lung), serum (2 samples – acute and convalescent). CDC USA is also including stool sampling for suspected patients of coronavirus.The state health department and Union government are not on the same page, when it comes to WHO protocols for testing of suspected coronavirus. MP health commissioner Prateek Hajela said, “The blood and swab samples of the suspected patient were sent to NIV Pune. We are following WHO protocols. No other samples are required. Biopsy is not required to be done on anybody, just because he has come from Wuhan, China.” He said the suspected patient is on the path of recovery.