Coronavirus spells trouble for electronics, toy sellers
2020-02-10
NEW DELHI: A crisis stares in the face of consumers as traders have put on hold import of Chinese products, including electronics, automobile parts, toys, mobile phone parts, fabrics and other materials, for the next two months.


The traders said that due to the outbreak of coronavirus, manufacturing units in China have suspended production. It has become difficult for businessmen to visit the country for checking the quality of consignments due to travel restrictions.

Manish Khandelwal, a furniture trader at CR Park, claimed that till December he visited China every month. “Even my clients came here till last month, but news of coronavirus caused panic among them. I need to visit the country regularly to check for new varieties, quality of products, negotiate prices and finalise the consignment. But I don’t think it is going to be possible to visit China soon,” he added.

Umesh Seth, an automobile parts dealer at Kashmere Gate, said many businessmen suffered losses during the ongoing Auto Expo as Chinese manufacturers didn’t turn up. “Traders from far flung areas come to place bulk orders at the expo. Even I had to cancel my tickets,” he added.

Low price, availability in bulk and variety are some of the favourable features of Chinese goods in India. The price of the same products manufactured in India are much higher, so people prefer to buy them even when there is no warranty, said traders.

Vinay Khandelwal, a trader of mobile accessories at Gaffar Market, said, “I have been in contact with my supplier. He told me that labourers are not turning up for work because of the sudden rise in coronavirus cases and deaths. These units were expected to open from February 8 with the completion of the extended Lunar New Year holidays. However, looking at the situation, I don’t think they will start operations soon.”

Confederation of All India Traders secretary general Praveen Khandelwal said traders importing Chinese products mostly keep stocks for at least two months. “The impact of short or no supply will be seen in April. In Chandni Chowk alone, around Rs 1,000 crore of materials are imported from China every month. Traders in other markets, like Lajpat Nagar, Rajouri and Gaffar Market, also regularly import Chinese products.”


