Coronavirus scare: Moradabad brass firms stare at Rs 700-crore loss as handicraft fair in Frankfurt wears deserted look
2020-02-16
Meerut: A drastic dip in the footfall at coveted handicraft fair in Frankfurt, Germany due to the coronavirus scare has left the Moradabad brass exporters gasping for breath as they are now staring at a loss of around Rs 700-crore. As many as 150 representatives of the brass industry, who have put up stalls at the fair which will a five-day affair, stared at empty galleries for the second day running on Friday.Adding to their woes, they have been allotted the stalls right next to exporters from China at the Ambiënte Fair Frankfurt 2020, one of the largest annual fares for handicraft held in Germany.Rohit Dhal, director of H Lal Exports, who spoke to TOI from Frankfurt, said, “Scenario is bad, really bad. There are 150 exporters from Moradabad and most of them are sitting idle. The US and European buyers are in any case not coming here because of coronavirus scare.”According to director of Export Promotion Council for Handicraft (EPCH), Neeraj Khanna, “According to an estimate, we expect a downfall of 70-80% in terms of footfalls. In usual circumstances, Moradabad-based brass industry used to conduct business worth Rs 800-crore in this fair. But, this year, we are staring at a loss of Rs 500 to 700 crores.”“We are already getting feelers from the biggest importers in the US and in Europe. They are cancelling their visits due to advisory issued by the US to its citizens,” says Rakesh Kumar, director general of EPCH.It’s not just export which has been affected drastically, but import as well.“There are a lot of items we import from China to keep our export deliveries intact. Our current orders are also stuck in the customs department in China. Factories there are shut down and no production is taking place. All that is impacting us,” added Khanna.However, there is a silver lining. China’s loss could be India’s gain. All hopes now rest on EPCH Fair in Greater Noida in April, the largest annual handicraft fair in India which is quite a draw for foreign buyers.“Since it is a national affair and no foreign exhibitors are invited here, we have strong feeling that losses suffered in Frankfurt can be made up in April. Although, we usually have Chinese buyers also, this time things are not so easy for them because of undeclared visa restriction after coronavirus outbreak. So European and American buyers can always arrive here,” said Vishal Agarwal, an exporter from Moradabad. 