Coronavirus outbreak: UV-based screening of passenger luggage at Cochin airport
2020-05-08
KOCHI: All the passenger luggage coming out of the flights from Friday at Cochin International airport (CIAL) will be exposed to Ultra Violet Light before reaching the passengers at the conveyor belt.


This facility has been set up by the scientists of DRDO’s Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory (NPOL), Kochi after the CIAL officials sought help in disinfecting luggage which will expose many of their staff to possible coronavirus infection.

On Wednesday, a team of scientists from NPOL fixed a UV Light scanner at the entry point of the luggage conveyor belt towards the aircraft-end.

“We had to do it in one day because authorities said that they wanted it ready by the time the flights land with passengers on Thursday afternoon,” said Sameer Abdul Azeez, project coordinator, NPOL.

He said that the UV Light facility was put at the entry point as there is a two-way tunnel after that. So, before it even reaches the customs, the luggage get disinfected. We have also suggested that they spray sodium hypochlorite solution on the luggage cargo as it is brought out of the aircraft. After that, this UV Light exposure will ensure that any person handling the luggage after that will be safe.”

As of now, it has been fitted on one belt only because of the limited number of passengers. This can be fitted in other belts too when more passengers start coming in over the next few days.

Meanwhile, NPOL is readying an automated luggage disinfector using UV-Bath which officials said would be ready in a month and can become a permanent facility at airports. This consists of a roller-based conveyor belt with a chamber that is configured with ultraviolet bath of calibrated dosage. The items to be disinfected are carried on the conveyor and their entire surface area is exposed to the UV rays. “It is with the production agency and will be ready soon,” officials said.

Another DRDO laboratory has developed an Ultra Violet (UV) Disinfection Tower for rapid and chemical-free disinfection of infection-prone areas. The equipment named UV Blaster is a UV-based area sanitiser designed and developed by the Laser Science & Technology Centre (LASTEC), Delhi with the help of M/s New Age Instruments and Materials Private Limited, Gurugram.

The UV Blaster is useful for high-tech surfaces like electronic equipment, computers and other gadgets in laboratories and offices that are not suitable for disinfection with chemical methods. The product is also effective for areas with large flow of people such as airports, shopping malls, metros, hotels, factories, offices, etc.

The UV-based area sanitiser may be used by remote operation through laptop/mobile phone using WiFi link. This sanitiser switches off on accidental opening of room or human intervention. One more salient safety feature of the product is the key to arm operation.

