Lucknow lockdown news: Today's updates from your city
2020-05-02
Amid prevalent chaos and uncertainty over access to the essential services and commodities during the lockdown, we bring you the latest updates from Lucknow.



Update at 11.08pm: Betel leaf farmers in Uttar Pradesh are incurring losses as they are unable to sell their products during the nationwide lockdown in wake of COVID-19. "Betel leaves are decaying in the field as their demand has stopped and they can not be stored. It is a perishable commodity and we can not restore it. I am losing a source of income. I have suffered a loss of Rs 40,000," Ashish Chaurasia, a farmer in the Nigoha area of Mohanlalganj told ANI.


Update at 10.15pm: To enforce the coronavirus lockdown, police conducted a flag march in Ghaziabad on Saturday. SSP Kalanidhi Naithani said orders were issued to all circle officers and SHOs to hold a flag march in sensitive areas to restrict the unwanted movement of people and initiate strict action against those violating the lockdown. (PTI)


Update at 9.20pm: 159 more people have been tested positive for Covid-19 in Uttar Pradesh today, taking total number of cases to 2487. Out of the total cases, 698 patients have been cured while 43 others lost their lives due to the infection, ANI quotes Uttar Pradesh health department


Update at 8.20pm: The first special train bringing migrant workers back to Uttar Pradesh from outside the state will arrive here on Sunday and talks are on with officials of many states to ensure their return, said an official. (PTI
)


Update at 7.30pm: Four people, including three women, tested positive for coronavirus in Uttar Pradesh's Gautam Buddh Nagar on Saturday, taking the total tally of Covid-19 cases in the district to 159, officials said.


Update at 6.35pm: Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath said that the patience of a person is his greatest friend in the disaster. So follow the lockdown with patience, it will be beneficial for the country, he said. (IANS)


Update at 5.50pm: Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Saturday asked officials to firm up a plan to provide employment to nearly 20 lakh people in the state after studying the Centre's advisory on lockdown and the permitted economic activities amid it. (PTI)


Update at 5pm: Hundreds of migrants from Surat who are on their way to UP were left stranded in transit despite necessary permissions, as UP govt is not allowing entry of their buses, Surat Police Commissioner RB Brahmbhatt said on Saturday. He said that Gujarat and UP govts are in talks to resolve the confusion caused by some "technical issues". (PTI)


Update at 4.20pm: The first special train for Uttar Pradesh has started from Nashik (Maharashtra) today morning and around 845 labourers and workers have boarded the train. They will reach Lucknow tomorrow: Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Awanish Awasthi. (ANI)


*Update at 3.30pm: A BJP activist was booked in UP's Muzaffarnagar district for the violation of the coronavirus lockdown, police said on Saturday. According to police, Sunita Malik was found wandering without a mask on a scooter in the Kotwali police station area on Friday. (PTI)

*
Update at 1.58pm: A special train with 847 migrants departed for Lucknow from Nashik in Maharashtra around 10 am on Saturday, says Central Railway

*
ANI update at 11.14am: UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath holds a Covid-19 review meeting in Lucknow with chairpersons of 11 committees

 

*
ANI update at 10.18am: Grocery shops and other outlets selling essential items will open from Monday in Varanasi according to a roster system, said district magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma. This comes after the lockdown was extended beyond May 4 amid surging Covid-19 cases in the country.

*
Update at 10.01am: Seven labourers who had arrived from Maharashtra via Jhansi in government buses to Basti, have tested positive for Covid-19, reports ANI quoting DM Basti

*
Update at 9.21am: Death toll due to Covid-19 rises to 1,218; number of cases climb to 37,336, says Union health ministry

*
ANI update at 9.03am: Out of the 865 samples tested yesterday for Covid-19, results of 14 are positive, says King George's Medical University (KGMU), Lucknow

*
Update at 7.30am: 22 new Covid-19 positive cases reported in Agra, taking the total number of positive cases in the district to 501, reports ANI quoting DM Agra Prabhu N Singh

*The novel coronavirus-induced lockdown that has struck a blow to economic activities across the country, is also set to hit the grassroots-level democracy in the state. Any decision by the government to extend the lockdown beyond May 3 would jeopardise elections to nearly 59,000 village panchayats in UP.

*Five days after a video of the inhumane treatment meted out to quarantined inmates at a private college in Agra went viral, this facility at Sikandra is now being converted into an isolation ward.


