Coronavirus scare in Bhopal: Tatya Tope stadium, coaching classes closed till March 31
2020-03-16
BHOPAL: In view of the Coronavirus scare, the district administration has directed that all coaching classes and sports activities should be suspended till March 31, forcing a lockdown at the Tatya Tope stadium and the city’s coaching classes. 


All sports activities at the stadium will also be suspended till March 31 for all members. According to the circular issued by the sports department on Sunday, boarding and day boarding athletes of all state sports academies will have a holiday till March 31.

The department added that the decision was taken in view of public health. Public places like sports grounds are frequented by many, hence the need for a lockdown. “Precaution has been taken to prevent the possible risk of the Covid-19 virus infection,” stated director sports VK Singh in the circular. The decision was taken in a meeting attended by Singh and senior officials of the sports department. 

It was decided at the meeting that all sports complexes and sports academies, including the Tatya Tope Stadium in Bhopal, will have a holiday till March 31 for all players trained under the boarding and day boarding scheme.

Similarly, all sports activities conducted through all the district sports offices of the state will be postponed till March 31 for all types of members. No sports activities will be organized by the sports department during this period. Even the hockey goal keeper coaching camp to be held from March 16 to 22 at Major Dhyanchand hockey stadium in Bhopal has been postponed.

For coaching classes, the district administration has issued a circular stating that their operations should be suspended till March 31. It was stated in the circular that students gather in large number in coaching classes which should be avoided to keep a check on the Coronavirus. 

In an attempt to check the spread of Coronavirus, the Madhya Pradesh government on Thursday had ordered closure of schools, colleges and cinema halls across the state. However, the exam schedule of the ongoing board examinations would remain unchanged. While there will be indefinite holiday in schools and colleges, cinema halls will remain closed till March 31.


