Coronavirus scare drives up interest in rental cars
2020-03-20
CHENNAI: With the Covid-19 scare keeping people away from public transport, self drive and rental car companies are seeing a sharp jump in subscriptions and enquiries. Car rental companies like Eco-Rent-a-Car and Revv have seen a sudden spurt in demand, others like Zoom has quadrupled rentals while Drivezy are launching new services to ride the wave. Work from home, fear of virus spreading while using public transport and schools being shut are all factors that are pushing greater demand for car rental companies. 


B2B car rental company Eco-Rent-a-Car, for example, has seen its individual cab segment attract fresh enquiries even as the tourist segment dwindles. “Since Monday a lot of our corporate clients are providing individual cabs to their employees rather than have them travel by public transport. So the private cab segment has suddenly seen a surge in demand. Some of these corporates are asking for 25 cabs a day or 35 cabs a day,” said Aditya Loomba, joint MD, of the company. 

Currently the individual cab business for Eco-Rent-a-Car is up to 350 cars a day while travel and tourism which used to be 200 cars a day is now down to almost zero. “But we have not increased our rates and offer discounts too in some cases,” he added.

Others like Revv have seen a 30%-40% increase in subscriptions said co-founder Anupam Agarwal. Drivezy on the other hand has actually reduced the price of the monthly bike subscription to Rs 6,000-Rs 7,000 per month for a period of 3-months. “Keeping in mind the concerns of customers who may hesitate to travel by public transport, we are rolling out the monthly car subscription service in all our operational cities,” said Ashwarya Singh, CEO and co-founder Drivezy India.

 “Customers can now rent a car for themselves and their family members for a month or more and these cars will be sanitised and sent after a full maintenance check-up.”

The demand spurt is also leading to a mark up in tariff. Self-drive rental Zoom Car has nearly quadrupled its tariffs on self drive cars in select cities. For example, a self drive KUV in Madurai earlier this month for 150 km drive was just Rs 1,249 with fuel.

 The same for the upcoming weekend is Rs 4,375. While the company did not wish to reply to TOI queries, a call to the customer service showed that the company followed dynamic pricing, like airlines: the greater the demand the higher the prices.


