Bihar: Coronavirus outbreak ruins vacation plans
2020-03-12
PATNA: The coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak has ruined honeymoon plans and family or group outings to Thailand, Maldives and other affected countries owing to restriction on travel and other related advisories.


Many airlines are cancelling the flights to other countries and holiday bookings have turned to temporary reservations.

Saurav Kumar of S K Nagar had planned to visit Thailand with his newlywed wife, but the airlines sent the cancellation message of flight tickets to him about a week ago. Saurav rued that there would be no refund on cancellation of hotel bookings. “It would take around 10 days to get refund for flight tickets as it was refundable. I had booked the tickets for Thailand almost two months ago,” he said.

Sandhya Prasad of Nala Road had also planned a trip to Thailand with her husband for anniversary celebration. “I have not cancelled the trip as it was non-refundable holiday package from Delhi to Thailand from March 22,” Sandhya said.

Ritu Tiwari of Rajendra Nagar said she had to cancel the Europe trip for her honeymoon under parents’ pressure. “I’m getting married on March 26 and we were supposed to visit London, France and Switzerland under Euro trip package. But our parents are scared due to spread of coronavirus,” she told this newspaper.

She added: “It is good that we had booked refundable tickets, but will not get back a penny for cancelling sightseeing and hotel bookings.”

The travel agents are also facing tough time as many people are cancelling the holiday packages.

Saurabh Khemkha, a travel agent, said five persons cancelled their bookings on Wednesday itself. They were to visit Maldives, Bhutan, Bangkok, Pattaya and Kerala. “Our business is going in loss as we have to refund the 25% commission that we make while booking the holiday packages,” he said.

Anupam Singh, another travel agent, said not a single person is visiting our agency for the query of holiday packages even though it is one of the busiest times of the year.

