Coronavirus: No impact on AP’s shrimp export
2020-02-08
VISAKHAPATNAM: Even though the World Health Organisation has cautioned people against consuming raw or undercooked animal products as part of its list of basic protective measures against the new coronavirus, the virus is yet to make its effect feel on Andhra Pradesh’s shrimp exports. AP is India’s largest shrimp producer, accounting for 30% of the produce. 

Although 23% of AP’s shrimp is exported to China, so far, the virus has not had an effect on the trade.

Exporters in Visakhapatnam claimed that peak season for shrimp export to China is from September to December and Chinese importers place their orders during this time of the year. So, the effect of coronavirus is negligible on the export. “Keeping in mind the Christmas, New Year and the Chinese New year importers in China place bulk order from September till mid-December. During January to August the orders are low. And, whatever small amount of shrimps we export to China during January to August is still going on,” Pawan Kumar G from the Andhra Pradesh region Seafood Exporters’ Association of India (SEAI) told TOI.

Exporters said that the US is the largest importer of shrimp from India (read Andhra) with 42% of the produce exported to the states. But, considering the present condition, they are not desperate to export shrimps in large quantity to the US. Rather, they are stocking the shrimps.

Explaining the situation,Pawan Kumar said, “We don’t want to make a hasty decision and start exporting bulk quantities of shrimps to the US. This would bring down the price. We want to monitor the scenario for the next few months. If the situation improves in China there won’t be any problem with export during the peak season. Else, we can think about the next course of action.” 

There are around 60 large exporters in Andhra Pradesh and most of them specialise in shrimp business. According to figures available with Marine Products Development Authority, under the ministry of commerce and industry, on an average Andhra produces 2,500 to 5,000 tonnes of tiger shrimps per annum.

