Coronavirus outbreak now a ‘notified disaster’
2020-03-15
NEW DELHI: With reports of confirmed coronavirus positive cases from states now touching 100 including two deaths (health ministry figures put the number of cases at 84), government on Saturday decided to treat the incidence of Covid-19 as a ‘notified disaster’ for the purpose of providing assistance for medical facilities under the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF). 


It also suspended all types of passenger movements on Indo-Pak border from March 16. On Friday, the government had announced that passenger traffic will be allowed only through 19 land check posts of total 37. Passenger bus and rail services to Bangladesh have also been suspended for a month till April 15.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

The central assistance to states will include setting up of quarantine facilities with temporary provisions for accommodation, food, clothing and medical care, sample collection and screening. It will also cover costs of additional government testing labs, consumables for testing and procurement of essential equipments like protection of healthcare, police, fire and municipal personnel.


Read our coronavirus live blog for all the latest news and updates

The initial announcement had mentioned assistance to cover hospitalisation expenses for a patient tested positive. The ministry of home affairs altered the order to remove Rs 4 lakh ex gratia for families of deceased as well as assistance towards hospitalisation expenses. The initial order included compensation for those involved in relief operations. The final order does not mention compensation, which means no sum will be provided from central funds for this purpose.

The MHA has “notified” the coronavirus incidence as a disaster. Natural disasters like floods are also similarly notified, but this is the first time for a pandemic, and officials could not recall when the provision was last invoked at a national level for all states.


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
 52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
 Helpline numbers for states and UTs
 Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
 How to stay safe
 How to quarantine yourself at home
 


The funds released by the Centre will provide for cost of thermal scanners, ventilators, air purifiers and consumables for government hospitals. SDRF is the primary fund available with states to deal with notified disasters like floods and earthquakes. A state government may use up to 10% of funds available under SDRF for providing immediate relief to victims of an event considered to be a ‘disaster’ within local context in the state.

With Covid-19 notified as ‘disaster’, states and UTs can now draw funds from SDRF, in addition to the money made available by state governments and the National Health Mission. The ministry of home affairs (MHA) has issued detailed guidelines to states and UTs in this regard.

Of the total 84 positive cases in India so far, 10 have been cured while two with co-morbidities have died. The cabinet secretary on Saturday again reviewed preparedness with chief secretaries of various states. He emphasised on strengthening preventive and control measures with adequate number of isolation wards, enhanced quarantine facilities and to ensure arrivals from identified countries are quarantined as per guidelines and took up steps taken for mass awareness about Covid- 19.

According to the health ministry, over 12.29 lakh passengers have been screened from 11,406 flights at the 30 designated airports so far. Apart from the positive cases, government has also identified over 4,000 people who came in contact with the 84 positive cases. “We have kept these 4,000 plus under rigorous observation and efforts are on to identify further contacts of these cases,” an official said.

The government has already issued stringent travel restrictions with almost all visas and also restricted passenger movements through land check posts. It has also implemented universal screening of passengers at airports and seaports, self-quarantine measures to effectively prevent, contain and manage Covid-19.


