Coronavirus scare hits hotel, transport business in Pune
2020-03-12
PUNE: Cancellation of bookings because of the coronavirus scare has started affecting the hospitality and transport sectors.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

A top source from a city hotel said, “There has been huge cancellation in long-stay room bookings from guests from Korea, Japan and China. We cancelled almost 150-200 room bookings last month.”

Some hotels have discontinued their contracts with cab companies, after a massive plunge in occupancy. Cab companies have also been hit hard after 60-70% cancellations of Pune-Mumbai airport transfers and on other routes.

Ashwin Trivedi, the director of car rental agency Pluto Travels India Pvt Ltd, said, “We are associated with all five-star hotels in Pune. After room booking cancellations because of coronavirus, they have discontinued all our contracts. This has led to a loss of almost Rs75 lakh in a month. After the booking cancellations, the hotels do not have many customers to use our cab services for airport transfers and local pickup and drop.”

Girish Makhijani, owner, Hare Krishna Comfort Tours, said, “Corporates have sent out communication to employees for meetings to be cancelled or have shifted to video conferences. So, cab bookings to Mumbai are getting cancelled. The cancellation rate so far has been 70%.”

Transporters renting out luxury buses have been hit, too. Kiran Desai of Swamiraj Tourism said bookings worth anything between Rs10 lakh and Rs15 lakh had been cancelled. “Now that Pune has some positive cases, we don’t think the situation will improve immediately,” Desai, the secretary of the Pune Bus Owners’ Association, told TOI.

Around 10,000 buses are given on rent in the city. “More than 90% of the operators are suffering losses between Rs20 lakh and Rs25 lakh. Close to 80% bookings have been cancelled for the whole month of March,” Desai added.

Rajan Junavane, the president of the Pune Bus Owners’ Association, said, “A college had recently booked one of my buses for a tour to Goa, but the booking was cancelled because of the prevailing coronavirus situation. The fear factor is huge, and no one wants to take a risk.”

Another transporter, requesting anonymity, said he had four cancellations in the past three days.

“The recent decision of the state government to increase the VAT on fuel by Re1 is another jolt in these troubled times. The state government should take some steps to bail us out,” said Prakash Gavli of All India Motor Transport.

An official of the Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML), which celebrated its “Bus Day” on Wednesday, said the passenger traffic was not as expected despite close to 1,700 buses being on roads. “Many are avoiding buses off late,” he said.

