Coronavirus in Hyderabad: Techie tests positive
2020-03-03
HYDERABAD: Health officials in Telangana went into hyperdrive on Monday after the state recorded its first positive novel Coronavirus (Covid-19) case. The patient, who works as a software engineer in Bangalore, had returned from Dubai on February 20. He landed at Bangalore, worked for two days in his office and then came to his home in upscale Mahendra Hills in Hyderabad on February 22 by bus. He is now in the isolation ward at Gandhi Hospital.


State health officials said that the ICMR lab at Gandhi Hospital first confirmed that he had tested positive for Coronavirus on Sunday evening. The samples were retested at National Institute of Virology, Pune, which too came positive on Monday. During his stay in Dubai the patient had worked with colleagues from Hong Kong, said health authorities.

Telangana health minister Eatala Rajender said that according to their estimates, the 24-year-old professional came in contact with at least 80 people after returning to India. 

“Over his travel to the city and his 11 days in Hyderabad, he came in contact with 27 bus passengers and 22 doctors and nurses at the Apollo hospital Secunderabad, where he was treated for fever as an outpatient, apart from his family members,” Rajender said. “The patient is currently stable.”

The patient is a frequent traveller to Dubai for work. “Dubai is currently not in the list of 10 countries mandated for screening for the virus,” the minister added. “It might now be added. We have alerted the Karnataka government over the possibility of the spread in the IT company where he works. All 80 people identified in Hyderabad will be put in isolation and will be tested. I believe that the high temperature in this region is not conducive for spread of the virus.”

The health department is also collaborating with a military hospital in the city to set up a 100-bed isolation facility for Coronavirus patients. At present Hyderabad has 80 beds to isolate suspected coronavirus cases at Chest Hospital, Gandhi Hospital and Fever Hospital.

The state government will on Tuesday hold a high-level review meeting with nine departments and agencies to put in place an action plan. These include the police, education, health, transport, revenue, tourism, urban development, panchayat raj and information departments.


