Coronavirus in Gurugram: Paytm employee tests positive
2020-03-05
GURUGRAM: A 26-year-old Paytm employee in Gurugram has tested positive for novel coronavirus, the company said on Wednesday. He is a resident of Pankha Road in Delhi's Janakpuri. 


The firm said the employee had recently returned from a vacation in Italy, one of the countries worst hit by coronavirus. He has now been quarantined at Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi.

 While the company's Gurugram office will remain shut for the next 15 days, employees in Noida and other offices across India have been advised to work from home for the next two days. Paytm has also advised all team members who had been in contact with the patient to get tested. The firm has nearly 3,000 employees, and the majority work out of its offices in Noida and Gurugram. 

"One of our colleagues based out of the Gurugram office who recently returned from Italy after a vacation has sadly tested positive for coronavirus. He is receiving appropriate treatment and we are extending complete support to his family," a Paytm spokesperson said, adding, "However, there will not be any impact on our daily operations and Paytm services will continue as usual."

 The Gurugram office, located on Golf Course Road, was evacuated on Wednesday afternoon after the employee's colleagues learnt that he had tested positive. 

 "The employee works from the Gurugram office and came back from Italy on February 26. Around 1 pm on Wednesday, there was some commotion among employees, after which we found out about this case. The office was evacuated almost immediately and we were asked to go home. By evening, we received communication that the Gurgaon office has been shut for the next 15 days," said an employee. According to sources, the employee had visited the Noida office on Monday and Tuesday. 


6 quarantined in Noida test negative

Six residents, who were screened for coronavirus on Monday after coming into contact with a Delhi patient, have all tested negative. However, the six persons — a couple with a son, and a woman with two daughters — are still in quarantine at their respective homes.

 “We are in touch with them and will take daily updates with them for 14 days,” said Anurag Bhargava, chief medical officer (CMO), GB Nagar. So far, as many as 391 people who had travelled abroad since January 15 have been kept under surveillance in GB Nagar.

 On Wednesday, 18 more people were screened and tested in the district. While 50 results out of 67 tested so far have come out negative, the remaining 17 reports are pending. All samples have been sent to the National Centre for Disease Control, said Brigadier (Retd) Dr RK Gupta, director, Government Institute of Medical Sciences (GIMS), Greater Noida.


