Coronavirus drives sex out of the bedroom
2020-04-19
Bhubaneswar: ‘Hum tum ek kamre mein bandh ho, aur chabi kho jay,’ crooned Shailendra Singh in Bobby with a young Rishi Kapoor romancing the beautiful Dimple Kapadia. The song leaves little to the imagination. Growing up, this could have been a staple for many youngsters. But not now. Cooped up inside the room for days with the novel coronavirus-enforced lockdown is taking a toll on active sex life.

The tension of dealing with the grim situation and the disturbing news from all around are putting a strain on conjugal relationship, feel experts.

“People are under a lot of stress. The pandemic has hit the economy hard. There’s threat of job loss in every sector. This could have been dissuading people from engaging in sexual activities,” said psychologist Pratap Kumar Rath.

He feels that unless a cure for the virus is found, the mood and the sexual appetite are not going to change anytime soon.

The sale of condoms reflects the mood of the people. These days, demand for sanitisers, masks and HCQ tablets has taken precedence over condoms. On an average, 80,000 condoms worth Rs 6 lakh used to be sold in Bhubaneswar every month before Covid-19 struck. “Now, sales have declined by over 70 per cent,” said Ajay Agarwal, one of the leading distributors of condoms in Odisha.

“We have stopped ordering new stock due to the sharp decline in demand,” said Dharmendra Narayan Senapati, who owns a medicine store in the state capital.

Rashmita Senapati (name changed), a software professional, said their conjugal relationship is not the same anymore. “Sexual activity is not on our mind these days due to the stress and anxiety that the virus outbreak has brought on us,” she said. “Between work from home and managing the house in the absence of the maid and cook, sex is not exactly a priority these days,” she added. 

Psychiatrist Surjeet Sahoo attributed a decrease in sexual urge to increased screen time. “People these days are glued to their mobile phones, TVs or laptops looking up news on the virus and its cure. The news is increasing the stress level,” Sahoo said.

“Besides, being cooped up at home for days can have a distressing effect on the mind. It can make people edgy, and that is not an ideal frame of mind for sex,” he added.

Then there’s the privacy factor as well. “With the entire family at home, people may not be getting the privacy to indulge in sexual activities,” Sahoosaid.

Lagnajit Sahu (name changed), a government officer, seconded it. “When children are around all the time, there is little scope of engaging in sexual activities,” he said.


