Mumbai lockdown news: Today's updates from your city
2020-04-05
Amid prevalent chaos and uncertainty over access to the essential services and commodities during the lockdown, we bring you the latest updates from your city.


Update at 11pm: Siddhivinayak temple during '9pm, 9-minutes' event

 


Update at 9.35pm: Glimmer of diyas in a Mumbai suburb marks PM Modi's '9pm, 9-minutes' call.


Glimmer of diyas in a Mumbai suburb mark PM Modi's '9pm, 9-minutes' call. #9baje9minute #Coronaviruslockdown https://t.co/SrWFLXHves— TOI Mumbai (@TOIMumbai) 1586102682000

Update at 9.05pm: All vegetable markets in Vasai- Virar region shut for four days from Monday to Thursday.


Update at 8.35pm: 13 COVID-19 patients die in Maharashtra on Sunday; toll rises to 45. Out of these, 30 deaths are from Mumbai.


Update at 7.35pm: As many as 80 Muslim IAS, IFS, IPS and officers of allied services, many retired but mostly serving, have appealed to the Muslim community to “act responsibly and stand out as examples for fellow citizens in the fight against coronavirus.”

In this hour of crisis, the officers said, Muslim community should come forward and strengthen the hands of the government and follow the directions of the ministry of the health and WHO to fight the coronavirus.


Update at 6.35pm: The Mahim Police have arrested eight people for assembling for namaaz on Friday despite the nationwide lockdown in force to curb the spread of coronavirus.


Update at 6pm: Family members of a 71-year-old man from Vakola in Mumbai who died of coronavirus infection on Friday have claimed that civic-run Kasturba Hospital had refused to admit him when they failed to provide his travel history. One of the two sons of the deceased said on Sunday that family members came to know about the exact cause of the death only after local police informed them.


Update at 5pm: As many as 29 people tested positive for coronavirus in Mumbai on Sunday, taking the total number of such cases in Maharashtra 690, state health minister Rajesh Tope said. With this, 406 COVID-19 cases have been reported from Mumbai alone, he said.


Update at 4pm: We have focused all the isolation beds in a few hospitals. Now we have 3,500 beds dedicated to Covid19 patients, says BMC chief


Update at 3.35pm: 29 new COVID-19 cases in Mumbai; Maharashtra tally jumps to 690: Health Minister Rajesh Tope


Update at 2.45pm: One more Covid-19 positive case reported in Mumbai’s Dharavi area.


Update at 1.50pm: Stern action will be taken against those spreading misleading / hate videos about Nizamuddin incident, says Maharashtra home minister Anil Deshmukh


Update at 1.20pm: 10 Filipino nationals have been booked in Vashi area of Navi Mumbai under Sections 188, 269, 270 of IPC, Section 14 of Foreigners Act 1946 & Section 11 of Maharashtra Covid-19 regulations, reports ANI.


Update at 12.45pm: Civic body to use rapid tests for health staff


Update at 11.05am: Cleric urges Muslims in Navi Mumbai to cooperate

A cleric of Tablighi Jamaat, Markaz Nizamuddin, has appealed to Muslims in Taloja to cooperate with police by offering namaaz at home. He also appealed to those who have returned from the Delhi congregation to inform police about their attendance there.


Update at 10.10am: Owner of press with staff from Worli tests Covid-19 positive

A senior citizen living in Dadar tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, with authorities saying he was likely to have contracted the novel coronavirus from one of his employees at his printing press in Prabhadevi. 


Update at 9.35am: 
Medicine supplies delayed as doorstep delivery halts in Mumbai, Thane

Availability of daily essentials continues to remain sporadic owing to a shortage of transportation, drivers and loaders. A matter of growing anxiety is the delay in supply of essential medicines to local chemists. Drug stores in Mumbai, Thane and Navi Mumbai are reporting procurement delays. 


Update at 8.54am: BMC amps up fight against Covid-19 with mobile medical squads, home visits for swabs
Even as the civic authority has a 10-day stock of personal protection equipment (PPEs) for its healthcare staff, it has introduced mobile medical squads, free home collection of throat swabs, and rapid upscale of the number of beds available for quarantine and isolation.


Update at 8.30am: Ward with tony SoBo areas second only to Worli in number of Covid-19 cases

The city’s D ward, which boasts of some of the most affluent addresses such as Malabar Hill, Napean Sea Road and Walkeshwar, had reported 30 Covid-positive cases until Friday. It has emerged as the second highest ward in terms of number of cases among the 24 civic administration wards in the city. Four more new cases were reported in the ward until Saturday evening.


* Mumbai’s 4% death rate lower than state, but more than national averageBMC has said that Mumbai's Covid-19 fatality rate stands at around 4%, which is less than the state average (5%). It was, however, more than the national average of 3%. Mumbai had reported 18 deaths until Friday, the day BMC gave out the information.


* Maharashtra logs 145 cases, its sharpest 24-hr rise in tally; 4 die in Mumbai 
Even as Mumbai registered four more deaths due to Covid-19, Maharashtra witnessed its sharpest 24-hour rise in tally by 145 to reach 635 cases by Saturday evening. The coronavirus tally in Mumbai, possibly the worst-hit city in the country, too rose significantly by 52 cases to climb to 377 so far.


* Maharashtra govt bars sale of PPE sans its approvalCracking down on black marketing and hoarding of masks and personal protective equipment, the state has invoked provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, to restrain manufacturers from selling them without its nod. It said it would fix the rates and the products can be sold only to organisations approved by it.


* 22 of Maharashtra's total 32 corona deaths have been in MumbaiWhile Maharashtra saw the highest number of cornonavirus cases in a day on Saturday, taking the total number of cases from 490 to 635, Mumbai saw four more deaths. The BMC health update for Satuday said that out of the four deaths in the city, three were of patients with co-morbidities and one of a person with other age-related risk factors.


* Neighbour of Tablighis’ host among 2 new Dharavi cases
A 30-year-old woman from the housing society where Tablighi Jamaat members were hosted by a garment businessman before Covid-19 claimed him and a 48-year-old man from another place in Dharavi tested positive for the novel coronavirus on Saturday. The test results took the number of positive cases from Dharavi to five.

