Coronavirus-struck Kolkata mourns Irrfan Khan’s death in Mumbai
2020-04-30
KOLKATA: Four years back, Irrfan was in Bangladesh to shoot for a Bengali film titled ‘Doob (No Bed Of Roses)’. The film had released in October 2017 — five months before he was diagnosed with cancer. On Wednesday, he succumbed to it in Mumbai. His untimely death added to the lockdown gloom for his friends, fans and well-wishers in Kolkata.


Right from the morning, condolence messages started pouring in from the likes of actor Rituparna Sengupta and director Atanu Ghosh, among others. “I am sad and devastated to know about the sudden demise of one of the most powerful and greatest actors of our times,” Sengupta said. “Along with a few others, he started a new era in contemporary Indian film acting. His craft, rooted in intense realism and effortless flexibility, changed the course of Indian cinema towards truthfulness and conviction, which inspired a large group of actors even from regional cinema to work on an intuitive and instinctive form,” said Ghosh.

Tannishtha Chatterjee’s first shooting experience in Kolkata was with Irrfan for director Florian Gallenberger’s Bengali film ‘Shadows of Time’, where Irrfan played her husband. Two years later, he was back in Kolkata to shoot for Mira Nair’s ‘The Namesake’. Subsequently, he shot for Shoojit Sircar’s ‘Piku’ in Kolkata. But before ‘Shadows of Time’, Irrfan had established his Bengal connection with Tapan Sinha’s ‘Ek Doctor Ki Maut’ (1990) and Anjan Dutt’s ‘Badadin’ (1998). 

“Incidentally, Irrfan had also directed me in a Hindi telefilm. When I was in National School of Drama, I acted in a film written by his wife Sutapa Sikdar. When we were doing ‘Shadows of Time’, Irrfan was already a star having done ‘Haasil’. This was the second film in my career. Yet he agreed to do a cameo because he liked the script,” Chatterjee said. That, according to Chatterjee, was the hallmark of a great actor. “

Parno Mittra who had shot with Irrfan for Kolkata-based Eskay Movie’s ‘Doob’, said, “Everyone mourning his death, even without having worked with him, is genuinely upset. Everyone really feels the pain. We all knew he was sick but it is heart-breaking to hear that he is gone. The last time I met him was at the premiere of ‘Doob’. 

It is a similar thought for producer Ashok Dhanuka, who had acted in ‘Doob’. “I spent 15 days with him. He was a down-to-earth person. We were both from Rajasthan and sometimes, he would want bajra roti and I would get it from home,” he said. 

Bangladeshi filmmaker Mostofa Sarwar Farooki’s ‘Doob’ has a scene where Irrfan’s character talks to his daughter about what his father had said about death. “Manush mara jae jokhon ei prithibir kachhe taar proyojon phuriye jae othoba taar kachhe prithibir (People die when they become irrelevant to the world or the world becomes irrelevant to them) That’s why I used to do this: Every day, I would visit my father to discuss a concocted issue. But I never concluded it. I always said: ‘We’ll discuss the rest tomorrow’. That way I gave my father a reason to live for one more day. That’s how I kept death away…” 

“I wish he had mastered the art of cheating death in real life too,” Farooki said.


