Coronavirus scare: Review nod for public meetings, Telangana HC tells police
2020-03-05
HYDERABAD: The Telangana High Court on Wednesday took steps to clean its premises and told the state and its administrative machinery to leave no stone unturned to tackle Coronavirus. 


Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan told advocate general BS Prasad in the morning that some doctors should be present in the court from Thursday to screen all those who enter the HC premises, and also to provide the required masks to all of them. 

It said some doctors should be deputed to screen those entering the court halls. The CJ also accorded permission to hear an urgent petition filed by G Siddha Lakshmi from Manikonda in Hyderabad seeking immediate steps to prevent the spread of Coronavirus by discouraging celebrations of Holi festival on March 9 and 10. 

The bench of CJ and Justice Abhishek Reddy took up this PIL in the afternoon and directed the state to come out with a plan by Thursday to deal with the situation. 

"It is better to avoid gatherings of people. I am appealing to all lawyers to tell their clients not to come to courts, both high court and trial courts," the CJ said. 

He also gave instructions through the registrar general to all the trial courts to not punish the accused or jail authorities if they fail to produce the accused before the court. "All jails must have quarantine facilities...," he said. 

Since slums are more vulnerable, the authorities must concentrate on them more, the CJ said. 

Senior counsel, S Niranjan Reddy, offered some suggestions based on the model followed by UK government, which is deputing its medical teams and officials to schools to educate children and teachers about Coronavirus. "Instead of earmarking isolation wards in hospitals, there should be two or three hospitals that should be designated and all suspected patients should be shifted to these hospitals, because the isolation wards in the hospitals are making the whole hospitals as suspects," he said.

The case was posted to Thursday for further hearing.

