Coronavirus partially affects tourism in Bihar
2020-02-06
PATNA: The outbreak of novel coronavirus (CoV) in China has partially hit tourism sector in Bihar, especially at Bodh Gaya and Nalanda where Chinese Buddhist pilgrims and tourists from Thailand, Hong Kong and Vietnam visit in large numbers.

State tourism department officials, however, said the overall tourist footfalls have not dropped much. Buddhists and people from all walks of life from across the world visit Bodh Gaya, which is considered the seat of enlightenment of Lord Buddha.

Though December to February period is considered to be peak tourist season at Bodh Gaya, officials and hospitality sector experts said the footfalls have been comparatively less so far this time.

Suryaketu Das, an official at tourist information centre of Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation (BSTDC) at Bodh Gaya, said: “The festive season at Bodh Gaya begins in September and reaches its peak in January-February. A large number of Chinese pilgrims visit different monasteries and the Mahabodhi Temple every year during this time. This year, pilgrims from China haven’t arrived following restrictions due to spread of coronavirus. Nevertheless, there hasn’t been much impact on tourists arrival from other countries.”

A member of Bodh Gaya Temple Management Committee (BTMC) said medical teams have been deputed at the temple for check-up of every visitor. “Tourists from China, Singapore and Vietnam, who arrived at Bodh Gaya after January 15, have undergone various tests. The medical team keeps a regular check on them,” he said.

Arun Kumar Ojha, member of Bodh Gaya Hotelier Association, said: “More than 500 Chinese tourists arrive at Bodh Gaya in February. But this time we are not expecting any visitor from China.”

Sharing similar views, KN Jha, manager of a luxurious hotel at Rajgir, said Chinese tourists contribute to around 40%-45% of the total bookings during this season. “Since, they have been restricted from coming to India, a major part of tourism sector has been affected. The tourists made last-minute cancellation of their bookings at various hotels in Rajgir,” he said and added: “The coronavirus has also affected tourists from countries like Myanmar and Japan. At least 10% of the tourists coming from these countries have cancelled their bookings.”

State surveillance officer Dr Ragani Mishra, who visited Gaya airport on Wednesday, said the outbreak hasn’t impacted tourism much as tourists from countries like Thailand are reaching there in huge numbers. “Authorities at Gaya airport are keeping a check on international tourists. From filling forms to thermal screening, several measures have been taken by the state health department to protect people from any infection. Besides, an emergency phone number has also been given to them in case they get any symptoms of coronavirus,” she said.

Meanwhile, a Supaul resident, who returned from Nepal on Wednesday, was kept under observation at his home. “We have sent his sample to National Institute of Virology (NIV) at Pune. As of now, he has been kept in isolation at his home in Supaul,” said Mishra.

Rajiv Sharma, an official at BSTDC’s tourist information centre in Rajgir said: “The outbreak hasn’t affected the inflow of international tourists, except from China.”


