Coronavirus fails to scare Holi revellers in Patna
2020-03-07
PATNA: The Coronavirus scare seems to have no impact on Holi as people were busy planning and preparing for the festival of colours to be celebrated on March 10.

Hotels, clubs, restaurants and coffee shops are soaked up in the colours of Holi and have made arrangements for food, dance and music on that day. Many celebrities, including singers and dancers, will also attend Holi Milan events. Several events have been organized by women groups, housing societies, water parks, hostels and schools.

Ambpali handloom and handicraft multistate cooperative society president Archana Singh, who will be organizing a Holi Milan event on International Women’s Day on Sunday, said: “It’s our annual event where we invite people from rural areas as well. I don’t think it has anything to do with Covid-19 as there won’t be any foreigner. Besides, it is not a huge gathering.”

Sagar, an official at a water park in Danapur area, said over 2,000 people have already made bookings for Holi Milan event. “From Bhojpuri and Bollywood music by renowned disc jockeys (DJs) to pool party and unlimited food and refreshments, the pre-Holi event will have everything to refresh the mood of Patnaites. People in huge numbers will attend the party on Sunday. Few Bhojpuri celebrities will also be a part of the event,” he said.

While hundreds of Patnaites have already made bookings, some are still in search of the best Holi Milan event. “My friends and I were not very sure about attending a Holi party. However, we will be attending the one on Sunday. I don’t think Holi celebration has anything to do with Covid-19,” said Hansika, a resident of Kadamkuan. 

Meanwhile, various Holi Milan events were celebrated on Friday as well. Amit, the coordinator of an event held at Bharatiya Nritya Kala Mandir, said: “I agree that Covid-19 is a major issue nowadays. However, the ancient Hindu festival of Holi marks the end of winter and the victory of good over evil. Therefore, a small event was organized. Altogether 50 people attended it. Art, culture and youth affairs department minister Pramod Kumar was also a part of the Holi Milan event.”

Sharing similar views, Abhay Nandan, secretary of Pataliputra Vikas Manch, said: “Covid-19 is a serious issue. However, I feel it is becoming too serious. We cannot put our lives on hold. Hence, we organized a Holi Milan event.”

He added: “Hundreds of people attended our Holi event where we used colours made from refined flour.”


