Coronavirus in Kolkata: 3 in ID isolation ward; health department sets up camp at airport
2020-03-05
KOLKATA: The ID&BG Hospital on Wednesday admitted three suspects in the isolation ward. Also, the state health department has set up a camp at the airport terminal international wing to ensure immediate quarantine of flyers identified as ‘suspects’ after thermal screening.


One of the suspects is a woman from Dum Dum who had been in close contact with friends who had travelled to Thailand recently. While none of the friends are corona infected, the woman showed some symptoms. The second person is a man from South 24 Parganas who has a travel history to an affected region. He was rushed to the state’s nodal hospital for nCoV after he complained of fever. The third suspect is a man from Ranaghat in Nadia.

 
 

Hospital medical superintendent and vice-principal Asish Manna said all the three would be monitored till their blood test reports arrive.

On Wednesday, the number of people on home quarantine in Bengal crossed the 1,000 mark with another 176 being added to the list. Though none of them are suspects, the move is aimed at ruling out possible transmission by a silent carrier.

The doctors manning the camp at the airport have been tasked with handing out a list of dos and don’ts to passengers and urging them to stay in home quarantine for 28 days to prevent the spread of the virus. Passengers arriving either directly or indirectly from China, South Korea, Japan, Iran, Italy, Hong Kong, Macau, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Nepal, Thailand and Singapore have to mandatorily undergo medical screening. If flu is detected in any patient, the person will be handed over to the state medical unit for quarantine at ID&BG Hospital.

Apart from the nodal hospital, all teaching hospitals in the city and eight state-run hospitals in the districts have also created isolation wards to deal with nCoV should the numbers suddenly shoot up. The statewide isolation ward infrastructure currently stands at 92 beds.

“So far, we have been able to manage the rush. We are equipped to increase our isolation facilities if the situation demands,” said state director of health services Ajay Chakraborty.

