Coronavirus in Hyderabad: Andhra Pradesh transport department, railways on high alert
2020-03-04
VISAKHAPATNAM: Following reports of a person having tested positive for coronavirus (COVID-19) in Hyderabad, the Andhra Pradesh public transport department and the railways are on high alert. Health authorities have noted that since the virus can be transmitted upon direct contact, it is necessary to be vigilant on the public transport front.


On February 20, a techie arrived in Bengaluru and subsequently journeyed to Hyderabad on a bus on February 22. On being tested positive for the virus, he has been placed under observation at a government-run hospital. Telangana government is also on high alert.

Speaking to TOI, Ravi Kumar, executive director of the public transport department said that the department has started taking precautionary measures to spread information about COVID-19. 

He added that posters about the disease have been pasted on buses going to and arriving from Hyderabad. He informed that the public transport department runs nearly 100 buses along the route, along with those that run between Visakhapatnam and Hyderabad. Nearly 3,000 passengers commute between Hyderabad and the Visakhapatnam region every day. 

Health authorities have also instructed operators of private buses to track the health of passengers before they board the buses in Hyderabad.

The Railways is also on alert. Authorities informed that around 25 trains move between Hyderabad and Visakhapatnam daily. The most popular trains among these are Godavari Express, Garibrath, Duronto and Visakha Express.

“We have received orders to track the health of passengers at railway stations. Passengers coming from Hyderabad to stations in Andhra Pradesh should ideally wear masks and avoid direct contact with people,” said a railway official.

Meanwhile, 11 people have been tested for the virus in Andhra Pradesh yet, five of them from Visakhapatnam. 

A 26-year-old man who was under observation at Government Chest Hospital was released on Tuesday. He had reportedly visited South Korea a few days ago. All 11 people have tested negative for the virus, including the 26-year-old.

