Nagpur: Coronavirus takes sting out of chilli prices
2020-02-17
NAGPUR: Coronavirus continues to hit farmers in Vidarbha. After cotton, prices of chilli, which is among the crops grown in parts of Nagpur district like Umred and Bhiwapur, have been affected by the outbreak. The rates of red chilli, which opened at Rs200 a quintal, double last year’s level, have soon come down to Rs100 to 150.

As the market was left with negligible carry forward stock this year, farmers were hoping to get super profits due to the Chinese demand. China is among the major importers of Indian chillies. As coronavirus has brought life to a standstill in the country, even spices trade has been hampered, leading to the rates crashing in India.

“For the first time in more than two decades, the trade has been left with nearly nil carry forward stock from the previous year. This led to the rates opening at Rs200 a quintal at the start of the season in January. As China shut down due to the virus outbreak, the rates slipped to Rs120 a quintal and have settled at Rs130 to 140,” said Pankaj Agrawal, a chilli trader at the Agriculture Produce Market Yard at Kalamna.

As against this, the rates were Rs80 to 90 during the same period last year and even the crop was low at that time, due to which there is no carry forward stock. The shortage led to the rates opening at a high at the start of the season only to fall after the virus hit.

Agrawal said for farmers, any price above Rs100 a quintal is suitable. There are chances that the rates may still go up to Rs150 a quintal, in the coming days.

Sanjay Wadhwani of M/s Riya Traders said farmers will not get the premium they were hoping due to the situation this year. China is a major market for Indian chillies. The rates have settled in the range of Rs100 to 150 a quintal, he said.

“The stock comes from various parts of India, although chilli cultivation in the traditional pockets of Umred and Bhiwapur have also come down over the years. These days much of the supply comes from Guntoor in Andhra Pradesh,” said Wadhwani.

Rakesh Bhatia of M/s BPL Exports in Guntoor said, “China buys nearly 3,000 tonnes from India. The chilli produce from India is not only used for self consumption in the country but also exported further to nearby nations from there.”

“China prefers Indian chillies due to the taste. The crop is even grown there but their chilli is not spicy enough,” added Agrawal.


