Coronavirus effect: Industrial units in US Nagar face supply disruptions
2020-02-19
RUDRAPUR: The outbreak of coronavirus in China has caused supply disruptions in several industries in Sitarganj and Pantnagar industrial parks of Udham Singh Nagar district. This supply disruption has led to production curtailment and thereby, a drop in revenue, representatives of some industries in the region claim. They add that they have a stock of supplies for the next two-three weeks but if raw material supply from China doesn’t resume in a few weeks, prices of their products will rise sharply.


Brajesh Kumar Upadhyay, HR manager of Sitarganj’s Yoyogo Textiles, a China-based blanket manufacturer company, said that production at their unit has been halted for more than a month now. The unit, which was established in 2017, imports almost 15 containers of raw material every month for the production of blankets.

"Since the outbreak of the deadly virus, our supply has been stuck at Mumbai harbour and we aren’t permitted to pick it up. Also, the suppliers are not sending any more consignments. We have a staff of over 100 people here and it is not possible to pay them salaries if this production shut-down goes on,” said Upadhyay. 

Gaurav Arora, MD of Shakti Boxes, is facing a similar crisis. “We get chemicals from China. They are essential for our production but now, our supply has been hit.” Saurabh Gava, MD of Vinayak Ply Industries, told TOI that the supply of cheap poplar wood boards from China has stopped and the company will be staring at losses if the imports aren’t restarted soon. 

Manoj Kothari, a leather shoe manufacturer, said, "We are monitoring the situation. If things don’t work out soon, we will look towards Cambodia or Vietnam for supplies."

Meanwhile, some entrepreneurs said that the crisis may help Indian industries become less reliant on Chinese supplies. “What’s happening in China is unfortunate but this may be a blessing in disguise for Indian industries. Production of ceramics, chemicals, garments, cosmetics, toys, and others in India may get a boost,” said Ronik Narang, a Sitarganj-based industrialist.

Ajay Tiwari, patron of the SIDCUL Entrepreneur Welfare Society of Pantnagar, added, "People who were earlier sourcing their products from China now want to procure supplies from Indian-based firms. Industries are approaching Indian companies for supply of homeware, fashion, textile, furniture, and lifestyle goods. However, the prices may go up a little.”

