Coronavirus scare: 436 under observation in Kerala
2020-01-28
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The state, which has taken utmost care on Coronavirus surveillance, has been free from any threats so far. Of the seven blood samples that had been sent for testing to the National Virology Institute in Pune, two have tested negative for Coronavirus. 

As many as 436 people who have come from China to the state in the past few weeks are under the strict radar of the state health department. Of them, five people have been admitted to isolation wards of various hospitals in the state. The rest, though allowed to remain at their homes, are under the department’s observation. 

Meanwhile, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan has written to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, urging him to operate a special flight to bring back the Indians, including Keralites, who have been stranded in the virus-hit regions of China. The chief minister also assured of all help, including the services of the health experts from Kerala, if the people are evacuated from China and are brought back to India.

The state has been put on high alert since hundreds of people are travelling to Kerala from the virus-hit regions. “On an average, 90 people are reaching the state per day from China. All the airports are under strict vigil and are screening all passengers. So far there is no threat for the state as none of the patients here has been found in the high-risk category,” said Dr Amar Fettle, state nodal officer on public health emergency. 

“At present five people are put in isolation wards in different hospitals of the state. The two patients who were admitted in Ernakulam have tested negative. The results of the five are expected in a day or two. Since they are having fever, they have been kept under constant monitoring by the health team,” he added. 

The health department has directed public to maintain personal hygiene in the wake of the spreading of virus globally. People should strictly maintain personal hygiene and keep their surroundings clean. Everyone must cover their nose and mouth while sneezing or coughing. Hands must be washed with soap and water frequently, said a bulletin issued by the state health department.

The health department has also issued specific directive to tourism department to keep a close tab on the tourist destinations if the tourists from the virus-hit regions are arriving. “All hotels have been issued specific directive on the steps and precautions they have to take if they receive any tourist from these virus-hit regions,” said Dr Fettle. 


'Hospitals equipped to handle emergency'

Health minister K K Shailaja said that there is nothing to panic about the coronavirus (Wuhan) outbreak and the hospitals in all districts in the state are equipped to handle any emergency.

“We should join hands to identify the people coming from the virus-infected areas, and the information should be regularly passed to the health workers to strengthen the preventive measures,” Shailaja said.

The minister also said that monitoring has be strengthened atall the airports. People arriving from abroad at Kannur and Kozhikode airports will be screened. Even in the cases in which the laboratory report is negative, the monitoring would be continued to make sure there is no spread of the disease. At the same time, it is for the central government to bring the Indians from the affected areas, said the minister. 

