Coronavirus scare in Karnataka: As panic sends prices crashing, farmer buries 6,000 chickens alive
2020-03-11
BELAGAVI: With Covid-19 leading to a steep fall in chicken prices over unfounded fears of transmission, a desperate poultry farmer in Gokak buried alive a truckload of chickens on his farm, saying he was facing massive losses. He shot a video of the gruesome burial which has gone viral, and ironically, is being passed off as culling to prevent the spread of coronavirus.


Najeer Ahmed Makandar loaded nearly 6,000 chickens, all about a month old, onto a truck and dumped the live birds into a large pit at Nulsoor in Belagavi’s Gokak taluk on Monday. “I was left with no option,” the 47-year-old told 
TOI. “I have spent nearly Rs 6 lakh to rear these birds. Their food and medicine cost a lot.” Chickens are sold when they are between 42 and 45 days old.

“Before the coronavirus scare, live chicken was selling at Rs 50-70 a kilo which was profitable. The prevailing price is Rs 5 to 10. A live chicken weighs up to 2.5kg which would give me a maximum of Rs 25 for a bird. I cannot sell at such a loss, nor can I maintain the birds,” he said. Makandar went on to shoot a video to make consumers aware of the plight of farmers but it is now fuelling rumours of culling over the virus scare.

Sources in the poultry industry said several farmers were staring at huge losses after investing lakhs of rupees as the demand has been plunging for a month following panic over Covid-19, which has not showed any link to fowl so far. Farmers in Belagavi, which contributes nearly 10% of chickens in the state, have taken a major hit, the sources said.

The input cost for producing a kg of chicken is about Rs 75. “Imagine the plight of farmers who are forced to sell birds for Rs 5 and Rs 10 a kilo. If this situation continues, many farmers may have to look for another livelihood,” said an industry expert.

Madhukar Pawar, general manager of Quality Animal Feeds Private Limited, said Belagavi produces 60,000kg to 80,000kg of chickens every month and the loss is massive. “Chickens are being sold at Rs 5 and many live chicken trading companies are unable to pay farmers. My company has 1,500 employees and more than 1,000 farmers are dependent on us. This month we have managed to pay them but it will be difficult from next month,” Pawar said.

Paward added that while his company used to sell 30 lakh kg of live chicken every month, the figure has halved now. “While farmers are suffering, meat traders are still selling chicken at Rs 70 to 120.”

