Coronavirus: 7 who travelled to China under observation
2020-01-25
MUMBAI/PUNE: Seven persons from Maharashtra who recently travelled to China and Hong Kong have been placed under observation amid the novel coronavirus (nCoV) outbreak that has so far claimed 26 lives and infected over 800 people in China and some other countries.


Four are from Mumbai and three from Pune, both cities adding one person each to Thursday’s count of five. But, in good news, the health ministry tweeted late on Friday that two samples from Mumbai have tested negative for the virus.

Earlier in the day, a 65-year-old Briton, who came from Hong Kong on January 10, was admitted to Kasturba Hospital in Chinchpokli, the designated isolation facility in Mumbai. A 31-year-old Nalasopara woman and a Kalyan man who had gone to China have been under watch since their hospitalisation on Thursday. BMC officials said throat swabs and blood samples of the Briton and two others quarantined on Thursday have been sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune.

Two of the samples have tested negative for nCoV. “ICMR-NIV Pune has informed that 4 samples (2 from Mumbai, 1 each from B’luru & Hy’bad) have tested negative for nCoV. One of Mumbai patients has tested positive for rhinovirus, a routine common cold virus,” it tweeted.

The fourth person under observation in Mumbai is a Jogeshwari resident, who hasn’t showed cold symptoms and is on a telephonic follow-up from home. State epidemiologist Dr Pradeep Awate said the three in Pune are asymptomatic as well.

Colleagues of the UK national said he had returned to the city from Hong Kong after spending Christmas in the UK. On Friday, he went to the Asian Heart Institute with complaints of cold and sore throat, and the doctors referred him to Kasturba after learning he had been to Hong Kong. “Doctors at Kasturba insisted on admitting him and getting the tests done,” said a colleague, adding that the Briton shuttles between Mumbai and Hong Kong on work. The two from Nalasopara and Kalyan had travelled to China’s Foshan and Guangzhou cities, both about 1,000km away from Wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak.

Public health minister Rajesh Tope said the state government is taking all preventive steps. “As on Friday, 1,789 passengers travelling from China have been screened through thermal scanner at the international airport. No positive cases have been registered so far. There is no panic situation in Maharashtra.”

Awate said naso-pharyngeal and lower respiratory tract swabs will be used for testing. “A naso-pharyngeal swab is used to sample secretions from the back of the nose and upper throat to help identify what pathogens are present and what could be causing symptoms or disease. But for more confirmatory report, lower respiratory tract swabs are preferred for the diagnosis of nCoV,” said Awate.

Civic officials said while the patients may be allowed to go home after their reports arrive from NIV, they will continue to be under observation for at least 28 days. Since the coronavirus is new, a long watch is being implemented.

Kasturba Hospital’s Ward 30, the city’s only public isolation facility, is humming with life since Thursday evening after two patients were admitted. Ward 30 comprises a room with six glass cubicles and four standalone rooms. A nurse on Friday said they have been provided with protective gear to be worn every time they enter the rooms to tend to the patients.

The Britisher’s colleague said he was allowed to meet him after donning an N95 mask. Besides Kasturba, Pune’s Naidu Infectious Diseases Hospital has been designated as a treatment and isolation centre.

