Coronavirus: Meerut man aboard quarantined ship in Japan appeals to govt for help
2020-02-11
Meerut: Piyush Vashist, 29-year-old resident of Meerut, had boarded the Diamond Princess on January 25 from Hong Kong. Little did he know that his experience on the cruise will be a harrowing one. The Diamond Princess cruise ship was quarantined in Japan’s Yokohama on February 3, after the crew got to know that one of the passengers who disembarked the ship on January 25 was detected with coronavirus a few days later. Preliminary tests were conducted on all the 3,700 people on board and they were asked to remain in their cabins to prevent spread of the virus. So far, 135 people have tested positive and the Japanese authorities have now decided to properly screen all the suspected cases on board.

Talking to TOI over phone, Piyush said, “From February 4 to February 8, I was isolated in my cabin. It was only on February 9 that I was allowed to go in for fresh air when I exercised and stretched my body to feel at ease. Different set of passengers are being allowed to go in the open on different days to prevent spread of infection. The ship is providing food, but after February 6, I have been avoiding all kinds of food being cooked here and eat only packed items. These include cup noodles, sterilized fruits, cornflakes etc. Being a vegetarian, my options are anyway limited. While the ship crew is helping us as much as they can, I am surprised that the Indian government has taken no steps to rescue the 138 Indians on board. The embassy just contacted me once and said there was little they could do. I raised the concern for more packed food items, to which, they said they would look into. I am yet to hear from them.”

According to Piyush, passengers on the quarantined ship have also been provided with thermometers and told to monitor their body temperature from time to time, and report in case it exceeds the 37.5 degrees Celsius.

Back at his home in Meerut's Shastri Nagar, his family is worried and praying for his safe return.

Piyush’s father Mool Chand Sharma, a doctor, and his mother Sukhwant Sharma, a staff nurse, have been speaking to him throughout the day to check on his health parameters.

Talking to TOI, Piyush’s uncle Pankaj Sharma said, “Nobody in the family is doing anything, except worrying about him.”

Piyush, who works with a private company in Gurgaon, was to disembark the cruise on February 9 in Taiwan. However, he is now stranded on sea in Yokohama as the ship has been quarantined and the Japanese government has denied permission to the cruise to dock anywhere in the country.

“We have been given hand sanitizers to keep ourselves clean at all times. I am just concerned that if no help comes from the Indian government in time, even those who are healthy will end up getting infected,” said Piyush.


