Coronavirus, Apple’s woes hit sensex, global markets
2020-02-19
Mumbai: The sensex closed in the red for the fourth successive session as global market sentiment was hit by the coronavirus impact on economies. Additionally, Apple warned that their business will take a hit because of the viral outbreak, hitting supplies from China. Markets opened weak with the sensex falling 245 points upon opening on frantic selling across sectors over reports of a rise in casualties on account of coronavirus. According to news reports, the death toll from the virus rose to 1,868.

Hong Kong markets were hit after HSBC’s weak earnings, dragging the Hang Seng down 1.5%. The bank said that it would shrink its workforce by 35,000 over the next three years. Most of Europe’s main markets were down between 0.5% and 1% with China-sensitive stocks leading the falls.

The sensex closed at 40,894 — 161 points below its previous close. The broader NSE Nifty 50 index ended 0.4% lower at 11,992. This is the first time in a fortnight that the Nifty has closed below the 12,000 mark. According to analysts, the fear in markets was that the shutdowns in China would cause supply chain disruption in India as well.

The rupee slid by 27 paise to a near three-week low of 71.56 against the US dollar. 

In stocks, the impact of the Supreme Court order on adjusted gross revenues (AGRs) continued to show. Shares of Vodafone Idea closed 11% lower at Rs 3 and Bharti Infratel also lost nearly 11% to close at Rs 210. Bank stocks were also hit on fears that they would have to make fresh provisions on telecom defaults.

Bankers said that once the government invoked the bank guarantees provided on behalf of telecom companies, lenders would call for the amount from the telcos. Among lenders, Union Bank and Yes Bank were the top losers.

LIC Housing Finance, which closed down 8% on Monday after reports of a possible merger with IDBI Bank, continued to weaken despite a denial. The company’s share price closed 4% down at Rs 364. “Despite a clear denial from the management, markets do assign some merger probability. We are also of a similar opinion that there is a high probability of the merger happening, considering various assumptions,” said Jignesh Shial, an analyst with Emkay Global.

Tech stocks, Infosys, TCS and Tech Mahindra showed marginal gains in a weak market. State Bank of India too closed positive after the market regulator cleared a public float of its cards subsidiary.


