Coronavirus effect: Pipeline works delayed to peak summer
2020-02-26
NAGPUR: The coronavirus outbreak in China has delayed Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s (NMC) plan to install seven full-bore electromagnetic flow meters on the pipeline bringing raw drinking water from Pench dam to the city in February. Now, the civic body is purchasing the meters from Aurangabad, but they can be installed only by May. The procedure will require shut down of water supply for a few days for 70% areas of the city in peak summer time, when water demand is huge.


Chairman of NMC water works consultative committee Vijay Zalke told TOI all efforts will be taken to minimize the impact in May. NMC had issued work order to a private company for purchase and installation of flow meters last year. The contractor placed the order with a China-based company. But the meters will not be available this month since the company cited disruptions due to coronavirus.

“Now, the contractor has placed order with a company in Aurangabad. We have given a deadline of May. Earlier, we have taken shut down in May for crucial works. We will take shut down of 1-2 days in intervals to minimize the impact,” he said.

To put an end to carriage of raw water through open canals, NMC had laid 31km giant-sized pipeline of 2,300mm diameter between Pench dam and Mahadula pumping station in 2015. Leakages were noticed in the pipeline due to some natural causes and also due to sabotage by unidentified persons. Over 30 million litres per day (MLD) water, sufficient for around two lakh people, was going waste for over one year due to the leaks.

NMC repaired some leaks on temporary basis and reduced loss. Also, it planned to shut water supply from pipeline and bring water through canal. During shut down, NMC planned repairs of leaks and installation of flow meters. NMC will then be able to know exact point and cause of leakage.

All this activity was planned in July last year. There would have been no effect to people had works been completed in the winter, as water demand is low. But NMC delayed the works for various reasons.

NMC was confident of executing the works in February, which is pre-summer days. Now, people will have to suffer due to NMC’s delays. The demand for water is high during summer, especially in May. Also, NMC cannot bring water through open canal in May as losses will be high and there are chances of breach in canal.

Zalke said works to repair leaks on the pipeline have started. “NMC took shut down for two days on February 13 and 14 for electric work. On these two days, some leaks were repaired. Remaining leaks will be repaired with shut down on March 1 and some more days,” he said.


