Coronavirus pushes up demand for N95 face masks from India
2020-01-28
CHENNAI/MUMBAI: The demand for N95 masks in China, where people continue to walk with the nose and mouth covered to protect themselves against the coronavirus, is making Indian manufacturers and dealers of the special safety gear smile. It has also led to an increase in cost by at least 50%.


With common disposable surgical masks considered ineffective against large, infectious particles, experts are asking people at risk — health workers and care givers — to use the N95. “But many in China are wearing it. N95 offers better protection by filtering out small particles,” said Manoj Vakharia, treasurer of Scientific and Surgical Dealers and Manufacturers Association (SIDMA). “Now, instead of importing from China, many dealers here are exporting them to that country.”

With China limiting exports, many Asian countries are now approaching Indian dealers. “We are sending boxes of masks we bought from China. Apart from this we are procuring fresh ones directly from manufacturers here,” said Anil Gupta of Mumbai-based Avishankar International Private Limited.

On Monday, several Indian manufacturers hiked prices. “Dealers here used to buy N95 masks at Rs 25 a piece. Now, it is at least Rs 38. Some other varieties such as N95plus are sold at a much higher price. Manufacturers are also demanding that we pay 100% money in advance,” said Chennai-based J Jayaseelan, chairman of Indian Drug Manufacturers Association. 

Corporates placing orders have just two demands — the masks should be National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health-certified and delivered in a week. Dealers say this may not be possible as Indian manufacturing units don’t have large capacities. “China is the largest manufacturer of masks and India would be 4% - 5% of it. This is first time we are getting orders from there…,” said Nikunj Kedia, director, Bellcross Industries. “A mask costing Rs 25-Rs 30 a unit is being exported at Rs 60-Rs 70 a unit,” he said. His company manufactures wide range of disposables such as disposable cap, gloves, masks and surgical drapes, among others.

Shiv Kumar Mangal, CEO of Faridabad-headquartered Manglam Medikits which has received orders from Hong Kong and Europe, said, “There is a bit of panic due to which existing supplies are being bought even at higher prices.”

Customers are not hesitating to order the consignment via air , he said. “We have flown a couple of consignments to Hong Kong.”


