Coronavirus alert: Another 12 moved to isolation wards
2020-02-06
HYDERABAD: City hospitals reported 12 fresh suspected cases of the Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) on Wednesday, taking the total count of suspected cases to 63. The patients have been kept in the isolation wards at the state-run Gandhi and Fever hospitals. Of the 12, three are said to be air-hostesses with a prominent airline. 


“Of the 12, eight people have been admitted to Gandhi Hospital while the remaining four are at Fever Hospital. Their samples have been collected and are undergoing tests. The samples of 25 others have tested negative for the virus,” said Vijay Kumar, state nodal officer for Corona. While most of these people walked into the hospitals with complaints of fever, on Wednesday, some of them were picked up by the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme teams. 

Meanwhile, in wake of the novel Coronavirus vigil resulting in many suspected patients being put in isolation facilities, district officials have now been asked to prepare teams to manage post traumatic events and stress during quarantine. So far, around 60 people who returned from Wuhan and other parts of China were kept in isolation wards (briefly) while many were asked to maintain self-quarantine at home for 28 days. 

“Isolation even for 24 hours is likely to have a psychological impact. A person in quarantine is not even allowed to interact with family members and exposure to doctors or nurses is minimal. This causes immense stress to many people who have never been on their own, without any contact with the outside world for even a few hours. Moreover, the number of suspected cases are on the rise and going by number of people who have returned from China as well as other affected countries, people observing self-quarantine will be in thousands,” said a senior health department official, speaking about the reason for the move. 

In fact, similar orders have also been given by the Kerala government in its action plan to tackle the outbreak of Novel Coronavirus. The Telangana health department is closely following the action plan of Kerala in preparation for an outbreak. Health authorities are also keeping close tabs on the daily situation of the outbreak in China and other affected countries, trying to trace patterns in the outbreak, hoping to pick queues from it. “These updates are being sent to district level authorities on a daily basis,” added the health official.


