Coronavirus curfew on bad air: Pollution levels decrease in Varanasi
2020-03-27
VARANASI: After nationwide lockdown, the city registered a dip in air pollution on Thursday. Reason: No communting and industrial activities led to better air quality. 


At a time when the novel coronavirus has wrecked a havoc on human health and lives across the globe, the efforts to check its spread has brought a positive impact on environment particularly after the lockdown. 

“We can notice a significant improvement in air quality not only in Varanasi but other places too due to the imposition of lockdown in the country. The vehicular exhausts and industrial pollutants, which are the major source of air pollution, have been stopped. Obviously, it resulted in improvement of air quality, which is good to human health to fight against the coronavirus,” said noted environment scientist of Banaras Hindu University Prof BD Tripathi. 

The data of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) suggests that the air quality in most of the cities, which used to breath in bad air, has witnessed a significant improvement. Varanasi, which had witnessed 378 Air Quality Index (AQI) in very poor category in the beginning of January, recorded 135 AQI (moderate) on Thursday. A day after Janta Curfew the city’s AQI was 99 (satisfactory) on March 23. 

More or less similar was the condition in other cities including Kanpur and Lucknow, which were in the categories of ‘good’ and ‘satisfactory’ respectively. Kanpur’s AQI was 50, while Lucknow recorded 91 AQI. Out of 102 cities in CPCB’s AQI Bulletin only two cities -Muzaffarpur and Guwahati had ‘very poor’ air with AQI 216 and 214 respectively. While 22 cities were in ‘Good’ category, 14 were in ‘moderate’ and 64 cities were in ‘satisfactory’ categories. Mandideep was the cleanest with 29 AQI in the country. 

The ‘Good’ AQI (0-50) has minimal on health, ‘Satisfactory’ (51-100) category suggests minor breathing discomfort to sensitive people, ‘Moderate’ (101-200) causes breathing discomfort to the people with lungs, asthma and heart diseases. The ‘Poor’ AQI (201-300) makes breathing discomfort to most people on prolonged exposure, while ‘Very Poor’ (301-400) AQI causes respiratory illness on prolonged exposure. The ‘Severe’ (401-500) category AQI affects health people and seriously impacts those with existing diseases. 

Prof Tripathi said that such a situation came after the restriction on public and private transport, including autorickshaws, taxis, and all inter-district and inter-State transport buses, railways and air service. 


