Bihar: Coronavirus samples to be tested at DMCH lab from today
2020-03-31
PATNA: The Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital (DMCH) will be the third government facility in Bihar for testing of samples for coronavirus.


So far, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS) and Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences (RMRI) in Patna were the two facilities with testing facilities for Covid-19.

A trial run was conducted successfully in the microbiology department of DMCH on Monday under the guidance of four doctors and three technicians. The trial report was sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune.

DMCH principal Dr Harsh Narayan Jha said the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has certified the institute to carry out the Covid-19 tests. “NIV had recently sent trial kits to the hospital. We have sent the report to Pune laboratory for confirmation,” he said.

“The testing facility for Covid-19 samples would begin at our designated laboratory from Tuesday. Now, the sample test results would be known in six to eight hours and treatment of the patients would be started accordingly,” Dr Jha said.

The hospital has an isolation ward of 200 beds. There is a plan to increase the number of beds to 400 in the next couple of days. Around 35 suspected cases were getting symptomatic treatment at the hospital while 40 more suspected cases with travel history were reported there on Monday.

Dr Jha said they got extraction kits, screening and confirmation kits among other items from the ICMR on Saturday. “We have written to the ICMR about the need of more propyl alcohol, personal protective equipment (PPE) kits and packaging materials,” he said and added that only 25 PPE kits were received so far. 

“The experts and doctors need protective suits while testing samples and performing duty in the isolation ward. From Tuesday, we will need more PPE kits even for lab technicians who will work for eight hours,” Dr Jha said.

DMCH superintendent Dr Raj Ranjan Prasad said all required biomedical materials and extraction kits have been provided to the hospital administration for Covid tests.

Meanwhile, Union minister of state for health and family welfare, Ashwini Kumar Choubey, has said the Covid-19 testing facility would begin at All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna as well. “Instructions have been given to the AIIMS-P to set up a testing lab,” he said.

Choubey said the state government is making arrangements even in the districts where there is no collection centre for Covid- 19 samples. “All officials working to check the spread of Covid-19 have been directed to strengthen the arrangements,” he said.

AIIMS-P director Dr PK Singh said on Monday that all the necessary items had already been purchased, except the extraction kit. “We would start within a week the testing facility in the new virology laboratory, which was set up in September last year,” he said.

