Coronavirus looms, but no labs in Telangana to test samples
2020-01-28
HYDERABAD: While the fear of a possible outbreak of the highly contagious Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is escalating with reports of suspected cases in parts of the country, the state is not prepared to carry out tests for the virus at existing facilities. 

Over one-and-a-half years ago, the outbreak of the Nipah virus and the subsequent epidemic scare had prompted authorities to plan the upgrade of the laboratory at the Institute of Preventive Medicine (IPM) to biosafety level 3(BSL 3) from the existing BSL level 2. 

 
 
Nearly 18 months later, the plan is still stuck in red tape. 

The existing facilities continue to be of a level which does not permit testing for highly contagious and emerging viruses such as Nipah virus, Ebola virus, Zika and Corona.

Currently, only National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune is equipped to test for Coronavirus and other such highly contagious viruses. The need for high level of biosafety is pertinent to prevent the onset of a bio hazard. A bio hazard in this regard is an outbreak of the disease that can be caused if bio waste released during testing is not disposed properly.

The BSL 3, meanwhile, entails having a negative pressure room that is temperature controlled with fabricated roofs, sophisticated laboratory apparatus. The air that escapes the room will be highly filtered along with regular cleaning of all lab materials. BSL 3 provides highly restricted entry with requirement of cleaning the area every time a person enters the lab.

The plan for upgrading the lab was approved at a meeting in June 2018 and Rs 3- Rs 3.5 crore was estimated to be cost for upgrading the lab. When asked about the facility, Dr K Shankar, director of Institute of Preventive Medicine (IPM), “The upgradation work is under process, currently. The decision has been taken but some civil works are pending,” adding that although testing equipment currently available at the lab can test for Coronavirus and other viruses, a minimum level of BSL 3 is required to conduct tests for Coronavirus and Nipah virus.


