Coronavirus in Bengaluru: Office parks, tech companies on alert
2020-03-05
BENGALURU: Business parks across Bengaluru are adopting urgent measures to ensure their premises are clean amid growing concerns over coronavirus, stepping up efforts to maintain hygiene in common areas such as washrooms and food courts.

Companies, too, are taking precautions such as drastically reducing business travel to the worst-affected countries, China, Singapore, South Korea, Japan and Italy. They have advised employees to work from home if they have flu-like symptoms.

Embassy Office Parks, which operates complexes such Manyata Tech Park and Embassy Tech Village on the Outer Ring Road, Bengaluru, has been disinfecting and sanitising the compounds while also seeking expert advice on prevention, detection, recording, isolation and treatment. “As of March 4, we are not aware of a single case of positive test for the virus in the more than 200,000 people who work on our business parks. We do understand that one employee of a company at one of our parks, who had travelled from a Level 3 country, was screened in the last 36 hours and determined to be asymptomatic (sic),” a company spokesperson said in a statement.

Developer Brigade, whose clients include Amazon and ABB, said it was running awareness campaigns on LCD screens across its parks to make employees aware of the steps to follow in case of fever and general caution such as washing hands and avoiding touching the face.

The company has been sanitising washrooms more frequently, cleaning them every two hours instead of about five hours earlier. It is treating common areas and floors once every four hours. “Not only that, we have instructed the cleaners to wear masks, gloves and safety shoes and clean the door handles, faucets, taps, walls and washbasins very carefully to ensure that objects that come regularly in contact with the body are clean,” said Subrata Sharma, chief operating officer of Brigade’s commercial business.

Wipro has suspended travel to and transit through mainland China, including Hong Kong and Macau, until further notice, and advised its employees to avoid non-critical travel to Singapore, South Korea, Japan and Italy. Any employee who travelled to an affected area within China in the past few days has been asked to work from home for 14 days before returning to office,” it said.

Cognizant said it had suspended travel to affected countries and cut back on non-essential trips. Employees have been requested to work from home if they experience flu-like symptoms. Accenture has undertaken a business continuity plan, basically taking stock of its critical resources and backup arrangements in case employees are asked to work from home. TCS is also taking precautions. “We are working closely with all the local, regional and global health institutions and are implementing the latest recommendations given to us. We are ensuring that our staff have all the information and support they require,” a spokesperson said.

