Coronavirus outbreak: ‘Heavy-duty N95 mask not necessary outside hospitals’
2020-02-01
MUMBAI: China’s coronavirus outbreak has resulted in stocks of N95 masks disappearing from chemist shops in Mumbai, but doctors say the high-end mask may not be as effective as presumed. Moreover, it may be unnecessary outside healthcare settings and hospitals.


“Only people in healthcare settings who are going to be constantly around infected people need an N95 mask,” said infectious diseases specialist Dr Om Srivastava.

Experts say data from China suggests the virus, when airborne, can go a distance of up to three feet as it is relatively large. Chennai-based internal medicine specialist Dr V Ramasubramanian said he doesn’t advise the general public to use a mask at all. “Only if you travel to an affected zone, use a triple-layered surgical mask,” he said. Infectious diseases specialist Dr George Oomen said just this preventive measure isn’t enough: “One also needs to wash hands regularly.” Doctors say washing hands frequently to break any transmission chain — such as an infected person touching lift buttons, door knobs or computer keyboards — could be the most effective preventive method.

Dr Oomen pointed to a 2019 study published in Journal of American Medical Association which showed that facemask type didn’t make a big difference in the spread of flu. The study among 2,862 medical health workers across seven health centres in the US concluded that “wearing N95 respirators versus medical masks” resulted in no significant difference in the incidence of lab-confirmed influenza.

In another study published in the Journal of the American Dental Association in 2009, surgical masks appeared to be nearly as effective as N95 respirators in preventing influenza among healthcare workers in Canada. Between September and December 2008, influenza occurred among 24% nurses in the surgical mask group and 23% in the N95 group.

“There is no need to panic and rush to buy masks. This isn’t ebola. It is a coronavirus outbreak that should die down in the coming weeks if not in a month,” said Dr Parvaiz Kaul, head, pulmonary medicine department, Shere-i-Kashmir Hospital, Srinagar. He said the virus’s genetic code is already known and vaccines and drugs are in the pipeline. “There also are reports from Wuhan about patients responding to anti-HIV medication nelfinavir and lopinavir,’’ he said.

