Coronavirus: PU teachers, students told to avoid large gatherings
2020-03-08
PATNA: Patna University (PU) authorities have asked the principals of different colleges and heads of postgraduate (PG) departments to remain alert and help prevent the spread of novel coronavirus (COVID-19). 

Vice-chancellor (VC) Rash Bihari Prasad Singh told this newspaper on Saturday, “Everyone has been directed to strictly adhere to the health advisory circulated by the University Grants Commission and protect themselves from the deadly virus.”

PU is shut for four days on account of Holi. The university has already postponed some of its activities scheduled to be organized this month in view of the COVID-19 scare. 

“The three-day Bihar Science Conference, which was to be hosted by PU from March 26 to 28 has been postponed. The next date will be announced later,” the VC said.

He added, “I will also request governor-cum-chancellor Phagu Chauhan to postpone a two-day workshop on ‘Curriculum Revision’, which will be conducted at Wheeler Senate House on March 16 and 17. HoDs and deans of faculties from different universities have been invited to the workshop, which will focus on changing the syllabi of PG courses in the light of the requirements of the National Eligibility Test.”

The university may also decide to suspend the use of biometric attendance by teachers and non-teaching staff after holidays if the threat of COVID-19 persists. “An awareness drive for prevention of the spread of the virus will be launched and banners with dos and don’ts displayed on the campus,” said the VC.

The UGC has sent an advisory to the universities to take preventive measures to combat the threat of COVID-19 as some cases of the virus have already been reported in the country. It has requested them to take necessary precautions for “a coordinated and collective effort in a mission mode” and avoid large gatherings. 

“Any student or staff, with a travel history to any COVID-19-affected country or in contact with such people in the last 28 days, should be monitored and home quarantined for 14 days,” the advisory said.


