Coronavirus hits tourism sector, over 5k tourists cancel bookings
2020-03-09
NASHIK: The coronavirus outbreak has affected domestic as well as international tourism in the last one-and-a-half month. Moreover, hotel occupancy and sale of non-vegetarian food items in city restaurants have also dropped by 50%.


According to Travel Agents Association of Nashik (TAAN), over 5,000 tourists from Nashik district have cancelled their bookings for international and domestic destinations. 

Some tour operators have given mandatory unpaid leave to their employees for 15-20 days as their businesses have taken a hit.

TAAN itself has 107 tour and travel operators as its members. On an average, 50-60 bookings per tour operator have been cancelled in the last one-and-a half month. The impact has been more in the last 25 days, said Datta Bhalerao, senior office-bearer of TAAN.

“Over 5,000 bookings, including both international and national, have been cancelled by tourists. The bookings ranged from Rs 5,000 to Rs 6 lakh each. Over 50% of the bookings were for international destinations,” he said. 

Bookings for destinations such as Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, Europe, Iran, Italy, China, Indonesia, and Cambodia have been cancelled. 

When asked, Bhalerao said that the cancellation charges depend on the type of booking — group or individual. It may be from Rs 3,500 per person onwards to 100% in some cases, depending on the cost of the package and the type of tour.

Hotel occupancy dips by 25%, non-veg food biz hit

Apart from tourism sector, hotel occupancy has also reduced by around 25% due to the drop in footfall of tourists. 

Moreover, the sale of non-vegetarian food in city restaurants have also dropped by around 50%. “The sale of non-vegetarian foods in the city restaurants and hotels are worst affected due to the outbreak of coronavirus. People are not eating non-vegetarian food due to panic about the disease,” said Sanjay Chavan, president, Association of Bar, Hotels and Restaurants (ABHAR) .


