Coronavirus: Rajasthan government identifies hospital to deal with suspected cases
2020-02-16
JAIPUR: Amid novel coronavirus (nCoV) scare, Infectious Disease Hospital (IDH) attached to Sawai Man Singh Medical College has been designated as Tertiary Care Centre for treatment and isolation of passengers referred with symptoms after screening from Jaipur airport. 


At present one suspected nCoV patient is undergoing treatment at the IDH. The Health department has strengthened their surveillance at airport. Also, it has issued Helpline numbers 0141-2225624 and Toll-free number 108 and 104 for nCoV.

Officials said isolation wards have been demarcated in all medical colleges and district hospitals for isolation and treatment measures. 

For spreading awareness on nCoV, the health department is distributing pamphlets at Sanganer International Airport, Jaipur. Health department is working in close coordination with police department for identification of passengers with travel history of China staying in hotels. 

An advisory has also been issued for people by the health department to ward off the risk of the disease. The advisory says that people should follow the cough etiquette by covering the nose and mouth using handkerchief while sneezing and coughing and frequent hand washing with soap and water. Those who have travelled recently from the nCoV-affected countries must inform the national/state/district helpline number and remain under strict home isolation for 28 days from the date of arrival in India, irrespective of whether they are symptomatic or asymptomatic. Those who have travelled to or from Wuhan must get themselves tested for nCoV at the government-designated centres, the officials said. 

So far, at anganer International Airport, screening of all passengers arriving from eight international flights daily has been continuing since January 28. For this purpose, five doctors and five paramedical staff have been deputed at the airport. Till Saturday, 13,539 passengers of 88 flights have been screened, of them 60 were suspected cases of nCoV. However, no confirmed case of nCoV has been reported from the state. 

So far, 59 suspected patients have been admitted in isolation. 


