Chennai: Business events take a back seat as Covid-19 fears intensify
2020-03-10
CHENNAI: With businesses and travel across the globe taking a hit due to Coronavirus, conferences and social gatherings scheduled at star hotels and convention centres in and around the city are getting cancelled and postponed as fears of contracting the virus spread. Chennai is one of the major Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Events (MICE) tourism destinations in the country.


Some events scheduled at Chennai Trade Centre (CTC), the largest convention centre for conference, exhibitions and meetings in the city at Nandambakkam, have been postponed.


 

V R Subbulaxmi, managing director of Tamil Nadu Trade Promotion Organisation that owns and operates CTC, told TOI that five exhibitions and annual celebrations of two corporate houses have been postponed due to Coronavirus. 


 

“We have received emails from the organisers — including a jewellery exhibition — to postpone the events. These were booked between March 15 and April 15,” she said. 

Spread over more than 1.10 lakh square feet with a covention centre and three exhibition halls, CTC hosts 10 conferences and 12 exhibitions — including those from the leather, pharma and tourism industries — a month.

Banquet and convention halls in star hotels are much sought after for conferences and social events. But organisers are cautious. Erine Louis, general manager of The Residency Towers, Chennai, said eight conferences that were planned at their hotel this month have been pushed to April as people do not want to travel due to Covid-19. 

“There is no panic on the ground, but participants for these conferences do not want to take any risk when it comes to travelling. This has hit bookings of rooms in hotels that are hosting these events,” he said.

Chennai and its suburbs is home to 200 star category hotels situated within a radius of 50km. Around 150 are come under the three star category with the rest being four and five star facilities. Most of these hotels are situated on Anna Salai, GST Road, Old Mahabalipuram Road and East Coast Road.

A senior representative of a leading chain of four star hotels said cancellations have caused significant losses to the hospitality sector. 

“With bookings for conferences and social events going for a toss, the losses for our hotels in Chennai and ECR would amount to be a few crores,” he said.

