Coronavirus cloud on campus calendars
2020-03-05
KOLKATA: A Lakshmipat Singhania Academy student on an 11-month exchange programme to Japan will return to Kolkata next week, much ahead of his scheduled date in April-end. At The Newtown School, 14 classes IX and XI students who are supposed to visit France are now in a dilemma as the parents have requested the school authorities to defer the programme. South City International School, which is scheduled to take 15 students to Dubai to participate in a competition in May, is reconsidering the dSccecision.


Struck by the coronavirus scare, several prominent city schools have started postponing foreign trips. The Covid-19 outbreak has also prompted numerous schools hosting foreign students to take strong precautionary measures to stop the spread of the virus.

 
 

Lakshmipat Singhania Academy principal Meena Kak pointed out that the school has a student exchange programme with Italy and the US and mostly, excursions are organized during Puja holidays and in December. But it has been deferred this time. “We had also sent a student of an 11-month exchange programme to Japan. He was scheduled to return in April. However, he will be in Kolkata next week. His parents are concerned,” said Kak.

Birla High School is also taking measures to keep coronavirus at bay. Mukta Nain, the director of the school group, pointed out that the educational trip to France and the US during the summer holidays has been postponed for the time being. “The decision has been taken in the last week after consultation with various authorities,” said the principal. Twelve students were selected from classes X and XI and they were to be accompanied by two teachers for the trip.

Calcutta International School has asked all parents and guardians, who have visited any of the affected countries or Southeast Asian nations, seeking admission for their children to the school to complete all the necessary formalities over the phone, including holding interviews.

The principal of Birla Bharati School, Apala Dutta, has been planning an excursion next year at the moment. There has already been a study tour to Seoul, South Korea. “We have no immediate plans for a foreign trip,” she said.

Students of South City International School have been asked to wear masks. “Those suffering from cold and running nose have been advised to stay home or wear masks while attending classes. The Dubai trip for selected candidates from classes IX to XII is also in jeopardy following concerns of parents. We are reconsidering our decision to allow them to attend the International Model United Nation competition,” said principal John Bagul.

Seema Sapru, the principal of the Heritage School, has shown some optimism in conducting the foreign excursion to Germany in July and the UK in October and November. There are a few students in the academy from Korea and Thailand, who have been living in India under guardianship. But they have reportedly not shown any signs of illness so far.

“The 10-day exchange programme with a school at Poitiers in France is at risk. The students were supposed to leave on March 14 and the visas are done,” said director of The Newtown School, Sunil Agarwal.


With inputs from Tanmaya Das

