Corona lockdown: Rescue flights to take 1,600 stranded foreigners out of Goa
2020-03-31
PANAJI: Efforts to repatriate tourists stranded in Goa have picked up pace as authorities have lined up at least six rescue flights to evacuate approximately 1,600 foreign nationals by April 4.


The German government with support from the Union ministry of external affairs has organised three rescue flights out of Goa International Airport from Tuesday. The flights, operated by Air India, will include not just German nationals, but citizens of other EU nations too, said sources.

The first flight will depart from Dabolim at 5.15am on Tuesday for Mumbai and then head directly to Frankfurt. On April 1 and 2, similar flights will depart at 11am to Mumbai and then Frankfurt.

“The document verification process has already begun, the passengers have been provided food. Most passengers are German, but the flight is loading a lot of EU passengers,” a source in the German embassy said.

Officials with Airports Authority of India also confirmed that the Finnish airline, Finnair, will be operating a relief flight on April 1 and that an aircraft from Poland could also be deployed to pick up stranded EU citizens on April 4.

Airport officials said Israel operated a special rescue flight to take its citizens stranded in the state through Arkia on Monday night.

“Our efforts are on to ensure that stranded foreign nationals return to their homes. We are working with all foreign embassies. Already three relief flights have taken off from Goa. In the coming days there will be three Air India flights in which at least 900 Germans will be leaving. One Finnair flight will fly to Helsinki after that,” Goa airport director Gagan Malik said.

Officials estimate that there are around 2,000 foreign nationals stuck due to the lockdown in Goa. “Social distancing will be maintained all through the process and we will also ensure that they are seated apart while sitting at the airport. We are trying to give as much relief,” Malik said.

The relief flights for German nationals sparked envy among the British tourists who remain stranded in Goa. “Germans putting UK to shame,” said Derbyshire resident Hazel Holiday.

“At the end of our lane in Colomb Bay we have just seen a group of German citizens being picked up by mini bus to take them to a coach in Palolem for airport transfer. They received individual emails from their government with everything planned for them. Well done Germany- UK still nothing!” she said in a public post on Facebook.


