Coronavirus lockdown takes toll on blooming biz of flower mkts
2020-04-11
Prayagraj: Prayagraj’s wholesale flower markets like Naini, Gaughat and Phaphamau are among the several businesses hampered by the 21-day lockdown announced to contain the novel coronavirus outbreak.

With weddings and parties cancelled, and temples shut following prohibitory orders, flower vendors are struggling to sell the blooms, which have a short shelf life.

Many local farmers who harvest flowers like rose and marigold in trans-Ganga and trans-Yamuna areas of the city have no other option but throw them away.

A wholesale trader from Naini, Rajesh, said “We can do nothing. If the flowers are unsold, we gave to throw them away. We want the state government to take some measures to ensure relief for flower traders like the West Bengal government did.”

Another trader Mohan, who is based in Phaphamau, said, “There has been sharp decline in the sale of flowers ever since the lockdown was announced. Farmers growing flowers in areas like Arial, Phaphamau, Mahewa, Manda, Chaka are reeling under mounting losses as their produce remains unsold. The demand for flowers has declined by over 70% as weddings and functions are cancelled and places of worship are shut.”

Retailers said that most flower shops are shut because of the lockdown. “Mid-March onwards, we have no orders for decorations for weddings or parties. There is hardly any demand for flowers,” said Ashok, a flower trader. Puneet, who supplies flowers to shops, said he hasn’t been able to supply flowers to his clients for the first time in years.

Most vendors who set up shops outside temples or mosques had to shut down as there were no buyers ever since the places of worships were ordered to be closed.

Local traders said earlier they had to bring flowers from mandis in Varanasi and Mirzapur mandis to meet the huge demand during the wedding season. However, now they are having a hard time selling the produce brought by local farmers. Ramesh Nishad, who grows and sells flowers in Arial area, said, “Flower markets usually see a lot of business around Ram Navami, but this year the scenario was extremely gloomy. We witnesses one of our lowest sales. The state government should offer financial assistance to farmers growing flowers across the state.”


