Coronavirus warriors go the extra mile to keep Bhopalis safe and secure
2020-03-25
BHOPAL: City police personnel, including women cops, across the state capital have been constantly pressed into duty round the clock to enforce restriction amid the Covid-19 scare. It is not that police officials are not terrified of being exposed to the risk, but they are selflessly working 15-16 hours regularly to contain the deadly disease.


Many police officials have resorted to self-isolation and restricted themselves to one room in their house so that they may not pose a risk for their family members. Police officers claimed that families of police staff were maintaining a complete lockdown over the ongoing coronavirus scare.

ASP Zone-1 Rajat Saklecha, who took over the post on February 22, said that during the three-week long political crisis, the briefing of SHOs for the day by senior officers started at 8am, but since the lockdown, the briefing starts at 6am in the morning. Since he is the in-charge of the control room, the planning for deployment of police force is his responsibility. Apart from setting up checking points, the control room calls over 100 dignified citizens every day and ask them to spread awareness on Covid-19 and the importance of the lockdown in their respective areas. 

Saklecha has to conduct monitoring of check posts in his jurisdiction area and visit them to boost the morale of the deployed force and provide necessary instructions. He returns home well past midnight on a regular basis. As he meets many people during the day and is exposed to risk, the first thing he does after reaching home is take a bath.

Misrod SHO Niranjan Sharma suffered a fracture in his left foot during the Holi festival. Despite his injury, he is doing duty for around 14-15 hours. SHO Sharma said that Misrod police station is on the outskirts of the city on Hoshangabad Road due to which the traffic at Misrod police check post is very high. He said that he reaches the police station by 8am and monitors the situation till 12.30am. “People quarrel with police all the time when they are stopped, but they don’t understand they are told to stay at home for their own safety”, he said.

MP Nagar SHO Manish Rai, whose wife Manjusha Mishra is deputed at the Indian embassy in China as assistant personnel and security officer, said that he was aware of the coronavirus disease before it was detected in India as his wife described about the horror from China. He said that he had sensitized his police station staff before any advisory was issued. He said that the police force is working for more that 14-16 hours just to ensure that the disease does not spread in Bhopal. “People should understand the dangers of coming out of their house”, he added.

SHO Rai stays here with his 13-year-old daughter. He said that at home he has already given paid leave to his maids and has the added responsibility of cooking. He said that if need arises, he would keep himself in isolation so that he may not pose any risk to his minor daughter. He said that the way people are violating the lockdown will severely affect the measures to contain the viral disease.

