Coronavirus scare: Jeet, Mimi cut short ‘Baazi’ shoot in London
2020-03-17
KOLKATA: On Monday evening, Nandan, Nazrul Tirtha and Navina were some of the single screen theatres to close down. That was done to implement chief minister Mamata Banerjee’s directive to shut down theatres till March 31 in the wake of the corona virus epidemic. An advisory was issued by the state government to shut all cinema halls and multiplexes in the public interest till March 31. “All concerned are requested to kindly abide by the decision of the state government,” the advisory stated.


 On Monday evening, Nandan CEO Mitra Chatterjee said, “Nandan and Nazrul Tirtha will remain shut from today evening till March 31.” Navin Choukhani, owner of Navina, said there were just eight people for the noon show of ‘Angrezi Medium’ on Monday. “In a hall with a capacity of 800, that’s a disastrous figure. Health of our patrons and staff is very important. Besides, there is no point incurring overhead cost when there is no audience. We shut from the night show on Monday as a precautionary measure against spreading of coronavirus. Salary of the staff during the closure period will be paid as usual.”
 
 
 Director Anshuman Pratyush with director of photography Ramyadip Saha
 Ratan Saha, the chairman of the exhibitors’ section of the Eastern India Motion Pictures’ Association (EIMPA), called an emergency meeting on Tuesday afternoon. “We are shutting down from Tuesday. All exhibitors will have to pay the salaries of the staff during closure.”

 Multiplexes too will be shutting down from Tuesday. INOX released an official statement saying, “Assigning top priority to the health and well-being of our guests, we will fully respect and follow the Government’s Advisory to keep the cinemas closed as a preventive measure. We would also like to assure our guests that we will be geared up and will look forward to serve them again.” Atin Ghosh, deputy mayor, Kolkata Municipal Corporation, said, “All KMC auditoria, including Star Theatre, will be shut from Tuesday till March 31.”
Director Indrasis Acharya, whose 'Parcel' was released on March 13, is expecting that his movie will get a re-run once the theatres reopen. "We just got three days to screen our movies. That too at a time when the footfall had already gone down. I would definitely want to re-release my movie later," Acharya said. 

 Meanwhile, two big shooting units currently abroad have also decided to cut short their schedules and take the flight back to Kolkata. They include Anshuman Pratyush’s ‘Baazi’ starring Jeet and Mimi Chakraborty in London and Srijit Mukherji’s ‘Kakababur Protyaborton’ starring Prosenjit Chatterjee in South Africa. 

 Speaking to TOI from London, Pratyush said, “We are leaving from London on Tuesday. Couple of days back, we had sat and discussed how there were chances of the situation turning bad. Even if one of the crew members fell ill, we would have to live the rest of our lives in guilt. We have some 50 members shooting in London. That would be completely unwanted. Even the production was of the same opinion. So, we decided to curtail the shooting in London.” While the shooting began on March 12, the original schedule was supposed to conclude at the end of March. “But we decided to cut that short,” he added.

 Meanwhile, SVF stalled shootings of web series, Mainak Bhowmick’s film titled ‘Chini’ and the second schedule of Dhrubo Banerjee’s ‘Golondaaj’. “The unit of Srijit Mukherji’s ‘Kakababur Protyaborton’ starring Prosenjit Chatterjee was supposed to return on March 21 and March 22. But decision has been taken to wrap up the schedule earlier. The earliest flight ticket they got was on March 18,” said SVF spokesperson. 

 Back in Kolkata, most production houses either postponed or geared up to cancel the shootings of films, reality shows and serials. Shooting of ‘Abar Bochhor Kuri Pore’, ‘Dictionary’ and ‘Haami 2’ have been postponed. The final call on shooting cancellations for other projects will be taken post a meeting on Tuesday between minister Arup Biswas and all stake holders including the Federation Of Cine Technicians & Workers Of Eastern India (FCTWEI).

 Actor-director Parambrata Chatterjee is waiting for a directive from the Federation on shooting cancellation of Soumitra Chatterjee’s biopic titled ‘Abhijaan’. “We have a schedule till March 20. A Hindi film that I’m acting in and was supposed to fly out to London for right after my shoot, has been postponed at least to September,” he said. On being asked how much of monetary loss would that be for the film, he said, “Thankfully, it won’t be a monetary loss because most of the stuff can be cancelled. But, it will be an enormous hassle because I’ll have to reschedule mine and everyone’s dates later.”


