Coronavirus effect: Gujarat diamond artisans stare at job losses
2020-03-10
SURAT: Ranmal Jilariya, president of Gujarat Diamond Workers’ Union (GDWU), looks distressed as he listens to a diamond worker, who lost his job a few days ago. In the last 10 days, Jilariya may have met about 40 diamond workers, who lost jobs, in his small office in the crowded diamond hub of Yogi Chowk as they recounted their travails.


“This is just tip of the iceberg. These workers were employed in small units and got affected as their units didn’t get enough diamond job work due to outbreak of coronavirus in China. Scores of workers will lose their jobs if this situation persists,” Jilariya said. 


 
He said over 3.5 lakh workers are employed in small and medium units. On the whole, Surat’s diamond industry employs about 5.5 lakh diamond workers in over 6,000 big, small and medium diamond units. The annual turnover of the industry is pegged at over Rs1.50 lakh crore.

The glitter of the world’s largest diamond cutting and polishing centre in Surat seems to have faded as polished diamond exports to China and Hong Kong, largest export markets for the city after the US, are grappling with coronavirus. 

Chandu Sheta, owner of a small diamond unit having 15 emery wheels in Varachha, told TOI, “I am doing job work and there is 60% reduction in the work since last fortnight. I plan to reduce workers’ strength from 20 to 15.” 

According to Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion Council (GJEPC), India’s gems and jewellery exports to Hong Kong and China are pegged at about $11 billion. Exports fell 16% at $1.4 billion between December 2019 and February 2020 compared to $1.6 billion during the same period last year. The GJEPC has predicted that exports to Hong Kong and China are likely to fall by over 60% in March. 

Jaysukh Sondarva, a diamond worker who lost his job, said, “Unit owner reduced my wages from Rs10,000 to Rs5,000 per month. When I asked him about the wage cut, I was told to leave the unit. I have a family of five member and it is difficult to survive with just Rs5,000 per month.”

Surat Diamond Association president Babu Kathiriya said, “A huge amount of payments are stuck in Hong Kong and China due to coronavirus outbreak. Exports of diamonds to Hong Kong have come to a stop as jewellery units in China are shut.” 

