Coronavirus: 2 UK nationals admitted to SMS Hospital
2020-03-07
JAIPUR: Two UK nationals, including a woman, have been admitted to the isolation ward of the SMS Medical College with symptoms of coronavirus on Friday. Authorities have taken their samples for tests and samples will be sent to NIV Pune for confirmation.


Amid the scare, only two out of the 267 samples sent to Pune from the state have tested positive for the virus. The Italian couple is undergoing treatment at the hospital.

Two foreign nationals from Hong Kong, who were also suspected to have the virus, tested negative and have been discharged from the hospital.

About the two UK nationals, Dr D S Meena, superintendent of the SMS Hospital, said the hospital received the duo, aged 72 and 65, who hail from Brentford, London, with symptoms like cough with sputum, fever and dry cough. “Both of them have been admitted and their samples collected. They will be sent to Pune for confirmation,” said Meena speaking to TOI.

According to sources, the two from London had landed in New Delhi on February 28. They first went to Amritsar and then came to Jaipur.

Meanwhile, two Indian nationals, who came from Dubai, too have been admitted to SMS Hospital after they were scanned at the airport.

For the time being, the administration can breathe easy as all the eight virus reports have been negative. “Till now, we have only two Italian nationals who have tested positive out of the 267 samples sent for testing. The condition of the Italian couple is improving,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

“We have removed the BiPAP mask. He has responded well to fluctuation of oxygen saturation,” Dr DS Meena said.

Meanwhile, at least 130 people from Nepal, who came for the Khatu Shyam Ji fair at Ringas in Sikar district, were screened for coronavirus. “130 people from Kathmandu in Nepal have been screened for coronavirus. None of them displayed any symptoms of the deadly virus."

Police personnel, deployed at the fair site, could be seen wearing masks. The administration is on high alert in wake of the virus threat.


