Bengaluru reports three fresh coronavirus cases; infected techie's wife, daughter test positive
2020-03-11
BENGALURU: Three more cases of Covid-19 infections from Bengaluru were confirmed on Tuesday, taking the total in the state to four. 


The new cases include the 47-year-old wife and 13-year-old daughter of Karnataka's first positive case, a software engineer from Dell. The girl is Karnataka's first paediatric case. Unlike the techie who had returned from the United States, his wife and daughter had no travel history to any country.

The state's fourth patient is a 50-year-old software engineer of Mindtree who returned to Bengaluru from the US via London on March 8. He reported at Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD) on Monday.

Including his wife and daughter, 12 persons who were in contact with the Mindtree techie are under observation. None of them has been admitted to the hospital. 

All the four confirmed patients are now in the isolation ward at RGICD and their condition is said to be stable.

A colleague of the Dell techie who had travelled with him from the United States and was admitted to RGICD has tested negative for the infection. In all, 2,666 primary and secondary contacts of the techie's family are on the health and family welfare department's radar.

 Meanwhile, a 24-year-old engineer, the first Covid-19 case of Telangana who worked and lived in Bengaluru, has recovered, a minister said. 

According to a media release from the health and family welfare department on Tuesday, 25 samples came negative for Covid-19. Fourteen more samples of suspected patients have been taken for testing, said medical education minister Dr K Sudhakar.

Currently, there are nine patients admitted to hospitals across the state: Four confirmed and two suspected cases at RGICD, one each in Dakshina Kannada, Bagalkot and Hassan hospitals.

Till date, 95,151 passengers have been screened in at KIA airport, Mangaluru airport and seaports of Mangaluru and Karwar.


