Man who came from Oman is Tamil Nadu's first coronavirus positive case
2020-03-08
CHENNAI: A 45-year-old man from Tamil Nadu has tested positive for Covid-19, Pune’s National Institute of Virology confirmed on Saturday. The man, first in TN to be confirmed of the viral infection, is in the isolation ward of Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital where his condition is stable, and he is currently showing no symptoms, doctors attending on him said.


Minutes later, health minister C Vijayabaskar tweeted saying a positive patient had been identified and isolated. “TN health department is fully functional to combat the situation,” the tweet said.

 
Officials said the employee of a Muscat, Oman, construction firm arrived on February 28 but didn’t show symptoms such as fever on landing at Chennai airport. On March 1, when he developed fever and cold, he visited his family physician in Kancheepuram. On March 4, he reported to Stanley Medical College and Hospital with fever, cough and breathing difficulty and was shifted to Rajiv Gandhi Government GH.


We can push the disease back if we follow hand hygiene, surface cleaning: Health secy

“He is in hospital quarantine ever since. His family members have been advised home quarantine. We have drawn samples from them for test,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh. “We may not be able to stop the disease but we will be able to push it back if we follow hand hygiene and surface cleaning.”

Director of public health Dr K Kolandasamy said the man underwent a series of tests including blood investigations, chest X-ray and CT scan in the GH isolation ward. Samples – (nasal and throat swabs, and blood) were drawn for test at King Institute. On March 5, the laboratory said the samples wereshowing signsof confirmation of the disease. “But there were variations. For further confirmation we sent the sample to the Pune lab. Today they confirmed the sample is positive,” he said. At present, the patient does not have fever. “He is a diabetic, but his sugar levels are under control. He is responding well. He will be discharged after two consecutive samples test negative for Covid-19,” a duty doctor said.

His eight family members, including three senior citizens, who were advised home quarantine, have not shown any symptoms so far. Samples were drawn by doctors and health workers as per WHO protocol. At least 19 other contacts including his friends, doctor and visitors, tagged as “low-risk for exposure”, were asked to stay in 28-day quarantine and call health workers in case they develop cold, fever or breathlessness.

