Coronavirus: 108 kept under observation in Bihar
2020-03-01
PATNA: At least 108 people in the state have been kept under observation at their homes owing to possible exposure to the novel coronavirus. Of the 108 people, samples of 48 were sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), state health department officials said. Altogether 26 people have completed the 14 days of quarantine.


Soon after the WHO declared coronavirus as Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), the state health department strengthened the surveillance and control measures against the disease.

The state health department has taken several steps to prevent spread of the deadly virus that has gripped China and several other countries. From revising health plans to preparing for emergency healthcare facilities, initiatives have been taken to fight coronavirus. Several teams have been working at hospitals, schools, villages, airports and border areas.

State surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra said altogether 16,035 and 93,190 people have so far been screened at Gaya and Patna airports, respectively. “We have enhanced the surveillance in bordering districts of Nepal, including Jogbani, Forbesganj and Raxaul. The district magistrates are also spreading awareness about the virus along with panchayats and anganwadi and healthcare workers. As many as 3,036 gram sabha meetings have been held till now,” she said.

Meanwhile, hotels and monasteries across the state, especially those in Gaya, Vaishali, Nalanda and Araria, have been asked to report any symptomatic case to the health authorities.

The state health department has also appealed to people not to panic or get driven by any rumour. “People should strictly follow the cough etiquettes by covering the nose and mouth using handkerchief and towel while sneezing or coughing. They should frequently wash their hands with soap and water. Those who have arrived from Corona-affected countries should stay at their homes and not go out in public gatherings, irrespective of their status of being symptomatic or asymptomatic. Besides, people with symptoms should immediately call 104 or visit nearest healthcare centre,” the advisory stated.

