Coronavirus alert: Health department starts screening fliers
2020-01-28
BHUBANESWAR/JHARSUGUDA: The state government on Sunday started screening of passengers from Kuala Lumpur in view of Malaysia confirming some cases of coronavirus (2019 n-CoV) there.


Odisha has, however, not found a single suspected case of corona that has killed more than 80 in China. 

After taking stock of the situation here, health secretary Nikunja Bihari Dhal on Monday said, “Our vulnerability is because of the direct flight from Malaysia, which has confirmed three n-CoV cases. A health team is stationed at the airport to check people flying from there. No suspected cases have been reported so far.”

Bhubaneswar has only one direct international flight (AirAsia) connecting the city with Kuala Lumpur four days a week. Dhal said there is no cause of panic. Only alertness is needed. “Those having recent travel history to affected countries and developing symptoms of acute fever, running nose, cough sore throat and shortness of breath should report to the health unit stationed at the airport,” he said. Dhal said the state has also requested the Union health ministry to ensure facility for thermal screening of passengers, in which a thermal imager measures temperature from radiation from people screened. The Centre has already made such facility available in seven airports having flights to China and Hong Kong. The government also asked the hotels to ensure international travellers, particularly those who have travelled to affected countries in past one month,, make self-declaration about their health condition. 

Ajit Kumar Mohanty, director public health, said the suspected cases, if any, will be clinically examined in the isolation room in the airport and the persons would be shifted to the Capital Hospital.

V V Rao, director, Biju Patnaik International Airport, said, “Commuters coming from Malaysia or with travel history to China are making a self-declaration about their clinical condition. Anyone having suspected symptoms is supposed to report the same to immigration authorities, who in turn will alert the health authorities.”

The Capital Hospital besides AIIMS Bhubaneswar, SCB Medical College and Hospital Cuttack, VSS Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Burla and District Headquarters Hospital, Jharsuguda, have readied isolation wards for possible cases.

Saroj Samal, district collector (Jharsuguda), after reviewing the preparedness there, said, “Screening of suspected passengers will be done at Jharsuguda airport from Tuesday. “We have also asked Vedanta Ltd Jharsuguda (aluminum company) for information regarding any official, who are from China or visiting China relating to any business. We will screen them as well,” he said.

The Paradip port set up a special Coronavirus help desk and started thermal screening for crew members for ships 

Chief medical officer (CMO), Paradip Port Hospital , Prahallad Panda said temperature is being screened for all crew members of the ships coming from other countries after their arrival in the port. “We have set up an isolation ward in the hospital at Paradip to treat any suspected patient. Crew members, who exhibit the symptoms, will be sent to the hospital for further testing,” he said.


