Coronavirus dampens Rangpanchami celebrations, Kolhapuri residents prefer to stay indoors
2020-03-14
KOLHAPUR: The fear of coronavirus outbreak witnessed a subdued celebration of Rangpanchami on Friday. 


There was a decent crowd moving out on the streets as no official programmes were arranged to celebrate the festival of colours. The civic health administration had earlier advised the citizens not to gather in large numbers and avoid contact with the persons having travel history lately or flu-like symptoms. 

Youths were seen enjoying at some places in the morning hours. The police were deployed at several schools and colleges to keep watch on the celebrations. The citizens mostly resorted to using dry colours and avoided much use of water. 

Despite the advice, in some places the rain dance programmes were organised, which were far and few as compared to last year. The vendors selling colours were seen waiting till afternoon for the buyers, unlike earlier years when the colours were in shortage due to high demand. 

A seller from Bajar Gate at KMC Building said that this time he witnessed less enthusiasm to celebrate the festival. The vendor had stocked the environment-friendly non-chemical colours, however there were no buyers this time around. “The Rangpanchami this year is not subdued. People are not coming out of their homes to celebrate. We are visiting our friends and relatives to apply colour. The fear of coronavirus is clearly seen on the celebrations,” said Prathamesh Solanki, resident of Nagala Park. 

Interestingly, the people avoided applying colours to strangers in the wake of the outbreak. Many covered their mouth and nose with masks while leaving out to celebrate the festival. “It is for precaution measure to avoid the infection, as well as to stop colours from entering mouth and nose,” said a resident. 

KMC halts football matches

After the directions from the state government, the KMC has decided to cancel all football matches from Friday onwards. The KMC had earlier arranged football tournament which was scheduled to conclude on March 15. Thousands had witnessed the earlier round of the matches.


