Coronavirus lays siege to hospitals in Bharuch, Surat
2020-04-18
Surat: Medical staffers of hospitals in Surat and Bharuch are under siege by coronavirus for the past few days. A male gynaecologist and three laboratory technicians of Bharuch’s Civil Hospital and a senior resident doctor working in COVID-19 ward of New Civil Hospital (NCH) in Surat tested positive for coronavirus on Friday. In the last two days, six medical staffers and a pregnant security guard at Bharuch’s Civil Hospital tested positive for the virus. The infection began to spread at the hospital after two nurses tasked with taking samples of suspected patients got infected and tested positive for the virus on April 15.Earlier, five staff members, including an ambulance driver, a male nurse and a ward attendant of Lokhat Hospital of Surat tested positive for COVID-19. They were infected by a coronavirus positive patient, who later died in SMIMER hospital.Surat Municipal Corporation’s health officials stated that the resident doctor working in the COVID-19 section of NCH developed symptoms of the virus and later tested positive for it. The doctor resides on NCH campus. SMC health teams have started the process of identifying his close contacts so as to shift them to quarantine facility.Dr Nilesh Patel, epidemic medical officer (EMO), Bharuch said, “Only samples of suspected patients are taken at Bharuch Civil Hospital and that positive cases are treated at Jayaben Modi Hospital in Ankleshwar. Two nurses got infected for the virus and from them it spread to other medical staff in their hospital.”Meanwhile, a staff nurse working at the COVID-19 isolation ward of Godhra Civil Hospital too tested positive for the disease on Thursday. Fifteen people working at the hospital were quarantined due to the development. Panchmahal district health department sources said results of the COVID-19 test on the woman had arrived on Thursday night and she tested positive for the viral infection.Officials said necessary personal protective equipment had been provided to the hospital. They added that the hospital will now have to probe into the reasons that led to the nurse catching the infection. The nurse was the seventh patient from Godhra Civil Hospital to test positive for COVID-19. Of them, two patients have died.Furthermore, Mahisagar district registered its first COVID-19 case at Virpur in the district. A man, who was quarantined two weeks ago after having returned from a visit to the Gulf, was tested on the last day of his quarantine and the results revealed that he was infected.