Coronavirus pushes city’s textile processing sector into doldrums
2020-03-20
Surat: Textile dyeing and printing mills in the country’s largest man-made fabric (MMF) hub in the city seem to have become casualty of Covid-19 in the country. Faced with weak demand for polyester fabrics in the domestic market and also dwindling exports, processing of finished fabrics has come to a grinding halt. Consequently, textile dyeing and printing mills are now operating at less than 50% of their capacity and most have chosen to implement closure for three days a week. Most of the migrant workers have no option, but to leave for their hometown. Textile processing sector in the city employs over two lakh workers. There are about 315 textile mills in Pandesara, Sachin, Palsana and Kadodara where about 2.5 crore metres of polyester fabrics are processed every day. Following outbreak of coronavirus in the country, textile mills now get less than one crore metres of fabrics for processing due to weak demand in domestic market and sharp decline in export orders from Europe, the United States and UAE. Industry sources said majority of textile mills are doing job work for textile traders. About 2.5 crore metres of fabrics are processed on job work to the tune of Rs80 crore per day. In the last one week, orders have reduced by almost 50% in textile mills thereby causing them a loss of Rs40 crore.South Gujarat Textile Processors’ Association (SGTPA) president Jitu Vakharia said, “If coronavirus epidemic worsens, we will have to shutdown our mills. Textile mills are processing one crore metres of fabrics per day against 2.5 crore metres. Demand for polyester fabrics in the country has declined sharply due to coronavirus.”Kamal Vijay Tulsiyan, a textile mill owner in Pandesara, said, “The situation has turned from bad to worse in the last few days. Domestic demand for fabrics has gone down and exports are also declining. Textile mills have become casualty. It is getting difficult for us to sustain jobs of workers.” Vinod Agarwal, another textile mill owner in Sachin, said, “We may be forced to shutdown the mills in the coming days if coronavirus situation worsens. In just few days, the job orders have decreased by almost 50%” PHOTO QUOTESBinay Agarwal, chairman of Swastik Polyprints: When the country is grappling with coronavirus, fabric purchase will become last priority for people. We are in an unprecedented situation. Domestic and export demand has decreased and we are forced to keep our mills shut for three days a week. Pramod Chaudhary, chairman of Pratibha Group: We will have to shutdown the mills if coronavirus situation worsens in the country. Traders have almost stopped giving job orders to textile mills as domestic and export demand has decreased. We are operating at less than 50% of our capacity. FOR GRAPHICSUnsavoury DevelopmentTotal textile mills: 315Total workers employed: Two lakhProduction loss: 50% Production of finished fabrics: 2.5 crore metre per dayTotal production loss: Rs40 crore 