Coronavirus scare: Passengers at railway stations, airport to be tested
2020-02-04
BHOPAL: With 19 cases of suspected coronavirus patients coming to light, health minister Tulsi Silawat held an emergency meeting to take stock of the situation and assess the health department’s preparedness in the state. Later in a press release, it was announced that screening of all people who have been to coronvirus-hit countries would be conducted. Doctors from government and private sectors also took part in the meeting.


In the city, the latest case of patient being tested for Novel coronavirus is a resident of Mandideep and has a travel history to China. The suspected patient with high fever was spotted at the Bhopal international airport by team of doctors. It would be the second suspected coronavirus case in Bhopal in the last week. Other patients have been screened at Indore, Ujjain, Mandsaur, Chattarpur and Gwalior.

Doctors are testing patients for symptoms of the virus on exit from the airport. Teams would also be deployed at railway stations, said officials. They would be actively screen patients coming on Shatabdi and Rajdhani trains. The first case of coronavirus was reported from Ujjain on January 27. Since then, about two dozen patients have been screened.

Meanwhile, chief minister Kamal Nath urged the people to remain calm, but cautious. In a tweet, the CM said, “The state government is fully equipped to deal with coronavirus. There is no need to fear unnecessarily from the coronavirus. Being cautious and alert is important. MP government is with you, fully alert and is actively monitoring the situation. We are ready to control coronavirus infection”. After the health minister reviewed the Coronavirus scare, the district administration on Monday set up an isolation ward for suspects at the district JP hospital in Bhopal. Medical personnel have been advised to strictly follow the protocol on treatment, diagnosis and isolation of any suspect.

 All suspected patients will be under observation and 24x7 vigil of doctors till their blood reports are received from the National Virology Laboratory in Pune. The CMHO Bhopal met the doctors and reviewed the facilities at the hospital.

 The health minister said there was no need for panic and said the health infrastructure was fully prepared to meet any eventuality.

