Coronavirus infected 25-year-old mingled with 1,000 guests at wedding in Dombivli
2020-03-27
KALYAN: A 25-year-old Dombivli resident testing positive for coronavirus has sent the Kalyan-Dombivli Municipal Corporation (KDMC) into a tizzy as he had mingled with at least 1,000 guests at his brother’s wedding on March 19. His report came in on Wednesday.


The youth, who works in a multinational company, had gone on a trip to Turkey with 21 of his friends. He returned home on March 15, and four days later attended his brother's wedding in Dombivli.

The civic health department has started tracking all local residents and relatives who attended the wedding as well as the 21 friends who had accompanied him on the Turkey trip to be tested for the coronavirus. Till Thursday evening, they examined at least 5,300 people for symptoms.

The patient is undergoing treatment at Kasturba Hospital. Three members of his family are also undergoing tests there, said sources.

According to sources, around 1,000 guests attended the March 19 function despite the state government's notification which had banned the gathering of over 50 people in one place, including weddings, to curb the spread of the virus.

A civic health official said that after the wedding, the youth started exhibiting symptoms of Covid-19—cough and fever—and he went to a nearby hospital, where doctors examined him and immediately sent him to Kasturba Hospital.

His report, which came in on Wednesday, showed that he had tested positive for coronavirus. Kasturba officials shared the information with the KDMC, which sprung into action and sanitized the entire locality and started conducting medical checkup of all residents.

Till date, six people have tested positive for coronavirus in the Kalyan-Dombivli city. While two of them were discharged after recovery, four are still undergoing treatment. Of the six patients, three had contracted the infection after coming in contact with those with international travel history, said sources.

The 25-year-old, who works in a multinational, had gone on a trip to Turkey with 21 of his friends. He returned home on March 15, and four days later attended his brother's wedding in Dombivli, which was attended by 1,000 guests

