Coronavirus: Death toll rises In Italy, US reports 3rd-most infections
2020-03-23
SOAVE: Italy, Spain and the United States reported soaring new death tolls as the coronavirus pandemic marched relentlessly across the globe Sunday, prompting a scramble in hard-hit regions to set up more hospital beds and replenish the dwindling medical supplies needed to keep health workers safe. 


 Worldwide, more than 3,28,000 people have been infected and over 14,300 have died, according to Johns Hopkins University. About 169 countries and regions now have confirmed cases, and deaths have been reported in more than 30 American states. 

 Italy 's world-topping toll from the coronavirus pandemic approached 5,500 on Sunday after the Mediterranean country reported another 651 deaths. The latest daily toll was smaller than Saturday's record 793 fatalities but still the second-highest registered during Italy's month-long crisis. Italy now has 59,138 confirmed cases of Covid-19 and 5,476 deaths - more than all of China, where the virus first emerged late last year. 

The head of Italy's Civil Protection Agency, Angelo Borrelli, noted that the increases had narrowed from recent days, adding "we hope that this trend can be confirmed in the coming days. We should not lower our guard." Italian PM Giuseppe Conte went on live TV to announce that he was tightening the country's lockdown and shutting down all production facilities except those providing essential goods and services. "We are facing the most serious crisis that the country has experienced since World War II," Conte told Italians during a broadcast at midnight. He cautioned citizens to be calm and patient, insisting there was "no alternative" than to impose further restrictions. 

I n the US , where several states have ordered residents to stay indoors, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said the government was "literally scouring the globe looking for medical supplies". Health care workers from Oklahoma City to Minneapolis sought donations of protective equipment. Staff at a Detroit hospital began creating homemade face masks for workers. Cuomo also disclosed new statistics that indicated that New York State now has roughly 5% of virus cases worldwide. There are now 15,168 cases of the coronavirus in the state, up 4,812 since Saturday, and 114 deaths. 

Top-level negotiations between Congress and the White House teetered on Sunday on a ballooning nearly $1.4 trillion economic rescue package, as the coronavirus crisis deepened and President Donald Trump called for a deal to steady a shuttered nation. Treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin indicated a deal was within reach, but congressional Republican and Democratic leaders said there was no deal yet after an hour-long meeting at the otherwise empty US Capitol. 

 Nationwide, there were 31,057 cases and 390 deaths as the US overtook Germany and Spain as the country with the third-highest number of cases. New Jersey and St. Louis were added to a growing list of areas where residents were ordered to stay home. 

 Some 3,500 doctors and other health workers in Spain have tested positive for the coronavirus, accounting for roughly 12% of the country's roughly 28,500 cases, the Spanish health ministry said on Sunday, as authorities moved to extend countrywide emergency measures two more weeks. 

 The army was building a field hospital with 5,500 beds in a convention center in Madrid, where hotels are also being turned into wards for virus patients without serious breathing problems. 

In Britain , PM Boris Johnson said the country may need to impose curfews and travel restrictions to halt the spread of the coronavirus if people do not heed the government's advice on social distancing. The government has told 1.5 million people most at risk to stay at home for 12 wee k. 

 Iran 's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei refused US assistance on Sunday to fight the virus, citing an unfounded conspiracy theory that it could be made by America. Iran says it has 1,685 deaths and 21,638 cases of the virus - a toll that experts from the WHO say is certainly under-reported. 

 Canada 's death toll from the outbreak jumped almost 50% fronm 13 to 19 in less than a day and PM Trudeau predicted on Sunday the crisis would last for months. Australia became the latest country to close all bars, clubs, cinemas, casinos, sporting and religious venues, while restaurants and cafes were restricted to takeout service only. 


