Coronavirus: 16 hospitals, 4 rehabilitation centres in Punjab isolation facilities
2020-03-25
CHANDIGARH: To tackle the coronavirus situation in the state, the Punjab government on Tuesday declared 16 hospitals in the state, having a capacity of 2,156 beds, as isolation facilities. Four rehabilitation centres with 250 beds have also been converted into isolation centres. 


The district administrations and authorities concerned have been directed to make these operational by March 25.

So far, as many as 29 people have been tested positive for the virus while one has died. The positive cases are either family members of people coming from aboard or those they have come in contact with. Around 90,000 Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) residing in the most virus-hit nations have entered the state in last one month. As the virus is being largely transmitted by people coming from aboard, the state government fears that the number of positive cases will rise in coming days.

These facilities will be set up at MCH wing of the Rajindra Hospital, Patiala (350 beds); Civil Hospital, Nawanshahr (50 beds); Civil hospital, Jalandhar (350 beds); Gain Sagar Hospital, Banur (350 beds); Advance Cancer Care Centre, Batinda (80 beds); Guru Nanak Dev Medical College, Amritsar (116 beds); district hospital, Ludhiana (100 beds); Super specialty block in Government Medical College, Patiala (250); Jalalabad Hospital (100 beds), eye department in district hospitals (50 beds), Ferozepur; rehabilitation centre, Muktsar (50 beds); rehabilitation centre, Kapurthala (100 beds); rehabilitation centre, Gurdaspur (50 beds); New Mother and Child Hospital, Pathankot (50 beds); district hospital, Hoshiarpur (75 beds); district hospital, Ropar (50 beds); rehabilitation centre, Barnala (50 beds); New Mother and Child Hospital, Tarn Taran (30 beds); GGS Medical College, Faridkot (100 beds); district hospital, Mansa (30 beds); and Community health centre, Bagha (25 beds) have been converted into isolation facilities equipped with trained health staff and adequate equipment. 


Isolation centres to help in Covid fight

Principal health secretary Anurag Agarwal shared that a notification has been issued and treatment will be provided to all the patients free of cost. “These isolation centres will help the government in its fight against the virus,” said Agarwal, who added that these facilities are following the guidelines issued by the central government.

Each bed, in these hospitals, is separated by 2-metre distance and all rooms have proper lighting, ventilation and other basic infrastructure. Only authorised and trained persons will be permitted to enter the quarantine areas and the doors of the rooms will be kept closed at all the times under surveillance of a guard.

Civil surgeons and concerned senior medical officers will ensure setting up of proper sample drawing facility at all these facilities as per the laid-down standard operating procedures.


Bio-medical waste

Emphasis has been laid on collection of biomedical waste management as per the set guidelines. For ensuring proper collection of biomedical waste management in these facilities, separate yellow, red /black, foot operating dustbins have been kept at each floor and outside the facility. Instructions have been issued to ensure that doffing of infectious material is done in designated area and the bins are to be collected at least twice daily by biomedical waste management vehicle. All the health care workers have to wear personal protective equipment (PPE) kits

