Coronavirus latest updates: CRPF DG, senior officers under home quarantine
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: As per data released by the Union health ministry on Sunday morning, India reported 3,374 cases of Covid-19 with 77 deaths. The ministry reported two new fatalities -one each from Karnataka and Tamil Nadu on Sunday. Meanwhile, the United States of America with over three lakh patients now has the highest number of cases in the world and Italy had the highest number of deaths with over 13,000 fatalities. 

Here are the top development from India and the world: 


CRPF DG, senior officers tested for COVID-19
With the Chief Medical Officer of the Central Reserve Police Forces (CRPF) testing positive for coronavirus, DG CRPF AP Maheshwari, who came into indirect contact with him through an official, has given his sample for COVID-19 testing. While 20 senior officers of the security force have been placed under home quarantine. Apart from the DG, several senior CRPF officials have also given their samples for testing, sources in CRPF said. Almost 20 CRPF officers are under home quarantine since the last couple of days as a precautionary measure.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage


Highest number of Covid-19 deaths in India from Maharashtra
Maharashtra has reported the most coronavirus deaths at 24, followed by Gujarat (10) and Telangana (7). Number of fatalities from other states are: Madhya Pradesh (6); Delhi (6); Punjab (5); Karnataka (4); West Bengal (3) Tamil Nadu (3); Jammu and Kashmir (2); Uttar Pradesh (2); Kerala (2); Andhra Pradesh(1); Bihar (1); Himachal Pradesh (1). 


Highest number of positive cases in India from Maharashtra
The highest number of confirmed cases was reported from Maharashtra at 490, followed by Tamil Nadu at 485 and Delhi 445. While the number of active COVID-19 cases stood at 3,030, as many as 266 people were cured of the disease and one had migrated. Tally of positive cases from other states as per health ministry data are: Kerala (306); Telangana (269); Uttar Pradesh (227); Rajasthan (200); Andhra Pradesh (161); Karnataka (144); Gujarat (105); Madhya Pradesh (104); Jammu and Kashmir (92); West Bengal (69); Punjab (57); Haryana (49); Bihar (30); Assam (24); Uttarakhand (22); Odisha (20); Chandigarh (18); Ladakh (14); Andaman and Nicobar Islands (10); Chhattisgarh (9); Goa (7); Himachal Pradesh (6); Puducherry (5); Jharkhand (2); Manipur (2); Mizoram (1) and Arunachal Pradesh (1).


PM Modi tweets #9pm9minute
PM Modi has reminded people to light up lamps on Sunday night to show the country's collective resolve to fight coronavirus. "#9pm9minute", the prime minister tweeted to remind people of the exercise. Modi had on Friday urged people to switch off the lights at their homes and light up lamps, candles or mobile phone torches for nine minutes at 9 pm on April 5 to display the country's "collective resolve" to defeat coronavirus.


India's cash transfer scheme inspires other countries
On Friday Canada’s PM Justin Trudeau announced he would pay $2,000 every month for four months to those who have lost their incomes. Earlier US president Donald Trump had announced a similar support program for those hit hardest by the Covid-19 crisis. These initiatives seem to have been inspired by Indian use of cash transfer schemes to benefit people during Covid-19 crisis. On March 26, the Modi government had announced a set of cash transfer and related benefits that would use the JAM (JanDhan-Aadhaar-Mobile) backbone to move over Rs 30,000 crore into woman JanDhan account holders and over Rs 5,000 crore into linked LPG connections.


Over 1K TJ members account for 30% of all India cases
Union health ministry joint secretary Lav Agarwal has said that around 30% of all Covid-19 cases in India are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation that was held last month in the Nizamuddin markaz. As many as 1,023 Covid-19 positive cases found in 17 states have been traced to the Jamaat event which now accounts for 30% of all cases in India.


DRDO develops portable decontamination chamber
The DRDO on Saturday said it has developed a portable full-body decontamination chamber or personnel sanitization enclosure (PSE), which can be used in hospitals, office buildings and other critical installations. On entering the chamber, electrically-operated pumps create a disinfectant mist of hypo sodium chloride which is calibrated for an operation of 25 seconds. With 700-litre tank capacity, the PSE can be used by 650 people until the refill is required.


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 


WORLD


Trump, Modi to ensure supply of medical goods; discuss yoga
US President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi had a telephonic discussion on Saturday. As per White House readout of the conversation, both leaders have agreed to ensure smooth functioning of the global supply chains for critical pharmaceuticals and medical goods to fight the coronavirus pandemic and discussed the significance of Yoga and Ayurveda for the physical and mental well-being of people during the major global health crisis.


'Toughest' weeks ahead: Donald Trump
President Donald Trump warned Saturday that the country could be headed into its "toughest" weeks yet as the coronavirus death toll mounts. "There will be a lot of death, unfortunately," Trump said in a somber start to his daily briefing on the pandemic.


Spain overtakes Italy to become worst-affected country in Europe
The overall number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Spain has increased to 126,168, overtaking Italy's tally of 124,632, making it the worst-affected European nation in terms of infections. The tally placed Spain first in Europe and second only to the US worldwide in terms of confirmed cases. The US was currently the highest with a total of 312,076 cases, according to the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at the Washington-based Johns Hopkins University. The CSSE update showed that Italy had the highest number of deaths in the world at 15,362, followed by Spain in the second place with 11,947 fatalities.


Pakistan cases may top 50,000 by April end
The number of coronavirus cases in Pakistan might be over 50,000 by the end of April — 2,392 critical patients needing intensive care, 7,024 serious patients and 41,482 others who would have mild symptoms and just require isolation at their homes, the Supreme Court was informed. In a report submitted to the apex court on Saturday, the Ministry of National Health Services, Regulation and Coordination (NHSRC), however, explained that these figures were mere projections based on assumptions made from trends of the outbreak in other countries.


(With inputs from agencies)
