Coronavirus fright: 31 doctors test positive in Telangana-run hospitals
2020-06-04
HYDERABAD: Worried doctors at state-run hospitals on Wednesday demanded Covid-19 tests for all medical staff after 31 doctors and three lab technicians tested positive.

With the threat of hospitals turning into transmission hotspots looming large, health authorities are holding an emergency meeting to discuss a plan of action.

 


Healthcare personnel who tested positive were on duty at Gandhi hospital, Osmania General Hospital (OGH), Nizams Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS) and at the Modern Government Maternity Hospital (MGMH) Petlaburj.

On Wednesday, four PG residents of NIMS cardiology department and three cath lab technicians tested positive. Also, a professor and two resident doctors from gynaecology department at the MGMH turned positive.

At the OGH, one PG doctor from anaesthesia department, two PG residents from microbiology and four house surgeons tested positive, while samples of 20 doctors from the OMC affiliated hospitals were collected for testing.

As fear gripped health workers, junior doctors met health minister Eatala Rajender and director of medical education, demanding re-introduction of quarantine for PG doctors, accommodation for Covid-19 positive PGs and healthcare workers in NIMS, regular swab test for all healthcare workers and postponement of PG final year exams.

“Many PG doctors have opted for the testing option provided by Osmania Medical College (OMC) authorities. Most of the PG doctors are reluctant to go home in the current situation as they are worried of spreading the virus to their family members,” said a junior doctor at the OGH.


Fear leads to drop in number of attendants with patients

The fear has led to the number of attendants accompanying patients see a dip, say hospital insiders.

“While previously we used to have some patients accompanied by 15-20 villagers, now most patients are coming with just one or no attendant,” said a junior doctor at the OGH, where many PG residents have been tested positive

The news of doctors testing positive is giving jitters to patients and their attendants as well.

“My brother-in-law was rushed to the hospital last night after he met with a road accident. After coming back, I have been constantly worried that I might have caught the virus,” said R Ali, a patient’s relative, who visited the hospital on Wednesday. 


