Coronavirus creeps into rural pockets as migrants return home
2020-06-04
KANPUR: The novel coronavirus is creeping to the rural belt, with an increasing number of cases being reported from neighbouring districts of Kanpur that were until recently untouched by Covid-19. 

On Wednesday, three more persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Farrukhabad, while 12 positive cases were reported in Kannauj on Tuesday. Besides, six positive patients were detected in Auraiya, five in Unnao and four in Etawah. 

In Kannauj, the pandemic has started turning green zones into orange zones. “A mother-daughter duo who had returned from Gurugram, infected ten members of their family in Galla Mandi area of Chhibramau, which has turned from green to orange zone. “The Covid tally of the district jumped to 72 from 60 in the past 72 hours,” informed district health department sources. 

“With this large-scale influx of migrants from urban cities to villages, the rural areas cannot be ignored and need special attention as far as monitoring is concerned. Infected people are being home quarantined or admitted to hospitals with the help of community management,” said CMO Dr Krishna Swaroop. District authorities have roped in block development officers besides village heads and Civil defence volunteers to take due care to avoid spread. 

“At present, we are in the process of contact tracing of infected persons. A Rapid Response team which includes Dr Atif Hasan and Dr Brijesh Shukla have been sent to Chhibramau’s Galla Mandi area where ten members of a family tested positive on Tuesday, leading to the district’s highest single-day spike in tally,” added the CMO.

An awareness and preventive measures programme is also being organised by the health teams to fight the pandemic. 

A senior health official preferring anonymity, meanwhile, told TOI that the situation is alarming in rural pockets. “Migrants coming back to the villages are violating the protocol. They are escaping quarantine centres, besides using the same water resources,” he said. 

The official further said that social distancing is a new concept for rural folks.. “If there is a marriage or mundan ceremony in the vicinity, everyone around gathers to celebrate,” he added. 

Auraiya, Etawah, Farrukhabad and Unnao have also witnessed a similar trend. Farrukhabad has 36 positive cases, Unnao has 40, Etawah has 50 and Auraiya has 32. 


