Nagpur: Coronavirus rumours bring chicken rates crashing down
2020-02-17
NAGPUR: Rumours regarding the global outbreak of coronavirus, which has spread from its epicentre China, has taken a huge toll on the poultry business, with farm lifting price coming down to as low as Rs30 to 45 per kg, while retail rates too have dropped to Rs74 to Rs84 per kg of live bird in Nagpur and most parts of the country.

The last time chicken rates witnessed such a sharp drop was around 2006, when the avian flu scare hit the business. Producers were forced to either cull the birds or dump them. 

The main reason behind the impact are several social media videos and posts advising people against consuming chicken as a method of preventing the deadly coronavirus though no fatality has been reported from across the country.

The industry stakeholders have been trying hard to contain the false videos, but have miserably failed to allay fears in the minds of consumers.

Since January 21, when first reports of coronavirus wreaking havoc in China spread, the retail chicken rates started plummeting from the high of Rs150 to Rs170.

Vidarbha Poultry Farmers Association has pegged the losses at around Rs1 crore per day in Nagpur, Rs5 crore per day across Vidarbha, and Rs25 crore per day at the Maharashtra level for the last 15 days.

Association president Raja Dudhbade told TOI the production cost comes to around Rs75 to 78 per one kg bird. “We already work on a marginal profit of 2 to 3 per cent. The wrong information being deliberately spread has disrupted economics of farmers. The loss is Rs200 to 250 crore across Maharashtra till date. Today, birds were even lifted at Rs30 per kg in Pune and Nashik, while the feed alone cost Rs32 per bird,” he said.

Dudhbade said consumers must not fall prey to fake news, and instead make informed decisions. “It will take at least four to five months for us to recover the damages alone,” he said. 

He said small farmers are in a state of shock as they may be unable to repay loans. “Farmers will be in big trouble if the situation continues like this for the next 15 days, though we are fighting hard to remove misconceptions in the consumers’s mind,” he said. 

A representative of a chicken retail chain said after they started creating awareness the business did recover to some extent on Sunday. “But, the rates continue to remain low. The footfalls were better than last Sunday but it was 20% short of normal,” he said.


