Coronavirus outbreak: TMC members suspend activities
2020-03-19
NEW DELHI: In the wake of the novel coronavirus outbreak, political parties across the board have suspended activities in West Bengal and have asked their activists to take precautions and generate awareness to prevent the spread of the disease.


While one of the TMC MLAs took leave from the House for the rest of the budget session, another went up to the Prime Minister to suggest early shutting down of the House in view of coronavirus pandemic

Senior TMC MP Saugata Roy went up to Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha chamber on Monday evening, after the House was adjourned and suggested that the session should be cut short to ensure that virus does not spread in Parliament.

TMC’s Sukhendu Sekhar Roy also wrote a letter to Rajya Sabha chairman M Venkaiah Naidu on Wednesday morning seeking leave from the House for the rest of the session to self-quarantine himself.

Roy in his letter said: “In view of such a situation which is fast deteriorating, I have decided to remain in self-quarantine at home for the remaining part of the ongoing Budget Session. Hence I request for grant of leave accordingly.”

Saugata Roy’s suggestion, however, seems to have been turned down as the PM had told the BJP parliamentary party meeting on Tuesday morning that while some members have requested cutting short the session, it will continue as per schedule, which is till April 3.

Senior TMC MP and leader of the House in Lok Sabha Sudip Bandopadhyay received a message from West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee to be shared with other party colleagues that asked him to avoid travelling and hence to remain in Delhi for the rest of the session.

She also mentioned a list of “dos and don’ts” to prevent the virus including “no handshake,” keeping yourself hydrated, avoiding cut fruits and food from outside, social distancing, no social gatherings for the next two weeks.” 

Meanwhile, TMC Lok Sabha MP Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar, who was checked at the Parliament entry gate on Wednesday morning, was detected with slight temperature and hence detained for few seconds. However, she was allowed to go back soon after.


