Coronavirus cases in Gujarat: Less is good! Lowest 3 positive cases after March 19
2020-03-28
AHMEDABAD/RAJKOT: Eight days after Gujarat tested its first two positive cases on March 19, the state recorded its lowest daily positive of three cases on Friday. All three Covid-19 patients are from Rajkot, taking the total tally to 47.


Top health officials in Rajkot said the three were in quarantine facility of the district administration and are close contacts of a Dubai-returned man who had tested positive two days ago.


 
His two friends — aged 37 and 39 — tested positive on Friday along with the 33-year-old wife of one of the friends. All three are under treatment in a private hospital.

Ahmedabad has the highest 15 positive cases followed by Vadodara and Rajkot with eight cases each. Surat and Gandhinagar have seven cases each while Kutch and Bhavnagar have recorded one case each. The state has recorded three deaths – one each from Surat, Ahmedabad and Bhavnagar.

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), said Rajkot Medical College has got permission for Covid testing. “Gujarat has now six government facilities for Covid testing. It would not only help us with quicker analysis but also distribute load if there is a sudden spike in samples,” Ravi said.

Meanwhile, Gujarat on Friday reiterated it would not allow mass exodus of migrant workers to other states any more. A helpline — 1077 — was launched to address issues faced by migrant labourers after they have been requested to stay put wherever they are, said Ashwani Kumar, secretary to the CM.

Thousands of migrant labourers had started marching on foot from major cities in a bid to reach their homes in MP, UP, Maharashtra and Rajasthan since the past few days, which some termed was defeating the purpose of the 21-day lockdown.


342 booked for lockdown violation

Across cities, migrant on roads were escorted to EWS housing for lodging and boarding during the lockdown period. Shivanand Jha, DGP, said that a total of 18,453 have been sent to the 54 facilities run by different district administrations.

Kumar said the state government has also launched a helpline — 1070 — for persons from Gujarat stuck in other states who need help.

Gujarat Police took a sterner stance towards those on the streets and those part of the mass exodus. “We request people of Gujarat to stay home and stay safe. We kept close watch on places where we received complaints for crowding and have deployed police personnel at wholesale markets. We will be sterner for the safety of the citizens,” said Jha. In past 24 hours, police booked 343 persons for violation of CrPC Section 144 and 272.

