Coronavirus advisory issued for BHU students, patients
2020-03-16
VARANASI: Banaras Hindu University (BHU), which has one of the five laboratories set up in the state for testing of coronavirus, convened a high-level meeting on Sunday to keep campus safe from Covid-19 threat.


The university authorities asked students to avoid crowded places and appealed people not to visit BHU hospital if there is no urgency.

Speaking at the meeting attended by directors of all institutes, deans of faculties and administrative officials, BHU vice-chancellor Prof Rakesh Bhatnagar said focus should be on creating awareness on coronavirus.

The VC appealed to students to stay in their hostel rooms and avoid visiting crowded places. He also asked mess operators to take precautions and ensure cleanliness of kitchen. “Officials should ensure no crowding takes place at BHU hospital or Vishwanath temple on the university campus,” he said.

“Patients and their attendants should avoid visiting hospitals on the campus if there is no urgency. The appeal is being made not only to reduce crowd at hospitals, as it will help doctors and paramedical staff to serve patients efficiently, but also help in checking the spread of coronavirus,” he said.

Prof Bhatnagar also reviewed special arrangements made by Institute of Medical Science at BHU (IMS-BHU) for conducting confirmatory tests of coronavirus.

“Any person with symptoms of coronavirus can visit room number 103 of the outdoor patient unit of SSL Hospital after collecting registration slip. They will not have to stand in any queue. This OPD room is operational round the clock,” the VC said.

He added that six isolation wards, including two for coronavirus cases of 10 bed each, were operational at the hospital and the team of doctors were looking after suspected patients. He said hospital staff had been briefed and sufficient stock of medicines was being maintained.

Meanwhile, three persons, including two from Ghazipur and one from Chandauli district, having Covid-like symptoms were admitted to the isolation ward of BHU’s SSL Hospital on Saturday.

“Test results of the patients are awaited. Earlier, 13 people, including an American lady, were discharged from isolation ward after their test reports were found negative,” said spokesperson Rajesh Singh.


