Kolkata: Coronavirus lockdown fear sets off panic buying of staple items
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: News of convenience stores in Covid-19 affected cities in India and abroad running out of essential staples and groceries has triggered panic buying in Kolkata with customers making bulk purchase fearing shutdown of stores. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

Branded standalone grocery stores in the city are seeing an unprecedented rush from the first hour itself. People are queueing up, waiting for the stores to open, so that they can pick up essential supplies before stocks are exhausted. Store employees say they are witnessing an unprecedented rush for foodgrains and essentials with people wanting to stock up for at least two months.

Take the case of one hypermart on Free School Street that opens at 7am but gets reasonable footfalls only after 8 am. This one hour is spent in cleaning because of lack of footfall. “But for the past four-five days, we are seeing an unprecedented upward curve, not only in footfall but also in the quantity that people are buying. We were caught off guard initially because even when we had doubled our stocks, we were not being able to cope with the rush,” said an official. 

All varieties of rice, lentils, cooking oil, salt, sugar, flattened and puffed rice and biscuits are getting exhausted by the first half of the day in most stores. “We have noticed 100% rise in demand of foodgrains in some stores. This is a result of panic buying. Initially, we were not able to cope because we were following a regular replenishing pattern but we have more than doubled that as well,” said an official of a group that runs a chain of hypermarts. 

“In the past week, we have had to replenish store shelves more often. Even then, we have repeatedly run out of stock. This is true for not just hand sanitizers and personal hygiene products but also for staples and essential food items,” the head of a hypermarket chain that has over a dozen stores in Kolkata said.

While the company had attempted to increase the inventory at the stores in Kolkata after witnessing unusual demand in Mumbai, Bengaluru, Delhi and other cities, even the new projections are failing in the wake of spiralling demand. “Customers are picking up as much groceries and staples in one visit as they usually did in four trips,” he said.

At another hypermarket company, the depots are working overtime to ensure that the stores are replenished on time. “We usually do not stock up the store at night. But such is the rush during the day that we are having to run a night replenishment service too,” the operations head of the chain said.

Though sales of essentials has shot up, it has not translated to higher footfalls or hike in revenue as customers are staying away from gourmet items and other personal care categories like cosmetics. However, the company has also witnessed a sharp uptake in essential groceries on its e-commerce platform and phone home delivery channels as well.


