Coronavirus safety measures trigger stormy housing complex debates in Kolkata
2020-05-20
KOLKATA: A slew of additional “safety measures” taken up by housing societies across the city has created a debate and heated arguments among the residents, with some flat owners expressing their angst at some of the norms laid down by the associations or facility managers.


A section of residents at Urbana, a posh multi tower complex near Ruby Hospital, has been vocal after the authorities asked its residents to stop walking, jogging, cycling or walking their pets inside the complex after one of the residents at Tower 6 was tested positive for Covid-19 on May 15. 


TimesViewIn many of these cases, there may not be any right or wrong. Housing societies, too, are having to grapple with new sets of rules every few weeks as we move from lockdown to lockdown. How we behave over the next few weeks is going to be critical in our struggle with the new disease and our response will have to evolve according to the situation.
“We can see people gossiping in clusters but they are asking people not to walk or jog inside the complex. When the rest of the city is slowly opening up preparing to face the infection, it seems we are getting further inside a cocoon,” said one of the residents of the complex.

Debjani Mukherjee, vice president of the residential project, said the decision was taken in the best interest of the residents. She added that they were still discussing if some restrictions could be relaxed. “The recent circular has angered a section of residents. We are still holding meetings to finalise if we can allow walking inside the complex but we are taking some precautions as the family members of the patient have not been tested till now,” said Mukherjee.

At Upohar condominium, the authorities had to conduct a voting among its residents recently over the issue of allowing maids, when a whopping 85% had voted against the idea of allowing maids. But after the end of Lockdown 3, following an internal meeting, the association had allowed maids inside the complex with some restrictions.

“There are still several residents who are against the motion. But we had to take a chance and from Monday, we allowed maids. Now we are just praying that none of the residents catch an infection any time soon,” said a senior official of the association.

At Silver Spring complex off EM Bypass, the main issue of contention has been only “clockwise movement” during morning and evening walks, which several residents opine is difficult scientifically. “It would have made more sense, if they allowed anticlockwise movement,” said a resident.

Ashok Baid, a senior member of the association, said the unidirectional movement has been thought of to make sure that people don’t cross each other. “Further we are also not allowing people to run. While running, they often pant and cough which can expose another resident to infections,” said Baid.

Another premium housing complex in Tollygunge also had a heated debate last week when the association members said the domestic help cannot use elevators and the norm that one domestic help can work at only one house. “There was a heated debate over a list of 12 precautionary measures listed by our association,” said a resident.

