Coronavirus fear brings Kolhapur to a standstill
2020-03-21
KOLHAPUR: The city came to a standstill with people winding up their business and returning to their homes following the state government’s decision of lockdown in three cities on Friday. 

Shops and other commercial establishments, which had opened their shutters partially in the morning, had to close down in the evening as there were hardly any customers. 

Areas having major shopping complexes like Mahadwar road, Paan lane, Bindu chowk, Shivaji chowk, Gujari, Bindu chowk, Laxmipuri and Rajarampuri wore a deserted look. Though shopkeepers and vendors opened their outlets, activity in the market area came to a standstill when the they were seen wrapping up for the day. When asked, many shopkeepers, vendors and hotel owners said that they were closing in response to the appeal by the administration. 

Dayanand Bawdekar, who runs a tea stall near the zilla parishad office, said that the police requested him to close his outlet from Friday till March 31. “I will keep my stall closed till the situation improves,” he said. Many roads including station road, Mahadwar road, Vidyapeeth road and Shiaji road wore a deserted look in the evening as people preferred to stay indoors. 

The central bus stand, which is always abuzz with passengers, was unusually peaceful with just a handful of buses parked in the premises, waiting to receive commuters. The canteen and the stalls at the bus stand were closed. Very few autorickshaw drivers were seen outside the bus stand. Not a single handcart could be spotted. 

A majority of the private bus operators have cancelled their routine service indefinitely. A spokesperson for the railway ministry said that 90% of the passengers had cancelled their reservation. 

Many vendors on Mahadwar road, which is always full of devotees, were missing. Rajarampuri, known to be a major market area, was also peaceful due to lack of customers. 

The situation at Chhatrapati Pramilaraje Hospital (CPR) was no different. Officials said that the number of outdoor patients has dropped from 3,000 a day to 900. 


