Coronavirus scare: Cochin International Airport to stop international flight services from today
2020-03-22
KOCHI: International services from Cochin International Airport Ltd (Cial) will be stopped from 9.30am on Sunday. This will offload the responsibility of screening, transporting, testing and quarantining at least 2,500 persons every day and so, the authorities can deploy around 60 doctors and other staff for intensifying screening the domestic passengers or other duties. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


As of now, around 60 doctors, nurses and paramedical staff are deployed for screening international passengers. "The number of international passengers, including arrival and departure, has come down to around 8,000 per now. It was around 30,000 before coronavirus cases were reported," a Cial official said.

 
 
District collector S Suhas said that all the staff, including doctors, thus relieved from the duty can be redeployed for other duties at domestic terminals. As of now, around 4,000 passengers, including departure and arrival, are being screened at the airport. "The doctors and staff deployed for screening international passengers are specialized in the area. So, they will be redeployed for intensifying screening domestic passengers," Suhas said. "We have given instructions to the health department and other officials to enhance surveillance and other activities from Sunday onwards," he said.

The screening desk at international terminal of the airport will be reduced to just three or four doctors. "This is to facilitate issuing various reports. The remaining staff will be given rest until March 29. Then, they will be redeployed for other duties considering the situation prevailing then," said Dr Hamsakoya, international officer, ministry of health, Government of India.

Officials associated with Cial said that with the closure of one terminal, staff deployed for customs checking, duty free shops, etc. will be on passive mode. "Around 50% of operations of the airport will be reduced. It may take at least three weeks for resuming the international services," said an official. 

A section of ambulances now plying at airport can be redeployed for other duties. 

