#CoronaLockdown: Home workouts and visits to farm keep Vijay Shankar occupied
2020-03-24
Lockdown, social isolation — these are words that we hear, read and are almost drilled into our conscience these days to fight the spread of Coronavirus. But finding a way out of boredom that comes with it is up to us. Here’s how Chennai paiyyan, namma Vijay Shankar is fighting it — boredom.


What he does at home... It’s been a month since I came back to Chennai after the India A tour of New Zealand. Once I came back, I was busy with the league matches in Chennai. Now, it’s been a week since everything has come to a halt. At home, I do basic strength training. I do deadlifts, squats, etc. I also have loop bands and power bands at home. I use them as well for doing exercises. But I don’t know how long I can last like this. Because all I know is to play cricket. However, not often we get to be at home and spend time with family. So, I am enjoying that at the moment.


‘Now, I am forced to binge watch’Generally, I am not someone who binge watch anything. However, I have no other go now. I just finished watching The Test: A New Era for Australia Team (a series on how the Australian men’s cricket team rebuilt its reputation after the 2018 sandpaper scandal). I am sure most of the cricketers would have watched it. Or sometimes, I sit and watch the highlights of some old matches.


‘I’ve got to spend more time in our farm’We’ve a farm on ECR, close to Mahabalipuram. I went there a couple of days ago. I think I should be going there more often since I have a lot of time now. It’s a great place to relax and unwind, and get to learn the basics of cultivation from the workers there. We’ve got vegetables, fruits, groundnuts, etc. It’s been close to a year since we bought this place and now we’ve started getting the produce from there for our kitchen.


What’s on his plate at home…A proper south Indian meal for lunch is what I enjoy the most since I am at home. And I don’t mind eating dosa every day. I love it.
 

Vijay recalls his First-time skydiving experience in NZIt wasn’t planned at all. I am generally someone who only thinks about cricket and cricket-related stuff. We had some free time after India A tour in New Zealand. So, Sandeep Warrier and I decided to go to Queenstown. And we decided to try bungee jumping and sky diving. It wasn’t even planned, so we had no time to think if it would be scary at all. It was really a good experience. 


