Coronavirus scare worries UP Board examiners
2020-03-16
Agra/Meerut: Amid coronavirus scare, teachers who will be evaluating the high school and intermediate examinations answersheets of UP Board have expressed apprehensions about gathering at one location, thereby facing the risk of getting infected in case anyone among them is a carrier of the Covid-19 virus. The evaluation process begins on Monday.

RK Trivedi, Lucknow district president, UP Madhyamik Shiksha Sangh, said, “At a time when the state government has closed all the schools and colleges until March 22, teachers are being called for evaluation purpose. There is a huge risk of getting infected by the virus in a large gathering.”

Rajesh Tyagi, a teacher in Meerut, said, “At least 500 teachers will be assembling at the evaluation centre and it increases the risk of coronavirus infecting all teachers at the spot.”

To check the virus from spreading, an advisory has been issued to people to avoid crowded places such as cinema halls or malls. While movie theatre officials have been asked to check the temperature of every person who comes to the cinema hall via thermal scanning, others have been asked to disinfect their surroundings from time to time to make sure that nobody catches the infection.

In this context, authorities in Agra have decided to sanitize the five evaluation centres in the district before work begins. Disinfectants will be used for mopping and cleaning the centres every day. In Agra alone, 3,500 teachers have been assigned evaluation duty.

Joint director (education) of Agra division Mukesh Agarwal has issued orders to the effect to all district inspectors of schools (DIOS). 

Ravindra Singh, DIOS of Agra said, “All the centres where the evaluation process is planned will be sanitized. Teams of the civic body and health departments will be conducting chemical mopping at the exam centres. In this regard, a request has been sent to the district administration.” 

The Secondary Education Council has directed that there should be at least one meter distance between each examiner. Special care be given on maintenance of sanitation and hygiene at each centre. The DIOS have been directed to ensure availability of sanitizers at the centres.

Arun Kumar Singh, principal of Government Inter College in Shahganj (Agra), where the evaluation will take place, said, “High level of precautions will be followed at the evaluation centres to prevent any possibility of the spread of coronavirus. Teachers having a cold, fever or any other health complication will not be allowed to evaluate answersheets without approval of the chief medical officer. Besides, high level of cleanliness will be ensured.” 


