Jaipur: Coronavirus prevention and control cells in districts soon
2020-02-06
JAIPUR: In the wake of three confirmed novel coronavirus (nCoV) cases in Kerala, health authorities in the state have stepped up measures to activate nCoV outbreak control and prevention district cells in each district. 

Instructions have been sent to all the districts to remain alert. So far, 5,927 passengers who arrived in the state by 41 international flights have been screened. So far, no confirmed cases of nCoV has been detected. 

“In all, 44 samples of suspected nCoV cases have been sent to laboratories for tests. Out of those, 26 cases have tested negative, while reports of 18 persons are awaited,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health), health department. 

Control room call centres will be set up in the districts as well. The health department has started taking measures for developing infrastructure in each district for at least 50 patients for quarantine facilities, a dedicated team in each district, training the team and other health functionaries and for ensuring strict protocol of infection control. 

There will also be a team that will compile data regarding the general public visiting private hospitals from all districts to identify suspected cases. 

Directions have also been issued to ensure that vehicles should be available round-the-clock in the district for transportation of patients. Facility will be developed to manage post-traumatic stress related events and stress during quarantine. 

The state level nCoV control room teams will also be formed for surveillance, call centre management, training and awareness generation, infrastructure management, documentation, private hospital surveillance and psychological support teams. 

The health department officials said the symptomatic patients admitted at isolation wards of hospitals are being closely scrutinised. Those patients discharged from hospitals are being monitored by field workers in their corresponding areas. Those asymptomatic travels/contact in home isolation are being monitored for 28 days by field workers and reporting it on daily basis.


