Coronavirus hits doorstep waste collection in Lucknow, raises a stink
2020-04-04
LUCKNOW: Door-to-door garbage collection has stopped in many parts of the city, affecting around one lakh households as a section of sanitary workers of Eco-Green, the company hired for the job, has stopped reporting for duty due to lockdown and fear of catching coronavirus infection. As a result, residents are forced to throw garbage in open. 


According to LMC records, of total 5.48 lakh households in the city, Eco-Green has the responsibility of collecting daily garbage from 3.78 lakh households, while the civic body itself covers 1.7 lakh households. Around 60,000 are yet to covered under the door-to-door system.LMC claimed that they are ensuring 100% garbage collection from 1.7 lakh households under it, Eco-Green officials said they are able to cover around 2.78 lakh units due to limited resources.


TimesViewLaxity in garbage management may complicate things further for the administration, which is trying its level best to check the outbreak of Covid-19 in the city. Waste dumps pose a threat of other diseases, besides serving as a mosquito breeding ground. LMC authorities and private agencies should provide protective gears to sanitary workers so that they can work without fear of catching the infection.
Eco-green project manager Abhishek Singh said, "Most of our workers have refused to work due to the lockdown and fear of catching infection. Some are even demanding extra wages. Even then we are trying to cover as many households as possible with limited hands."

Partially or fully affected areas include Jankipuram, Chowk, New Hyderabad, Nishatganj, Daliganj, Niralanagar, Mahanagar, and some parts of Aliganj. Residents of Jankipuram Sector-F and Sector-G said no collection has taken place in their area for one week, Akhil Mishra, of Sector-F, said, "We are dumping garbage in a vacant plot in our locality"The problem is more severe in the Old City area of Chowk. In New Hyderabad, residents complain that garbage collectors show up only once a week, forcing people to hire private sanitary workers. Pawan Jaiswal, another resident said, "Workers have been coming only once or twice a week for 15 days."

LMC environment engineer Pankaj Bhusan said, "We are receiving complaints about erratic garbage collection in some parts of the city. We are not relying on Eco-Green to collect household garbage as they have failed to ensure 100% garbage collection. Now, we are sending our workers to collect door-to-door garbage. "


