Coronavirus: Navy officer from Doon, chef from Tehri admitted in AIIMS
2020-02-10
Dehradun: Two patients — a 34-year-old Navy officer and a 38-year-old chef from Tehri Garhwal — are the latest to have been admitted to AIIMS Rishikesh with symptoms of suspected coronavirus. 

Providing details, Harish Thapliyal, public relations officer, AIIMS Rishikesh said that the naval officer, who is a resident of Dehradun, had travelled from Taiwan to Tianjin in China by ship recently.

“He stayed in the ship from January 22 to January 24, and then boarded a return flight from Bangkok to Delhi. He travelled to Dehradun on the same day and started developing dry cough with sore throat, nasal discharge, and nasal blockade on February 6, which is barely 10 days after his visit to the ship,” said Thapliyal.

Doctors at AIIMS found that the patient, brought to the hospital on Saturday night, was also complaining of fever since the past three days and was having chills. However, he had no history of breathlessness, chest pain, nausea or vomiting.

“We are suspecting coronavirus infection in the officer. We have sent his reports to a test lab in Pune along with the samples of a 38-year-old man from Tehri Garhwal who works as a chef in Shanghai city in China and had come back to India on January 5,” Thapliyal said.

Talking about the details of the second patient, Thapliyal said that he is working in China since 10 years and was brought to the hospital with complaints of fever and sore throat.

“He has no history of visits to crowded market places preceding two weeks during his stay in Shanghai city and no history of contact with any known sick persons there. But we have sent his samples, too, for testing just to be 100 per cent sure that he has not been infected,” said the PRO.

Since January, AIIMS Rishikesh has received seven suspected coronavirus cases. While the reports of initial three cases were negative, another person was kept in the isolation ward for observation for some time and later discharged, and his samples were not sent. The hospital is still awaiting the reports of an 11-year-old who was admitted last week, along with the two cases whose samples were sent for testing on Sunday. 


