Coronavirus casts shadow on Puri Rath Yatra
2020-03-19
BHUBANESWAR: The state government’s six-month plan of action to contain coronavirus is likely to take the sheen off the 10-day Puri Rath Yatra, which is scheduled to begin on June 23 . 


Amid global concerns about the novel coronavirus and restrictions on almost every sphere of activity, especially outdoor events and public gatherings, the temple servitors and travel professionals apprehend that the state’s famed festival may be a low-key affair this time.

“We pray to Lord Jagannath to put an end to the corona crisis. Since the state government is tying to sensitise people to Covid-19 for at least six months, there is an uncertainty that the ensuing Rath Yatra would be as grand as it has been in the previous years,” temple’s senior servitor Ramakrushna Dasmohapatra said. 

More than six lakh devotees from the country and abroad visit Puri during Rath Yatra every year. Most of them plan their tours well in advance. The construction of chariots is scheduled to start on the occasion of Akshaya Tritiya on April 26. “It will be difficult to organise the crowded festival if the situation continues to remain grim. My guests in Kolkata have already started inquiring about the fate of Rath Yatra,” Shyama Mahapatra, another servitor, said. 

The temple and district officials are keeping their fingers crossed. “Every year, preparations for the grand festival usually start two months in advance. With Puri in a near lockdown state, officials are uncertain about the Rath Yatra’s massive preparations. We will act according to the situation. At present, our priority is to check the possible spread of the deadly virus,” Puri district collector and the temple’s deputy chief administrator Balwant Singh said.

Hoteliers said they usually receive bookings from tourists at least two months before the Rath Yatra. “By this time, we would have started receiving queries about the availability of rooms in hotels. But we have been asked by the district administration to not entertain any bookings for an indefinite period,” Debasis Kumar, owner of Hotel Victoria Club, said.

Last year, the district administration had pulled out all stops in the aftermath of Cyclone Fani that devastated Puri in May and successfully conducted the Rath Yatra on July 4. 


