Coronavirus scare: Madhya Pradesh to keep 6-month stock of drugs
2020-02-29
BHOPAL: In the wake of the coronavirus scare, the Madhya Pradesh government will purchase and store medicines — worth approximately Rs 120 crore — for six months. 


The move comes as it is suspected that supplies may be affected as most of the ingredients used for making tablets come from China.

“We have medicine stocks for two months. As of now, there is no shortage, but if the situation continues, there may be a shortage after two months. That’s because a majority of the ingredients used for manufacturing medicines come from China. Thus, as a precautionary measure, we are going to stock medicines for six months. We already have two months’ stock, so stock for another four months is being purchased,” Dr J Vijaykumar, managing director of Madhya Pradesh Public Health Services Corporation Limited (MPPHSCL), told TOI. 

MPPHSCL is a state government-run company. One of the key objectives of MPPHSCL is to act as the central procurement agency for all essential drugs and equipment for all public healthcare institutions under the health department.

“Annually, our medicine budget is around Rs 350 crore, thus cost of stock for four months would be approximately around Rs 120 crore. Tenders would be issued in a couple of days and deadline for supply will be within one month,” VIjaykumar said. However, private chemists say that as of now, there is no apparent scarcity, though there is some spike in prices. 

“Supplies are normal as of now and scarcity is not evident. Though prices have slightly gone up, but that is a normal activity,” president of MP Chemists’ Association, Lalit Jain, told TOI. 

It is noteworthy that so far more than 20 suspected corona virus patients have been identified in Madhya Pradesh, but no one has tested positive till now. Currently, a medical student who studied in Wuhan, China, is under ‘community surveillance in Bhopal’s Karond area along with a dozen others who are also under community surveillance. 

Across India, a total of 23,531passengers with a travel history to China in the recent past are currently under community surveillance through IDSP, according to the Union ministry of health and family welfare. There are around 700 such cases in MP, according to estimates. 

