Uttar Pradesh: Corona Care Fund set up to combat coronavirus
2020-04-04
LUCKNOW: A Corona Care Fund was set up on Friday, a day after chief minister Yogi Adityanath announced a fund-raising drive to battle the coronavirus pandemic in the state. The basic education department made the first donation to it of Rs 76.15 crore, on behalf of teachers and education officers of basic schools.


The fund will be used specifically to improve and expand facilities for testing labs and purchasing equipment like ventilators, masks, sanitizers, personal protection equipment and essential medicines. The CM has said that he would like to build it up to at least a Rs 1,000 crore corpus.

“Corporate houses will also be roped in to donate under corporate social responsibility while MLAs and MPs will also be allowed to contribute to it from their area development funds. Efforts will be made to provide corona testing facilities in every division and all 24 government medical colleges,” said a government spokesperson.

The chief minister said, an action plan had been put in place to establish separate quarantine wards and manufacture of ventilators, N-95 masks and PPEs for which the fund was created. “Earlier we had only one testing lab at KGMU, but now we have managed to set up seven new testing labs in the state. In the next few months, all 24 government hospitals in the state will have testing labs,” he said.

The CM has also directed officials to train anaesthetists, physicians and women and child specialists in treating coronavirus, if they are needed at a later stage. He sought a list of doctors in the private sector, who have expertise in management of covid-19 patients, and said they too should be roped in during exigency. A list of beds and ventilators available in private hospitals that can be used during an emergency should also be prepared, the chief minister said.

The MSME department has also been directed to ensure production of essential commodities. Production of masks in the state will lower cost and increase availability, he said. “Reusable masks should be prepared using khadi and made by women’s self-help groups. This will promote khadi and also mobilise employment among women at the grassroots,” the CM said. 


