Coronavirus treatment made free in Maharashtra; Rs 1.5 lakh cover for each family member
2020-04-01
MUMBAI: Treatment for Covid-19 will be free in the state from Wednesday under the Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Jan Arogya Yojana (MJPJAY). The state will bear the cost of treatment of even those who don’t have the MJPJAY card or fall under the BPL category, TOI has learnt. Additionally, the state has extended the insurance cover of Rs 1.5 lakh per family to each member of the household.


“As long as a coronavirus patient is admitted to one of the empanelled hospitals, his/her treatment cost will be fully covered by the state. Essentially, we have insured all 12 crore citizens of the state,” said health minister Rajesh Tope. 

Under the scheme, the state has doubled the number of empanelled hospitals—to 1,000 hospitals up from 492. “We now have over one lakh beds and about 4,000 ventilators,” Tope added.

There are around 60 hospitals from Mumbai, though the big trust-run hospitals continue to avoid the scheme. “If people get themselves admitted to Mumbai’s five-star hospitals, we may not be able to support as those hospitals have not joined us. But in empanelled hospitals, we will cover everyone. Even people who don’t have relevant documents or ID proof will be covered,” said Sudhakar Shinde, CEO of MJPJAY. “By Covid patients, we don’t mean those who have tested positive, but the scheme will broadly cover everyone who land in acute respiratory distress syndrome and those who need a ventilator,” he added. Explaining the increased cover for families, Shinde said Covid is extremely contagious that has affected more than one member in many families. 

In a first, the scheme has also empanelled hospitals outside the state that cater to people in bordering districts such as Sindhudurg and Palghar. “People from Sindhudurg often travel to Goa or those from Palghar to Daman-Diu. We have included such hospitals in the scheme,” he said.

The premium the state government will be paying too has doubled. “From Rs 640 per family, we will be paying a premium of Rs 797 per family this year. This will cost the exchequer an additional Rs 330 crore,” said Shinde. He added that at least 230 talukas have been covered under the scheme from the previous 120.

The scheme has also done away with 130 less popular packages and included around 170 news ones, including knee and hip replacement and psychiatric illnesses. The rates for certain surgeries, such as fractures, have been increased from Rs 15,000 to Rs 20,000. It also said rates for 12 dialysis sessions have been revised from Rs 10,000 to Rs 13,200.

