Coronavirus cases spike in Telangana, 8 positive in one day
2020-03-19
HYDERABAD: The number of Covid-19 cases saw a massive jump in Telangana on Wednesday with the state recording eight positive cases in a single day, taking the total count to 13.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


While one patient is a 22-year-old who had returned from Scotland on March 15, the rest seven are Indonesians. The Indonesians were part of a religious group that had been picked up from Karimnagar along with another in the group who had tested positive on Tuesday. The group had stayed in Karimnagar for three days after arriving from Delhi via Ramagundam. All the eight patients are currently kept in isolation at Gandhi Hospital where they were rushed to on March 16.

The Indonesian group had travelled from Delhi to Ramagundam in Sampark Kranti Express (12708) on March 13 in S9 coach as per railway police. People who had travelled in the coach have been advised to be careful and approach government authorities.

The 22-year-old who tested positive was studying BBA in Scotland and had arrived in Hyderabad on March 16. He had gone to his Medchal resident from the airport at 6.30 am and stayed with three family members and the next morning developed high fever and cold, and was rushed to Gandhi Hospital.

“His test results have come positive and his condition is being monitored roundthe-clock. We have quarantined four people who met him and are checking his flight details,” an official said.

With the number of cases steadily increasing, the Telangana government on Wednesday said it would re-examine the health status of 70,545 foreign travellers who had arrived in the city since January 15.

A worried state government put 1,683 persons on home quarantine on Wednesday as it strengthened containment measures against the possible spread of disease.


‘Not a party out there, maintain social distance’

The airport was swarming with police as witnesses said checking had been intensified. “It’s not a party out there. We urge people to maintain social distancing or we will have to take stricter measures,” said health minister Eatala Rajender.

Keeping in mind the possibility of local transmission of the virus, the government said it was setting up more quarantine facilities to house all people coming into the state from various routes and was also looking at the possibility of restricting movement in the city between 6 pm and 6 am. However, no decision was taken on the restriction of movement.

Health authorities are planning to set up quarantine facilities to house over 20,000 patients if required by pooling in the infrastructure of private hospitals, resorts and other facilities along with government hospitals and medical colleges.

Meanwhile, eight persons who have been described as ‘primary contacts’ of the 10 Indonesians have been home quarantined. Karimnagar district officials are now in the process of identifying secondary contacts and other persons who may have come in contact with the Indonesians. They had come to Karimnagar on March 14.

The mosque where the Indonesians stayed on March 14 after they arrived in Karimnagar was also fumigated and the mosque authorities and local public have been advised against gathering at the mosque.

