Coronavirus scare likely to hit already struggling prawn farmers in AP
2020-03-09
VISAKHAPATNAM: Demand for prawn has dipped in the local market. This comes in the wake of the coronavirus situation across the country. So far 39 people in India have tested positive for the disease. Experts in the sector who earlier told TOI, that the virus had failed to make a dent in the shrimp exports are now apprehensive that it may hit prawn exports.

Visakhapatnam, which has a near 135km coastline, exports more than Rs 2,000 crore worth of prawns internationally every year. But in the wake of the outbreak of the coronavirus, Visakhapatnam’s prawn cultivation is all set to reduce as farmers are apprehending that consumption might fall considerably.

“Prawn exports always fall prey to rumors easily. And, now that the virus has broken out. We are apprehending at least a 30% dip in prawn exports this year. Consumption in local market has already fallen,” said Arijili Dasu, executive director of Fisherfolk Foundation.

This is not the first time that prawn cultivation has been affected in Visakhapatnam. In 2004 cultivation of tiger prawn and Vannamei variety of shrimps got affected owing to the outbreak of white spot syndromes.

Experts said, previously there was a huge demand for tiger prawns and Vannamei in countries like Japan, China, Germany, Gulf countries and the USA. However, the demand fell because of the white spot syndrome in Indian prawns.

“From around 150 hatcheries in 2004 now Visakhapatnam has less than 40 hatcheries. Although the consumption and export have increased in the last two years it would receive a setback again owing to the outbreak of coronavirus,” added Dasu.

But farmers pointed out that coronavirus is only one of the reasons for the fall in consumption.“First, we are not getting quality seeds. Second, cold storage facility is inadequate. In fact, we are not getting government support to run our business. If such a scenario continues we have to shut down the farm,” said Gopala Rao, a farmer.

This has also affected the ancillary businesses. “Business is not as good as it used to be before 2004. Demand for equipment for prawn farming has reduced considerably over the years and it is falling further,” said Adnan Sabuwala, a supplier of prawn farming material and equipment.


