Coronavirus scare: 14 cases in 36 hours, Gujarat locks down all but food and medicines till March 25
2020-03-22
AHMEDABAD: Gujarat declared war against coronavirus as it declared a lockdown of all establishments except those dealing in life essentials like food and medicine in four major cities of Ahmedabad, Surat, Rajkot and Vadodara till March 25. The move followed the state recording a sevenfold rise in novel coronavirus cases in 36 hours as positive cases rose from two on March 19 to 14 on March 20.


“Except those selling medicines, medical equipment, vegetables, groceries and other life essential commodities, all other shops and malls will remain closed till March 25,” a statement released after a high level meeting chaired by CM Vijay Rupani and deputy CM and health minister Nitin Patel said. While 13 positives had a history of foreign travel, the state recorded its first Covid-19 patient, a 67-year-old Surat man, who had no international travel history but had visited Delhi and Jaipur recently for work.

o contain a Covid-19 outbreak in the state, the health department now stares at the challenging task of tracking 47,000 people with history of foreign travel. It has also under scanner 100-odd persons who have come in contact with the positive cases.


13 of 14 patients went abroad

The seven new cases on Saturday included those with history of travel to Dubai (4), the US and Sri Lanka (one each), and Jaipur/ Delhi. Of the 14 positive cases, 13 have foreign travel history. This includes a 52-year-old woman from Kutch who had travelled to Mecca.

From Monday, a health officer in Ahmedabad has to check the list of 120-odd persons in his/ her ward having foreign travel history from January 2020 and make a personal visit to every household, reporting health condition of the person and his/ her relatives on the day and also inform authorities if the person is untraceable. The state has pinned its hope on these health workers to fight the spread of Covid-19 locally.

Jai Prakash Shivahare, state health commissioner, said they have details of travellers who have landed at Gujarat airports and having local address. “The data has been distributed among municipal corporations and districts for verification,” he said.

The process not only covers Covid-19 affected countries such as China or Italy – which was the practice earlier – but all the countries ranging from Cananda and the US to UAE and African nations. Every such case needs home quarantine of 14 days and regular medical attention, said health department officials.

Vijay Nehra, Ahmedabad municipal commissioner, had mentioned earlier that Ahmedabad alone has 500-plus persons in home quarantine.

