Visakhapatnam: Coronavirus deniers flout norms, roam streets
2020-03-24
VISAKHAPATNAM: Around 1,600 police personnel and over 500 home guards took measures to prevent crowds from gathering in the city on Monday to ensure the lockdown announced by the state government to contain the spread of Covid-19.


Even as Section 144 of CrPC was imposed in the city and the district till March 31, cops had to struggle to control crowds and turn back vehicles and motorbikes. An autorickshaw driver was taken into custody at Dwaraka Nagar police station while at other places there were cases of triple riding on motorbikes. “When we are trying to explain to them the ill-effects of coronavirus, people are not listening and are saying they have masks. They are even abusing the cops on duty, putting their lives at stake,” said a traffic cop at Isukathota junction.

City police commissioner RK Meena said, “We will not spare anyone if they violate lockdown rules. The government imposed this for the public safety and people should know this and act accordingly. Scores of people became infected in foreign countries. We have seen this and still roaming on roads is not excusable.”

By evening, however, the situation had improved as fewer people came out on the streets. “People should cooperate with the government machinery. We are striving hard to protect the people from coronavirus. It is everyone’s responsibility to control the spread of this virus,” said GVMC chief medical officer KSLG Sastry. 

Meanwhile, prices of essential commodities including milk and vegetables skyrocketed due to panic buying in the city on Monday. Large crowds gathered at rythu bazaars and stall owners and rythu bazaar estate managers struggled to control the crowd. Vendors enhanced the price, with some vegetables selling out at an additonal 15 to 30 per kilogram. Milk prices went up to 30 to 35 per half litre.

The price of eggs, which had been down for a few weeks, went up to 60 in retail outlets. “Brinjal is 20 a kilo in rythu and we can expect it to be sold at 5 more in other retail outlets, but they sold it for 40 a kilo in MVP Colony,” said Narasimha Rao, a retired shipyard employee.

Assistant director of the marketing department M Kaleswara Rao said they do not have control over private outlets. “We will look into rythu bazaars and we have been monitoring the situation in these markets,” he said. Officials of the civil supplies department said the hike in prices has been informed to the marketing department.

Greater Visakha has under its ambit 13 rythu bazaars that altogether sell around 5,000 quintals of vegetables everyday, apart from Jnanapuram wholesale market, from where vegetables are sent to the open markets. At Anandapuram market, where farmers directly sell, another 2,000 quintals of vegetables are sold out everyday. 

The vegetables are sourced from Anandapuram, K Kotapadu, Padmanabham, Devarapalli and Araku mandals and parts of the district, as well as from Kottavalasa, S Kota and other border mandals of Vizianagaram.


