Coronavirus scare hits chilli exports from Andhra Pradesh, Telangana to China
2020-02-04
GUNTUR: Prices of the famed Guntur and Teja varieties of chilli has dropped by nearly 50% at the Guntur market yard, the biggest chilli marketplace in the country. The sharp fall has largely been triggered by the coronavirus outbreak in China, one of the largest importers of Indian chilli. The neighbouring country has suspended imports since the virus outbreak, leaving chilli farmers in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh worried.

The prices have dipped to between Rs 5,000 and Rs 7,000 per quintal in recent days. The chillis, known for their high heat quotient, were commanding a price of between Rs 9,000 and Rs 12,000 till a fortnight ago.

 
 

In fact, prices of the Teja variety touched between Rs 16,000 and Rs 20,000 per quintal in December, thanks to demand from China and Bangladesh. Bangladesh exports this chilli to China after purchasing the stock from India.

The fall of Teja price has affected prices of other low-quality varieties as well. While Rs 8,000 per quintal is considered remunerative for growers, it was hovering between Rs 4,000 and Rs 6,000 per quintal for ordinary varieties.

The Teja variety is considered the highest quality stock and commands high price chiefly in China. Interestingly, Teja stock which comes with very high pungency, is not a favourite stock for many other importers as they prefer varieties that sting the palate a little less.

“We are closely monitoring the situation. It looks like a temporary halt. We will take appropriate measures to bail out the farmers if prices go down further,” agriculture market committee chairman C Yesuranthnam told TOI.

“China uses the Teja variety to make many products which are then exported,” chilli exporter P Suresh Reddy told TOI. He added that traders involved in international businesses have urged merchants in Guntur agriculture yard to go slow on purchase following restriction on exports. Sources said that many Indian companies handle exports to China via Bangladesh due to ease of doing business and low taxation.


