Coronavirus scare hits tourism industry in Madhya Pradesh
2020-02-05
BHOPAL: Coronavirus scare has affected the tourism industry in Madhya Pradesh. After the outbreak of the viral disease, large number of bookings of Chinese nationals were cancelled suddenly in Khajuraho leading to almost 15% decline in the tourist footfall.


India on Sunday also temporarily suspended e-visa facility for Chinese travellers and foreigners residing in China in view of the coronavirus outbreak that has killed more than 400 people, infected over 20 ,000 others and spread to 25 countries.

This year the number of foreign tourists also declined and the tourism industry attributed the drop in the footfall to the ongoing unrest over pro and anti CAA ( Citizenship amendment act) agitations across the country. Archaeological survey of India (ASI) sources in Khajuraho said, “ this year there is a general decline in both foreign and domestic tourists.”

This year there was a “ very good” flow of Chinese tourists to Khajuraho. They were following Delhi, -Jaipur- Agra- Orchha -Khajuraho -Benaras circuit, said Mahendra Sharma , owner of a hotel in Khajuraho and office bearers of the hotel owners association at the international tourist centre.

“ This was a new trend for Khajuraho and Orchha that a large number of Chinese nationals were arriving when the number of international tourists went down”, he said adding, “ in every 100 international tourists, the number of Chinese would be 10 to 20. Recently there was a group of 300 also.”

Balbeer Goutam, president of the Guide association of Khajuraho said, “ I deal with French tourists and there numbers declined unprecedently this year. Chinese tourists compensated the shortfall to some extent and I would use my skills in English to explain the temples and their history to them.”

“But”, he paused and added, “ as the luck would have it, they too stopped coming because of the corona outbreak.” Only those who had already reached India before the trouble started visited Khajuraho and appreciated its beauty, he said.

One of the world heritage sites, Khajuraho temples are looked after by the ASI which include their conservation and entry of tourists. 

