Coronavirus red zones in Delhi expand to 49
2020-04-14
NEW DELHI: Six new areas were added to the red zones in the capital on Monday taking the total number of containment zones to 49. While these places were sealed, the areas around them were declared orange zones paving the way for an extensive sanitisation exercise. In the past 24 hours, 356 new Covid-19 positive cases have been recorded. The total number till date is 1,510.


Balaji Apartments at Sant Nagar in Burari, the area in and around A-1B/75A Krishna Apartment in Paschim Vihar, A-280 JJ Colony in Madipur and 36/4 in East Patel Nagar were four of the places declared red zones. Two areas in South district were also marked red, but the names were not disclosed till late on Monday.



 
The district administration of these areas have sealed them to check the spread of novel coronavirus.

Till Sunday, there were 43 containment zones. House numbers 97 to 107 and 120 to 127 in Kailash Hills, East of Kailash were converted into containment zones, while E-Block (E-284 to E-294) and house numbers 53 to 55 and 25, Shera Mohalla were also sealed.

Areas are marked red after Covid-19 positive cases are found there. People residing there are put under strict observation and monitored for symptoms of the disease. Containment zones have been created in South, Southwest, Southeast, East, North, Central, Shahdara, New Delhi, and West districts, while no red zone exists in Northwest and Northeast districts as of now.

With each red zone, an orange or buffer zone is also created. “In case street number 5 is declared a containment zone, street numbers 4 and 6 are converted into orange zones,” a source explained.

All the containment zones have been completely sealed. The entry and exit gates have been barricaded and policemen have been deployed there to ensure no outsider enters and no one leaves the area. The government has made special arrangements for supply of essential services like vegetables, food and medicines to those staying within the sealed areas.

An extensive sanitisation exercise is being carried out by urban local bodies within the red zones. People who came in contact with Covid-19 positive cases are being traced. All of them will be screened and tested.

A government official said that the orange zones are also under surveillance. “Though there is no restriction on movement like in red zones, the health of those living in orange zones is being monitored. The government is also focusing on sanitisation and social distancing in the orange zones so that the spread of novel coronavirus can be doubled-checked,” said a government source.


