Coronavirus: General public not allowed in Mumbai local trains from Sunday
2020-03-22
MUMBAI: In order to decongest local railway stations, the Konkan divisional commissioner will be starting a drive from Sunday in which only personnel who are a part of emergency services with valid I-cards and people who are in medical emergency will only be allowed to travel in local trains. This will continue till March 31


Konkan Divisional Commissioner Shivaji Daund said that there will be two teams and in each team there will be 5 personnel one from GRP, RPF, health official and two from the revenue department. These fleets will be stationed at the northbound and southbound entry points of the railways stations and will not allow passengers who are found to be travelling unnecessarily on the platform.

There are nearly 150 railway stations under the Konkan division –From CST- Khopoli, CST-Panvel and Churchgate to Dahanu. “All these stations will be covered under our decision. The idea is to not let any passenger without an emergency reason to travel. We will send passengers home if they are found to be travelling unnecessarily. Mostly, passengers with a medical emergency –personal or in the family will only be allowed that too after verification by the health personnels on the team,” Daund told TOI. He added that people who want to board a long distance train, their valid tickets will be checked and only then allowed on the platform.

He said that under the epidemic disease act, 1897 the state government has empowered all municipal commissioners, divisional commissioners and even collectors to take action to reduce crowding. If people do not cooperate then action can be initiated against them under IPC section 188 and even section 144 IPC for unlawful assembly, said Daund.

He said that the revenue department staff should maintain a diary in which the details of the passengers allowed should be noted. He added that the team will be provided with adequate masks and thermal scanners.

“On certain stations where there are multiple entry points, some will be blocked and only entry and exit will be allowed from the main gates so that each passenger can be checked,” said Daund. He also said that the idea is to discourage non-essential travel and ensure that there is a sense of responsibility amongst the people during the crisis situation.

Also if people who are supposed to be in home quarantine are found then they will be sent to institutional quarantine, said Daund. The government has made the facility of institutional quarantine with the capacity of 7,000-8,000 and 4,000-odd rooms at non-occupied government and SRA buildings at Mumbai suburban area and Panvel respectively,” said Daund.

