Coronavirus scare: 10 medical students return from China via Bangkok
2020-01-30
VADODARA: Ten students from Gujarat returned home from China amidst the novel coronavirus scare there. All the students had gone to study medicine in Jiujiang University in Jiujiang.

The outbreak in China has led to Indian students rushing back home. Several appeals were made by parents to the government asking it to ensure that the students returned home at the earliest.

However, the present lot of students was able to return without much hiccups as they were staying about 250km away from Wuhan that is the worst affected due to the outbreak. They reached Ahmedabad in early on Wednesday and later reached their homes . So far, they have not shown symptoms of any illness.

Said Kishansinh Gohil, one of the 10 students who stays in Godhra, “All of us came to Ahmedabad via Bangkok. While the condition in Jiujiang is not alarming, we heard of some isolated cases being reported there. There was not much difficulty in reaching India and we could get tickets easily.”

The group had boarded a flight from Nanchang airport in China. They were thoroughly examined before they left the country. “There is no lockdown in Jiujiang and hence we were able to leave easily. The authorities are being very careful to ensure that nobody who is sick with symptoms like that of the viral infection leaves the country,” said Om Upadhyay from Shehra, another student from Jiujiang who was among the 10 who returned on Wednesday.

The group that returned on Wednesday includes four students from Godhra, one from Shehra, one from Lunawada, one from Anand and three from Mehsana. One student from Ghoghamba will also return shortly, Upadhyay said. Health officials have started examining the students who have returned and will do so for 28 days.

BOX: Scanning begins at airport

Vadodara: The Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) has put up a standee at the Vadodara airport asking those who may have travelled to China in the past 14 days and have symptoms like acute onset of fever, cough and breathlessness to report to the airport health unit immediately.


