Coronavirus scare: Five more from Hyderabad kept in isolation
2020-01-29
HYDERABAD: Five more people from Hyderabad were put in isolation at Fever Hospital on Tuesday. Of the five other cases that were reported in the past few days, two have tested negative, while the other three are being monitored at home as they have not shown any symptoms after initially reporting fever.


Health authorities said that the five latest cases are people who returned from China last week and walked into the hospital with complaints of fever. Names of the cities they visited, have however, not been disclosed.

 
 
They have currently been kept under observation. Depending on their symptoms, officials said, it will be decided whether their swab samples will be sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune for testing for the novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV).

Dr K Shankar, superintendent Fever Hospital, said: “Three members of a family — husband, wife and their daughter — returned from China a week ago. They came to the hospital around 2.30pm and have been put under observation in the isolation ward. They have reported with cold and fever and are stable. We are closely monitoring their condition if their symptoms are persistent we will take their swab samples and send for testing.” 

Apart from the three, two more people who had visited China in the last week approached the hospital authorities on Tuesday evening and was put in the isolation ward. With the five new suspected cases, the total number of people who had been suspected for Coronavirus in the city have touched ten now, of which five have already been declared clear.

Those cleared are being monitored by rapid response teams and surveillance teams of Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) in the state.

Meanwhile, one of the person who had travelled to Wuhan and was previously admitted to the hospital but tested negative, came back with symptoms of gastric problem. The patient was tested and sent back on Tuesday evening. 


