Coronavirus outbreak: Air India crew to get hazmat suits
2020-03-21
MUMBAI: Air India has become the first and only Indian carrier to provide all its pilots and flight attendants operating all flights with Hazmat suit, complete with goggles, gloves, mask and shoe covers. The suits will be placed in the cockpit and will be used only when a suspect passenger or crew on board the flight falls ill or shows symptoms like fever, cough, difficulty in breathing. Air India will also be carrying two extra pair of suits, one for the suspect passenger and another for the caregiver, said sources.


 On board a Boeing 777 which operates ultra long haul flights, like Mumbai-Newark for instance, there will be a total of 40 Hazmat suits, 8 for pilots, 2 for passengers and the rest for each cabin crew member. On an A320, which operates domestic flights, there will be 16 Hazmat suits. ``The crew will use the suit only when they suspect a passenger to be infected. If there is no suspected coronavirus passenger/crew on board, then the crew will not wear the suits. But they have to strictly wear their surgical masks and gloves throughout the flight,’’ said the source. An Air India spokesperson confirmed the development saying that bulk orders for the Hazmat suits have been placed. These will be placed on board the high-risk flights first and then eventually all flights will be covered, the official said, adding that they have begun uploading these suits onboard certain flights already.


More on Covid-19

 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete coverage
  Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
  52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
  Helpline numbers for states and UTs
  Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
  How to stay safe
  How to quarantine yourself at home
 

Apart from the suit, each flight will be carrying an additional 50 pairs of gloves and 50 pairs of masks, the official added. The airline had issued detailed instructions to its crew on use, disposal of these suits and other safety gear in bio hazard disposal bags. If a COVID positive passenger happens to have travelled on board a flight or if the crew develops symptoms like fever above 99.5 degree F, cough or shortness of breath then the concerned crew members will be home quarantined, said another note issued to crew by AI medical department. The airline issued a series of notes and circulars in the past two days detailing does and donts for crew on its international and domestic flights. An 

Among the changes made for domestic operations include no food to be served for flights upto one hour duration. For flights upto two hour duration, crew will place packed dry food in the seat pocket prior to the flight. No hot beverages, except bottled water will be served. 

 ``There should be barest minimum interaction between cabin crew and passengers,’’ said a note issued by the medical department. ``Adequate supply of masks, gloves and sanitizier should be available in the aircraft for use of crew and passengers,’’ the note said. 

Not all Indian carriers are geared to keep a check on COVID outbreaks though. On the other hand though, is a private low-cost carrier which has been cutting costs by not providing masks and gloves to their cabin crew, wet wipes to pilots, despite instructions from the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). The chief of flight operations of this low cost carrier sent a letter early this week to its pilots about coronavirus stating that this ``was a great opportunity to connect with our passengers’’. ``Our passengers are understandably concerned and fearful about their safely when travelling as a group in a confined space. We need to take this opportunity to calm their fears. The overall risk of contracting a disease from an ill person on board an aircraft is similar to that in other confined areas with high occupant density, such as a bus, a train or a metro…,’’ said the letter, urging pilots to make such announcements. The letter did not say anything about safety gear or other steps the airline has taken to ensure the safety of its crew. ``What has (the airline) done to safeguard its cabin crew on the front line from contracting coronavirus while on duty? Our cabin crew are still serving without any safety equipment (gloves or masks),’’ said an anonymous letter sent by a disgruntled crew member.

