Coronavirus outbreak: Section 144 in Mumbai till March 31
2020-03-23
MUMBAI: The city police on Sunday evening imposed section 144 of the CrPC in the city during 9pm Sunday to 5am Monday. The order prohibits presence or movement of one or more persons in public places and also any vehicle carrying such persons. The order says it does not apply on emergency and essential services. Later, in the night the city police promulgated another order on similar pattern. The new order will be in force from 5.01am on March 23 to 12am on March 31.

The one-page order, signed by DCP Pranaya Ashok who is in-charge of operations unit, said that the order is to prevent the spread of Covid-19 virus and to prevent any outbreak of infection under the control of Mumbai police.

The essential services exempted from this order include food and milk supplies, hospital, medicals, telephone and internet services, electricity, petroleum, oil and energy related, drinking water and warehouses related to all of these, trucks carrying goods and manpower related to such services to be allowed by putting necessary stickers.

In the second order (between March 23 and March 31) issued on Sunday night, police included some more categories in the list of establishments providing essential services where the order of section 144 does not apply. They include banking, stock exchange, clearing corporations, depositories, stock brokers and SEBI registered participants, operating through the institutions, IT and IT enabled services and data providing services, for critical national and international infrastructure, and need for the above essential and emergency services, Media, Port, services providing home delivery of food, groceries and essential commodities, drinking water, supply and maintenance and governments/semi government agencies, and their officials on duty.
 
However, some newspaper and milk delivery personnel say they gather in large numbers at depots and police has been questioning and "harassing" them.

