Coronavirus fighters hear Delhi applaud effort loud & clear
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: Even before the clock struck 5 on Sunday evening, the ghostly silence that had enveloped the city through the day was suddenly broken by the rhythmic beating of thalis, blowing of conch shells, ringing of bells and clapping. As the noise rose to a crescendo, birds took flight and stray dogs barked nervously. People had emerged from their houses to thank the healthcare workers in this unique gesture, as requested by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Balconies filled up quickly and many spilled out of their homes on the streets.


The din lasted for about 10 minutes as the city thanked doctors, nurses, paramedics, municipal staff and airport workers, who are fighting Covid-19 from the frontlines. People across the city — and the country — were united in purpose for the long battle ahead which will call upon all their reserves of patience and fighting spirit.

“There can’t be a better way of supporting and thanking all these people who, wiout bothering about their own lives, are tracking or reating patients of the coronavirus. That’s why we all did our share of clapping and cheering. It was a great sight...to see so many people cheering loudly from their terraces. Even bells in nearby temples were ringing so loudly,” said Chitra Jain, a resident of New Friends Colony.

Ruchin Garg, who stays on Ramjas Road, Karol Bagh, had a similar experience to share. “The area reverberated with the sound of conch shells. My children too joined me. We were excisted to see so many people actually coming out to express their gratitude,” he said. One spotted a young woman beating a thali, all the while chanting, ‘Go corona, go!’ Another young woman held up a placard which read, ‘Equipment for doctors, nurses’, mixing her applause with concern.

Sarika Shukla of Adarsh Nagar, however, cautioned that all this din may have obscured the fact that we have a serious situation on our hands and people need to understand the relevance. “At some places, the beating of thalis and clapping by children went on for a long time. “I think parents should have made them understand the purpose of the exercise.”

Karan Khanna, a resident of C Block of Janakpuri, shared her concern. “There’s a reason why a janta curfew was called in the first place, and at many areas, people defeated that purpose by gathering on the streets as they could have done the same thing from their balconies. I hope everyone stays safe and better sense prevails,” he said.

At Pocket B and C of Sector A in Vasant Kunj, the thanksgiving started somewhat early. “Tough times are ahead and we need to acknowledge the healthcare professionals who are toiling day and night with great risks,” said Seema Sharma, 31. One could also hear hymns being played on a speaker and some firecrackers going off at a distance.

“We should respect life and rejoice. And these events teach us to do so,” said Amit Kumar, a 42-year-old businessman. “We take things for granted and have the luxury to stay at home in these times. The ones fighting for us deserve more than a clap. More than 10 minutes of organised noise.” 


