Coronavirus: Spain surpasses China’s virus toll
2020-03-26
MADRID: The death toll in Spain from the coronavirus shot up by more than 700 on Wednesday, surpassing China and is now second only to Italy as the pandemic spread rapidly in Europe, with even Britain’s Prince Charles testing positive for the virus.


Spain recorded a record daily increase of 738 deaths, pushing it to 3,434 overall and past China’s 3,285, the ministry of health said. The country’s infections rose by 20% to 47,610, and more than 5,000 have recovered. The coronavirus pandemic has killed more than 20,000 people worldwide and infected over 4,51,355 people, according to Johns Hopkins University. Overall, more than 112,000 have recovered.

Spanish media reported that 23 residents of a Madrid retirement home had died from Covid-19 or symptoms related to the new virus, news reports said. National police also arrested two people in southern Spain on Tuesday for throwing stones and other debris at a convoy of ambulances and police vehicles as 28 elderly people were being transferred from a nursing home with a high number of infections to another facility in their town.

With its health system overwhelmed, Spanish hotels have been converted into hospitals and a Madrid ice rink is being used as a temporary morgue. Lawmakers were set to extend the country’s lockdown for two more weeks, to April 12.

Italy has been the hardesthit nation in Europe with more than 74,386 infections and 7,503 deaths. Italian doctors are being forced to choose who will receive desperately needed ventilators and who won’t.

Ger many’s parliament was set to approve later in the day a series of measures that will allow the government to offer aid totaling more than 1 trillion euros for the country of 83 million people.

There are signs, however, that drastic measures to keep people away from one another can push back the spread of the illness and flatten the infection curve. In China’s Hubei province, where the outbreak was first spotted late last year, started lifting its lockdown. Some train stations and bus services reopened in Hubei and people who passed a health check were allowed to travel for the first time since January. A similar easing in the hard-hit epicenter of Wuhan is planned for April 8.

For most people, the new coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough that clear up in two to three weeks. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia and death.

It is the latter cases — often requiring ventilators and specialized care _ that threaten to overwhelm hospitals. Several countries are already running short of the critical equipment needed to treat patients and keep doctors and nurses safe. Doctors are dying in Italy and Spain says 14% of its infections are health care workers.

Cases edged up in countries with fragile health care systems. Virus cases in South Africa rose to 709 as the country got ready to go on lockdown on Friday.

After Russia reporting 163 new cases overnight bringing total cases to 658, the country’s prime minister ordered provincial governors to move more quickly to ready hospital beds for patients as the outbreak spreads across the vast country. President Putin, too, postponed a nationwide vote on proposed constitutional amendments that include a change potentially allowing him to stay in office until 2036. Putin didn’t set a new date for the plebiscite, which was originally scheduled for April 22, saying that it would depend on how the pandemic develops in Russia. The country reported its first two deaths on Wednesday.

Canada announced that it was imposing mandatory self-isolation of 14 days for those returning to Canada under the Quarantine Act.

In New Zealand, the government declared an emergency before an unprecedented lockdown began. “I have one simple message for New Zealanders today as we head into the next four weeks: Stay at home,” PM Jacinda Ardern said. “It will save lives.”

Pakistan halted all domestic passenger flights to stop the spread of the new coronavirus after reporting nearly 1,000 cases in the country, just as Libya became the latest at-risk Mideast nation to report its first infection.

About half of Iran’s government employees were staying at home on Tuesday as the country’s death toll rose to 2,077 after 143 deaths recorded in the past 24 hours. Iran may face a second wave of the outbreak, a government spokesman said, as some Iranians ignored guidance to contain the spread.

Meanwhile in Hungary, Steven Dick, deputy head of mission at the British embassy in Budapest, died of Covid-19. He was only 37 years old.

