Coronavirus in Delhi: As screens go dark, cinema halls stare at loss of crores
2020-03-14
NEW DELHI: Roughly 150 cinema screens in Delhi have gone blank. The state government announced the closure of all cinema halls till March 31 in view of the risk posed by the novel coronavirus. The halls were already counting their losses with many movie releases being postponed and people wary of going to theatres. The two-week closure will affect not just the movie industry, but also cinema-associated industries such as retail and food and beverage outlets.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Contrary to the belief that OTT, or streaming, platforms were weaning away cine-goers, theatre attendance was actually on the rise. An industry expert associated with a leading cinema chain estimates that around 2,000 people visit a multiplex on weekdays with the number touching 3,000-3,500 on a weekend if a popular movie is being screened. This translates, he explained, into roughly one lakh people seeing movies in the city’s multiplexes every day and spending on average Rs 500 per person for tickets and snacks. “Going to a movie also includes parking cost, fuel cost and taxes on movie tickets and food. Entertainment, especially movies, is a big revenue and economic contributor,” he said.

Amit Sharma, MD of Miraj Cinemas, which as 128 screens across India, felt a shutdown in Delhi would mean a loss of up to Rs 20 crore per week for the industry. “There are new releases every week. There are movies that are in their second or third weeks and are having a good run alongside sought-after regional movies. All these earnings come to a standstill in case of a shutdown and impact the movie industry as a whole,” he said.

Sharma though conceded that the situation created by the novel coronavirus was beyond anyone’s control and that he would not lay off any employee but bear their cost. “When the world enjoys movies on the weekends, our staff almost never have an off. This is the time to stand by them,” he asserted.

Employees at other cinemas in the city are worried about their jobs as the communication from their employers hasn’t been as clear as Sharma’s. Most of them reported to work on Friday. Some who spoke to TOI on condition of anonymity complained that there had been no clear direction on whether to sit at home or report for work. “This is not a time when one can afford to lose a job loss because there aren’t other outlets hiring anyone for the next few weeks,” said a cinema employee.

Most advance bookings for the closure period have been refunded, including those that were bought at the cinema counters, which are being refunded on site. Majority of the phone calls made to the cinemas on Friday related to refunds. Effort was made to explain that refunds were being processed at the earliest either by the cinemas or by the popular ticket booking platforms, a cinema worker revealed.

PVR Cinemas, which has 68 screens in Delhi, stated that it believed this was a temporary crisis and remained optimistic about the film business in India. Sharma similarly said he expected things to pick up post Good Friday on April 10 and normalcy returning from May with the virus successfully contained across the globe by then. 


