Coronavirus effect: Out-of-bounds China market hits Rajasthan businesses
2020-02-05
JAIPUR: The out-of-bounds China market is having a ripple effect on businesses in Rajasthan with jewellers in Jaipur estimating that postponement of Hong Kong jewellery show could shave off the industry business worth Rs 150-200 crore. Besides, marble, granite and tourism industries are also feeling the heat.

Ajay Kala, secretary of Jaipur Chamber of Commerce & Industry, who is a regular at the Hong Kong International Jewellery Show, said, “Yes, the show has been postponed to May. More than 150 jewellers from Rajasthan participate in the show which has over the years become an important showcasing platform for us. But now, there is lot of uncertainty for the next 10 days at least. All the businesses will suffer significantly in case the situations worsens in China.”

Jewellers in Jaipur say they used to generate business worth Rs 150-200 crore at the show which is now at stake.

Besides gems and jewellery, importers and manufacturers of furniture, stationery items, toys and other raw material are also in a bind, not knowing the next step to take.

“Chinese products are 15-20% cheaper which a major reason why many companies have stopped making them here. Now, it is difficult to import and the industry is keeping its fingers crossed. If the coronavirus problem persists, the companies may have to start making those products again,” said Digvijay Dhabriya, chairman of PHDCCI-Rajasthan. The stone industry is facing a similar dilemma. Arrivals of buyers, who would earlier come and mark the stone blocks for import to China, have stopped following visa freeze. Interestingly, much of the machinery used by the stone industry is from China.

“Now, there is no scope to replace parts of the machines if need arises. The impact will be significant if the virus problem continues to prevail. A significant part of the exports go to China and it will certainly impact the industry,” said Ashok Dhoot, vice-chairman, Centre for Development of Stones, a subsidiary of RIICO. The travel and tourism industry is also losing steam as travellers from other countries have started cancelling bookings after nCov cases were reported in India.

A tour operator said, “Visitors from other countries have also started cancelling bookings fearing that India might also witness a spread of the virus. While no cases have been found in Rajasthan, nCov cases in Kerala have made foreign tourists, who had plans to visit India, apprehensive.”

He said the cancellations will affect the hotel industry in the midst of the peak season. 


