Coronavirus fear making Bhopalis boycott those under quarantine
2020-04-02
BHOPAL: As the state capital copes with the coronavirus, there are reports that the residents who have quarantined themselves as a precautionary measure are facing social boycott. 


The residents under home quarantine told TOI that their families are facing social boycott and are not able to get even essential items like milk and groceries, as vendors have refused to deliver goods to them because of the fear of ‘getting infected’. 

Public health experts warn that stigmatising people under quarantine will hamper the battle against Covid-19 as stigma is the reason people hide symptoms and even avoid treatment. 

A 40-year-old man who came to India from London on March 18 told TOI about the problems his family had to face since he returned. 

“I reached New Delhi from London on March 18. I was asymptomatic, but I decided to stay at a hotel in New Delhi and avoid travelling to Bhopal as a precaution ... Since, New Delhi hotels started getting shut I returned to Bhopal on March 23. As soon as I reached here, I informed the district administration about my travel history. After this, a team from district administration came to my house and pasted a ‘home under quarantine’ poster outside my home.” 

“It is only I who has a travel history, not my wife or my daughter or my parents. I followed all the guidelines and isolated myself in a room in my home and did not come in contact with my family. But, soon after local residents spotted the quarantine poster outside our home they started treating us differently.” 

“The vegetable sellers have refused to give us vegetables and the milkman also does not deliver the milk to our home ... weirdly so, youths gather outside our home and click selfies with the quarantine poster. When we go out in the balcony or terrace people give us looks ... It is upsetting.” 

“The administration says they cannot test for Covid-19 because I do not have the symptoms, but will take me to the hospital if I get unwell. I get calls from the administration checking up on me, inquiring about my health. It has been over 12 days now since I came to India and I am still asymptomatic ... but I am following all the guidelines and will keep following them. I will come out only when I am allowed by the district administration.” 

“My only concern is if people who are taking all the precautions are socially boycotted and left without essentials, they will stop coming forward and not inform anyone about their travel history or symptoms ... which will ultimately defeat the purpose of quarantine or home isolation,” he said. 

