Coronavirus latest updates: 30 cases in India test positive
2020-03-05
NEW DELHI: The number of confirmed coronavirus cases rose to 30 on Thursday after a Ghaziabad resident tested positive. The health ministry had on Wednesday confirmed as many as 28 new cases — all in Delhi, Agra and Jaipur. The ministry urged people not to panic amidst shortage of hand sanitiser and surgical masks being reported from several places.

The global death count due to COVID-19 is now over 3,000.


Read our coronavirus live blog for all the latest news and updates

Here is a look at the latest developments —


Ghaziabad resident tests positive; total cases in India 30

The patient, a resident of Ghaziabad, who tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday is said to have travelled to Iran recently.

Until Wednesday evening, India reported 29 confirmed cases of COVID-19. A Paytm employee, who had recently went to Italy on a vacation, tested positive on Wednesday. Sixteen Italian national, on a vacation to India, tested positive alongwith their Indian driver. In Hyderabad, a techie who had returned from Dubai tested positive. A Delhi businessman who had travelled to Iran tested positive and also his six family members. In the three cases reported from Kerala, patients were discharged after receiving treatment.


Special flights for Indians stranded in Iran

March 6 onwards, special flights will start between Iran and India for the stranded passengers. Over 2000 Indians are stranded in Iran. "Iran will send an empty flight to India (Delhi) tomorrow to take back the Iranian nationals from India to Tehran & one more flight will come to India a day after tomorrow to carry Indian equipment to Iran for stranded Indian nationals," said Iran embassy Official.


Over 1,200 quarantined so far in Kolkata amid coronavirus scare

Over 1,200 persons who arrived in West Bengal from countries under the grip of coronavirus have so far been quarantined. Altogether, 1,252 persons were placed under surveillance till March 4 and of them, the surveillance period of 115 is over, the official said. One person is admitted to an isolation facility, while 1,136 are under home surveillance, he said, adding that they are in a stable condition.


Five isolated in Srinagar hospital
Health authorities in Kashmir have kept five persons with a recent history of travelling to coronavirus-affected countries in the isolation ward of the SKIMS hospital hereafter they showed symptoms of the disease, officials said on Thursday. Of the five, one had travelled to Thailand while two had been to Iran, the remaining two had a recent travel history to the epicentre of COVID-19 in China's Wuhan.


Sikkim suspends issuing ILP to foreigners

The Sikkim government on Thursday decided to suspend issuing Inner Line Permit (ILP) to foreign nationals following coronavirus scare as a precautionary measure, a senior official said. "In view of the rapid spread of coronavirus, no ILP may be issued to foreign nationals, including those from Bhutan, with effect from today," a Home Department notification issued by Joint Secretary Parina Gurung said.


India-EU summit postponed 
An India-EU summit scheduled for March 13 in Brussels has been postponed because of the coronavirus, announced foreign ministry spokesman Raveesh Kumar on Thursday. "The decision (to postpone the summit) has been taken in the spirit of close cooperation between India and the EU who share the same concerns and commitment to global health and hope that the outbreak is contained soon," Kumar said.


Delhi schools to remain shut till March 31
All government and private schools in the national capital will remain shut till March 31 for students up to class 5, announced Delhi deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia. The notification orders school to shut down starting tomorrow in the wake of coronavirus.


Indian student in Dubai tests positive for Covid-19

An Indian student in Dubai has tested positive for the novel coronavirus, taking the total number of cases in the United Arab Emirates to 27, health authorities said. A 16-year student of an Indian school in Dubai has tested positive for the coronavirus. The infection was contracted from the student's parent who had travelled overseas.


89 persons under observation in Bihar

89 persons, including 14 who have returned from Iran, are under observation for COVID-19 in Bihar even as no positive case has so far been reported, the state health minister has said. Blood samples of 48 persons were tested for coronavirus in Bihar, out of which 44 were found negative, he said. Blood reports of three persons were yet to be received.


Fourteen Italians shifted to Medanta Hospital in Gurugram

The fourteen Italians, who have tested positive for coronavirus, have been shifted to the Medanta Hospital in Gurgaon from an ITBP quarantine centre. The hospital stated on Thursday morning, saying these patients are housed on a completely separate floor, which has been quarantined and has no contact with the rest of the hospital.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

Trade impact of Coronavirus epidemic for India estimated at 348 million dollars: UN report

The trade impact of the coronavirus epidemic for India is estimated to be about 348 million dollars and the country figures among the top 15 economies most affected as slowdown of manufacturing in China disrupts world trade, according to a UN report.

The coronavirus outbreak could result in a 50 billion dollar decrease in exports across global value chains. The most affected sectors include precision instruments, machinery, automotive and communication equipment.

Among the most affected economies are the European Union ($15.6 billion), the United States ($5.8 billion), Japan ($5.2 billion), South Korea ($3.8 billion), Taiwan Province of China ($2.6 billion) and Vietnam ($2.3 billion).


Paytm Shuts Gurgaon Office For 15 Days

A 26-year-old Paytm employee, a resident of Pankha Road in Janakpuri, became the second Delhi resident to contract Covid-19. He had recently returned from a vacation in Italy, a coronavirus hotspot. The Paytm staffer worked at the company’s Gurgaon office, which has been shut for 15 days. Paytm has advised employees in offices across India to work from home for two days.


Two more Covid-19 cases suspected in Hyderabad city

Two days after a 24-year-old software professional was confirmed as the first case of Covid-19 in Hyderabad, two more suspected cases tested positive in the first round of testing at the ICMR laboratory at Gandhi Medical College in Secunderabad. The samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, for final confirmation.

1,500 Indians in Iran to be screened

The government will collect samples of 1,500 Indians who are visiting Iran primarily for pilgrimage and these will be brought for tests at local laboratories to prevent the spread of coronavirus.

Governments join hands to step up efforts

Health officials in Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan face a massive task of tracing and testing everyone who may have come in contact with the infected people. The number of such persons is likely to be over 100.


High anxiety among the healthcare staff

One of the most defining moments in the fight against Covid-19 in China was the death of Dr Li Wenliang, the doctor who made the presence of the infection public, due to the same virus. Last week, his colleague, Dr Mi Wenliang, also fell prey to novel coronavirus, underlining the risks faced by healthcare workers treating infected individuals.

The data shows 1,700 medical workers have been infected by Covid-19 in China and at least six have succumbed to it.

Though no healthcare worker has been affected in India, the anxiety level among the staff at hospitals such as Safdarjung and Ram Manohar Lohia, where coronavirus patients are being treated, is high.


Kejriwal sets up a task force on Covid-19

Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Wednesday set up a task force to tackle the spread of the novel coronavirus in the capital. The task force is chaired by the chief minister and includes top officials of all departments concerned, the municipal corporations and Delhi Police.

At the first meeting on Wednesday, Kejriwal directed officials of all departments and civic bodies to ensure that measures such as surveillance and screening were implemented on a war footing.

Weather unlikely to stall the spread of the virus

Some experts believe that the spread of coronavirus may be slowed down under hot weather conditions, but the forecast till March 12 doesn’t throw up any relief on that front as there is no prediction of any increase in temperature in the next few days.

Though seasonal forecast of India Meteorological Department for March-April-May talks of “warmer than normal” temperature over northwest, west, central and parts of south India, it predicts “below normal (2-5°Celsius in general) maximum day temperatures” over major parts of the Indian mainland during the March 6-12 period.


Andhra Pradesh on alert as Covid-19 suspect cases rise

In Andhra Pradesh, the government is on high alert as there is a spurt in the suspected cases of Coronavirus. On Wednesday, 11 new cases were reported from Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam, East and West Godavari and Krishna districts.

The suspects with fever and cold have been quarantined. All of them had a history of recent travel to foreign countries. The state government has so far screened 262 persons with symptoms of Coronavirus and quarantined them. Of them, 170 have completed the two-week quarantine with no Coronavirus infection. As many as 92 people are kept under isolation at their homes and their reports are yet to be received.

In China

The death toll of coronavirus in China has crossed 3,000 with 31 new fatalities and the total number of confirmed cases jumped to over 80,400.


Outside China

In the past 24 hours, 2,103 newly confirmed cases outside China have been reported and four new member states--Argentina, Chile, Poland and Ukraine--have reported cases of COVID-19. South Korea confirmed 438 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 5,766. Japan confirmed over 1,037 coronavirus cases, and so far 12 people have died due to the infection. Italy reported a total of 107 deaths of the deadly coronavirus. In Iran, the deadly infection claimed 92 lives out of more than 2,922 cases. 

The US' death toll from the COVID-19 rose to 11 on Thursday and nationwide there are nearly 160 confirmed cases. France said that 21 new cases of COVID-19 had been identified with a total of 285 cases now diagnosed, of which 12 were cured and four have died.

Across the world, there are 95,483 confirmed cases, 3,286 deaths and 53,688 people have recovered.

