Coronavirus scare: Mumbai's SevenHills Hospital may be used as quarantine facility for now
2020-03-08
MUMBAI: Less than a month after it shut, SevenHills Hospital, Marol, may start functioning again, albeit as a temporary quarantine facility of BMC for people suspected to be suffering from Covid-19 (coronavirus).


BMC officials, who surveyed the defunct hospital on Friday, said it would initially function as a 500-bedded facility. “There is enough space to add 400 beds if needed,” said a civic official.

 
 
BMC is identifying other quarantine facilities, such as BMC Centre for Municipal Capacity Building & Research (MCMCR) building in Chandivli. It has roped in CREDAI-MCHI to identify and designate four-five buildings as quarantine facilities.

SevenHills Hospital was set up in 2010 as a public-private partnership between a Vizag hospital chain and BMC, which provided land in lieu of free beds and treatment for poor patients. The building could accommodate 1,500 beds, including 300 ICU beds, but it shut down in February, after a prolonged dispute between the two parties over treatment costs.

A BMC team of senior officials and doctors on Friday assessed if the closed building could be ideal for quarantining Covid-19 patients. “We had to assess if there was adequate infrastructure to treat serious patients,” said an official. He said BMC would require at least a sevenday intimation to get any hospital space ready as a quarantine facility.

Additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said, “We are working on keeping hospitals ready in the eastern suburbs and western suburbs.” Kasturb Hospital, near Saat Rasta is the main facility, and BMC is in making 100 quarantine beds in four of its hospitals: Rajawadi in Ghatkopar, Bhabha Hospitals in Bandra and Kurla and Jogeshwari trauma care facility. A report on whether SevenHills Hospital can be used as quarantine facility will be submitted to Kakani on Monday.

The state government said 96,493 passengers who arrived at Mumbai international airport were screened between January 18-March 7. While 532 were from Maharashtra, 242 were kept under quarantine or isolation. “Fifteen are still in the facility awaiting test results,” said state diseases surveillance officer Dr Pradeep Awate. Kasturba Hospital in Mumbai has 12 suspects.

