Coronavirus hygiene beats summer diseases in Bihar
2020-04-26
PATNA: Covid-19 pandemic may have scared people and alerted the authorities concerned, but adherence to hygiene standards to keep the virus at bay has led to sharp drop in other diseases this summer.


The onset of peak summer season usually increases the risk of several foodborne and bacterial diseases, but doctors and health experts said the number of such cases was comparatively low this time.

Health specialists have attributed the drop in non-Covid-19 cases to closure of industrial units and people’s appetite for homemade food.

Dr Pratyush Kumar, a general physician at Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH), said he expected the number of patients to increase with the onset of summer. “Health ailments like heatstroke, diarrhoea, food poisoning and malaria are very common during summers. However, the lockdown and hygienic conditions have helped contain these diseases,” he said.

Asked about waterborne and bacterial diseases, Dr Kumar said, “People are getting a healthier environment at their homes. In addition, improved air quality has also played a key role in containing these diseases. Hygiene practices like washing hands regularly and not eating roadside food have protected people from these diseases.”

Paediatrician Dr Vivekanand, who owns a clinic in Kankarbagh, said staying at home has helped children too. “Now that the children are not able to go outside and play, the risk of fatigue, diarrhoea and other diseases has reduced. Besides, regular hand washing has stopped the spread of other diseases. Parents should make it sure that their kids exercise these practices on a regular basis,” he said.

City-based general physician Dr Kaushal Kishore Keshari said the entire graph of diseases has changed due to lockdown. “Even though the temperature is quite high, I have received very few patients suffering from diseases that mostly occur during summers. More than physical ailments, people are seeking aid for mental ailments,” he said.

People, on the other hand, are reluctant to visit hospitals. Boring Canal Road resident Amit Ranjan said, “The arrival of summer season has increased the risk of several foodborne, waterborne and bacterial diseases. However, visiting hospitals at this point of time is quite risky.”

Health specialists at primary healthcare centres and other hospitals said non-Covid-19 patients were properly taken care of. They said OPD services have resumed at all major government hospitals and private hospitals have also started giving medical services following instructions by the state health department. 

