Coronavirus test must for all admissions at Max hospitals
2020-04-16
NEW DELHI: All patients seeking admission to Max hospitals will now have to undergo Covid-19 testing. This includes persons who do not have any disease symptoms and are seeking admission for non-Covid-19 problems, the hospital chain said.


Those seeking OPD consultation will also have to undergo mandatory screening for symptoms at the entry point and use masks. But, if they do not have any symptoms, they will not be required to undergo testing, Dr Sandeep Budhiraja, clinical director of the Max Healthcare group, said.

The group runs 13 hospitals across the country of which 10 are in National Capital Region, including Max Saket, Max Patparganj, Max Shalimar Bagh.

The decision to test all in-patients by the Max Healthcare group comes days after there was a scare among the staff at Max Super Specialty Hospital in Saket, when it was revealed that two patients admitted to the hospital for cardiac ailment had tested positive for Covid-19. A least 39 healthcare workers, including nurses and doctors, who had come in contact with them, had to be quarantined.

“It has been observed that persons who are asymptomatic and positive for Covid-19 can also transmit the virus. This puts our healthcare workers and other patients in hospital at great risk. Therefore, testing all admitted patients is important,” Dr Budhiraja added.

Max Healthcare group will also do precautionary Covid-19 testing of all its 24,000 employees, said Abhay Soi, chairman, Max Healthcare and Radiant Life Care. “Covid-19 is an unprecedented global pandemic and despite being at high risk, front-line care givers are working relentlessly. A large number of infections among healthcare workers have the potential of severely crippling the healthcare systems,” he added.

Soi said they have developed Covid and non-Covid hospitals so that there is minimal risk to non-Covid patients and staff. “We have seen as in Singapore that meticulous planning, testing and process safeguards can allow us to minimise infections among healthcare workers,” he added.

To reduce the cost of Covid-19 testing of in-patients and staff members, the hospital chain said they will use pool testing in which five samples can be processed at one time.

Healthcare workers are among the worst affected by Covid-19 crisis in Delhi. Rough estimates show more than 50 healthcare workers in the state have tested positive for the disease. On Wednesday, a post graduate student working at Lok Nayak hospital tested positive. Two doctors from RML hospital were confirmed positive on Tuesday. Delhi State Cancer Institute has recorded 30 positive cases of the viral infection. 


