Coronavirus scare in Bengaluru: Doctors get flood of test requests
2020-03-05
BENGALURU: There has been an increase in the number of people with cold, cough and other flu-like symptoms in the city and many are worried that their condition could be linked to coronavirus, doctors said.


They and their family members have been ringing up hospitals and clinics seeking tests for Covid-19.

Dr Anoop Amarnath, chief of clinical services at Manipal Hospitals said flu-like cases and respiratory infections had gone up by 15% in the past week. “However, there are standard protocols and criteria for screening and testing. Guidelines of the World Health Organization and the government of India state that testing can be done only if the person has developed respiratory issues and has a travel history involving affected countries. Tests are also done if the person was exposed to a confirmed Covid-19 case,” he said.

Hospitals in the city have been counselling anxious citizens who suspect they have symptoms of the disease. Doctors at the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD) said several people, with no history of travel to affected countries or exposure to a confirmed case, were turning up complaining of cold and cough.

Dr Deepak Balani, chief of medical services at Sakra World Hospital said it had received some cases of influenza. “Every day now, we get 20 to 40 patients who suspect they might be infected with the coronavirus. The fears are unjustified; no one has tested positive yet,” he said.

The number of H1N1, or influenza A, cases in BBMP limits has gone up. According to the state health and family welfare department, 109 cases were reported between January 1 and March 4. During the same period, the state recorded 256 cases. Three deaths have been reported, one each in Tumakuru, Bengaluru Rural and Davanagere.

“When winter ends, respiratory infections like H1N1 surge. Cases of flu-like symptoms, viral infection and even bacterial infections are commonly seen in outpatient units. There is a fear in the public, and it should be allayed through proper information. Most people read something in social media and become worried,” said Dr Jyothsna Krishnappa, an internal medicine specialist at Apollo Hospitals.

Every day, four to five people, who have visited one of the affected countries, report at Fortis Hospital, Bannerghatta Road seeking Covid-19 test.

“Most of them are sent by corporate companies, which want their employees to obtain a fitness certificate. But as per the guidelines, despite the travel history, they cannot be considered for testing if they don’t have any symptoms. In such cases, I write a note saying the person is not suspected to be infected with Covid-19,” said Dr Pratheek, internal medicine testing, Fortis Hospitals.

After being turned down for Covid-19 tests at private hospitals, many seek help at RGICD. “We have set up a help desk to deal with such queries. Not all cases require testing,” an official said.

