Coronavirus: International event in Jaipur on wilderness cancelled
2020-03-03
JAIPUR: The marquee international week-long event on wildlife and environment of World Wilderness Congress scheduled to start from March 19 in Jaipur fell prey to the coronavirus, joining a growing list of cancelled events that has direct bearing on trade and businesses of Rajasthan. 


Organisers of WILD11 had written to the co-host Rajasthan government to postpone the event and sources said a decision has already been taken to cancel it for the time being. 

“Keeping in view the spread of the coronavirus and the interest of the participants and the people, we made a request to the Rajasthan government, our co-host for the event, to cancel the event for time being. We will keep a watch on the developments and accordingly decide the next date when the situation becomes normal,” said Sunil Mehta, managing director of WILD11. 

Over 2,000 participants from 60 nations, which included names like Stanley Patrick Johnson, father of British Prime Minister Boris Johnson; Shannon Elizabeth of American Pie fame; Felix Padel, anthropologist and great-great-grandson of Charles Darwin; Eric Garcetti, mayor of Los Angeles; and host of others of similar repute. 

Billed as the biggest travel-trade event in the world, the ITB Berlin exhibition, which was due to start on March 4 was cancelled. The travel trade industry in Jaipur said it is a big blow to the tourism and hospitality industry. 

Event cancellations and fear of coronavirus have already impacted the hospitality industry with cancellations of foreign individual travelers (FIT) going up to 30%. Mohan Singh, general manager of Rajasthan Tours, said, “The FIT segment has witnessed cancellations up to 30% though groups which has already paid are still coming.” 

A hotelier said travel advisories have been issued by many countries, cancellations of conferences and corporate events are now having a telling impact. “If the situation does not improve, we will also lose student groups during summers,” said the hotelier. 

An Italian testing positive in the screening test for the virus on Monday is a pretty bad news for the industry as it will force many tourists to cancel their trips to the state, he added. 

The gem and jewellery sector has also suffered as couple of big-ticket exhibitions have been cancelled and that would cause huge losses to the industry which depends on such shows. 

