Coronavirus scare in Telangana: Colleges, schools, clubs and theatres shut
2020-03-15
HYDERABAD: The Telangana government on Saturday became the ninth state in the country to shut down with immediate effect most establishments in the state that see large public gatherings. The move was announced by chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao after a cabinet meeting as a preventive measure to check the spread of coronavirus.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The closure order will directly affect all educational institutions, clubs, gymnasiums, zoo, cinema halls, bars, pubs, public meetings, seminars and swimming pools.

 
 
After a three-hour meeting KCR told reporters that every single educational institution, from primary school to universities, including coaching centres and summer camps, would remain closed till March 31. The state cabinet also decided that the ongoing board exams, including those in government residential hostels will continue as scheduled with special sanitization measures.

A decision on continuing the ongoing budget session of the assembly will be taken by the speaker on Sunday.

A high level committee of IAS, IPS and IFS officers will review the situation after a week and take a decision on relaxing the orders. A special task force will review the situation on a daily basis.

RTC buses and metro rail services will run with sanitization measures. Trains and district buses too will have similar measures. To allow people to get essential commodities, supermarkets, shops and malls will function with a rider to restrict the number of customers at any given point.

Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Saturday announced that he was releasing Rs 500 crore immediately for preventive measures against coronavirus but reiterated that there was no need for panic situation. “All these are precautionary measures on the lines of steps taken by Maharashtra and other states,” the CM said.

“Only two positive cases have been reported in Telangana,” the chief minister added. “These are precautionary measures. At the same time, anyone creating unnecessary panic will face stringent action.”

Marriages which have already been fixed and scheduled to be held before March 31 would be allowed with just 200 guests. Marriage halls have also been directed not to accept new bookings from Saturday night and shut down completely after March 31 until further orders.

All membership clubs, including the prestigious Nizam Club and Secunderabad Club, would remain closed. The managements of temples, churches and mosques have also been urged to maintain hygiene.

The chief minister said that the coronavirus threat to Telangana is mainly in and around Hyderabad as the state has only one airport at Shamshabad. Over 200 health department staff are conducting screening of passengers round the clock at the airport. People in rural areas are not as threatened, the chief minister added.

