Coronavirus, confusion over exams making students anxious
2020-04-25
AHMEDABAD: Lack of clarity about competitive exams due to coronavirus pandemic has left the students preparing for JEE and NEET anxious and confused. They are studying for hours, attending classes online, doing their revision, but motivation is going down with each passing day. Besides the extension of the lockdown period and some media reports suggesting further extension are also creating fear of wasting an academic year.


Sharonya Jain, a class XII student preparing for JEE, said, “Covid-19 pandemic has impacted the momentum required for the studies. The online classes are covering the curriculum, but the opportunity to interact with teachers/faculties is amiss. Besides, corona spread is having its own effect on our psyche.” Adds Nupur Vasinav, a NEET aspirant, “The one-to-one interaction in the classroom environment provides an opportunity of solving the doubts at that moment itself. The queries of other students also enrich the discussion. I pray the exam date is announced soon.”

 


Dheeraj Parikh, a JEE aspirant said, “It is a boon for me as now I have all the time in the world for focused study. The only thing I miss is group studies with friends because that brings a lot of clarity and shows how deep I have understood the concept.” While Anish Dhawad, another class XII student said, “WhatsApp has emerged as a major saviour. I note down all doubts and share it with educators for a solution.” Harshit Kumar, an aspirant, adds, “During the first lockdown period there was a lot of confusion and discomfort when it came to online learning. But, now things have settled down and classes go smoothly. Both students and teachers have adapted this kind of learning.”

While Tushar Parikh, vice-president of a reputed coaching institute feels that children's momentum is registering a dip due to lack of clarity in terms of date. He said, "This lockdown is best for those who were not prepared. They have time in hand to improve. We have uploaded paper material and worksheets for the benefit of children.” Murlidhar Rathod, associated with a leading coaching institute, said, “We are taking lectures for three hours in the morning and evening sessions are for clearing the doubts. Children are now comfortable with the new format of education.” Sanjay Singh, in-charge of a coaching institute, said, “With parents at home, the pressure is on students to study, but only time will tell how much they benefit from this extended time period.”

