Coronavirus: Medicos quarantined at Sawai Man Singh Hospital
2020-01-28
JAIPUR: A 25-yer-old medical student, resident of Sanganer in Jaipur, studying in Hubei University of Chinese Medicine in Wuhan of China, where novel coronavirus (nCoV) has played havoc, has been quarantined at Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital as he is suffering from similar symptoms of the virus. Apart from suspected case of nCoV, there are other 17 such students from the same university, who are under monitoring of the health department.


The suspected patient returned from China to India on January 12. He was under monitoring of the health department. He developed influenza like illeness symptoms such as cough, fever and runny nose on January 24. Alert health department officials immediately reported the case to higher authorities of the health department and admitted him to the isolation ward of the SMS Hospital.

“Taking precautionary measures, a team of two doctors and four nursing staff have conducted survey in neighbourhood of residence of the suspected nCoV patient,” chief medical health officer (Jaipur-II), Dr Hansraj Bhadaliya told TOI.

All the medical students belong to Jaipur, Hanumangarh, Sikar and Barmer. A student from Sikar district told ToI that he had returned from China on January 12. “The university declared holidays from January 10. There is a scare of nCoV,” said a medical student from Sikar, who has been studying in the university since 2018 for MBBS course. The health authorities have directed chief medical health officers of all the four districts to keep monitoring health of the students returning from China. However, the suspected nCoV student doing well, the hospital claimed.

The patient was brought to the hospital with symptoms such as runny nose, headache, cough and sore throat. Since, he has returned from China recently, the health authorities have taken it seriously and kept in isolation ward. “He is fine. We have kept him in isolation ward as a precautionary measure. Since he was suffering from similar symptoms, we have admitted him last (Sunday) evening,” said Dr DS Meena, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital. 

Moreover, health minister Raghu Sharma has directed the officials to conduct screening of the family members of the suspected nCoV patient. Sharma said that he has directed the officials to keep monitoring health of 18 students reached Rajasthan from China’s Wuhan for 28 days.


