Coronavirus alert in U’khand: Govt hosps cancel docs’ leaves
2020-01-29
Dehradun/Nainital: With state government hospitals asked to be on alert against Coronavirus that has claimed several lives in China, leaves of doctors, para-medical staff and surveillance workers have been cancelled at several government medical facilities in state capital Dehradun, including Coronation Hospital and Gandhi Shatabdi Hospital. To combat the fatal disease, isolation wards have also been set up in various hospitals across the state, especially in districts that border Nepal and China. 

According to health department officials, Almora district hospital has kept 14 beds in its isolation ward, Chamoli district hospital has kept 18 beds, and Champawat district hospital has separated 16 beds for Coronavirus treatment. Government Doon Medical College and Hospital has arranged for a 30-bed isolation ward while in Nainital district, isolation wards have been set up in Dr Sushila Tiwari Hospital in Haldwani and BD Pandey Hospital in Nainital. Similarly, isolation wards have also been set up in the district hospitals of Pauri Garhwal, Rudraprayag, Tehri, Haridwar and Pithoragarh.

“Special teams of police and health department have been prepared to check the tourist inflow at Banbasa-Tanakpur in Champawat, Dharchula-Baluwakot-Jaulajibi-Jhoolaghar-Nainisaini in Pithoragarh, Khatima-Pantnagar in Udham Singh Nagar, and Jollygrant Airport in Dehradun,” said Pankaj Kumar Pandey, secretary (in-charge) health.

The official also added that if someone wants to share any information regarding a suspected patient, they can contact at integrated helpline number 104. The health directorate has also issued guidelines to all the hospital heads to organise awareness camps in hospitals for both staff and patients.

On Tuesday, Gandhi Shatabdi Hospital organised a symposium on Coronavirus. Doctors and paramedics of the hospital were briefed about causes of the disease and how to tackle symptoms.

Dr BC Ramola, chief medical superintendent of both Gandhi Shatabdi and Coronation Hospital, told TOI “We have asked the chief medical officer to provide us masks and other materials to sanitise the wards in case any virus-affected case comes to our hospitals. We have arranged for a six-bed isolation ward in Coronation Hospital and 24-bed ward in Gandhi Hospital."

Meanwhile, Nainital’s chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Bharti Rana told TOI that an advisory has been issued to doctors in the region to handle the suspected cases with utmost care. "A meeting will be held with senior officials on Wednesday where we will decide on further course of action regarding this matter," Rana said.


