Coronavirus in Noida: Five of 14 cases may have same source
2020-03-27
NOIDA: It seems like a rerun of Case No. 10 in Delhi — five of the 14 Covid-19 cases in Noida seem to go back to one source, a British citizen who was in India between March 15 and 19.


In Delhi, a woman who had returned from Saudi Arabia may have infected at least eight more, including her doctor, setting off a chain reaction.

In Noida, the first in this chain of infections was a 47-year-old woman who lives in a Sector 137 housing society. Neither did she have any travel history nor had she come in contact with anyone who had travelled. When health officials investigated her case, they found out her husband’s office had a visitor from the UK. He had been in contact with the visitor. The couple tested positive for Covid-19 on March 24 and their 21-year-old daughter tested positive on Thursday.

While this was playing out, another employee of the same company started showing symptoms. Both he and his wife, residents of Sector 150, tested positive. None of the five who tested positive had any recent travel history. A health official said employees of the company had said the visitor from the UK “seemed symptomatic” when he was here.

“The company staff told us he had fever and cough when he was in India. We had sent an email about his testing in London, but were told he is healthy and has not been tested,” chief medical officer Anurag Bhargava said.

To stop the chain of transmission, the hotel where he had stayed and the societies where the couples who tested positive live have been sealed and sanitised. “No one from our staff has reported any symptom,” the hotel manager said.

The district administration, meanwhile, is trying to map the contact points. “We are checking for suspected cases and carrying out sanitisation,” said district magistrate BN Singh. About 750 people are being monitored — 19 who came in direct contact with the five patients, and 150 employees and their families — and told to keep an eye out for symptoms.


