Coronavirus Shadow Looms Over Gair
2020-03-07
INDORE: With number of suspected cases of coronavirus going up in city and fear of spread of virus increasing, district administration has sought directions from state government over organizing of Gairs on Rangpanchmi that see participation of over 1.5 lakh people.


“We have informed senior officers in the state capital about expected turnout of visitors in Gairs amid fear of spread of coronavirus and have sought directions over what steps need to be taken regarding holding of the event,” collector Lokesh Kumar Jatav said.

State health department has already issued an advisory asking people to take necessary preventive measures to stop spread of this virus as much was not known about it and as of now, there was no drug or vaccine available to keep a check on it .

In its bid to include Gair in UNESCO’s list of intangible cultural heritage, the district administration had made widespread arrangements that included preparing a documentary on the event, attracting foreign tourists to witness the event and making required arrangements for them to watch the processions from top of buildings in and around Rajwada area.

So far, 15 tourists from various countries including the US have approached district administration with a desire to witness the event on March 13.

Ministry of health and family welfare had also advised that mass gatherings may be avoided or possibly postponed till the spread of virus was contained. In case of any such gatherings, states may take necessary action to guide organizers on precautions to be taken.

The virus fear has also made Gair organizers sceptical about holding the event

“We have made required arrangements to take out Gair and only purchasing of gulal is left. If there is any such threat of spread of coronavirus, the authorities concerned should cancel the event,” Tori Corner Gair, organizer Shiv Gupta said.

Rajpal Joshi, organizer of Rasia Gair, said, “Gair is decades old tradition and it should not be stopped. However, in view of spread of coronavirus, giving masks and other required steps should be taken by the government”.

Abhimanyu Mishra, organizer of Moral Club, said, “If playing Holi with gulal is a threat, we would use only water in the procession. The event should however not be cancelled”.


