Coronavirus has summer camps feeling the heat
2020-03-10
Nagpur: Those in the summer camp and trek businesses are sweating because of the Coronavirus fear. The threat is hurting Nagpur-based operators, who are reporting a sharp fall in bookings as compared to last year.This business relies mostly on school and college students who are looking for a break not only from a long academic season but also from the blistering Nagpur heat. But coronavirus anxiety is holding back parents from confirming their bookings for these camps, which are based mostly in Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Amol Khante, founder of CAC All Rounder, said, “There’s an almost 70% decline in bookings on a year-to-year basis. Enquires are coming but parents are not willing to book it if the travel itinerary includes New Delhi, which is where coronavirus cases have been detected.” He added that the fear level is such that even though the touring party is not halting at the capital, parents don’t want to go ahead. “We go directly to Ambala by train but since it passes through New Delhi, parents want to stay out,” said KhanteAvinash Deoskar, director of Adventure Academy, says there is a slowdown but is hopeful of things picking up later. “There is no doubt that bookings have slowed down. And it’s obviously due to coronavirus anxiety in people. I feel that in April things will pick up as board exams get over and there will be more clarity about the virus from the government,” said Deoskar.Pankhuri Bandelwar, trek leader at Alpha Adventures, said, “Parents are enquiring about this and we explain to them carefully about the situation so that they can make an informed decision.”Many people are backing out because of the perception that the virus thrives in cooler places. Senior medical practitioner and ENT surgeon Dr Madan Kapre said such fears are not completely unfounded. “In hill stations and other tourist places, it is natural for more people to congregate in small areas which makes it easy for the infection to spread. And of course, the virus can survive longer in cooler temperature,” said Dr Kapre.