Warm welcome for some, social stigma for others: Covid-19 survivors
2020-04-20
BHOPAL: They have emerged triumphant after defeating Covid-19, but the battle is far from over for them. The patients who have recovered from the infection, are now battling social fears. 


One of the 30 people who recovered from Covid-19 and were discharged from hospital on April 18, said, “There were mix reactions when I went to hospital after testing. Even when I recovered and returned home, some people were and are helpful. However, some are and were too scared. When I went to the hospital, the availability of newspaper to milk, became an issue. This thing needs to be addressed. Corona is an infection, anyone can get infected like me. In such a scenario we humans should help each other. I want to urge people that co-operation should be ensured under all circumstances, if nothing then moral support is also a great help”. “I live with my wife and a seven months old child on seventh floor of an apartment. Now, even if my wife used to go downstairs for picking up milk packets or newspaper, people used to get scared and start calling on helpline numbers saying that my family members are roaming, it was not roaming, however there are few who were too helpful,” he said. 

“During the entire period at hospital, I used to think about my toddler, and it gave me courage that I have to get well soon and return home to play with the kid,” he added. 

Another public health professional who was also among those discharged on Saturday, said, “I was a bit tensed in the beginning but slowly and steadily when treatment started things started becoming better. There is nothing except courage. I felt that either the disease will take over me or let me take over it, so I thought of giving it a fight. There is nothing to be scared of.” 

Similar sentiments were expressed by another patient. Talking to TOI, he said, “Doctors took very good care, they served us a lot. My wife had gone to her mother’s house, daughter is here, but we are taking precaution in home too. I got my daughter also tested for corona. Neighbours are keeping distance. Take precautions and pray to god that our country gets rid of this disease. A lot of people are trapped, troubled, especially daily wagers who used to earn their bread daily.” 

