Coronavirus outbreak: Himachal Pradesh police to act tough against those concealing travel info
2020-04-05
SHIMLA: Not disclosing about the history of travelling to Nizamuddin in Delhi or any other part of country to authorities by Sunday 5 pm in Himachal Pradesh would invite registration of cases under the provision of attempt to murder. 

In case of death due to negligence of concealing information, then trial under murder charges would also be started. Making this clear, DGP S R Mardi on Sunday warned the district chiefs of Tablighi Jamaat in the state that it would also be their responsibility to inform about such persons. Himachal Pradesh at present has six positive cases undergoing treatment in the two medical colleges located at Tanda and Shimla and all of them belong to Tablighi Jamaat.

S R Mardi said that people have time to disclose about their travelling to Nizamuddin in Delhi or any other place and country by Sunday 5 pm after which action would be initiated against who would fail to disclose the same. He said that if those returning from Nizamuddin will make the disclosure then they will be immediately quarantined and responsibility to ensure the disclosure would also be on the district chiefs of Tablighi Jamaat.

He said that after Sunday 5pm if it is found that travel history was not disclosed that resulted into spread of Corona virus in community then action against such persons will not only be initiated under the provisions of IPC and Disaster Management Act, 2005 but charges of attempt to murder would also slapped against them.

“If someone dies due to negligence and deliberate hiding of information then murder case trial under section 302 of IPC will be started against such persons, this is my ultimate warning as case would also be filed against district chiefs of Tablighi Jamaat as it would be their responsibility to inform about such persons,” he added.

He said that so far 277 members of Tablighi Jamaat have been identified and quarantined in the state including 76 in Baddi area of Nalagarh sub division of Solan district, 21 in Chamba district, 40 in Kangra district, 20 in Mandi district, 23 in Shimla, 58 in Sirmaur and 39 in Una district.

He said that 17 FIRs against 85 persons belonging to Tablighi Jamaat has been registered in the state including two FIRs against 45 persons in Baddi, two FIRs against five persons in Bilaspur, one FIR against one person in Kangra district, four FIRs against seven persons in Mandi district, one FIR against 11 persons in Shimla district, two FIRs against two persons in Sirmaur district and five FIRs against 14 persons in Una district. In the state so far 11 members of Tablighi Jamaat have been arrested from Shimla.

