Coronavirus: Centre readies 250-bed facility in Alwar district
2020-02-01
ALWAR: The Centre has formed a 250-bed isolation-cum-observation centre here for Indians who are scheduled to be airlifted from coronavirus-hit Wuhan city in China. The isolation centre is readied at the Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) Medical College Hospital. Necessary logistical support has been installed in the hospital under the supervision of the Union ministry of health and family welfare (MOHFW) officials in the last two days.

Three such centres are being readied across the country, including Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force (ITBP) Hospital (Manesar) and Director General Armed Force Medical Service (DGAFMS), Delhi. Officials said that over 2,500 Indians, mostly students, are being airlifted from China in two batches. The first batch will arrive in the wee hours of Saturday, while the second batch will arrive on February 2.

“The newly constructed ESIC Hospital is located on the outskirts of the city and it is barely 130-150 km from the international airport in Delhi. It makes it convenient for the authorities providing any emergency assistance to the suspected persons,” said an official.

Medical commissioner (MOHFW) R K Kataria told reporters in Alwar that close to 2,500 normal Indians will be evacuated from China. “They will be quarantined first at ITBP and DGAFMS. Thereafter, the suspected persons will be brought to Alwar for 14 days observation. Those who show no signs of the carnivorous will be released only after 14 days. If any person tested positive will be treated as per the ministry guidelines. The ministry has made all preparations including doctors, to deal with the number of patients,” said Kataria.

Off total, 250 persons are expected to be quarantined in Alwar. The capacity of beds at the hospital can be extended up to 500 on need basis, confirmed officials. The hospital is newly constructed state-of-art with a cost of Rs 850 crores.

The national carrier, Air India has departed for China this afternoon from Mumbai and will bring first batch on the wee hours of Saturday. The second flight is expected to depart on Saturday afternoon. India has been on toes since one student from Kerala, who is a student in Wuhan has been tested positive to virus in Thrissur.


