Coronavirus in Mumbai: Home quarantine for over 700 proves easier said than done
2020-03-16
MUMBAI: The 14-day home quarantine has finally ended for the Mumbaikars who had travelled abroad with the Andheri couple, the first from the city to test positive for the novel coronavirus. Their group which returned from a Dubai tour on March 1 make up the biggest cluster of Covid-19 cases in Maharashtra. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The home quarantine imposed on the non-infected members of the Dubai group has been a mixed experience. At least one senior citizen couple from Vile Parle admitted they had breached the rules to step out for shopping. It turns out the BMC's health department phoned them each day to track their health but did not monitor their actual quarantine. The husband, a retired customs officer, said, "There is just the two of us at home. Who would run errands? Moreover, don't I know my responsibilities? BMC did not post anyone at our door. They would have to hire staff and pay wages to do so. Is that easily done?" He and his wife finally tested negative.


 
 
With over 700 Mumbaikars now confined to their homes, the success of the arrangement is vital to the fight against the virus's spread. However, those quarantined speak of lack of support, harassment by neighbours, and the haphazardness of the process, while authorities say the BMC does not have the resources to ensure hundreds of citizens can be supported through the process. For citizens, problems range from everyday concerns like supply of household provisions to battling ostracism, to tackling fake news and being summoned for tests during the confinement. For the authorities, challenges vary from logistics of enforcement to tackling breach of protocol by quarantined individuals, some of whom invite relatives over out of boredom. The situation is not very different from even the advanced countries, as documented by the medical journal Lancet which recently did a study on quarantining and its impact. At Bangur Nagar, Goregaon, where Archana Bhargav (name changed) and her mother, Purnima, were asked to stay put at home for a fortnight from March 1 onwards, the fortnight-long process has left more questions unanswered than resolved. Archana casts doubt on the very purpose of quarantining them since they were forced to step out of their home within days. "We were called for testing to Kasturba Hospital on March 10. And it turned out we were never ill," she said. BMC does provide ambulances to ferry people for Covid-19 tests at Kasturba, but services are patchy. 

Quarantined families say BMC also exposed them to infection during the overnight testing procedure in Kasturba Hospital. "Seven of us were put in the same room, of whom two turned out to be infected with the virus. Was that a wise thing to do? Why didn't they isolate us there?" one asked. "A key to halting the virus's progression lies with people's cooperation in strictly staying home when advised to do so," BMC's Dr Daksha Shah told journalists on Sunday. "The idea of home quarantining is to limit one's interaction with the rest of the community," Dr Shah said. So far, 270 Mumbaikars have completed the 14-day isolation period. "In this situation, neighbour and friends must step in and help people who are under quarantine," she said.

