Coronavirus survivors turn friends
2020-04-03
PATNA: Rahul Kumar and Faiyaz Ahmad, who defeated the deadly Covid-19 virus and were discharged from Patna’s Nalanda Medical College and Hospital on Wednesday, are happy for two reasons – victory over coronavirus and their newly developed friendship.

Phulwarisharif resident Rahul (24), a software engineering student, had returned to Patna from Scotland via England on March 19 and tested positive for Covid-19 virus on March 22. Patna City resident Faiyaz (29), who works in machine maintenance unit of engineering department of railways at Gujarat’s Bhavnagar, also tested positive for Covid-19 on March 22. Both were put in separate isolation beds facing each other at NMCH.

Recalling the interaction with Rahul at the hospital, Faiyaz said, “Spending time alone in a room was quite difficult for me. Thanks to Rahul, I felt relaxed and confident. We fought the virus together and won the battle. He is a very optimistic person. We exchanged phone numbers and my negative thoughts subsided whenever I had a conversation with him.”

Faiyaz returned to Patna on March 8 from Gujarat during the Holi celebrations, but he could not go back to the workplace owing to the lockdown.

“During my isolation period, I kept reciting verses from Quran. I also learned that positivity and faith can help you in any situation,” Faiyaz said.

Rahul, on the other hand, said returning home from the hospital after 10 days of isolation was a great feeling. “It was quite difficult to stay alone in a hospital room,” he said.”

Rahul, a native of Phulwarisharif, said he watched online movies and chatted with his family and friends via video call. “I watched a lot of movies on my smartphones, mainly comedy ones. I also did cardio exercises in the morning. From time to time, the doctors and nurses gave anti-viral medicines,” he said.

Rahul added, “I was quite confident of getting well and I also told the same to Faiyaz, who was really scared.”

The two will now be on 14-day home quarantine as per the official protocol for discharged patients.


