Delhi corporations release norms for last rites of coronavirus patients
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: The municipal corporations have started sensitising crematorium and burial ground staff in case more Covid-19 deaths occur in the capital. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

After the confusion around the cremation of the capital’s first virus victim at Nigambodh Ghat last week, the Union health ministry has sent a standard operating procedure for handling such bodies. A senior public health official said all major crematoriums were run by NGOs and their management and staff were being sensitised. “We are hoping that things will not deteriorate much but we are prepared for all contingencies,” he added. 

As various precautions such as use of personnel protection equipment will have to be followed, all bereaved families will be advised to use one of the bigger crematoriums at Lodhi, Punjabi Bagh, Green Park or Nigambodh. 

Another official said the ministry had allowed viewing of the body at the face end, but the body bag can be unzipped only by the staff using standard precautions for the relatives to see the deceased one last time. “Bathing, kissing, hugging etc. of the body should not be allowed,” the guideline states. “Religious rituals such as reading from scriptures, sprinkling holy water and any other last rites that don’t require touching the body can be allowed”, but everybody should carry out hand hygiene after the funeral, the official said. 

An officer of the South Delhi Municipal Corporation added that large gatherings won’t be allowed to stick to the social distancing norm. “The guideline tells us not to allow crowding and the number of a gathering in Delhi has already been restricted by the state government,” he said. 

Many officials, however, said there was no clarity about burials. “In the old manual, it was clearly stated that cremation is advisable against the burial in case of death due to an infectious disease. The fresh guideline doesn’t clarify this issue,” he pointed out. 

The last rites of the first Covid-19 casualty in the capital had got mired in controversy at Nigambodhghat crematorium due to lack of clarity on the protocol for such cases. Her family had to wait for several hours before civic officials stepped in to facilitate the cremation. 

Dr Sudhir Gupta, professor and head of forensic sciences at AIIMS, had told TOI that there was nothing to worry about cremation by electrical or traditional burning or even burial as per the religious faith. However, in case of burial, the upper portion of the burial spot should be cemented and plastered, he clarified.


