Chennai: Corporation’s Covid warriors lost in maze of forms and formalities
2020-06-09
CHENNAI: In the city’s fight against Covid-19, officials seem split on the strategies to be adopted. With more nodal officials being brought in, ground-level workers including engineers and corporation employees are ending up filling forms, registers and papers rather than being involved in the actual implementation, say sources.

With an IAS officer appointed in each zone as a nodal officer and with ministers also getting into the field, they spend at least half a day preparing for visits, distribution of masks and health drinks and the other half in preparing reports. “It is difficult to work in such conditions. There is fear of disease too as four of my close friends, who are engineers, have tested positive for Covid-19,” said an official.

An engineer-supervisor for health workers who has to make 30 calls to ensure they visit homes is unable to do that now. And there are complaints that health workers don’t turn up for door-to-door survey. On several days, many contacts are not even traced and the close contacts are not tested as health workers are unable to visit that many residences in a day.

Even top IAS officials are unable to work freely. “Every day at least three meetings are scheduled. While it is important to monitor and supervise but if it happens every day, it is difficult to work as we are now asked to report to several officials above us and each seeks a different data every day. But we are here to help people and we will do our best,” said an official.

There are also instances where nodal officers have helped make the system smoother. One official said the health department and the engineering department are always at loggerheads. “It is after IAS officials were posted in zones that the working became smoother,” said an official. Certain streets in Royapuram and Tondiarpet are free of Covid-19 because instructions were followed.

Public affairs experts say governments should improve communication strategies to ensure ground-level changes. Annapoorna Ravichander, executive director of Bengaluru-based Public Affairs Foundation, said bureaucrats should involve community in decision making and consult stakeholders. “They should identify what is the need at the bottom level and try to address the issues ... telling people to not go out is easy but if a person needs to use a public toilet he will go out. We need localized solutions...”

