Kochi corporation chalks out measures to contain spread of coronavirus
2020-03-20
KOCHI: With the city staring at a lockdown due to the spread of Covid-19, Kochi corporation has started a slew of measures to fight the virus outbreak. The local body will also seek the support of NGOs, Kudumbashree and the public in spreading the message to contain the disease.

As part of Break the Chain campaign, facility to wash hands will be set up at 50 places in the city. “Facilities would be arranged at market, bus stations and railway stations. Wash basins, soaps and sanitizers will be provided at those places,” mayor Soumini Jain said. 

“A five-member squad comprising health officials of the corporation, Asha workers, Kudumbashree workers, councillors and members of NGOs will be formed in each division. They would act as a surveillance team and report the developments related to Covid-19 in the division. They would keep in touch with those returned from foreign countries, and apprise the health supervisor of their condition and requirements,” Jain said. 

The local body also plans to procure one lakh face masks and distribute it among vulnerable persons. “Vendors at markets, autorickshaw drivers, passengers heading to railway stations, taxi drivers, etc. are among the vulnerable population. There will be weekly meetings to review the progress of preventive measures,” the mayor said. The local body is also planning to distribute food and grocery kits to those in need. “Those families whose breadwinner is down with the disease, would require food items. We have received 70 food packets from the control room. We will be distributing it to the deserving families. If anybody want cooked food, we will explore the possibilities of providing it to them. We can tie up with hoteliers for the purpose,” she said.

Infrared thermometers will be procured for testing the temperature of those arriving at different parts of the city. “Corporation will set up a helpline number and help desk for giving advice and guidance to the patients and the public. Corporation secretary should take the responsibility for setting up the help desk,” Jain added.

Also, measures would be taken to see that public places like market are clean and hygienic. “If a vendor is found to be adopting unhygienic practices, his or her licence should be cancelled. Unauthorized wayside eateries will be closed down. The local body would consider extending time for payment of various taxes. As per norms, many of the taxes are to be paid by March 31. The corporation has written to the state government seeking facilities to quarantine people at Fort Kochi taluk hospital. Many of the private hospitals in the city have informed that they are ready to upgrade or arrange facilities to treat Covid-19. This would be conveyed to the state government,” said the mayor.


