Covid-19 scare in Delhi: Corporations to disinfect open gyms, parks, zonal offices
2020-03-14
NEW DELHI: Municipal corporation teams have started mass disinfection drives at common places like open gyms, toilets, parks, zonal offices and community centres among others. In the midst of the coronavirus scare, awareness banners and announcements via loudspeakers are being used to spread awareness among Delhiites.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

On Friday, a training programme was held by the north corporation for sanitation supervisory staff. A senior south corporation public health department official said that sodium hypochlorite is being procured in bulk for future use.

“Senior officers explained in detail the precautions and steps to be taken to check the transmission of the virus. The staff were asked to regularly disinfect the public places using a solution of sodium hypochlorite,” a senior north municipal corporation official added. “Stickers on the ways to wash hands will be soon displayed in the public toilets.”

The staff were also asked to wear masks and hand gloves for their own protection. “The zonal office buildings, citizen bureuas and other office buildings which see more footfall will be sanitised,” said the director of the sanitation department.

East corporation, too, has started its own training and awareness programmes. “Two deputy health officers of the public health department and couple of doctors from the hospital administration had undergone training of trainers on March 9. Subsequently, training was imparted to supervisory staff and healthcare personnel,” the spokesperson said.

Municipal bodies have also been instructed to identify properties that can be used to create isolation wards.

Meanwhile, north corporation mayor, Avtar Singh, visited Hindu Rao Hospital to check preparations of the 50-bed isolation facility. He also reviewed the preparedness at MVID hospital. The nursing home of Hindu Rao Hospital has been converted into a ward for coronavirus patients, while the newly constructed boys’ hostel of Hindu Rao Medical College has been converted into a ward for suspected cases.


