Corpn PRO croons song to fight spread of coronavirus
2020-04-07
Coimbatore: With the state and central government pulling out all stops to contain the spread of novel coronavirus, some are going the extra mile, in terms of novelty, to spread awareness.

A public relations officer of the Coimbatore corporation has composed a song to highlight the measures taken by authorities to arrest the spread of Covid-19, apart from creating awareness on the critical need for social distancing. The song has gained instant fame on social media platforms.

The officer, R Mathialagan, has penned and sung ‘Vallamai tharayo’, a song directed by his friends Vijay Nachimuthu and music composer K Benny Pradeep.

“Ever since the lockdown was implemented, I have been thinking about writing a song which would not just talk about the basic rules to be followed by all citizens in the fight against Covid-19, but also help make the public realise how tough it has been for the government to work for public interest,” said Mathialagan.

The civic body officials said his song focusses on relief efforts being carried out by those in charge of essential services such as sanitation workers, doctors and police officials and the importance of social distancing.

Mathialagan was an avid fan of poetry and songs while being a student leader at Mannar College in Pudukkottai. What he did not have in plenty was time, to pursue his passion.

“Though I had written a few poems after my college, I had stopped singing. This is the first time I have penned a poem and sung it… and made it public,” he said.

As part of the government machinery, usually the first responders in crisis, Mathialagan and his team have rarely got a minute to breathe after the lockdown was announced. Taking time out after his daily engagements, he sat down over several nights to finish his poem and managed to complete it in less than a week, he said. “When I expressed my interest of singing an awareness song to my friends and sought their assistance, they agreed immediately,” he said. The group of friends managed to finish the music composition, recording and shooting in two days.

The song, Mathialagan said, has become an internet sensation.


