Corpn intensifies efforts to contain Covid-19
2020-03-22
Coimbatore: The city corporation has intensified the drive to create awareness on preventive measures to contain the spread of Covid-19 among the public. It has deployed about 800 workers for the purpose who would also disinfect public gathering places. A source said the city corporation workers have been on a door-to-door campaign to sensitize people on precautionary measures by distributing pamphlets. “They are also creating awareness at bus stands in Ukkadam, Singanallur, Gandhipuram and on Mettupalayam road, railway station, integrated court premises, airport and corporation office in Town Hall. Working in three shifts, the source said, the corporation workers have also been spraying disinfectants on bus stand premises, buses and at depots, railway station and other public gathering places. “Earlier, they used to disinfect temples and shopping complexes. Now that they are closed for public till March 31, they have been exempted.” The source said the city corporation has set up screening centres at the airport, railway station and on court premises. “We are screening everyone for high temperature.” The corporation workers had on Wednesday disinfected the premises of Nirmala College for Women at Race Course following a request to this effect from the college management. “We were concerned about the students, who were staying on the college premises, and we wanted to ensure their safety,” the source said.The civic body had also set up a help desk at Ukkadam bus stand on Wednesday. A doctor, who is part of the help desk, said, “We are distributing pamphlets that details steps to be followed to prevent Covid-19 infection and hand washing techniques.” The doctor said the screening cum help centre was set up at Ukkadam bus stand owing to the presence of buses bound to Kerala, where a large number of people were tested positive for Covid-19. “Since the district administration has sealed all the check posts on Tamil Nadu-Kerala border, a decision on whether to continue the help desk is yet to be taken.” Meanwhile, villagers of Nathegoundenpudur in Karamadai block sprinkled turmeric power in a government bus, which they also decked up with neem leaves. Pointing out that both turmeric and neem leaves were considered as disinfectants, they justified their act by saying that was a precautionary measure to contain the virus spread. 