Covid-19: Chennai corporation to test slum dwellers extensively
2020-06-01
CHENNAI: The city corporation will intensify testing for Covid-19 in the various slums after experts said the number of cases is likely to go up in the coming weeks. On Sunday, there were 804 positive cases in the city.


Officials in the Royapuram, Thiru-Vi-Ka Nagar, Tondiarpet, Kodambakkam, Anna Nagar and Teynampet zones have been asked to test even asymptomatic people in contact with a Covid patient. “We will also test extended contacts. We have got orders to open more testing centres. Earlier, testing centres functioned on alternate days. Now, they will be open daily,” said an assistant engineer.

Another official said people in slums were among the most vulnerable. “Now, with more relaxations in place, they will be travelling across the city for jobs and other activities.”

J Radhakrishnan, Covid-19 special officer for Greater Chennai Corporation, said they had told officials not to worry about numbers. “They will have to identify every contact in slums, test them and ensure they are aware of the precautions. In slums, we have realized people are shying away from tests. Officials will reach their homes and take tests. Next week, we may cross 1,000 cases a day,” he said. Corporation deputy commissioner (health) P Madhusudhan Reddy said of the 1,094 contacts of Covid positive people tested on Sunday, 500 were family members.

Of the 1,200 slums in the city, volunteers of NGOs distribute masks and create awareness in 92. “We are conducting house-to-house surveys and have appointed one worker for 100 houses. We disinfect tenements periodically and give residents multivitamin tablets and other immune boosting drinks,” said Dr Jagadeesan, city health officer.

The civic body is taking surveys of various unauthorised slums. At Pulianthope, Annai Sathya Nagar, Thideer Nagar, the corporation’s drives have helped stabilise the cases. “We want to intensify testing at slums in hotspot zones to ensure they do not turn into clusters,” said Jagadeesan.


