Kochi corporation told to handle waste from quarantine homes
2020-04-17
KOCHI: The onus on scientific disposal of all kinds of waste from quarantine homes in the city have fallen on Kochi corporation with the pollution control board mandating that it be treated as biomedical waste and disposed as per rules. 

Earlier, the board had said biomedical waste (BMW) from quarantine homes and camps had to be collected in specially designated yellow colour bags provided by urban local bodies (ULB). 

As per the revised guidelines, these wastes should be collected and transported separately by ULBs and disposed through incineration. The vehicles collecting these quarantined wastes should also be thoroughly disinfected and cleaned daily. In case incineration facilities are not available, as a last resort, these wastes may be buried in a deep pit in the ground, so that they cannot contaminate any other surface, the guidelines said. 

“Whatever can be done practically we are doing,” said mayor Soumini Jain. It would be difficult for us to procure yellow bags in short notice as shops are closed, she said. “Wherever there are Covid positive patients, we are taking all mandatory precautions,” said Jain. 

As per guidelines issued in March, people taking care of those under home quarantine should deposit yellow bags containing medical waste to authorized waste collectors at doorsteps or deposit them at designated deposition centres established by local bodies. BMWs can also be handed over to waste collector engaged by Common Biomedical Waste Treatment Facility at the doorstep. 

Health workers and people under quarantine said they have not been issued any guidelines regarding collection of waste. “We are absolutely in the dark about yellow bags or designated collection centres. We don’t even know in which houses people are under quarantine,” said a waste collector who works in Elamakkara area. 

Mohanshwin, Ernakulam district convener of Malinya Nirmarjana Thozhilali union, said the corporation has not given them any directives regarding collection of biomedical waste.

