Coronavirus outbreak in Delhi: Corporations order closure of weekly markets, salons
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: Amid the novel coronavirus outbreak across the country, municipal corporations in the national capital have ramped up their efforts to curb spread of the pandemic.


Coronavirus in India latest updates

On Friday, South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) announced closure of all salons, beauty parlours, sports academies, recreation centres and weekly markets till March 31. Sale of fruits and vegetables and essential items will, however, continue. Earlier, spas, gyms and discotheques were temporarily shut down in south Delhi areas.

The north corporation asked its sanitation workers, beldars and malis above 55 years of age to stay at home till the threat subsides. This is aimed at keeping the elderly people who work outdoors safe from the coronavirus infection.

The three civic agencies—North, South and East Delhi Municipal Corporation—also issued advisories on Friday to shut down operation of non-essential departments. The staff would, however, continue to work from home.

These steps have been taken under Section 376 of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act.

SDMC has temporarily shut down its 14 departments, including horticulture, town planning, building, vigilance and education. “Officials of these departments should be available on telephone and online to work from home in any eventuality. However, heads of all departments and staff of the remaining departments will have to come to office regularly,” read the advisory.

On Friday, the north corporation announced a list of 29 “non-essential” departments, while the east corporation 19. Employees of these departments will attend offices only in case of an exigency.

The circular issued by the north corporation also mandated provision of thermal scanners and hand sanitisers at the entry of the municipal building gates. “Those having flu-like symptoms should be asked to take proper treatment and quarantine themselves. Entry of visitors should be discouraged and meetings, wherever possible, should be done through videoconferencing,” stated the circular.

The civic body has also decided to hold sensitisation drive in groups of just 2-3 people.

A senior official of SDMC health department said that their staff are working in coordination with the central and Delhi governments.

“A total of 66 medical staff, including 32 doctors and 34 nurses, are deployed with district surveillance officers for round-the-clock duties at the quarantine centres of Delhi government. Besides, the information of 11,000 guests staying in hotels has been shared with Delhi government. Surveillance of passengers, who visited Delhi from abroad, is being carried as per the directions of the state government,” the official added.

Officials of the south corporation claim to have distributed 20,000 N-95 masks to its medical staff and 10,000 surgical masks to the OPD patients visiting its dispensaries and hospitals with symptoms like fever and cough.


