Companies advance payday to ease virus woes
2020-03-30
MUMBAI: In a move that will calm the frayed nerves of employees, several organisations have disbursed March salaries early. Given the state of the economy, and now the Covid-19 impact, job losses and salary cuts are some concerns that would naturally make employees anxious. An advance payment is expected to help for now.



Coronavirus outbreak: Live updates

Organisations like Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), Indiabulls, Marico, Metro Cash & Carry and SBI General, to name a few, decided to disburse March salaries before time to their employees who are currently grounded due to the nationwide lockdown, and are working from home.

In an e-mail to its employees, TCS said, “In view of Covid-19 pandemic and current lockdown across the country, the company has decided to credit your March’ 20 India salary on March 27, 2020.” Usually, TCS credits the salary on the last working day of a month. About 85% of its employees have been working from home since countries announced shuttering of non-essential businesses to break the chain of the coronavirus transmission. The remaining TCSers continue to function from campuses as the company supports critical systems that run banks, stock exchanges, telecom, electricity and retail services.

 
 

For the month of March, Marico disbursed salaries one week prior to the normal timeline, said the company’s CHRO Amit Prakash. “In addition to this, we are also facilitating salary advance for our members to meet any other unforeseen or urgent expenditures. These are some of the steps we are taking to ensure that financial constraints do not come in the way of our members or their families’ health and wellness in the current situation,” said Prakash.

Metro Cash & Carry MD & CEO Arvind Mediratta said, “We have disbursed salaries on March 27 so that employees have money in hand. Additionally, we are paying Rs 200-400 to every employee who comes to work plus free meals and snacks. Transportation has now also been organised.”


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
 52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
 Helpline numbers for states and UTs
 Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
 How to stay safe
 How to quarantine yourself at home

Indiabulls released the salary for March on the 26th, instead of the usual salary day which is the last date of the month. The group’s employees are also contributing a day’s salary, aggregating about Rs 2 crore, to the PM’s special relief fund set up to tackle coronavirus-related issues, a top company official said. Similarly, employees at SBI General received their salaries on March 26, and these include the off-role staff as well.

With the country gripped by an unprecedented challenge, most companies are following comprehensive business continuity plans. Despite facing hurdles and bottlenecks due to a 21-day lockdown, an early salary is expected to certainly ease employee pain.

The government had encouraged companies to not cut employee salaries in these challenging times. Additionally, to lift the burden off individual and corporate borrowers and to help them tide over the situation, the Reserve Bank of India has provided a three-month moratorium on loan repayments.

(Contributions by Reeba Zachariah, Namrata Singh & Partha Sinha in Mumbai & John Sarkar in New Delhi)


