Companies go into advisory overdrive as coronavirus continues to spread
2020-03-04
MUMBAI: Given the spread of the dreaded coronavirus across several geographies, organisations are on high alert. Advisories are being issued on travel and preventive care. Senior managers of a large manufacturer, who were returning from an official trip to Germany, were asked to stay at home for the requisite 14-day period. People with even the mildest of viral symptoms are being asked to work from home.


Apart from travel advisories, sneezing and coughing etiquette is being drilled into employees. At Ceat Tyres’ factories, anybody found sneezing, or running a mild fever, is immediately attended to by a doctor. “The idea is not to create panic, but to improve upon our advisories towards a safe environment,” said Ceat Tyres CHRO Milind Apte.

Tata Group chairman N Chandrasekaran has written to employees to exercise caution in travel plans and to follow preventive measures in hygiene and personal contact. The $113-billion group, which earns more than half of its revenues from overseas, is expected to see lower growth this year from some of its international markets like China due to the impact of coronavirus and economic slowdown. 

 
 

Some of the group companies like TCS and Tata Motors have imposed travel restrictions to countries that have been reported as a hotspot and review plans to invite/host visitors from these countries. “Covid-19 continues to be a threat, especially in the Asia-Pacific region. Even with precautionary measures, we have seen over 79,000 cases of the virus. It has become clear that the situation around the coronavirus is complex,” said Chandrasekaran in a memo. “In particular, when it comes to our China operations, we expect a slower return to normal and continue to monitor the situation in real time.”

Hindustan Unilever has shared awareness posters and information with all employees on the coronavirus. Globally, Unilever CEO Alan Jope issued a recorded message on the overall perspective and how it is affecting various Unilever markets. “We have advised our people to avoid all travel to China, South Korea, Singapore, Japan, Italy, Iran,” said an HUL spokesperson. The company added that it is ready with plans for supporting public health officials in the event of tracing of close contacts if any of the employees get infected.

 
Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

Walmart India has advised its employees to take adequate preventive measures, which include keeping distance (of 6 feet, if possible) a from people who show symptoms of respiratory illness, such as coughing and sneezing. Associates have been advised to stay at home when they are sick, consulting a doctor for any such symptoms, wearing a mask when they are around other people, and informing their teams if they have been infected.

KPMG’s admin has encouraged travellers from coronavirus-hit regions to self-quarantine themselves and work remotely. Avery Dennison HR director (labels & graphic materials, south Asia) Manvi Sushil said the firm is offering its employees time flexibility in case this is needed due to any health-related issues.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In a statement, the Society for Human Resource Management - SHRM India has recommended that employers follow the precautions of, first, sending symptomatic employees home until they produce documentation from a medical professional that they are able to return to work. Second, ensuring employees returning from high-risk areas telework during the incubation period, only returning to the office when they can produce medical documentation confirming they are able to return to work.


