Cotton, castor prices fall as virus clouds export prospects
2020-02-01
Ahmedabad: Prices of cotton and castor seed have eased in local markets, as the novel coronavirus outbreak in China has clouded export prospects. While China is a major buyer, Gujarat is a leading supplier of these commodities.

Castor prices have declined to Rs 4,050 a quintal from Rs 4,180 a fortnight ago. Prices in tghe futures market are even lower, due to the uncertainty, market players say. China imports 2 lakh tonnes of castor oil worth Rs 2,500 crore every year, which is 40% of India’s castor oil exports.

“There is no impact on exports currently. However, business sentiment has been dampened due to the coronavirus outbreak. If this situation persists and derivative product makers in China are compelled to shut factories, it will certainly reduce our exports,” said B V Mehta, executive director, the Solvent Extractors’ Association of India (SEA).

According to Arun Dalal, a cotton broker from Ahmedabad, cotton prices have dipped by Rs 500 per candy (356kg) over the past week. The price of the Shankar-6 cotton variety has come down to between Rs 39,800 and Rs 39,900 from Rs 40,300-40,400 per candy.

“Cotton exports to China have also slowed mainly because of the Lunar New Year holidays and the shutting down of a dozen Chinese cities to contain the coronavirus outbreak. Payments are being delayed and letters of credit (LCs) are not being honoured as banks are closed due to the holidays,” said Nirav Patel, a city-based cotton exporter.

“Consignments are lying at ports and exporters are in a quandary as whether to ship goods to China or not. So far 5-6 lakh bales of cotton have been shipped to China from India and 3 lakh bales are presently stuck,” he added.

“60% of the total exports of cotton yarn from spinning units in Gujarat goes to China. With production affected in Chinese factories due to the virus, demand has declined significantly. As a result, the price of 30 combed hosiery cotton yarn, which is exported to China, has gone down from Rs 207/kg to Rs 200/kg,” said Dr Bharat Boghra, chairman, All Gujarat Spinners’ Association (AGSA).

“Several chemicals such as H-Acid, vinyl sulphone, J-Acid, Tobias acid, beta naphthol, naphthalene, gamma acid, K-Acid, among others are imported from China. With the outbreak, prices of these chemicals have risen significantly,” said Bhupendra Patel, chairman, Chemexil Gujarat region.“The prices are expected to remain high as the virus has crippled various provinces of China such as Hebei and Guangdong, where various factories are located,” he added.

20% raw material shortage expected

Several Indian manufacturers are heavily dependent on China for raw-material imports and the coronavirus outbreak and resultant shutdown in China is expected to affect Indian manufacturers in a big way.

Ritesh Goenka, director of an electronics OEM manufacturing company in China, said, “Due to the Chinese New Year, industrial units were to remain shut till February 2. However, based on the notification form the Chinese government, this has been extended to February 10 and it is expected the last even till February 20. As Indian industry is heavily import-dependent on China, a raw-material scarcity to the order or 20-30% of requirement is expected over the next three months.”

“The shortage of raw materials will also lead to a significant increase in prices in the Indian market which will affect demand, as local players will wait for prices to fall. Overall, this is expected to hurt sales by at least 30%,” said Goenka.


