Counsellors calm Lonara quarantined, Satranjipura suspects separated from others
2020-04-16
Nagpur: Two cases on Tuesday and six Covid-19 cases since April 6 have created a lot of anxiety and apprehension among not just the 124 suspects, mainly from Satranjipura, Takia Deewanshah, Jaripatka and those identified as ‘Delhi returnees’, but also civic officials at the Lonara quarantine facility in a private college.

On Wednesday, a team of psychological counsellors held sessions facilitated by the district collector’s office with many people who showed anxiety and nervousness.

The two Satranjipura-linked persons detected positive — a woman and her daughter-in-law, relatives of first Covid-19 deceased — were till Tuesday staying in one room with around 7 to 8 other suspects. The earlier positive cases too had been staying with more than five to six suspects. 

Since the college didn’t have a hostel, it’s big classrooms were converted into isolation rooms to accommodate around 10 people each.

When the two Satranjipura residents tested positive, the news created panic, forcing health officials and college management to address the concerns immediately. 

The officials had a tough time till late on Tuesday night addressing the concerns. The officials controlled the situation by asking the college administration to make arrangements as per social distancing norms.

The college management said it was already following all the norms prescribed by NMC and health ministry, and provided all amenities to fight the contagion.

As some advanced measures, less than five suspects were now occupying each of the big rooms. The close contacts of all eight positive patients from here too were shifted to different rooms. Bathrooms were also marked in the name of the people who would use them exclusively. 

All suspects from Satranjipura have also been separated from others and kept in ground floor rooms.

College trust adviser Anees Ahmed said, “People are now settling down. A CRPF jawan too was asked to lift the morale of people staying here. One to one counselling is also going on. Disinfectant was sprayed after positive cases were detected. Of the 124, 114 have been tested and all are negative. Next test will be done after seven days. All are asymptomatic.” 


