Counsellors to keep quarantined persons engaged
2020-04-06
Kolhapur: People kept at institutional quarantine centres have begun to show signs of restlessness and unruliness. There have also been reports of false complaints being made to the district authorities, political leaders and family members.

On Sunday morning, the district authorities got a complaint that the food served to people in one of the quarantine centres in the city had been discarded in the dustbin. After enquiry, it was found that some of the inmates had declined to eat the food and were demanding that they be allowed to go home. A couple of days earlier, some inmates complained that they were not being treated well by the staff. Some political party functionaries went to the centre to check what was happening there. Similar complaints were also made on social media and to the family members.

The inmates, totalling 995, are the persons identified by the door-to-door screening teams. They were earlier quarantined at home after their return from coronavirus-hit foreign countries or Indian cities. Stamps had been marked on their hands for easy identification. Many of them, however, were found violating the home quarantine norms.

Prasad Sankpal, the district disaster management officer said: “Many complaints made by the inmates are false and made out of restlessness they experiencing due to the quarantine rules. We are letting them go only after they complete 14 days. We are going to deploy counsellors to consult them individually. The counsellors will tell them about the need for quarantine and the seriousness of Covid-19. Also, we are making entertainment arrangements for them in quarantine centres.”

After an individual completes the quarantine period, they are allowed to go homes. Around 29 people have been discharged so far. Institutional quarantine is important to stop the community spread of the coronavirus.

The total number of beds reserved in various establishments such as hospitals, community centre, lodgings and even hotels is 2,193. The inmates are screened regularly to check for symptoms. Also, throat swab samples of the persons showing symptoms are taken for testing.

The district administration is going to take help of 200 professionals from known counselling agencies, teachers, doctors and even the youth from various walks of like. “The inmates will be engaged in the activities while following social distancing rules. Their mind will be kept busy,” added Sankpal.


