Count of Covid-19 suspects rises, 61 more quarantined
2020-04-11
KANPUR: The number of Covid-19 suspects almost doubled as the health department quarantined as many as 61 suspects on Friday. So far, 4,791 persons, who either came to the city from outside or had travelled abroad, have been quarantined.


As no fresh corona positive case was reported on Friday in the city, the number of positive cases remained stagnant at 11. One person had already been discharged after treatment.

According to the health bulletin, 19 persons, who had been quarantined were found negative, and with them 507 persons have recovered so far.

District magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari and DIG/SSP Anant Deo on Friday visited the hotpot areas under Chamanganj, Beconganj, Colonelganj and Bajaria police stations and supervised the lockdown through drone camera.

In a direct dialogue with residents of Yateemkhana area, the officials asked them about their problems. They told the DM that they were getting all required items. The DM assured them that all essential commodities would be provided to them through door-to-door delivery system. He also asked them to maintain social distancing because prevention is the only way of protecting people from the deadly virus.

The officials during the inspection distributed around 250 hampers consisting of raw edibles to the needy persons. They asked the police to use IIT glider drone for aerial inspection in all the hotspot areas.

Earlier, the two officers visited Ghatampur town and Baripal village under Sajeti police station and supervised the aerial inspection of rooftops through drone. They assured the locals that the district administration would provide them all essential commodities at their door steps.

Divisional commissioner Sudhir M Bobde and IG police Mohit Agarwal also inspected Yateemkhana, Quli Bazar, Anwarganj, Halsey Road, Beconganj and Dada Miyan areas and inquired about problems from the locals.

Meanwhile, the teachers and staff of Brahmanand College on Friday donated Rs 5.31 lakh in the chief minister’s relief fund.

Kanpur Municipal Corporation continued its sanitization drive at several places of the city. Around 60 persons sought medical advice from its tele-medicine facility.


