Couple celebrate 79th wedding anniversary amidst pandemic gloom
2020-05-22
Mangaluru: If it wasn’t for the pandemic, the Pais family from Madanthya, about 45 km from here, would have a had a priceless moment of capturing in one frame, the large family of Joseph Pais, 101, and Cossess, 95, while celebrating the 79 years of their union on May 20.

The couple has 13 children, including seven girls, of whom one passed away, and six sons, 64 grandchildren and 68 great-grandchildren. The family had celebrated the couple’s platinum wedding anniversary in 2015. All the 12 children of the couple, and most of the grandchildren and great-grandchildren were part of the grand celebrations held at their residence. However, this year, the celebrations were muted, and not many of their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren could make it. Only those family members who lived nearby witnessed the momentous occasion.

Their wedding was arranged in 1941, when World War II was going on. The couple say that everything was difficult during that time, like it is now, due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The couple never met before they got married, though both the families hail from Madanthyar parish. Bride Cossess D’Souza was just 15 when she started her life with her husband.

Life was far from a bed of roses for the couple living in the wilderness of Madanthyar, where the only source of livelihood was agriculture. The couple went through a lot of struggle to bring up their 13 children. Five of their daughters are married off, and are well settled, and their youngest daughter is a nun. Most of their sons live in Madanthyar, around the home, except for a son, who is in Mumbai. 

His son David points out that his father expects his wife to be present before him as soon as he calls her, even now. David also said that their aged parents have their share of fights, which are usually short-lived. Joseph is very fond of traditional Mangalurean fare, and keeps grumbling if the taste is not to his liking. Dennis, with whom the elderly couple now live, recalls, “I could study only up to standard VII because of the prevailing situation then. There was a lot of poverty, and our only source of income was from the beetle leaf and paddy that we used to grow. I remember accompanying my parents to the markets in Madanthyar, and even to markets as far as Belthangady and Moodbidri. Most of the time, we used to go walking long distances to the markets, to sell our produce.”


