Ludhiana: Couple jumps quarantine, coronavirus helplines of no help
2020-03-24
LUDHIANA: Even as the health department and district administration claimed to have made enough arrangements to check those who have been home quarantined, the reality seems to be quite different. 


Besides launching 24-hour complaint helpline, the Ludhiana civil surgeon-cum-chief medical officer has claimed that they have separate teams that visit houses where people have been asked to home quarantine. But nothing is really helping residents, who want to approach the administration and health department for issues related to coronavirus. 

An incident has come to light in which a resident had to approach the police after they found the house of a couple under home quarantine locked. On approaching the police, it was found that the couple had gone to their relative’s house outside Ludhiana. 

A middle-aged couple from a locality on Gill Road had recently returned from Dubai. They were directed to go for home quarantine. However, on Sunday some residents found their house locked and called up the area police to inform about the same. 

ASI Ashwani Kumar, in-charge, Marado police post, said, “The police were in touch with the couple. They were asked for self- quarantine. When I received a complaint from a locality resident, I called up the couple. They told that they had gone to some relative’s house outside the city. I immediately asked them to return else face action.” 

On Monday, the couple returned home. A sticker of home quarantine has been posted outside their house. 

Chief medical officer Rajesh Bagga said, “We have a team which visits the houses where people have been home quarantined.”

On asking that residents had informed police about middle-aged couple, Bagga did not give a satisfactory reply. He said, “Don’t worry, the entire administration, including police, is working. We will contact them, as we have contacts of everyone. We will approach the district administration to find out where the couple had gone. We have also started stamps for home quarantine, so they could easily be identified by public and police.” 

In other incident, the residents of a residential complex had a stressful day on Sunday as despite repeated calls, the medical team did not come to their locality for examination of an Australia-returned youngster. 

“On Saturday night, a youngster, whose family lived in our apartment, returned from Australia. We all were concerned. Being vigilant citizens, we wanted to contact the administration to get his medical examination done,” a resident said. 

“When I dialed ‘104’ helpline, the attendant asked us to dial a local helpline number 1061-2444193. There the attendant asked to share my mobile number which I refused as I did not want to get into any trouble. Then the attendant said they are yet to receive the name of the foreign-returned youngster in the list, issued by the authorities.” 

He said, “Thereafter I got other helpline number of DC office, but nobody answered calls. For the entire day, we kept calling on different numbers, but nobody came to check him.” 

Similarly, a resident of Rishi Nagar said he wanted to inform about his Dubai-returned neighbor, but he could not get through 112 and 104 helpline numbers on Sunday. Then someone gave him the contact number of CMO. The CMO sent ASHA workers on Monday morning, but they refused to go inside that house. Then, he called up police. Two PCR cops, who came to the spot, asked him to contact the health department.

“Is this the way Ludhiana administration is working to fight against coronavirus?” he questioned. 

CMO Bagga said, “They must have called a wrong number. Our teams visit houses on getting information.” 


