Aurangabad couple barred from contesting polls after lying about number of children
2020-03-16
AURANGABAD: A woman gram panchayat member in the Latur district and her husband were recently disqualified by the Aurangabad bench of the Bombay high court from contesting any election for having more than two children after the prescribed cut-off date.


The cut-off day for the implementation of two-child rule in panchayats was September 12, 2000 and the couple had twins in 2005. The twins were disowned by the couple for which the court took them to task for lying and suppressing information.

Lalita Nagnath Patil of Koraliwadi in Nilanga taluka of Latur district was elected to gram panchayat as member, but her election was challenged by Bhaskar Birajdar and others.

Additional divisional commissioner had disqualified her on December 18, 2019, concluding that two 2 biological children (twins) were born on March 30, 2005 to the petitioner and her husband, Nagnath, and this information was suppressed by them.

Lalita then moved high court challenging the additional divisional commissioner’s orders stating that she was ready to file an affidavit on the next date declaring that these two children are not her biological children.

She was also willing to undergo a DNA test if these two children are produced and if their DNA matches, both are willing to deposit an amount of Rs 5 lakh each in this court as costs and willing to face permanent disqualification as well as criminal prosecution.

Government pleader Suresh Munde said the couple stated that they did not know about the twins, while one of the respondents, Birajdar, pointed that the twins were studying in an English-medium school.

“The court had even granted the petitioner one opportunity before fling their individual affidavits, to reconsider their stand and if they want to resile from their stand, they would be at liberty to make a statement before the court on March 7, 2020,” he said.

The court later directed Latur superintendent of police to immediately embark upon a search for the two children by interrogating persons or relatives of the petitioner as deem fit and proper and shall follow all lawful methods for carrying out such interrogation and shall endeavour to produce two children before the court on March 7, 2020 at 10.30 a.m.

The petitioner and her husband were also directed to remain present in the court on the said date. When the matter came up for hearing before justice Ravindra Ghuge on March 7, the petitioner and her husband submitted that they are tendering an apology and desire to withdraw this petition.

During the course of hearing on the petition, the court also came across five birth certificates issued to the petitioner’s husband on a single day in support of their claim.

While dismissing the petition, the court imposed a fine of Rs 1 lakh on the petitioner, and directed the amount be deposited in this court on or before April 15, 2020, failing which, this court would initiate suo-moto contempt proceedings and would also direct the Latur district collector to initiate proceedings for recovery of Rs 1 lakh with an additional fine of Rs 50,000 as arrears of land revenue.

The court also directed Kasar Sirsi police station to register an FIR against Nagnath for manipulating the records of the birth dates of the five children. The court directed the district health officer to “locate the person, who had issued the birth certificates on December 22, 2016 to Nagnath and initiate disciplinary action against him for manipulation of records”.


