Couple suffers allergic reaction due to home quarantine stamp ink
2020-06-08
Nagpur: A couple from city who arrived from Pune by flight two days ago was stamped on hand for home quarantine. Within hours after stamping, both suffered from allergic reaction and developed pus. 

There have been instances in the past too when the ink used for stamping has led to some allergic reaction on hands of many home quarantined people. 

“Within two hours of the stamping, we started feeling burning sensation. Within five to six hours, it developed into infection and pus got deposited,” said Sneha Moon, who reached Nagpur along with her husband Rakesh. 

As they were in home quarantine, the couple first decided to consult doctors within their family. Dr Siddhant Bharne, who happens to be their relative, said that the infection could turn serious. 

“I asked them to do minor dressing for pus. We are dressing the burn wound regularly. But this must have happened due to excessive use of chemical in the ink. Our health department should replace the ink immediately,” said Dr Bharne.

Dr Sanjiv Choudhary, additional professor, dermatology at AIIMS, Nagpur said that this was basically allergic reaction of skin towards the ink. “Some individual may experience such type of allergy towards the ink used for stamps. Instead of treating with home remedies, I suggest them to see dermatologist so that the allergy can be treated well,” he said. 

Earlier, many travellers who came by road to Yavatmal suffered similar skin burns. The local health administration had to change the ink following several complaints. 

“After receiving many complaints about the ink reaction, we replaced the bottles from particular batch. No complaints have come since then,” said Dr Sushama Khodwe, health officer, Yavatmal.

Health department officials in Nagpur said that they have received no such complaint about the ink used in the district. “We will look into the matter if there is a complaint. Till date, thousands of travellers have been stamped with the same ink, but no such complaint of allergy has been reported,” said a senior official from health department. 

Ink causing skin burns

Electoral ink, a semi-permanent ink or dye, is used for home quarantine stamp

It contains silver nitrate, a chemical which leaves a mark that is impossible to wash off 

This mark is only removed as external skin cells are replaced

Ink may contain 10%, 14% or 18% silver nitrate depending on length of time mark is required to be visible

If the ink is old, then because of the evaporation of alcohol, silver nitrate concentration may increase which may cause cutaneous burns


