Couple from Mumbai adds to Goa’s tally of Covid-19 positive cases
2020-05-22
PANAJI: Goa’s tally of Covid positive cases crossed the 50-mark as two more persons—a couple—tested positive on Thursday, taking the total tally of active patients in the state to 45. 


Seven patients, who had tested positive earlier, have recovered.

“Both positive cases are of rail passengers, a couple who arrived in Goa on Wednesday in a transit train,” health secretary Nila Mohanan said.

She said the couple “have given a local address”.

Mohanan also said all the 417 seafarers, who arrived from Italy on Wednesday by three charter flights, have tested negative.

On Wednesday, one of the seafarers had reported positive in the TrueNat screening test. But the confirmatory tests conducted at Goa Medical College turned negative.

“We did the RT-PCR test (real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction) twice on the seafarer. And both times it came negative. There are no positive cases among the air passengers who arrived in Goa yesterday (Wednesday),” she said.

Mohanan also allayed fears over lack of personal protection equipment (PPE) and said they have received 5,000 PPEs on Wednesday and 5,000 more were on the way.

“There is no shortage of PPEs. In GMC, too, there was never a shortage of PPEs,” she said.

With a spurt in cases, Mohanan said they were well prepared in the fight against Covid as they had enough medical staff ready. “The GMC’s consultants are very much part of the Covid-19 management and directions have also been issued to the GMC dean,” she said.

She also clarified that there was no case of Covid-19 reinfection reported in Goa. “There is absolutely no such incidence in Goa,” she said.

She said all patients are doing well, including the seven who have recovered and discharged. “All seven have even completed their mandatory home quarantine,” she said.

Mohanan said of the 775 samples sent for testing, 734 results were received, and all were negative. “We are awaiting results of 39 samples,” she said.

On Thursday, 269 domestic road travellers were placed in home quarantine and 379 seafarers in the facility quarantine.


