Couple, aged 93 & 88, beats Covid-19 in Kerala
2020-04-04
KOTTAYAM: In what could be a good news for all those who have been tested positive for Covid-19 across the world, an elderly couple in Kerala, who were critically ill after contracting the virus, recovered and were discharged from the Government Medical College Hospital, Kottayam, on Friday. They had tested negative for Covid-19 earlier this week. 

The medical board met on Friday afternoon and decided to discharge Thomas, 93, and Mariamma, 88, who had contracted the disease from their close relatives who had arrived from Italy. On getting discharged, they left for their home at Aythala in Ranni in Pathanamthitta. They are the oldest patients to overcome Covid-19 in the country.

Considering their age and other underlying health issues, the couple were in the high-risk category, said health minister K K Shailaja. They had diabetes, hypertension and cardiac issues. 

They were initially admitted to the VIP room in the medical ICU where they started showing uneasiness as both were kept in separate rooms. Following this, they were shifted to transplant ICU where both could see each other. Later, the health condition of the 93-year-old man deteriorated and he was put on ventilator. He also suffered a cardiac arrest during this period.

They both also had urinary infections which was later cured. Once their health condition improved, test was conducted and both were found negative.

According to the nurses who looked after the couple, they sometimes insisted on going home and even refused to take food. However, the nursing staff pacified them through their friendly interventions.

Incidentally, one of the staff nurses who was tested positive for Covid-19 after attending to the couple, was also discharged on Friday. Shailaja has lauded the medical team at the MCH for bringing laurels to the state by curing the aged couple.

Covid-19 was confirmed in the couple on March 8. They were shifted to Kottayam MCH from Pathanamthitta general hospital on March 9 based on the health minister’s directive.

Along with the seven-member team of doctors, 40 medical staff, including 25 nurses, actively took part in various stages of their treatment. 

Meanwhile, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan lauded the health workers in the state. “In Kottayam, the elderly couple who has been cured was discharged today. A nurse who was infected while attending to them has also been discharged. This shows the excellence of our healthcare system and workers. Let's congratulate the health workers profusely,” the CM said. 


