Courts ‘quarantine’ documents for 24-36 hrs
2020-06-11
Nagpur: Following ‘directions by Bombay high court’, the city’s industrial and labour courts are strictly keeping documents filed by lawyers in a separate box from 24 to 36 hours, to avoid spread of Covid-19 among staffers.This directive, though, goes against the World Health Organisation (WHO) opinion, which rejects the possibility of the virus being transmitted through paper. Confirming that the HC’s directives were being strictly followed in all these courts, Vidarbha Labour Law Practitioners Association (VLLPA) president Shreyas Zinzarde said the city has five industrial and four labour courts.“The directives were basically issued by the Supreme Court to quarantine documents and avoid spread of the deadly disease. According to them, the virus wouldn’t survive on paper surface for over 24-36 hours, and therefore, they avoid touching them for that much time,” he said.He clarified that even if lawyers take all care, by wearing gloves and sanitizing places where the documents are kept, the person receiving it wouldn’t know this. “The documents are handled by multiple persons till they reach the judges,” he told TOI.Justifying the directive to not touch the documents, assistant registrar for five industrial and four labour courts PN Chede told TOI that they were taking all precautions to stop anyone getting infected inside the court premises due to documents.“The HC has also directed to prevent crowding in the courts. The lawyer is allowed to bring only one petitioner inside the court.”Explaining the emergent hearings, Chede said these would be conducted through video conferencing. “We’re opening an e-filing centre on the ground floor in a couple of days. Lawyers can register cases online and hearings would be held through video conferencing,” he said.Applauding the registry’s move, lawyer Vikram Marpakwar questioned those who were objecting to it. “I believe that courts shouldn’t be reopened in haste when the number of Covid-19 cases are spiralling in the city. Even if courts are allowed to function, hearings should be conducted via video conferencing. Unfortunately, lawyers who’re not techno-savvy are opposing the registry’s move.”Stressing that lives of poor workers and their union leaders were precious, he said there was no such urgency of cases in both courts, and therefore, no one should be put at risk. “Those demanding reopening of courts themselves sought repeated adjournments of cases all these years. I fail to understand what’s the urgency. The registry is doing the right job and anyone having urgency should opt for online filing,” he said.COURTING CHANGE* Lawyers would drop case documents in separate box kept with registry* No official touches them for 24 to 36 hours to avoid spread of infection* After that, documents would be scrutinized for proper documentation & annexures* If no objections are received from registry, lawyers are called for hearing* Actual hearings with only one client present, while maintaining Covid distancing