'Coronavirus deals severe blow to Bodh Gaya tourism’
2020-03-03
GAYA: The two coronavirus (CoV) suspects, who had been kept in the isolation ward of the Anugrah Narayan Magadh Medical College Hospital, were discharged as virological tests conducted at a lab in Pune gave negative results. However, the story does not end here.


With CoV scare all over, the tourism industry in Bodh Gaya has been severely hit. 

“Chief minister Nitish Kumar has been making efforts to promote Bodh Gaya as a key tourist destination. Hence, any drop in the footfall of foreign tourists can adversely affect the local businesses,” Nagar Vikas Manch president Suresh Singh told this newspaper. 

The tourist season officially ends in Bodh Gaya in March. Hospitality sector expert, Arun Kumar Ojha, claimed that the tourist inflow in February this year registered a nearly 50% decline compared to the same period in 2019.

“Several tourist groups, which were set to visit Bodh Gaya, have got their bookings cancelled now. The tourism sector has, anyway, witnessed a slowdown in recent years on account of two terrorist attacks, prohibition and general recession. Hence, the CoV has added to the woes of Bodh Gaya’s businessmen,” said Ojha.

Asked about the impact of the advisories issued by several countries to its nationals, deeming India an unsafe travel destination due to the ongoing anti-CAA protests, Ojha pointed out, “Such advisories have not been issued by countries like Thailand, Myanmar, Korea, Japan and Sri Lanka from where most tourists come to Bodh Gaya.”

Activist, Motibhai, said, “Quality infrastructure is required for the healthy growth of the tourism industry. Going by the average profile of the visitors, it can be said that most of them fall in the low-budget category.” 

“On account of factors like poor air connectivity, lack of good hotels, quality roads and recreational facilities, high-end tourists, who would otherwise have visited Bodh Gaya, do not put the place high on their itinerary,” the activist added. 

According to sources, the four-laning of NH-83 is now in limbo. The development of a world-class golf course, which could attract tourists from countries like Japan and Korea, has also been shelved, thereby, adversely affecting the growth prospects of Bodh Gaya.


