Coronavirus: 25 persons in Bihar kept under observation
2020-02-13
PATNA: Amid the ongoing fear of novel coronavirus (nCoV), at least 25 persons from different parts of the state have been kept under observation at their homes.

Of them, two persons are from Madhepura, Siwan and Madhubani each, three from Patna and East Champaran each and one each from West Champaran, Saran and Bhagalpur. The remaining persons are from Supaul and other places. “Even though these people have been found to be asymptomatic, we have kept them under observation for 14 days as precautionary measure,” state surveillance officer Dr Ragani Mishra said.

Meanwhile, samples of altogether five persons from different parts of the state, including Bhojpur, Supaul and West Champaran, have been sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV) till now. “Of the five nCoV suspects, four have been tested negative, including the one who was admitted to ANMMCH in Gaya last week. Test report of Supaul resident is awaited,” she said.

“Earlier, strict vigil was kept on people returning from China, Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore and Nepal. However, on Tuesday, the state health department asked to keep a vigil on people coming from South Korea and Japan as well. We have also increased the number of gram sabha meetings and orientation programmes being conducted at schools,” she said.

Meanwhile, residents are avoiding poultry and non-vegetarian food, including seafood and chicken in view of the nCoV. Sujit Yadav of Buddha Colony said: “I have stopped eating non-veg food, especially fish. Since, the cause for the deadly virus is still unknown, we must avoid food that we are unsure about.”

However, Mishra said people should not panic. “People should definitely take precautions, but coming to a conclusion is not correct because nothing is clear as of now. Until and unless some solid proof comes up, we cannot say what food to avoid,” she said.

“However, in the wake of the nCoV outbreak, people, especially those who returned from China after January 14, are advised to follow health advisories issued by the government. Besides, if they feel any symptoms of coronavirus, they should call on our call centre number ‘104’ and report us,” she added.


