Covid-19: Technopark on precautionary mode
2020-03-11
Thiruvananthapuram: Now, offices of IT companies based in Technopark have an ‘open door’ policy, shedding the biometric access control system at the entry of buildings. Several IT company offices are keeping their doors open in order to avoid spread of diseases from high-touch areas such as door handles. 

Housekeeping staff are some of the busiest persons of the IT parks these days as they have been designated with the task of keeping high-touch areas such as doorknobs, elevator buttons, stair railing etc. sanitized frequently. As companies began stocking hand sanitizers and masks, the shops around Technopark are experiencing severe shortage. 

Sasi PM, CEO, IT Parks, said that directions were given to keep commonly touched areas sanitized every 15 minutes. “Companies have been directed to provide hand sanitizers. There is a shortage of masks. Steps were taken to isolate persons with symptoms and to inform the health department,” he said.

Several IT companies have asked their staff, who visited home town of Pathanamthitta where positive cases of Covid-19 were reported, to work from home for around two weeks to prevent spread from affected areas. “Several persons who have to travel via Pathanamtitta too were asked to stay at home as there are chances to get infected during travel,” said an IT professional. There is also demand from IT professionals to give more work-from-home options, which several companies have agreed to. 

Group of Technology Companies (GTech) is associating with Kerala chapter of Indian Medical Association and Technopark co-operative society to provide awareness for IT professionals. GTech CEO Vishnu V Nair said that a meeting with be held with Gtech and health department officials on Wednesday at Technopark to discuss the precautionary measures to be taken in crowded places like IT parks.

Several programmes planned by organizations and companies within Technopark were postponed due to precautions taken in view of spread of Covid-19. Majority of companies cancelled their Women’s Day public events. Empowering women in IT (eWIT), an organization of women IT professionals, is the latest to cancel their Women’s Day celebrations grand finale, which was scheduled to be held on Thursday.

Companies such as UST Global have deployed service of doctors at their campus. Several companies have posted pamphlets on ‘social distancing’ and other etiquette to be followed at the time of pandemic. 

“Rumours are spreading like wildfire. There were instances where people spread rumours about presence of corona positive cases in Phase III campus of Technopark and H1N1 in a company. All these turned out to be fake information. Misinformation in social media is another issue. We ask persons who forward such messages to give the source or delete such messages without creating more trouble,” said Rajeev Krishnan, core member of Pratidhwani, a socio-cultural organization in Technopark. Rajeev, however, added that crowding of people at cafeterias and elevators is unavoidable as of now.


