Covid-19 infection rate is slowest in MP: CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan
2020-06-04
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that the pace of Corona infection in Madhya Pradesh is slowest in the country. The doubling rate of Corona in the state is 31 days while the recovery rate is constantly increasing and has become 63.4%. He said there is a constant decline in active Covid-19 cases in the state.

Chouhan was reviewing the situation of Corona and arrangements through video conferencing at Mantralaya on Wednesday.

While reviewing Gwalior district, it was found that the district has all the best arrangements and the condition of all active patients is good. But, fresh cases of Corona have also been found first time in Gwalior city. Chouhan directed to take all precautions there as the cases will not take time to jump.

It was found in the review of Neemuch district that 127 cases of Corona have been reported in the district in the last 7 days, which constitute maximum number from Jawad. Instructions were given to expand surveillance and sampling in the district. The chief minister instructed that special attention should be paid to Neemuch and Jawad and work should be carried out with utmost seriousness there.

During the review of Sagar district, Chouhan asked to make better arrangement for treatment and sanitation at Sagar Medical College. He directed that a team of specialist doctors should be dispatched immediately to Sagar and to provide the high flow oxygen machine there.

Chouhan lauded the services rendered by the Madhya Pradesh Police in this hour of Corona crisis saying it was highly commendable. Excellent work has been carried out by police in adverse condition. Chouhan appreciated DGP Vivek Johri and entire police force for their excellent work.

ACS health Mohammad Suleman informed that the high flow oxygen machine is very effective in treatment of corona. Five to 10 litre oxygen can be given in one day by normal machine, whereas 60 litre oxygen can be given by the high flow oxygen machine to patients in a day. This machine will be made available soon to all the district hospitals and other Covid hospitals.

Health minister Narottam Mishra, chief secretary Iqbal Singh Bains, DGP Vivek Johri, and principal secretary Sanjay Shukla were present on the occasion.


