Chennai: Covid-19 warriors to get tributes from sky and sea
2020-05-03
CHENNAI: The move by Navy and Coast Guard to line up illuminated ships along the shore and honk foghorns in honour of Covid-19 warriors on Sunday may turn counter-productive, as it may send people flocking to the shore to watch it at a time when officials are struggling to keep people indoors. 


Indian Navy is bringing two ships including INS Sahyadri while the Coast Guard will also have its ships lined up along the shore after dusk. The ships will be illuminated and will use the foghorn, usually used as a signal to other ships when visibility is low or when sailing into a harbour.

The plan has left police, who are already struggling to manage the non-cooperative crowd, worried. A police officer said, “We are hoping people will not queue up to watch these ships duue to the Covid outbreak.” There are about 188 temporary check points on the roads leading to the beach. Many side roads and streets are also blocked. There are about four checkpoints on Rajaji Salai and more than five checkpoints on Kamarajar Salai. People coming out for merry making will be dealt with severely, the officer said.

The announcement by chief of defence staff Bipin Rawat has come as a surprise to many services personnel but they are following the orders.

Worried that the display of ships may cause the public to head to the beach, defence authorities haven’t divulged the spot along the coast where the ships will assemble. Air force and coast guard helicopters will shower flower petals over two major government hospitals including the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital earlier in the day. “The helicopters will fly by showering flowers over the hospital closer to 10am.

The helicopters flew over the city as part of rehearsals on Saturday.

A retired navy officer said he has not seen military aircraft and ships being used to honour civilians. “This is the first time,” he said. 

A few wondered whether it was wise when the funds could have been used for something more productive. However, those in the services appreciated the move. 


