Covid caution crushed in rush for booze in Bhopal
2020-06-11
BHOPAL: Oblivious to rules, tipplers jostled outside the liquor shops that too, without face masks. Employees at liquor shops were found dealing in cash and refused to accept cards or online payments.

There are 90 liquor shops in city. Out of which, 32 have been opened. Another 14 will start operating from Thursday. Excise department is directly handling the shops in Bhopal. Social distancing was comprised. Circles were marked on the floor to keep distance between customers but that to no avail. “Customers are not ready to follow the instructions. We have asked them several times to follow social distancing norms but they hardly listen to us,” said an excise official. People standing in queues were found pushing each other at a Barkhera Patahni shop. Even floor markings were missing. “How to keep a distance when there is no circle in front of the shop?" reacted a customer.

Quizzed on the large crowd even on the second day of the opening of liquor shops, an employee at the shop said, “As only one-third shops are opened such a crowd is expected. In BHEL area shops are opened in Govindpura and Pathani. As people are anxious about the lockdown they are thronging the liquor shops in large numbers.”

Also, it was found that shops refused to accept online or card payments. “This is strange that when govt is encouraging online payment as it is a safe option, excise department has refused to accept online payments,” said a customer Arvind Yadav.

Difference in the price of liquor was also witnessed in a few shops. When TOI team visited a Barkhera Pathani shop, the price of a liquor brand of 180ml was found to be sold at Rs250, while the same liquor brand of same quantity was being sold for Rs280 in Ratibad area. Around 2,000 Home Guard personnel are deployed at different shops across the state including 100 such shops in the state capital. On several shops, private employees were spotted selling liquor.

Assistant commissioner (excise), Sanjeev Dubey, however, said, “They have been hired after being instructed by the state government. Officials of excise department were there to get help from these private employees.”


