Covid-19 test lab starts at GDMCH, CM Rawat inaugurates facility
2020-04-26
Dehradun/Haridwar: The authorities of Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH) started Covid-19 tests on Saturday. Chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat, while inaugurating the newly-functional lab via video conference, said that the process of Covid-19 test will speed up as three government labs in Uttarakhand are now equipped with diagnosing coronavirus.

Dr Ashutosh Sayana, principal of GDMCH, told TOI that 11 samples were tested at the newly-inaugurated Viral Research and Diagnostic Lab (VRDL) on April 25. “This lab is placed at the second level of bio-safety and we are upgrading it to third level very soon. The lab will also be used for research purpose. In the first phase, we have started Covid-19 tests here,” he added.

At present, the Covid-19 tests are being conducted at Dr Susheela Tiwari Medical College in Haldwani, All India Institute of Medical Sciences in Rishikesh, GDMCH and Ahuja pathology labs in Dehradun.

On the day, one more Covid-19 positive patient was discharged from GDMCH. Now, 26 patients have fully recovered from the disease in Uttarakhand. The state till now has 48 Covid-19 positive cases.

Additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant informed that 153 samples were sent for Covid-19 test on the day and results of 411 samples are still awaited. “We have sent 5,194 samples to the four labs across the state so far. Among these, reports of 4,423 samples were found to be negative,” the official said while adding that special guidelines have been issued to all the government healthcare facilities to ensure that delivery, neonatal care, immunisation and other related cases are not being neglected.

Meanwhile, Haridwar district administration is also planning to establish a Covid-19 testing lab at Mela Hospital. This decision was taken in view of the rising number of coronavirus suspected cases in the district. Till now, seven coronavirus positive cases have been found in Haridwar. Among them, six patients are associated with Tablighi Jamaat.

Notably, samples of more than 1,000 suspected cases have so far been sent for Covid-19 test to AIIMS Rishikesh. 

Haridwar’s district magistrate C Ravishankar told TOI, “We have planned to set up a Covid-19 test laboratory at Mela Hospital. Sending samples to AIIMS Rishikesh takes a lot of time. We have sufficient budget and staff to run the Covid-19 test lab.”


