Covid toll in Jaipur touches 100, staff of 3 hospitals found +ve
2020-06-04
Times News Network

JAIPUR: A day after 13 Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital staff found were infected with Covid-19, eight more employees tested positive at the institute on Wednesday. Cases of infections were also reported from Kanwatia Hospital, JK Lon Hospital and Mahila Chikitsalaya. 

This comes on a day the death toll in Jaipur hit the 100-mark and total infections across the state standing at 9,652. 

At the SMS Hospital’s microbiology laboratory where Covid tests are conducted, a senior professor has been found infected along with one other staff of the same department. Also, two security guards have also been found infected along with three ward boys and a computer operator. 

SMS Hospital administration claimed that they were taking precautions to contain the spread of the virus. “All those staff who have tested positive in the hospital are those who had gone on long leave due to lockdown. Since they wanted to join duty, we conducted tests as per our guidelines,” said Dr Rajesh Sharma, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital. 

From June 1, the SMS Hospital has turned into a non-Covid institute. 

A resident doctor from Mahila Chikitsalaya has been found infected while a nursing staff and a ward boy of JK Lon Hospital have been diagnosed with Covid-19. A doctor of Kanwatia hospital staying at Zanana hospital also tested positive. 

With four more deaths in Jaipur, the capital’s toll touched the 100-mark on Wednesday. Across the state, six persons died taking the toll to 209. In all, 279 people tested positive. 

Districts which reported new cases are Bharatpur (88), Jaipur (55), Jodhpur (20), Nagaur (19), Pali (19), Alwar (13), Jhalawar (10), Sikar (7), Ajmer (6), Dungarpur (5), Kota (4), Rajsamand (3), Sirohi (3), Tonk (3), Baran (3), Dausa (3), Dholpur (3), Sawai Madhopur (2), Udaipur (2), Bhilwara (2), Karauli (2), Churu (2), Chittorgarh (1) and four from other states. 

As many as 309 more persons have been cured of Covid-19 taking the tally of such persons to 6,744. 

In Jaipur, 24 different places reported 55 cases. Areas which reported new cases are Ramganj (12), Gulmohar Vatika (8), Chandpole (6), Shastri Nagar (4), Jhalana Doongri (2), Adarsh Nagar (2), Bas Badanpura (2), SMS Hospital (2), while one each case was reported from Sodala, Hatwara, Madhorajapura, Bhrampuri, Khatipura, Ramgarh Road, Mansarovar, Bani Park, Vivek Vihar, Amer Road, Eidgah bypass, Purani Basti, Chitwari, Virat Nagar and address of one case is not clear. 

Amid the pandemic, camps for filing online forms for two-month free ration for underpriviledged people who are not enrolled in NFSA scheme started. One such camp was organised by Mohammad Sabir Qureshi, youth Congress president of Adarsh Nagar.


