Covid-19 cases rise to 12 in Tamil Nadu, first community transmission suspected
2020-03-24
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu may have recorded its first case of cluster or community transmission of Covid-19 on Monday. Officials said they did not have travel history for a 54-year-old man hospitalised in Madurai. The other two patients who tested positive on Monday, in Chennai and Tirupur, had a travel history to London. Tamil Nadu now has 12 Covid-19 positive cases.


Health minister C Vijayabaskar said the patient admitted to Rajaji Government General Hospital in Madurai had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cardiac disease, uncontrollable diabetes and hypertension. “He does not have any travel history. He has not travelled to any other country or any other state. We are trying to find out if he met people who have travelled abroad,” he said. Doctors treating him said his condition remains critical.

Sources in public health department said the patient had been attending functions and visited a mosque in the last few days. Health officials are tracking down his family members and those associated with him to subject them to home quarantine and collect swabs for testing. 

Meanwhile, the 25-year-old who travelled from London to Chennai has been admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital. His condition is stable and his relatives have been isolated, officials said.

Another 48-year-old businessman from Tirupur who also travelled from London flew into the Chennai International Airport on March 15. He came to Tirupur Government Hospital on March 16 with symptoms. Samples tested in Coimbatore showed he was positive. Tirupur public health department has now transported his family members, his car driver and maid to Coimbatore Medical College Hospital for testing.

Vijayabaskar urged people who have been put under quarantine to remain at home. “It is not a request. It is an order. That is the only way we can stop community spread,” he said.

On Monday, the number of people under home isolation went up to 89 from 54 on Sunday and the number of people in home quarantine – either because they travelled from Covid-19-hit countries or came in contact with corona positive people – went up to 12,519. “There are no flights but the number of people who have travelled with positive patients on trains and buses are now rapidly increasing,” said a senior public health officials. As many as 552 samples were drawn compared to 443 on Sunday.

