Covid tally breaches 400-mark as 28 migrants test positive in Jharkhand
2020-05-26
RANCHI/RAMGARH/JAMHEDPUR/GUMLA: The number of coronavirus cases in Jharkhand crossed the 400-mark on Monday as the state recorded 28 cases, including one from the tribal-dominated Khunti, which, becoming the 23rd of 24 districts to be affected by the pandemic. Only Sahebganj district along the border with Bengal now remains Covid-free. All the new cases are migrants who have returned to Jharkhand recently.

While it took 45 days for the state tally to reach the 200-mark after the first case was reported in Ranchi on March 31, it took just 12 days for the figure to double. Jharkhand coronavirus caseload now stands at 405, of which 253 are active, 149 have recovered and three persons have succumbed to the disease.

The number of suspected Covid-19 cases tested also crossed the 50,000-mark on Monday with a total of 50,709 samples tested and the results of about 8,000 samples pending.

Ranchi detected 10 fresh cases from Silli block on Monday, taking the total number of cases in the state capital to 125. “All ten are migrants and have returned from Maharashtra, Gujarat and other southern states three days ago. They were in institutional quarantine since their arrival,” an official said.

Simdega detected three fresh cases, all; migrants, with travel history to Maharashtra. “The patients are from Kolebira block,” said a district administration official. Ramgarh, Bokaro and Garhwa districts detected two cases each. “All of them are have returned from Telangana, Maharashtra, the officials in the respective districts confirmed

Palamu, which had become Covid-free with the last of the 15 patients discharged on May 21, recorded one case on Monday. “The patient returned from Brijwasan in Haryana a week ago and was put at an institutional quarantine centre,” Palamu DC Shantanu Agrahari said. East Singhbhum, Khunti and Gumla also recorded one cases each on Monday.

In Khunti, a resident of Karra block with travel history to Mumbai tested positive on Monday. “The patient returned on May 17 and was at a government quarantine centre with the others who had accompanied him. We have started tracing his contacts,” Khunti DC Suraj Kumar said.

Simdega detected three fresh cases, all migrants with travel history to Maharashtra. “The patients are from Kolebira block,” said a district administration official. Ramgarh, Bokaro and Garhwa districts detected two cases each. “All of them have returned from Telangana, Maharashtra, the officials in the respective districts confirmed. Palamu, which had become Covid-free with the last of the 15 patients discharged on May 21, recorded one case on Monday. “The patient returned from Brijwasan in Haryana a week ago and was put at an institutional quarantine centre,” Palamu DC Shantanu Agrahari said. East Singhbhum, Khunti and Gumla also recorded one cases each on Monday.

In Khunti, a resident of Karra block with travel history to Mumbai tested positive on Monday. “The patient returned on May 17 and was at a government quarantine centre. We have started tracing his contacts,” Khunti DC Suraj Kumar said.


