Goa: Covid hospital gets 70 more beds, swab centre working 24x7
2020-05-20
PANAJI: The ESI Hospital at Margao, which is the state’s dedicated Covid-19 medical facility, has enhanced its capacity to 170 beds. Seventy beds were added on Tuesday, deputy director of health services, Dr Ira Almeida, said. 

“We are ready to accept more patients and plan to go up to 200 beds in a few days time. We have to be ready,” she said. 

One floor of the hospital has a dedicated paediatric ward with a paediatric ICU. This ward was used over the last weekend, when a four-month-old infant, a one-year-old toddler and three brothers aged 3, 6 and 11 years all tested positive for the virus. 

They have been admitted along with their mothers, two of whom have tested negative. Asymptomatic and symptomatic patients have been accommodated in separate wards on separate floors of the Covid-19 hospital. A 61-year-old woman is also among the admitted patients and is the first senior citizen to have tested positive till date. 

“Most of those who were sick have now turned asymptomatic. But so far, no one who was asymptomatic has become symptomatic,” Almeida said.


Police accompany those entering Goa for testing

The hospital’s ICU has provision for 40 spaces where ventilators with central oxygen and compressed air can be accommodated.

The TrueNat swabbing centre and testing laboratory at the new South Goa district hospital works round the clock in three shifts: 8am to 2pm, 2pm to 8pm and 8pm to 8am. 

Police travelling to and from the borders accompany those who enter by their own vehicles, for testing.

The 24x7 swab centre and laboratory at the hospital tests between 100-150 samples each day. However, over the weekend, when the state received more than 650 passengers by trains, the TrueNat labs at Ponda and Mapusa were activated at night to cater to the load.

If the TrueNat tests come negative, passengers are stamped for a 14-day home quarantine and sent to their residences. Those who test positive are sent to the isolation ward at TB hospital, Margao, while they are re-swabbed by the district hospital — this time a naso-pharyngeal swab — and wait for confirmatory PCR tests results from the GMC. 

There are two ambulances dedicated to moving people suspected to have Covid-19 and positive patients in South Goa. 


