Covid lockdown takes a toll on Ramzan shopping
2020-05-05
NAGPUR: As much the holy month of Ramzan is about fasting and feasting, it is also about new clothes, jewelry and dressing up the traditional way. As no shopping is possible amid lockdown, people couldn't go out to pick up their favourite shararas, sherwanis and kurtas.

Men generally continue with their marriage sherwani, kurta pyjama or pathani for years. But women love to shop for jewelry, henna and perfumes. With lockdown continuing it’s not possible to get pathanis, kurta pyjama, salwar suit, and gowns stitched. TOI spoke to a few garment sellers, shop owners, and rozedaars to learn about the clothing business and dressing scene.

Mohammad Shoeb, who owns a garment shop in Mominpura that is usually the nerve-centre of Eid celebrations, says his clothing business is into heavy losses as his shop is shut. But he still spoke about how it is each year. “People would come in huge numbers to buy variety of clothing items. From children to men and women, each one would pick up their favourite pieces. Now everything is at stand still,” he said.

Mohammad Aslam Belawala, who also has a shop in Mominpura, shared his experience of celebrating Ramzan at home, while his shop is shut, as he was looking forward to a good business this year, “Even before Ramzan, the marriage season is the peak time for the shopowners. This year we could not have good business,” he said.

“Every year the demand is high for different duppattas for women, small sherwanis for children, frocks and heavy dresses for young girls. We will wear the clothes we have at home and celebrate this pious month,” he added.

Raaziya Hussain, principal at MSB educational institute, said pandemic was the time to cut out extra expenses and spend more time praying. She surely will miss the dressing up, putting on jewelry or applying henna on her hands. “This time is more about understanding the importance of what little we have, but yes we surely seek celebrations. I won’t be able to apply henna as shops are closed, no new jewelry but positively we have more time for ibaadat and that’s the greatest gift of all,” she said.

Owners are hoping if the lockdown ends before Eid celebrations, they could sell all sorts of traditional clothing. “I have all the expensive and beautiful collection of anarkali, shararas and jewelry. I can’t wait to open my shop as my loyal customers would definitely come,” said an owner, who owns a big showroom in the city.

Another garment shop owner Amjad Hussain said, “Hopefully the lockdown will end soon. Probably people would get their clothes stitched or buy dresses but for now the markets are shut. We are positive and hope it will end soon,” he said.

Sumera Siddique along with her daughter Saleha looks forward to Ramzan as it is an opportunity to dress up but this time it will all be limited. “We will wear the old clothes and so will my son. We have many traditional sharara and suits. We will surely celebrate and buy newer ones once this ends,” she said.


