Covid spreads to rural parts of Agra dist, 19 villages marked as hotspots
2020-05-11
AGRA: In what could be a major challenge for local administration, the deadly Novel Coronavirus (Covid-19) has started spreading its tentacles to the rural parts of Agra district. So far, 98 people of 19 villages in the district have been tested Covid-19 positive. Fatehpur Sikri Block, villages of Baroli Ahir Block have emerged as the district's major hotspots. 

From Fatehpur Sikri, 29 positive cases have been reported. In Block Baroli Ahri, 22 Covid-19 positive cases have surfaced in four villages. Out of these, 16 cases have been reported from village Kakua, four from Rajrai and one each from village Shyamo and Nadhot. From village Nagla Kali, located on Devri road, 10 positive cases have been reported. The health department has started screening people in all the villages marked as hotspots. 

Notably, since May 1, around 250 villagers who had come in contact with the infected people have been quarantined. Besides, all the villages marked as hotspots have been sealed. Barricades have been put to block roads. Police are checking all the vehicles moving in and out of these villages. 

Besides Fatehpur Sikri and Baroli Ahri Block, Covid-19 cases have also surfaced in Bah, Achnera, Bichpuri, Khandoli, Akola, Etmadpur and Shamshabad block. Meanwhile, at least 15 positive cases have been confirmed in Kaushalpur, semi-urban area under the Dayalbagh Nagar Panchayat. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “Nineteen villages have been marked as Covid-19 hotspots. All of these villages have been sealed by the police. Besides strict enforcement of lockdown, sanitisation is being done in different parts of these villages daily. The health department is regularly screening people. Samples of people with breathing difficulties are being sent for lab testing.”

The Centre has also sent a two-member expert team to investigate reasons behind the increasing number of Covid-19 cases in Agra district. The team will help the local administration to check the spread of the virus. Led by Dr Sanjay Gupta, the team visited the city's various hotspots and chaired a meeting with administration and health department officials. 


