Covid-19: Railways withdraws blankets, curtains from AC coaches, asks passengers to bring their own
2020-03-16
BAREILLY: Novel coronavirus outbreak has forced Indian Railways to remove curtains and blankets from AC coaches. Authorities announced on Sunday that in order to prevent the spread of Covid-19, blankets and curtains have been withdrawn with immediate effect till further orders. Noting that the linen is not washed every trip, officials said that passengers are advised to bring their own blankets.


The temperature of the AC coaches will be set suitably so that passengers do not require blankets, they said.

Madhusudan Rao, additional member (commercial) of Railway Board, said that the member (traffic) has desired this be implemented with immediate effect for a month or a date to be notified later.

Meanwhile, Western Railway has posted a tweet to this effect stating, “Kindly note that it has been decided to withdraw curtains & blankets from AC coaches of trains as they are not washed every trip, for prevention of #coronavirus. Passengers may please bring their own blankets if need be. Inconvenience is regretted.”

Senior commercial manager of Moradabad division in Northern Railway (NR), Rekha, said that a helpline number of control room – 9760541564 – has been issued, setting up anti-Covid-19 task force at all major railway stations under NR.

She said, “Blankets as well as curtains are most likely source of infection. That is why it is decided to withdraw them from service till further orders. However, blankets will be given to passengers only on demand and some quantity of additional bedsheets may be kept for any exigency.”

Passengers are advised to bring their own blankets in their own interest. Besides, general managers of Delhi, Moradabad, Lucknow, Ambala and Firozpur divisions under NR are directed for wide publicity to this effect.

Only the bedsheets, pillow covers and hand towels will be given to passengers. The reasons for the same may be explained to the passengers if there is any query.

Chief public relations officer of North-Central Railway (NCR), Ajit Singh, said, temperature in all AC coaches will be maintained above 25 degrees and prior to the journey, passengers will receive auto generated calls from railway helpline 139, informing them to carry their own blankets till March 31.

