Covid-19 control room hits 100 days of relentless service in Thiruvananthapuram
2020-05-03
THIRUVNANTHAPURAM: The Covid-19 control room that functions round-the-clock at the directorate of health in Thiruvananthapuram has notched up a century. 


Saturday marked day-100 of the control room that has been going strong with the able support of as many as 100 health workers, including doctors.

Health and social justice minister K K Shylaja said the control room “has been able to effectively defend the spread of Covid-19 in the state”.

Even though the first positive case of Covid-19 in the state was reported on January 30, the control room had already been set up, on January 24; the experience gained from controlling Nipah and the floods came in handy in this early intervention.

The control room coordinates an array of tasks, including gathering information from those who had returned from pandemic-affected places, preparing the list of their primary and secondary contacts, providing medical aid, ensuring observation of such individuals at their homes and ensuring the availability of medical equipment and creating awareness among others.

As many as 18 teams have been formed in the control room that includes a surveillance team, call-centre management team, human resources management team, training and awareness generation team, material management team, infrastructure management team, sample tracking team, media surveillance team, media management team for creating awareness, documentation team, private hospital surveillance team, transportation and ambulance management team, departmental coordination team, community-level volunteer coordination team, psychological support team, data compilation team, budget and financing team, and an expert study coordination team.

The teams regularly interact through video conferences via their respective subordinate teams in all districts. 

All decisions are taken after compiling and analyzing the work undertaken by these 18 teams on a day-to-day basis. 

The analysis of the overall teamwork is conducted by a group comprising the health minister, principal secretary (health), state mission director of the national health mission, managing director of medical services corporation, director of health education, and additional directors.

A 24-hour call-centre is also functioning in the control room, where the public can contact and alleviate any concerns regarding Covid-19. As many as 15,000 calls have been received at the call-centre till date.

