Covid-19 fallout: Karnataka misses revenue target by Rs 4,536 crore
2020-04-01
BENGALURU: The financial year ended on Tuesday and Karnataka missed its overall revenue target by a whopping Rs 4,536 crore, thanks to multiple factors, including the Centre’s failure to pay GST compensation and impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the economy.


For the first time in the state’s history, the shortfall in commercial tax collection is about 3,908 crore. Other two revenue heads — motor vehicle tax and stamps and registration duty — have also missed the target by Rs 628 crore and Rs 450 crore, respectively. Registration of vehicles and properties is normally expected to peak in March, but the activities nosedived this year due to the lockdown, said official sources.

The only silver lining is revenue collection by the excise department, which has exceeded the target by Rs 450 crore. The department has collected Rs 21,400 crore through liquor sales as against the target of Rs 20,950 crore.

The biggest setback has come from commercial tax revenue collection, which includes GST, sales tax on motor fuels and professional tax. The target was fixed at Rs 76,046 crore in the budget for 2019-20. However, the collection stands at Rs 72,138 crore as on March 31.

Officials in the commercial tax department said the shortfall is mainly because of the economic slowdown and the Centre’s failure to pay GST compensation to the tune of Rs 4,500 crore. However, sources said the worst is yet to come. Revenue collections are expected to dip further as the impact of Covid-19 will be felt more in the coming months because of the 21-day lockdown.

“As commercial activities came to a grinding halt in March, the revenue figures in April are obviously expected be much below the monthly target,” said BT Manohar, member of consultative committee on GST, Government of Karnataka. 

On an average, the monthly collection of commercial taxes stands at Rs 4,500 crore. It includes sales tax of Rs 1,200 crore from the sale of petrol and diesel. This is expected to come down by Rs 1,500 crore.

“Fuel consumption has taken a major hit although petrol pumps are not closed. We can only hope the virus spread is curbed and the lockdown is not extended beyond April 15,” said KM Basave Gowda, president of Akhila Karnataka Federation of Petroleum Dealers. 

Another reason why GST collection would be low in the next three months, say experts, is Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman’s announcement extending the last date for filing of GST returns to June 30. “Most traders would like to avail the benefit of the moratorium on filing GST returns and would defer tax payment. Because of this, there will be a sharp dip in collection,” said S Prakash, former president of Karnataka State GST Practitioners Association.

Could have collected Rs 1k cr more

We could have collected Rs 1,000 crore more without the lockdown. As it continues in the first half of next month, there will be a sharp fall in April revenue 

SL Rajendra Prasad, joint excise commissioner


