Covid-19 may usher in ‘non-surgical’ post mortems
2020-05-25
Nagpur: Covid-19 seems to be re-defining post mortem techniques too. Latest guidelines from Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) indicate that minimum, partial or no dissection or non-surgery techniques may be the future of the forensic jurisprudence in the country.

The measures are being explored to save the forensic experts and mortuary staffers from getting infected from dead bodies.

In city, police have already issued instructions to waive post-mortems for natural deaths, whether at hospitals or homes, if there are no allegations or grounds for suspicion following a representation from forensic experts of city’s two government hospitals against the backdrop of Covid-19 outbreak. 

City police have also waived requirement of post mortems for unclaimed or unidentified bodies if there are no apparent injuries or suspected foul play unlike in the past when the medico-legal process was completed as per forensic rule book and Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) for such cases too. 

It is learnt that post mortems of the bodies with visible indications, like suicide by hanging, drowning, poisoning and so on are also being avoided following a mutual decision of the police personnel and medical officers certifying the cause of death. 

According to a source, the forensic experts are now awaiting orders from the director of health or home department based on the latest ICMR guidelines. “The guidelines stress on the minimum dissection in case of apparently visible injuries. The dissection is to be done at the affected part only and not the whole body as in the past for citing the cause of death. Though there is nothing called ‘partial dissection’ in forensic jurisprudence, Covid-19 seems to be redefining the concept now,” he said. 

A forensic expert said ICMR guidelines also indicated dissections should be avoided unless there is a need as per the complications of the case. “It is also suggested that the cause of the death can be furnished on the basis of the MRI and CT scan report along with inclusions of the medical history and details gathered from interviewing the relatives. This is because the body fluid of the deceased may also be a Covid-19 risk. A positive patient not being detected through tests is also not uncommon,” he said. 

The senior forensic expert also informed about two most advanced practices of the furnishing the cause of death are virtopsy and verbal autopsy which should be practised now in India too. “Virtopsy or virtual autopsy means giving post mortem reports or cause of deaths on the basis of MRI and CT scan along with the other medical history and police reports. Verbal autopsy means furnishing the cause of death on the basis of the family history, illness details, doctor and police report even without touching the body,” he said. 


