Covid-19 warriors stand stoic at the front line
2020-04-24
GANDHINAGAR: Krishna Rana, a staff nurse at the Covid-19 hospital longs to see her two-year-old daughter Kavya, but she hasn’t gone home for over a week now. Her home is in Shahibaug, barely a kilometre away from the Covid-19 hospital. But she feels going home may put her loved ones at risk, as she can easily get infected while treating Covid-19 patients.


Rana is not alone. Like her, there are close to 550 frontline warriors – doctors, nurses, paramedical staff, sanitation workers and security personnel – posted at the designated Covid-19 hospital in the city, who are staying away from their families and loved ones, to minimize the risk of their families getting infected. These frontline workers are living in hotels or hostel facilities arranged by the government in and around the Civil Hospital campus.



“I have not seen my daughter Kavya since I was posted here. My husband, who works in a private firm, has been taking care of our daughter. Although my house is just a kilometre away, I cannot go home and thus talk to my baby only over the phone,” said Rana.

Ami Patel, another staff nurse at the Covid-19 hospital said her parents and family members were worried when she was posted at the Covid-19 hospital. “Yes, there are risks involved, but this is part of my job. I am staying in the nursing hostel campus to avoid any chance of my family members getting infected,” said Patel.

Dr Arif Vora, a paediatric who lives in Danilimda area, is now serving in the Covid-19 hospital and staying within the civil hospital campus. Vora said, “There are three types of facilities for children at the Covid hospital – critical, non-critical and corona-negative children whose parents are positive. The government has advised us to stay here to serve people better.”

Omen Prajapati, who is from Jamnagar and lives at PG hostel in Civil Hospital campus, has now been put up at a nearby hotel with 50 other doctors. “The government has made these arrangements so that doctors can spend maximum amount of time treating patients, and families of doctors remain safe,” said Prajapati.

Dr Girish Parmar, in-charge of staff management at the Covid-19 hospital said staying arrangements for doctors, nurses, paramedical staff, sanitation workers and security personnel have been made in and around the Civil Hospital campus.

