Covid-19 spreading its tentacles in Surat’s posh Athwa zone
2020-06-13
Surat: The coronavirus seems to be spreading its tentacles in city’s posh Athwa zone with localities such as Athwalines, City Light, Piplod and Parle Point. This areas have seen a spurt in Covid-19 infections after the unlock-1. 

According to the official data from the Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC), Athwa zone was the least affected with less than 10 cases in the early May. However, the number of cases has increased to 100 by June 11, with majority of the cases being reported after May 25. Between May 25 and June 11 alone, about 56 cases have been reported in Athwa zone. 

Interestingly, city’s first Covid-19 case was reported from Athwa zone on March 19. A 21-year-old girl, who returned from London, was among the few first Covid-19 patients of Gujarat. She had recovered from the virus on March 29. 

Health officials believe that the residents in the upmarket Athwa zone, which has a mix of migrant population connected with diamond, textile and other businesses, religiously followed the lockdown rules and stayed at home. However, during the unlock phase, people started moving out for work and businesses resulting in the increase in Covid-19 cases. Many have also been travelling by air to domestic destinations for work purpose. 

Deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), Dr Ashish Naik told TOI, “People with co-morbid conditions including diabetes, heart problems, hypertension etc. are highest in Athwa and West zones of the city. The residents in Athwa zone are elite class people and they followed the lockdown rules strictly and avoided moving out of their houses thereby decreasing the chances of infection”

Majority of the people living in Athwa have their industries, factories and work places located in the hotspot areas of Limbayat, Central zone, Katargam, Udhana etc. After unlock-1, they have started visiting these areas and the threat of contracting the deadly infection has increased.

About four asymptomatic Covid-19 positive patients in Athwa zone have chosen to stay at home and recover. 


