Covid positive’s kin, foreign-returned man get virus, state tally at 5
2020-03-30
Panaji: Two more persons tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday taking the state’s tally to five. Last week, three persons with travel history were detected of having the virus.

“Of the 56 samples sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, 55 reports were received today (Sunday). Two tested positive for Covid-19,” said Dr Jose D’Sa, director of health services.

“Both are male patients, aged 37 and 19 years. One has a travel history of returning from Bahamas via New York to Goa. He was admitted to the isolation ward of GMC. The other is a close contact of a Covid-19 positive detected earlier and under isolation at sub-district hospital, Ponda,” said Dr D’Sa.

Later, chief minister Pramod Sawant said one of the persons who tested positive was the brother of a patient who had earlier tested positive for the virus and was undergoing treatment along with two other positive afflicts.

The patient’s family, including his brother and mother, were home-quarantined after he was tested positive immediately after return from Spain last week.

Sawant said the other person, who had tested positive, had been quarantined after his return from Bahamas.

 “He did not come in contact with any of his family members. We have shifted eight of his relatives to the government quarantine facility,” he said.

Sawant said the test reports of the family members of three Covid-19 persons have come negative, while the report of one of the family members would come on Monday.

Meanwhile, two Covid-19 suspects, a 75-year-old man and a 68-year-old woman, who were undergoing treatment in the isolation ward of the Goa Medical College (GMC) died on Sunday. “Both tested negative for Covid-19,” a health official said.

The man’s test had come negative, while health minister Vishwajit Rane had tweeted earlier in the day that the woman was suffering from respiratory distress and was diagnosed with COPD. 

“The woman tested negative for Covid-19,” Sawant said.

Sawant said he virology set-up at GMC will become functional from Monday. South Goa district hospital will be used as a quarantine facility.

“We are making all efforts to make it functional within a fortnight,” he said. The completion of the 500-bedded hospital has been delayed.


