Covid-19 testing: AP scales peak 10,000 per day
2020-05-06
VIJAYAWADA: Andhra Pradesh’s Covid-19 testing capacity touched the 10,000 tests per day milestone on Monday, April 4. This feat is a significant step in the fight against the pandemic.

The state which had only one virology lab with a testing capacity of 90 samples a day on February 15 managed to ramp up its infrastructure in months and has been testing the highest number of people per million in the country for several days now.

The state health department has screened nearly 18,500 people in the last two days. To get a sense how big this number is one might consider one of AP’s neighbouring states which conducted the same number tests over the last two months.

Of the 8,263 tests conducted in the state between 9am Monday and 9am Tuesday, 5,445 were Truenat tests.

The viral research and diagnostic laboratory (VRDL) at Andhra Medical College (AMC) completed 628 tests within the same timeframe, the highest among all VRDLs in the state. The VRDL at AMC was followed by the VRDL at Government Medical College in Guntur (420 tests), RIMS in Kadapa (401) and Rangaraya Medical College in Kakinada (398). 

During the comprehensive door-to-door surveys conducted earlier, the state health department had identified 32,792 symptomatic cases. As of Tuesday morning, 29,234 people among those identified have already undergone screening. The remaining will be tested within the next couple of days.

Apart from the 9VRDLs at work in the state, AP has extended its testing footprint by making use of Trunat machines and rapid antibody tests. Meanwhile, three more VRDL labs are getting ready for launch, one each at Srikakulam, Nellore and Prakasam.

The health department has also decided to use the two HIV viral load testing labs in Visakhapatnam and Vijayawada for Covid testing. The National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) has already accorded permission for the same. 

Three CBNAAT (cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test) machines located at Government Hospital for Chest and Communicable Diseases in Visakhapatnam, Siddharth Medical College in Vijayawada and RDT Hospital in Anantapur have also received approval to test for Covid-19. Both HIV lab-based tests and CBNAAT-based tests are antigen-based and hence confirmatory in nature.

KS Jawahar Reddy, special chief secretary (medical, health and family welfare) said that the administration is intent on further improving the test footprint in the state. “The HIV viral load testing labs and CBNAAT machines will help screen more people in the coming days,” he said.


