‘Covid-19 patients doing well at GMCH, Mayo’
2020-03-16
Nagpur: The three Covid-19 positive patients admitted in GMCH and the one at IGGMCH had special visitors on Sunday. District collector Ravindra Thakare and DDHS Dr Sanjay Jaiswal inspected the facilities in their wards and interacted with them.

Doctors treating these patients said their condition is improving. “All three patients in GMCH are showing no symptoms. They are not being given any high-end medicine. We are just monitoring their health parameters frequently,” said a doctor. All three patients are having regular food, and keeping themselves busy in activities like reading and surfing on mobile phones.

At IGGMCH, the first positive patient of Nagpur city is showing improvement so far. “There is good improvement in major health parameters of this patient. He is stable and doing well. He is a sensible person and cooperating very well with doctors,” said Dr Ajay Keoliya, dean of IGGMCH.

The collector also paid a visit to the lab facility at IGGMCH, which is loaded with work these days. “The collector visited our lab facility and interacted with the staff. He was explained the process of testing samples,” Dr Keoliya added.

As per the protocol, these positive patients will be once again tested after they complete seven days in isolation. Irrespective of the result of this test, they must complete 14 days in isolation ward. Another test will be conducted after 14 days, and the patients will be allowed to go home if this test comes negative. If the test is positive even after 14 days, another 14 days will be added to their isolation period.

Two positive patients admitted at Vasantrao Naik Government Medical College, Yavatmal, are also doing well, said authorities there. “Two patients who travelled to Dubai with a 40-member tourist group have tested positive. They have been kept separately in the isolation ward at GMCH, away from suspected patients. As one of the patients has cough and cold, medicines are being given to treat these symptoms. Another patient is asymptomatic. Only vital parameters of this patient are being checked,” said one of the doctors treating them.


