Delhi lockdown: No movement of vehicles between city and NCR
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: Delhi will be under a complete lockdown from 6am on Monday till the midnight of March 31, as part of strict measures to check the spread of coronavirus. chief minister Arvind Kejriwal announced on Sunday. 


People engaged in non-essential services who are not going out to avail essential services will not be allowed to travel even in private vehicles, the government said. Delhi’s border with Haryana and UP will be sealed. “People who come out to provide or avail essential services will be allowed on their self-declaration,” the order said. 

 
 
 
The government has clarified that no document will be sought from a person who is out to provide or avail of any essential service. Taxis, autos, e-rickshaws, rickshaws, buses and public transport facilities, including inter-state bus and Metro services, will be suspended.

Only 25% of DTC buses will run. “Extraordinary times call for extraordinary measures. Delhi will be under lockdown from tomorrow 6am until March 31. Certain exceptions have been made to ensure essential services,” Kejriwal tweeted after a joint presser with LG Anil Baijal.

 
 
 
All offices, shops and commercial establishments, factories, workshops, weekly bazaars, religious places, construction works will remain closed and any gathering of more than five persons will continue to remain banned, Kejriwal announced in a joint press conference with lieutenant governor Anil Baijal at Raj Niwas on Sunday evening. The government has exempted diaries, grocery shops, milk plants, cashier and teller services in banks including ATMs, municipal and water services, general provision stores, home delivery from restaurants, print and electronic media, e-commerce of all essential goods, medical shops, petrol pumps, law enforcement agencies, police, health services, fire, electricity, and other essential services from the lockdown.

“Delhi has 27 confirmed coronavirus cases, out of which six are via local transmission, and 21 are those with travel history. There has been no community transmission of the virus. But if we do not take stringent measures now, the cases might surge to 1,000-1,500 in a few days,” Kejriwal said. 

Domestic airlines are continuing to operate although the city government order mentions domestic and international flights in the list of services that are barred. The order has also been sent to the Airport Authority of India chairperson for compliance. Those taking domestic flights will obviously face the problem of commuting to or from the airport at a time when Metro, taxi and bus services won't be available. The government found it imperative to adopt strict social distancing and isolation measures to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the city. The Delhi government has already issued the Delhi Epidemic Diseases, Covid-19 Regulations, 2020 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 for prevention and containment of coronavirus. Under these a slew of measures have already been announced by the government. 

“We are lucky that the virus hit India late. We have examples of countries which have dealt effectively that clearly shows that the sooner its spread is checked the better. We know people will face difficulties, but lockdown is necessary to contain the spread of coronavirus,” Kejriwal said. 

The lockdown order approved by the LG will be enforced by various authorities including Delhi Police and DMs. Any congregation of more than five people prohibited and punishable and any person found violating the lockdown order will be punished under relevant laws, the government order stated.


