Covid-19: ITBP men told to be on guard
2020-03-07
Bareilly: Indo Tibet Border Police (ITBP) personnel deployed along international border with Tibet have been on high alert since the outbreak of novel coronavirus in China.

According to senior ITBP officers at the paramilitary force camp at Bukhara in Bareilly, the ministry of home affairs (MHA) has issued an advisory to them to take precautionary measures against the spread of Covid-19 among its personnel. 

A senior administrative officer of the ITBP said the MHA has instructed that all personnel use a mask and immediately contact a doctor if anyone feels feverish. Anyone complaining of feeling unwell must be granted leave immediately, the MHA said. 

All personnel have been directed to avoid shaking hands and greet one another by saying ‘namaste’ with folded hands. In a letter, the MHA instructed the paramilitary force personnel to refrain from “touching” while greeting officers who come from outstation posts. In case of a touch by accident, specially with an outstation officer, one must immediately wash one’s hands with soap.

In addition to MHA’s instructions, the ministry of electronics and information technology on Friday issued a letter to all National Informatics Centres (NIC) across the country that biometric attendance be suspended with immediate effect till March 20 as a precautionary measure.

The senior ITBP officer of ITBP said all personnel were advised to avoid visiting civilian localities during off duty hours and also ensure that their family members following the advisory thoroughly.

Manoj Sharma. NIC’s Bareilly director, said, “Attendance of the employees during this period will be marked in a attendance register. Later, a copy of the attendance register will be submitted to the personnel division when the Aadhar Enabled Biometric Attendance System (AEBAS) is resumed.”

At present the ITBP battalions are deployed on border guard duties from Karakoram Pass in Ladakh to Diphu La in Arunachal Pradesh, covering 3,488 km of the Indo-China border, covering Ladakh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. 


