Covid-19 scare: BMC directs nine private hospitals to start isolation wards
2020-03-19
MUMBAI: BMC on Wednesday directed nine major private hospitals and a railway facility to reserve, in all, about 90 beds for Covid-19 patients. It said the beds are likely to be offered at concessional rates —at least 50% the usual charge.


But some hospitals told TOI that starting isolation facilities would take a while as procuring protective gear, training medical workers and creating designated areas will take time. Isolation wards separate ill persons with communicable diseases, whereas the purpose of quarantine is to separate or restrict the movement of healthy people.

BMC said Jaslok, HN Reliance, Hinduja, Kokilaben, SL Raheja, Bombay, and Lilavati can now treat Covid-19 patients, but samples for testing will have to be sent to the civic-run labs at Kasturba or KEM hospitals. A BMC notice said Jaslok Hospital would reserve five beds, HN Reliance two, Hinduja 20, Kokilaben 17, Raheja 12, Bombay four, Lilavati 15, and Gurunanak and St Elizabeth two beds each. Jagjivan Ram Rail hospital will have a 10-bed unit.

Under emergency powers vested with BMC, it can get private hospitals to take in Covid-19 patients. Municipal commissioner Praveen Pardeshi said, “One need not come directly to Kasturba, but go to any one of these hospitals. Swabs will be collected and sent to Kasturba or KEM for testing.” Additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said the isolation wards will become fully operational over a week or 10 days. “We have told them to start with 1-2 beds and scale up gradually,” he said, adding that the decision was made after a meeting on Wednesday. “Once patients land at the airport and are screened by our doctors, they will be given a choice to go to any of these centres if they need isolation,” he said. Currently, travellers are being sent to Seven-Hills Hospital, Marol, that has a 300-bed quarantine facility. Ten patients are quarantined at SevenHills and another ten at the nearby Mirage Hotel.

Several hospitals said setting up isolation facilities could take time. “Personal protective equipment (PPE) for health workers is expensive and in short supply,” said a hospital head. Ajaykumar Pande of Lilavati said PPEs now cost at least 5-6 times more than their usual prices. “If the government helps us with procuring PPEs and consumables, we can expedite the process,” he said, adding that Lilavati has started work on identifying a corner where an isolation facility would be started.

Dr Santosh Shetty of Kokilaben said they would reactivate an isolation facility created during the H1N1 outbreak. “We would take within 10 days, we have to factor in existing patients, where to move them, fix protocols and do staff training,” he said.BMC has said a decision on charges will be made soon.

