Covid-19 suspects getting 5-star hospitality in Agra
2020-03-26
AGRA: After a sip of tea, Vijay Kumar (name changed) peeked outside the balcony of the luxury hotel. The tranquil setting outside the twitched curtains made him forget the illness for which he was grounded by Uttar Pradesh health authorities, surprisingly in a 5-star hotel in Agra. The Dubai-based software engineer, who tested negative for novel coronavirus on Wednesday after a brief stay at the 45-bed quarantine facility in the upscale hotel, was hesitant to leave after doctors asked him to go home.


The 30-year-old said he was “overwhelmed” by the arrangements made by the state government and district administration.

 
 
“I was worried about my stay in government facility. But, I couldn’t believe my eyes when I reached the five-star hotel. I was served packed food and mineral water as prescribed by the doctors. The room was spacious, had a very nice bed and a television. The chief medical officer (CMO) gave me his personal number for any consultation,” he said.

The techie had returned from Dubai via Amritsar to celebrate Holi at his home in Raghupura village in Agra’s Sainya block on March 7. On March 22, he experienced severe cold and fever. He called the district coronavirus control room and shared his concerns. Soon, his blood, nasal and throat swabs were taken at Agra’s district hospital and he was shifted to the quarantine facility at the hotel in Agra’s Cantonment area. 

The administration has booked the 45-bed facility in the luxury hotel till March 31 to quarantine suspected coronavirus patients.

“People should have full faith in the authorities. They are doing their best to fight the novel coronavirus. People with a travel history or symptoms of the disease should immediately report to the district administration or the health department. The control room number for coronavirus can be used. The best prevention of the disease is to stay home,” he said.

The CMO said, “All the 17 samples including that of the Dubai-based techie sent to the King George Medical College (KGMU) have been tested negative. He has been advised home isolation for a few days.”

District magistrate (DM) Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 1,816 people have been advised home quarantine. Health department teams are closely monitoring the condition of all these people. 

“Eight positive cases have surfaced in Agra so far. Of them, seven people have been cured of the disease and are in home quarantine. A woman Covid-19 positive patient is being treated at SN Medical College. On Wednesday, nine samples were collected at the district hospital and were sent to KGMU. Reports are likely to come on Thursday afternoon. People are advised not be step out of their homes without any valid reason.” 

