Covid-19: Only one patient under treatment in Thiruvananthapuram
2020-04-16
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The concerns over spread of Covid-19 are subsiding in the district with only one person remaining Covid-positive. A 13-year-old girl at SAT Hospital is the only remaining case in the district as per official sources. The girl is healthy and doctors expect that she will soon turn negative. With no new case reported in the district for the past six days, health officials heave a sigh of relief. 


Along with the 13-year-old girl, her 8-year old brother who was cured of Covid-19 is also staying in the hospital. The two children got infected from their UAE-returned father, who has already recovered. 

SAT Hospital superintendent Dr A Santhosh Kumar said that the girl and her brother were on treatment at SAT after they were tested positive for coronavirus. “The boy has tested negative. Since he has acquired immunity and has been staying with her sister, we will be discharging them together,” he said. 

Of all the 16 positive cases reported from the district so far, only four were caused by local transmission. A Pothencode-native died after contracting Covid-19, but his source of infection is yet to be known. The district administration and health department conducted mass testing in the areas to rule out fear of community transmission in Pothencode. 

With the support of local bodies and health workers, the district administration was able to properly quarantine the foreign-returned persons. Concerns over spread of infection from persons who attended Tablighi meet at Nizamuddin subsided after the district was able to trace and conduct tests on 11 such persons.

Of the around 20,000 persons quarantined in the district after the spread of Covid 19, there are only 2,539 under quarantine now. Of these, only 106 are in hospital. Around 129 persons have been quarantined on Wednesday, while 28 were admitted to hospital. On Wednesday, around 66 samples were sent for testing while results of 119 samples received were found to be negative. The health department is awaiting results of 86 samples. 

The district was declared a Covid-19 hotspot when there had been 15 cases. With the number reduced to only one, the district will be removed from the list of hotspots when the list is revised next. 

Meanwhile, the city police continue to register cases for lockdown violations. On Wednesday, city police booked 143 persons for violating lockdown norms. Out of these, provisions of Kerala epidemic diseases ordinance were invoked against 120 persons. They also seized 125 vehicles in this regard. City police commissioner Balramkumar Upadhyay said that the police will continue to maintain vigil in the wake of government deciding to extend the lockdown till May 3. 


