Covid-19 hits food industry, business down by 50%
2020-03-19
MANGALURU: Kudla’s watering holes and restaurants, which are always bustling with customers, have taken a hit due to the outbreak of Covid-19. 


According to restaurant owners, business is down by 40 to 50 per cent and lodging facilities are almost empty.

The hotel and food industry had suffered a similar jolt when the city was under prohibitory orders the violence that occurred on December 19 last year. 

“Our hotel business has reduced to 15 to 20 per cent. All the events are being cancelled as there is a ban and it is same with lodging facilities. Yet we are keeping our facility open so that no traveller or customer is left in the lurch,” expressed B N Girish, vice-president, The Ocean Pearl. He added that there is no decision to shut down the hotel.

“There is a slowdown in business as footfalls have reduced in the last few days, as people are scared to come out. I also think that hotels, restaurants, pubs and clubs should voluntarily take a decision of suspending business until there’s some clarity on the issue. It’s a force majeure situation, and I think we must take this undesirable step of shutting down the place,” feels a restaurant owner, who did not want to be named.

Vadi Shenoy, who runs Tandoor Bar and Restaurant, Karangalpady, said business is down by 50 per cent. 

“But we are happy that the government allowed us to keep our restaurant open. Otherwise there would have been more losses.”

According to food blogger Laxmi Shenoy, business has gone down by 50 per cent in most restaurants. 

Though there is no proven evidence that Covid-19 spreads through meat, most people are avoiding eating out. They prefer to stay at home and come out only when it’s required. 

Meanwhile, the staff in some restaurants are not willing to work due to the spread of the pandemic. A lot of fake news is also being circulated that is causing additional fear. 

“A prominent restaurant that used to do daily average business of nearly Rs 32,000 is making Rs 4,000 per day now. There is a need for some more clarity on the issue, so that people stop panicking,” she stressed.

