Covid killed her before her first foreign trip
2020-06-11
AHMEDABAD: On May 19, 56-year-old head nurse Catherine Christian, was the first among the nursing staff at Civil Hospital to succumb to Civid-19. For more than 24 years the Civil Hospital at Asarwa was her second home. She was nearing her retirement and a few weeks back she had her passport readied just so that she and her husband could plan their first trip outside the country to Israel and Turkey, where their younger son Rajan and his wife ran a restaurant. Her husband had retired from the AMTS. But she tested Covid-19 positive on May 11 and and succumbed to the virus on May 19.

Working during disasters and pandemics was not new for sister Catherine. Her colleagues at the Civil Hospital remember how she would often volunteer for personal care if patients’ relatives could not make it to the hospital. 

“She used to say to patients, ‘till the time you are in this hospital and under our care you are my family’,” recalls a staff nurse who had worked with sister Catherine for nearly a decade. Sister Catherine had served in GG Hospital of Jamnagar between 1988 and 1996 and was later transferred to the Civil Hospital in Ahmedabad, where she served for more than two decades. 

Her elder son, Kenil (30) remembers how for more than 20 years she would travel from Mahemdabad to Ahmedabad. It was only in the last five years that she had shifted to a rented accommodation in Ahmedabad. “My mother was punctual at work, caring for her patients. She was very jovial and loved to socialise,” says Kenil. 

“When the news of Covid-19 pandemic first broke, she played a pivotal role in readying the Covid-19 isolation beds. She had warned us what was to come from her experience of handling the swine flu epidemic,” remembers Kenil. 

During disasters she was the person who got the wards ready for patients and deputed staff. She was given duty in Ward A-1 of the Covid-19 hospital from April 26 to May 3. She took a break for three days and then was given duty in the gynaecology ward.

Before the Covid-19 outbreak, she was assigned to the gynaecology ward. She had also worked in the children’s ward. Her colleagues remember her as a disciplinarian about cleanliness and management and a true friend to many junior nurses.

Sister Catherine was given a teary farewell on the morning of May 19. As her mortal remains were laid in a casket, she was given a guard of honour by her staff members and Home Guard personnel on duty at the campus as a ‘corona warrior’ who had served in the Covid-19 ward. 


