Covid-19 scare in Chennai: Footfalls down at city gyms, swimming pools
2020-03-13
CHENNAI: The all-pervasive fear of contracting the novel coronavirus has had a direct impact on footfalls in gyms and swimming pools. Prevention is better than cure seems to be the mantra.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Swimming coach K K Mukundan said he noticed a dramatic dip in the number of children coming to his class. "We’re down by half," said Mukundan, who runs the Orca swim centre. Over the last few days, he has been sending videos to nervous parents explaining that the sport is safe.

 
 

His is not a one-off case. The IIT-Madras administration sent out an email to its staff and students on Thursday that the gym was being "closed until further notice as a precautionary measure". At C3 Fitness Science, another gym in the city, staffer Christopher John has been wielding calls over the last few days from worried gym buffs.

"I’ve had to reassure them that the gym is not shutting down. But from our end, every precaution is being taken like disinfecting equipment at regular intervals," he said. John adds that while the younger clientele is still trooping in, the older members have stopped coming. "Our footfall has reduced by half," he said.

Ajit Shetty of the Score Gym said rumours of Covid-19 is drowning out every other conversation. "In the last two weeks, handshakes and high fives have stopped. People are keeping to themselves."

Dr K Kolandaswamy, director of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, said gyms or pools are not high risk locations. "Just maintain three simple rules of washing hands thoroughly in running water, cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that have been touched, and remaining at home for a few days if one has a cold, cough or running nose. Then it does not matter where you go or what exercises you do," he said.

Former city health officer Dr P Kuganantham said the management at fitness centres and swimming pools needs to ensure there is no overcrowding. "At public pools, there is no check on the number of people. Exercising outdoors is always better, but at closed air-conditioned gyms, it is recommended that people take their own mats, towels and water bottles."

