Covid-19 cases cross 200 mark in Kashi, Jaunpur
2020-06-04
VARANASI: With the detection of 13 new Covid-19 positive cases, including a fellow doctor of Homi Bhabha Cancer Institute and a new channel staff of Delhi on Wednesday, the total tally of Varanasi touched the mark of 203 while Jaunpur left it behind after 25 new cases took the total number of infected persons there to 208.

In Mau, a community health centre was sealed after its in-charge was found Covid-19 positive. A total of 10 new cases including the CHC in-charge were found in Mau while seven new case in Ghazipur and one in Chandauli district also came to light. 

District magistrate Varanasi Kaushal Raj Sharma said four members of the family of the landlord of an infected health employee from Tarna hotspot area had been tested positive. Apart from them, a fellow doctor of Homi Bhabha Cancer Institute was also found infected. Among eight migrants found infected, one is an employee of a new channel in Delhi, who had returned home by flight on May 27.

Sharma said with newly detected 13 infected persons, total number of cases in district has reached to 203. Of it 123 have become cured while four had died. Now, active cases in Varanasi is 76 while number of hotspots reached to 104.

Regarding Jaunpur, divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal said that total number of Covid-19 positive cases in this district has reached to 208 following detection of 25 new cases on Wednesday. Most of them are migrants, said officials. Detection of one infected person in Olandganj area led to panic in this busy markets as with the spread of new of such confirmation the shop owners started pulling down the shutters in afternoon.

In Mau, DM Gyan Prakash Tripathi confirmed that 10 new cases came to light on Wednesday after which total tally of district reached to 49. On them one had died while 10 became cured. Now active cases in the district is 39.

The in-charge of Mohammadabad Gohana CHC was also among these 10 infected persons. Tripathi said that with the confirmation of infection in this CHC in-charge the centre was sealed for 24 hours for proper sanitisation while contact tracing of other staff had also been started. A woman of Mahatwana locality in Chiraiyyakot area and her two daughters were also tested positive.

In Ghazipur, the detection of seven new cases mostly from Kasimabad and Karanda area, took the tally of Covid-19 positive cases in the district up to 135, said DM Omprakash Arya. 

In Chandauli district, DM Navneet Singh Chala said that one native of Majhgava village in Naugarh area, who had returned from Maharashtra, had been tested positive. His sample was sent for laboratory test on May 25. Now, total positive cases in Chandauli has become 27 of which 11 are in active category.


