Covid-19 claims second victim in Bihar, total cases 83
2020-04-18
PATNA: A 35-year-old man from Vaishali, who tested positive for Covid-19 on April 15, died at AIIMS-Patna on Friday, taking the coronavirus death toll in the state to two. There are currently 81 active cases in the state.

The first Covid-19 death in the state was that of a 38-year-old man from Munger, who was admitted in AIIMS with chronic kidney problems but was found to be coronavirus positive a day after his death on March 21.

“Two persons who were suffering from other illnesses as well have so far died. They both had comorbidities,” said state health department secretary Lokesh Kumar Singh.

According to AIIMS-Patna dean Dr Neeraj Agarwal, the Vaishali man was admitted on Tuesday with high fever. He also had history of tuberculosis. His report confirming Covid-19 came on Wednesday. Doctors at AIIMS-Patna also suspect fungal infection in brain, encephalitis and multiple infarction. “Since entire investigation could not be done so we cannot say exactly what it was, but there were few lesions in the brain,” said Dr Agarwal.

Unlike the first case, who had returned from Qatar, the Vaishali man had not travelled outside the state for the past three months and neither had he come in direct contact with any Covid-19 positive person.

Patna DM Kumar Ravi said, “The Vaishali man had come to a private hospital in Khusrupur from Vaishali on March 23 and was there for four or five days, then was taken to another private hospital on Bypass Road on April 3 and was discharged on April 7. He had also been to a diagnostic centre for tests. When his condition deteriorated, he was brought to AIIMS-Patna.”

Health officials suspect that he may have got infected at one of these hospitals or diagnostic centres as neither he had any travel history, nor anyone from Vaishali has so far been found Covid-19 positive.

His wife and two other relatives who had accompanied him have tested negative.

The deceased’s last rites were performed in Patna as per guidelines set by ministry of health and family welfare under the guidance of Patna and Vaishali district administrations.

Patna DM said, “His two relatives, brother and a niece, along with a priest, three civic employees and two others were there during the final ritual. They were all given PPE kits and body was properly sealed and brought to the ghat and was cremated using woods.”

So far, 83 people in Bihar have tested positive of whom 37 have recovered and two have died. Maximum number of cases have been reported from Siwan with total 29 cases, followed by Munger with 17 cases.

State health minister Mangal Pandey said an additional RT-PCR machine has been brought to Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences to increase Covid-19 test capacity. “Now 700 to 800 samples can be tested in a day at RMRI,” he added.


