Covid-19 cases among migrants on rise
2020-05-22
MEERUT/AGRA/ALIGARH/BAREILLY/PILIBHIT: Even though the Covid-19 lockdown is currently in its fourth stage in the country, the number of corona cases in western Uttar Pradesh continued to rise on Thursday - with most of the cases are of migrant workers, among others. 

In Covid hotspot Agra, six new cases were reported till Thursday evening, taking the district tally to 837. A constable on duty at Sikandra police station and cancer patient of Malpura locality was among the fresh cases. Other cases were related to Prithavi Nath Phatak, Kagrol, Lohamandi, Basant Vihar Colony and Shahaganj locality. 

A 65-year-old senior doctor of a hospital in Rakabganj locality also tested positive. He was suffering from breathing difficulties and sent to a Delhi private hospital. 

Significantly, a 71-year-old retired bank employee died in Bulandshahr, with seven more positive in Bulandshahr, including a migrant worker.

Also, nine tested positive in Meerut, four in Amroha and one in Hapur on Thursday. With this, the death toll in Bulandshahr reached two, with 103 cases, while 359 were in Meerut, including one found in Kanpur, 39 in Amorha and 89 in Hapur.

Meerut's CMO Dr Raj Kumar said, “Nine cases were reported in Meerut on Thursday. Three of these are family members - including a five-year-old grandchild - of a private doctor who had tested positive recently and died earlier this week.”

Moreover, a day after six migrant workers tested positive in Mainpuri, seven migrants were found infected among 11 new patients in the neighbouring district of Aligarh on Thursday. Till now, 55 patients have recovered and and nine have succumbed, out of total 115.

CDO Anunay Jha said the seven migrants were found positive, with all of them returning from Gujarat and Maharashtra. The other four patients are women aged between 45 and 89.

In Bareilly, four people tested positive while 17 cases were reported from Budaun district. Bareilly district surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “Four people, who returned from Mumbai to Bareilly on Tuesday, were tested positive. They were fruits and vegetables sellers in Mumbai.” With this, the Bareilly tally has reached 22.

Four more positive cases were found in Pilibhit, taking the tally to nearly 30. Of the four, three are aged between 18 and 21 while the other is 34. They had come from other states. The health department has shifted them to Shahjahanpur. A temporary jail is also being mulled to lodge new prisoners.


