Covid-19 and your pets: No need to panic — yet
2020-03-07
NEW DELHI: A pet dog in Hong Kong has tested positive for Covid-19, raising fears of pets getting the novel coronavirus infection too. The World Health Organization (WHO) is working closely with the authorities in Hong Kong, World Organisation for Animal Health and the United Nation’s Food and Agriculture Organization to determine its implication.

According to Maria Van Kerkhove, the technical head of WHO’s emergencies programme, having one pet positive doesn’t drive the transmission channel in this outbreak. “We are only aware of this one animal that has tested positive and he is doing well,” Kerkhove said at WHO’s headquarters in Geneva on Thursday. There is no need for any special measure for pets as yet, she added. 

The current policy of WHO on pets spreading 2019-nCoV states, “At present, there is no evidence that companion animals/pets such as dogs or cats can be infected with the new coronavirus.” Its advisory, however, adds that it is always a good idea to wash your hands with soap and water after any contact with pets as it protects against various common bacteria such as E.coli and salmonella that can pass between pets and humans. 

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advisory on pets and Covid-19, which was last reviewed on Tuesday, says while this virus seems to have emerged from an animal source (bats), it is now spreading person-to-person in China. “There is no reason to think that any animal, including pets, in the United States might be a source of infection with this new coronavirus. To date, CDC has not received any report of pets or other animals becoming sick with Covid-19. At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets, can spread Covid-19,” it states. CDC also advises washing hands after being around animals.

What if somebody is sick with Covid-19? CDC says such people should restrict contact with pets and other animals, just like they will do around other people. “Although there have not been reports of pets or other animals becoming sick with Covid-19, it is still recommended that people sick with it limit contact with animals until more information is known about the virus.” 

CDC asks anyone down with Covid-19 to avoid “petting, snuggling, being kissed or licked, and sharing food” with pets. If contact can’t be avoided, “wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a facemask”, the advisory states.

