Covid positive docs fight for their rights
2020-04-22
Ahmedabad: On Sunday, three doctors with private practice volunteered for Covid-19 test when they came to know that their patients had tested positive. They were asymptomatic. However, they decided to undergo the test in order to stop the infection to other patients. Shockingly, three of them tested positive. 

“The trio was shifted to the general ward of SVP Hospital. There was no issue of VIP treatment or privilege. They were practising doctors, and they observed that there were many symptomatic patients in the ward,” said a senior member of Ahmedabad Medical Association (AMA). 

“With no symptoms, they requested the authorities that as asymptomatic positive patients, they should be shifted to another ward. Moreover, there were both men and women in the same ward,” said the AMA member. 

The doctors also made a representation that they should be shifted to the ward earmarked for the government doctors. However, their request was turned down. The association then had to intervene and take the matter to the state government, where it made a representation for the treatment of the trio doctors in a private sector hospital.

AMC president Dr Mona Desai said that the issue they raised was not about privilege but about parity. “The doctors mentioned that it was a case of not paying heed to their requests. We had no other option but to shift them to a private hospital on Monday,” she said.

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health and family welfare), had told media on Monday that the doctors could choose where they wanted to be treated.

AMA and Indian Medical Association (IMA) office-bearers and members said that so far close to 50 doctors in both public and private sector had either tested positive or were in quarantine after coming in close contact with the positive patients. The experts said that the number could rise rapidly and there should be separate arrangements for the health workers turning positive.

Dr Bipin Patel, former national vice-president of Indian Medical Association, said that the government should protect and safeguard the lives and moral of the doctors in such times of public health crisis.


