Allahabad: Covid-19 lockdown enters day 3, but rule violations continue
2020-03-28
PRAYAGRAJ: As the nationwide lockdown enforced in view of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic entered its third day on Friday, more than 110 Prayagraj residents were booked for flouting rules. The accused were charged under section of 188 (violation of norms) of the Indian Penal Code. Also, more citizens were caught violating rules in trans-Ganga areas of the city as compared to the trans-Yamuna localities.
]

On the other hand, most Muslims in the city offered Friday prayers at home, instead of going to mosques. Earlier this week, clerics had appealed to namazis to stay at home on Friday in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak.

Meanwhile, police also caught two persons — one each in Mutthiganj and Mauaima — allegedly blackmarketing essential commodities and lodged FIRs against them under section 3 \7 of the Essential Commodities Act.

A man was arrested in Baihrana Khanpur area of th city for allegedly hoading essential commodities on Friday. Te accused was identified as Akbar Ali.

SSP (Prayagraj) Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj said police have stepped up checking in areas like Shivkuti, Muttiganj Nawabganj, Khuldabad, Shahganj, Khiri, Mauaima and Manda area. 

He added that over 10,000 vehicles were chekced by the police in different parts of the city. “While 1,100 of them were challaned for flouting rules, 29 vehicles were seized,” he added.

Like the past two days, city streets wore a deserted look as local residents stayed indoors following the announcement of the 21-day lockdown to check the spread of novel coronavirus. Shops selling essential commodities like medicines and groceries were open from 7am to 10pm.

Police teams on Friday visited vegetable markets and urged to citizens to practise social distancing. They also appealed citizens to use the Dial 112 helpline to complain about any trader found blackmarketing essential commodities.

“Thana cops on inter-district borders have been directed to not stop those vehicles from entering city limits, which are ferrying essential commodities,” the SSP added. On Friday, over a dozen police teams distributed food packets to the poor and homeless in areas like Civil Lines, Cantonment, Leader Road , Kareli, Naini and Bara. 


