Covid spreads in three more south Gujarat districts
2020-04-22
SURAT: Valsad, Tapi and Navsari joined the list of districts infected with Covid-19 cases on Tuesday.

Three persons, all less than 30 years in age, tested positive in Valsad on whom one succumbed while one case each was registered in Navsari and Tapi.

Of them 21-year—old Sufiyan Kadri, who had brain tumour, died in Surat’s New Civil Hospital (NCH). Kadri was admitted since April 19. His mother, however, tested negative for Covid-19. Being a patient of brain tumour, Kadri had visited several hospitals in the past few months. "He went for a health check-up at NCH and due to symptoms, he was tested for Covid. He was under treatment after testing positive," said a health official in Valsad.

Sagar Mangela, 30, a resident of Dehari in Umargam taluka, is the first case of Valsad to test positive on Monday night. Mangela, a fisherman, has no travel history and had returned from Mumbai around a month ago. One of his neighbours had returned from Mauritius around a month ago.

Yash Patel, 22, a gram rakshak dal (GRD) jawan, working with Dungri police station and posted on highway checkpost for vehicle checking also tested positive. His brother, employed with Dakshin Gujarat Vij Company Ltd in Surat and travels daily between Dungri and Surat, tested negative on Tuesday.

“In all the three cases, it isn’t clear from where the patients got infected,” said a health official.

Valsad collector has declared three km area around Dehari, Asura and Dungri villages as containment area and restricted the movement, while an area up to seven km around these three villages was declared buffer zone.


Woman tests positive in Tapi

Surat: Tapi police were a worried lot on Tuesday after a 35-year-old woman, whose house in Maypur village was raided for liquor two days ago, tested positive on Tuesday. The local crime branch (LCB) team had raided the house of Kansa Gamit on April 19 and booked her under sections of Prohibition Act. Police had recovered 10 litres of country liquor from her house. Eight policemen including two gram rakshak dal jawans have been put under home quarantine now.

Tapi collector R J Halani said samples of her husband, son and daughter have also been taken along with those of the eight cops who raided her house. Six teams of health department are camping in the Maypur that has a population of around 1,131. 


First positive case in Navsari
Surat: Navsari registered its first Covid-19 case on Tuesday when a 42-year-old man from Hansapore village of Jalalpore taluka tested positive. The patient Dinesh Halpat tested postive during a community sampling drive undertaken by the health officials in the talukas and villages across the district.

Halpati works as a helper on a fishing boat. He had returned from Okha a few days ago. Sources said that Halpati is believed to have come in contact with positive patients from Surat. 


