Covid-19 test is possible in 50 mins in Gadchiroli
2020-06-05
Nagpur: The tribal district of remote Gadchiroli district is now set to implement the TrueNat system, as per the guidelines of the Indian council of medical research (ICMR), for comprehensive screening of Covid-19.The portable TrueNat diagnostic machine, the latest induction in the arsenal to fight Covid-19 for the Maoist-affected district, was inaugurated by guardian minister Vijay Wadettiwar in presence of the collector Dipak Singla and Civil surgeon Dr Anil Kumar Rudy on Thursday. The apex body of medical research in India had approved the diagnostic machine for Gadchiroli which has a testing capacity of 22 samples within 24 hours. The district administration, which has 20 active patients now, is also mulling a full-fledged pathology laboratory for RT-PCR testing for Covid confirmation. The proposal has now been sent to the AIIMS, Nagpur, which has been designated as the mentor laboratory for Vidarbha. The district administration would send a final proposal for the approval of a dedicated Covid pathological laboratory in the district soon. Dr Rudy said TrueNat machine can help conduct emergency testing in the containment zones, in cases of urgent surgeries, to gauge the status of a high-risk contact and such requirements where the Covid-19 status is crucial within a short period of time. “TrueNat gives a confirmed negative testing. In case of positive result, the sample needs to be sent for confirmation through RT-PCR methods in Government Medical College and Hospital in Nagpur,’ said Rudy.“In the coming days, TrueNat’s upgraded version would have the confirmatory positive testing facility too. After the TrueNat is upgraded and the district gets the approval to set up an independent laboratory for Covid, we will become self-reliant for testing and sampling,” said the civil surgeon. Dr Rudy said a few technicians and doctors have been already trained to use the system. Collector Singla sounded hopeful about a competent Covid pathological laboratory in his district soon. “We have already sent a proposal and are following it up regularly,” he said. 