Covid-19 spurts in rural areas of Chhattisgarh as migrants return home
2020-05-20
RAIPUR: Chhattisgarh’s focus of prevention of spread of coronavirus is shifting more from urban to rural areas with nearly two dozen people testing positive after migrant workers began returning to their native villages. So far, 100 positive Covid cases has been reported in the state including 41 active cases till Tuesday.


The Bhupesh Baghel government had managed to contain the virus to a few clusters and the number of active Covid patients was down to single digit, when the migrants started streaming back and the count soared. 
The state is bracing for a major challenge as more than two lakh migrant workers are likely to return from many states in the next few days.

As of Tuesday, there are 41 active cases out of total 100 that tested positive. Barricades may now go up in villages and outskirts of cities as new areas turned into containment zone- identified in few patches of districts including Koriya, Balod, Balodabazar, Sarguja, Rajim, Raigarh and Janjgir.

While the initial spread of virus contained to a great extent in urban areas, a new challenge is emerging in rural areas.

A sudden spike in corona cases were seen since Sunday night when 25 new patients were detected in different parts of state. As per state health officials, the latest five Covid-19 patients from Rajandgaon and Korba had been admitted for treatment in medical colleges of Rajnandgaon and Bilaspur respectively.

The remaining 36 active cases are admitted at different hospitals including 20 patients in AIIMS Raipur, six patients at Covid hospital at Mana Raipur, five patients at Covid dedicated hospital at Bilaspur, three patients at Medical College hospital in Ambikapur and two patients at medical college in Raigarh.

These 41 patients majorly includes migrant labourers returned from Maharashtra and three have ravel history from Kota and Delhi. They all were in quarantine when their samples were collected and later confirmed Covid positive.

On seeing the spurt in Covid-19 cases, Chhattisgarh Health Minister TS Singh Deo on Monday directed health department to speed up mass testing. Medical colleges of Rajnandgaon, Bilaspur and Ambikapur have been told to upgrade its medical lab to get certification for virology testing from AIIMS Raipur AIIMS.

As per state control and command centre for Covid-19, on Tuesday 2437 migrant labourers have returned to Chhattisgarh . These migrants were screened through thermal temperature at railway stations and then sent to respective quarantine centres.

For Migrant labourers, there are separate 17,907 quarantine centres, which has capacity to accommodate 6,44,724 suspects and presently there are 1,31,814 such labourers are quarantined in these centres.

The Chhattisgarh government has extended restrictions imposed in all districts of the state under CrPC Section 144 for next three months in a bid to contain the spread of coronavirus, an official said

