Covid-19 pandemic hits wedding industry in Uttarakhand
2020-04-08
DEHRADUN: The wedding industry has taken a severe blow in the state as the Covid-19 outbreak has forced postponements and even cancellations of weddings. Hoteliers, caterers, wedding planners, and others in the business fear that things will only go downhill in the next few months and the industry will be able to recover only by November.


According to some of the prominent wedding and event planners in the state, the major cause behind the setback is cancellations by NRI clients who had made bookings for destination weddings in Uttarakhand.

Vineet Kumar Jain, an event and wedding planner in Rishikesh, told TOI, “The lockdown resulted in cancellations from our NRI clients as postponing dates would have been cumbersome for them considering the situation of foreign travel. This has caused massive losses. While most of the events and weddings scheduled for March and April have been cancelled, we are still trying to persuade the clients to settle for dates in November this year.”

Along with the wedding planners, the venue owners too are bearing the brunt as most events have either been cancelled or postponed. Vishal Mishra, owner at foothill garden in Dehradun, said, “I don’t see any event taking place for at least next three months. I just hope things improve in a few months so that the industry could revive from November onwards”.

The event planners estimate that every business would lose at least Rs 5-Rs 10 in April due to cancellations. Some fear that the people who couldn’t get married in the state in April might shift to destinations in southern India for wedding in November.

However, other wedding planners speculate that they would face enormous pressure in November due to multiple bookings and may have to let go some of the events. “Most people want to get married only on auspicious dates and as a consequence, the pressure on venue owners and wedding planners would keep on mounting due to limited dates even in November this year,” added Jain.

Meanwhile, Ravi Goel, owner of Big Daddy Events Company, told TOI, “Event and wedding planning is one big umbrella which shelters many more business like wedding photography, catering, and flower decoration, among others. The lockdown has affected each one of these. March and April had many auspicious dates and thus, several events got cancelled in these months. The crisis will persist for the next few months and we hope for better days only in November.”


