Covid-19 cases cross 100, nurse tests positive
2020-03-25
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The number of Covid-19 cases in the state has crossed 100. On Tuesday, 14 more positive cases were reported. With this, 105 patients are undergoing treatment in various hospitals in the state for the viral infection.


A medical worker involved in prevention activities was among those who tested positive on Tuesday. The nurse, who was working in Kottayam district, is the first health worker to contract the disease.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said of the 14 persons who tested positive on Tuesday, eight had travelled from Dubai. Three fell sick after coming in contact with Dubai returnees. One person had flown in from Qatar and another from the UK.

The CM said that, so far, there is no threat of community spread but several people who had come in direct contact with Dubai returnees have tested positive. He called for special caution in Kasaragod.

Of Tuesday’s new cases, six are in Kasaragod, two in Kozhikode and one each in Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Kottayam, Palakkad, Ernakulam and Malappuram.

At present 72,460 people are under observation in the state. Of these, 467 are admitted in the designated isolation wards of various hospitals. Of the 4,516 samples sent for testing, 3,331 have returned negative. The remaining results are awaited.

The CM announced more restrictions as part of the lockdown in the state. He said no private vehicles will be allowed on the roads, unless in case of emergencies. Even so, occupants will have to furnish details of purpose and place they want to visit to police. People defying police directives will be arrested, Vijayan said.

He said shops -- and only those -- supplying essential commodities will remain open from 7am to 5pm. More than five people will not be allowed to assemble in any area.

On restrictions in Kasaragod, the CM said he had interacted with local MLAs, who have been asked to contact local-body heads under their constituencies for a list of people who need food and other support. They have also been directed to find out the number of elderly living alone. Local bodies have been directed to provide food and medicines to such people.

