Covid busts the myth of NCR: Close to Delhi of dreams, but not close enough
2020-06-09
NEW DELHI: Where are you from? That’s usually one of the first questions that anyone I meet for the first time asks me. Delhi is never the right answer as it only makes people more curious. Because that is usually followed by, “We all are from Delhi, but where are you really from?”

When the probe intensifies, I give in and reveal that I’m a Bengali and a Dilliwallah. “Oh, you are from West Bengal?” The answer is yes and no. My ancestors left Bengal two centuries ago and settled in Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh. I know the language well and my maternal grandfather’s house is in Kolkata, but despite the annual visits during summer vacations my knowledge of the state is limited.

My grandfather moved to Delhi in the 1930s and initially lived at Gole Market with his uncle’s family. After marriage, he moved to a rented place in Karol Bagh. It was around 1950 that he moved to the newly built government flats in Vinay Nagar. The name of the area that came up on agricultural land acquired from residents of Pillanji village denoted “humility”. This is the area where my family would spend the next 60 years.

During graduation, I realised that I had to compete with students from other states to get a seat in a Delhi University college. Those were the late 1990s and 90% marks were not normal, which helped me land a seat in a South Campus college with marks that wouldn’t allow me to sit at a Satya Niketan bus stop now. However, I never heard my parents or anyone talk about DU seats for Delhi students. Delhi is the national capital and it was natural that its university would attract the brightest minds.

When I applied for a print journalism course in Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), the only branch apart from Delhi was in Dhenkenal, Odisha. There were only a few seats for thousands of applicants and I was lucky to get a chance to study at IIMC, Delhi. In a class of 35, only about five students were “from” Delhi, but that never bothered us.

It was also around this time that my father first showed signs of a heart problem. Safdarjung Hospital was the closest and that is where he was treated. In the next decade, visits to AIIMS and GB Pant hospitals, which boast of some of the best cardiologists in the country, became a routine affair.

The OPDs of both GB Pant and AIIMS overflowed with patients, many from neighbouring states and, in the case of AIIMS, from as far as West Bengal. We had to wait for hours to meet a doctor. Even while gasping for breath from the exertion and taking puffs from his inhaler, I never heard my father grudge about the crowd.

“We have the best hospitals in the country and two of them at a walking distance. Imagine travelling hundreds of kilometres and staying on the roadside for treatment. We are lucky we live here,” he used to say.

After my father’s demise, we had to leave Sarojini Nagar, the only home I knew. I wanted to own a house, but found myself priced out in Delhi. The odds of landing an affordable DDA flat were too high, so I decided to move to Ghaziabad.

Though we live in Ghaziabad, we shop at Sarojini Nagar market, watch films at Cinepolis in Laxmi Nagar, love to eat at Saravana Bhavan and, on special occasions, at United Coffee House or Zen in Connaught Place. Our family physician is in Delhi.

Delhi Metro made it possible for me to reach from one part of NCR to another seamlessly and the region did feel like an organic, contiguous entity. Covid-19 changed all that. District administrations of Ghaziabad, Noida and Gurugram closed borders with varying restrictions and, finally, so did Delhi.

There are many like me for whom Delhi is still home. We thought of ourselves as residents of an urban sprawl called NCR. But Covid-19 proved that the boundaries, which we believed only existed on maps, are actually quite rigid and run deep. NCR is just a mirage.


