Goa: Covid positive teen longs for Eid biryani with her ‘hospital family’
2020-05-25
PANAJI: It will be novel Eid without family and home-cooked delicacies for those who have tested positive for the novel coronavirus over the past week. 


In the adult ward of the Covid hospital in Margao, one of the youngest patients has been begging her parents to bring her some food for the occasion. 

“I asked my mother to donate biryani to the entire hospital, so that I get to eat some too,” she told TOI. “I also asked the doctors whether we would get any special food on Monday.” 

At the 200-bed hospital, outside food it not permitted, but she isn’t giving up hope. When she tested positive for Covid-19 upon arrival in Goa last week, she broke her Ramzan fast after 30 days.

“I couldn’t stop crying when they told me,” she said. “With all the news and Whatsapp messages I read, I thought I was going to die. I thought I would be put on saline drips and my phone would be taken away.” But the doctors left her hopeful. 

“They (doctors) told me that I only had to be admitted because I could be a carrier of the virus, and assured me there was nothing wrong with me. After being treated, I realized the virus is not so dangerous.”

The fever, headache and tiredness she experienced when she first arrived in Goa have all disappeared, and she has now been moved to another floor of the hospital reserved for asymptomatic patients. “I’m feeling better from the inside. I have more energy now. I will wear a nice traditional dress and put on some simple makeup for Eid,” she said. 

The teenager caught a glimpse of her mother only when she was getting into the ambulance from the quarantine centre to be taken to the Covid hospital, when she handed over home-made puri bhaji. 

This will not only be her first Eid spent in a hospital, but also her first experience being hospitalized. “I was very scared of syringes, blood and hospital corridors, but I want to become a doctor,” she says. 

In hospital, she spends her days preparing for the NEET, participating in online classes, completing assignments and watching movies on her phone. 

She says the other patients, doctors and nurses have all turned into family for her. “Our beds are two metres apart and we wear masks, but we laugh and joke together. The doctors and nurses are very kind and patient with us, unlike what I have seen in other government hospitals,” she said. 

How she got infected with the virus is still unclear. “I didn’t leave the house at all for 50 days. It’s still a mystery to me,” she says.

