Covid patients at Surat’s NCH get special uniforms
2020-05-21
Surat: In a first, the Covid-19 positive patients undergoing treatment at the New Civil Hospital (NCH) have been given specialised Corona uniform for their comfort and easy of identification.

The city-based textile design development centre 'Fashionova’ and a non-government organisation (NGO), Seva Foundation, have joined hands to provide the special uniforms for male and female patients undergoing treatment at the NCH free-of-cost. About 250 uniforms have already been supplied till date.

A Mumbai-based fashion designer, Saurav Mondal had came up with the idea for designing corona uniform for the Covid-19 positive patients. Mondal, who visited Fashionova institute in March, had to stay back in the city as he could not move out of the city due to lockdown.

“There were few cases of Covid-19 positive patients escaping from the isolation ward. In Surat, a patient’s body was recovered from NCH campus. Since I was sitting idle, I decided to design specialised uniform for the Covid-19 patients for their comfort and identification,” Mondal told TOI.

“The shirt buttons can be opened easily in a single touch. This will help the hospital staff to maintain distance while dealing with emergency cases. We have given pockets for keeping the personal belongings of the patients including mobile phones, wallets etc,” said Mondal.

Following the success of the Covid-19 uniform at NCH, Fashionova is planning to approach other government hospitals in the state and across the country for the supply of uniforms on no-profit-no-loss basis.

Anupam Goyal, director of Fashionova told TOI, “We are giving the uniforms free of cost to the patients at NCH with the help of Seva Foundation. However, we are ready to give the uniform in other hospitals in the state and across the country on no-profit-no-loss basis”

A senior doctor at the Covid-19 hospital in NCH said, “The uniform for Covid-19 patients is very much comfortable and patients are happy with it. It is easy to identify the patients in the ward”

Head: Style with purpose

Material: Made out of 100% cotton fabric

Colour: Pastel green for women, sky blue for men

Size: One size fits all design

Design: Adjustable shirt buttons, pockets for personal belongings

Cost: Free of cost for Covid patients at NCH


