Covid-19 patient on plasma therapy off ventilator now
2020-04-21
NEW DELHI: India’s first Covid-19 patient who had received plasma therapy has been weaned off ventilator and shifted to a normal room from ICU.


The 49-year-old man from south Delhi, who was admitted to Max Saket (east block) on April 4, has also tested negative twice for the novel coronavirus which means he has recovered from the disease, doctors said on Monday. “Plasma therapy worked as a catalyst in speeding up his recovery. We cannot attribute 100% recovery to plasma therapy only, as there are multiple factors which helped in the recovery,” Dr Sandeep Budhiraja, clinical director of Max Healthcare, told TOI.

Covid-19 has no known cure as yet. Countries across the world are exploring several experimental drugs and therapies to treat persons suffering from the viral infection and plasma therapy is one of them.

Delhi, Kerala, Maharashtra and Gujarat among other states are running clinical trials to test its efficacy before it can be made a part of the treatment guideline.

 

However, Max Healthcare said, they had to use the therapy on the patient on compassionate grounds and as a last resort.

“The patient was admitted to our hospital on April 4 with history of fever and respiratory issues. Within a few days, he developed pneumonia and Type I respiratory failure, after which he had to be put on ventilator,” said a doctor. He added that the patient’s father, who was in his late 70s, was also admitted in the hospital with severe symptoms and the family, requested the doctors to do anything possible to save the two. 

“We had used all possible drug combinations including hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin already. So, as the last resort, it was decided that we will administer plasma therapy to save them,” the doctor added.

The patient’s family arranged the donor, a Covid-19 patient who had recovered from the disease two weeks ago. “Both the father and the son received plasma therapy. But the father didn’t make it, perhaps because he was old and had co-morbidities but the son’s condition improved significantly after the therapy,” Dr Budhiraja said.

The 49-year-old received plasma therapy on April 14 and four days later, the doctors said, he was weaned off the machine which assists in breathing. The patient, however, continued to be on supplementary oxygen. “He is totally out of danger and taking oral feeds as well,” Dr Budhiraja said.

