Covid-19 cases rise by 100 times, tally now 504
2020-05-10
Nashik: The number of confirmed Covid-19 positive cases in Malegaon has swelled by almost 100 times in the last one month ever since the first five positive cases were reported from the textile town on April 8.

As many as 56 new Covid-19 positive cases emerged from Malegaon on Saturday, taking the tally of positive patients to 504 in the textile town. While 18 patients from Malegaon have died of Covid-19, 41 have been cured of the infection. The total number of positive cases in Nashik district stands at 632. 

“The doubling of Covid 19 positive cases in Malegaon is around four to five days as against the national average of 11 days. Our apprehension is that the rate at which the positive cases are increasing, Malegaon could emerge as one of the biggest hotspots of Covid-19 in the country in the near future,” said government sources.

According to the data provided by the officials, the positive cases shot up to 114 by April 24 and further swelled to 350 by May 3.

“On an average, about 300 samples from Malegaon are being sent for Covid-19 analysis. We are getting reports of only 60-70 throat swab samples per day. There is a need to hasten the speed of testing samples,” said officials.

Speaking to TOI, state health minister Rajesh Tope expressed concern about the rise in the number of Covid-19 cases in Malegaon. He assured that the state government would render all possible assistance to authorities in Malegaon to tackle the issue on a war footing. “I am planning to visit Malegaon soon to review the scenario,” said Tope.

According to the health minister, there have been many positive developments after his previous visit to the textile town in the last week of May. “Treatment of patients suffering from other ailments apart from Covid-19 have started after I directed the clinics there to open. Even Malegaon Municipal Corporation has stepped up its activities to prevent the spread of the infection,” said Tope.

In the meantime, former Congress MLA from Malegaon central Asif Sheikh discussed the surge in the number of Covid-19 positive cases with Tope over telephone on Friday. 

“Tope has assured me that he would send more doctors to Malegaon as the municipal corporation there is in the process of opening more Covid care centres and roping in more hospitals in the town as the positive patient count is increasing,” said Sheikh.

Dhule medical college gets Rs 38 lakh

The district administration has given Rs 38 lakh to Shree Bhausaheb Hiray Government Medical College, Dhule. The college will be buying testing kits with the funds that will enable the Covid-19 testing laboratory there to test up to 300 samples a day for Malegaon. 

Plans are also afoot to increase the testing capacity of the newly established laboratory at Dr Vasantrao Medical College Hospital and Research Centre in Nashik for which MLA Devyani Pharande has pledged Rs 25 lakh. The funds will be used to buy an automatic RNA extraction machine to handle the process prior to testing of the throat swab samples. It will expedite the pace of testing. 

Sources from the district administration said the college would soon get another real-time PCR test machine.


