Covid distancing to go for a toss in trains as RAC passengers allowed
2020-06-01
Nagpur: Even as railway ministry will launch 100 pair of (200) passengers trains from June 1, social (Covid-19) distancing will go for a toss with the Railway Board allowing even reservation against cancellation (RAC) passengers.

Earlier, when the Railway Board decided to run these trains, it had specifically said that only confirmed ticket holders will be allowed to board these trains. 

“Now even RAC passengers will be allowed. So, what about Covid-19 distancing? After train services resumed those who have been detected coronavirus positive in various districts were travellers who returned from other states. Under such circumstances, RAC passengers should not be allowed,” said Brijbhushan Shukla of Rail Yatri Sangh.

On June 1, Hyderabad-Delhi and Secunderabad-Danapur trains will pass from Nagpur. TOI has already reported that with the announcement on May 20, berths in these trains were booked the next day.

As per railways statistics, on Day 1, more than 1.45 lakh passengers are expected to travel in these 200 trains. Over 26 lakh passengers booked for advance reservation period from June 1 to June 30, 2020. These services will be in addition to ‘Shramik Specials’ and 30 AC trains being run from May 12.

Senior railway officials, who did not want to be quoted, said, “It is true that in earlier advisory, RAC passengers were not allowed in these pair of trains, but there are always last minute cancellations and RAC get confirmed.”

Bharatiya Yatri Kendra (BYK) general secretary Basant Shukla said, “Even if RAC berths are meant for sitting during the day journey, what about night? Who will be responsible if such passengers, though look asymptomatic, are carriers of Covid-19.” 

These trains are on lines of regular trains and are fully reserved having both AC & non-AC classes. Even general coaches have reserved sitting accommodation. There will be no unreserved coach in the trains.

On Sunday, total bookings of passengers was over 25.82 lakh. Booking of tickets for these trains is being done online, at reservation counters and through ticketing agents. 

The advance reservation period (ARP) of all 230 specials has been increased from 30 to 120 days. Current booking and tatkal quota allocation of seats to road side stations to be same as in regular trains.


