Covid puts brakes on bus service project
2020-04-07
NASHIK: The coronavirus pandemic has pushed back the city bus service, which was expected to begin on May 1 (Maharashtra Day), as the nationwide lockdown has halted the planning and execution work on the project.

“The civic body was supposed to sign an agreement with the electric bus contractor, but could not do so because of the ongoing coronavirus crisis coupled with a lockdown,” said a civic official .

The NMC plans to run 400 buses (200 CNG, 50 diesel and 150 electric) and has already finalised three contractors for operating the services effectively. The agreements with the contractors for CNG and diesel buses have already been signed.

“We had already started working towards developing the infrastructure for the bus service project, but all development works have stopped for the past three weeks because of the Covid-19 outbreak,” the official said.

“We have received subsidy for 50 of the 150 electric buses from the Centre. Our plan was to sign the agreement with the contractor for operating these buses in the second half of March. But everything has been delayed,” he added.

The official said that the civic body had decided to launch the bus service on May 1 with 50 diesel buses and the remaining vehicles were to be deployed in phases.

The bus service is to be operated on gross cutting contract (GCC) for 10 years. This includes purchase of new buses, their maintenance, employing drivers and purchasing fuel. The NMC will pay charges to private agencies on kilometer basis.

“All 250 CNG and diesel buses arrived in the city last month and their RTO passing and fitness tests have been completed. The buses are parked at three locations in the city,” an official from the bus operating agency said.

“All our work has come to a standstill. Although the buses have arrived, we are yet to work on other fronts like maintenance and hiring employees. We will require a total workforce of 1,500 for operation and maintenance of 250 CNG and diesel buses. We have shortlisted the candidates for the posts of drivers, but the final selection is pending,” he added.


