Coronavirus proves a body blow for inbound tourism in Tamil Nadu
2020-02-29
With hundreds of international tourists who had booked a trip to Tamil Nadu in March forced to put off their plans, the Coronavirus (COVID-19 ) outbreak has thrown the tourism sector into a crisis.

 
 
While some foreign travellers could not make their trips to India due to travel restrictions from coronavirus-hit countries, many are cancelling their tour programmes due to fear surrounding the virus outbreak.

 
 
At least 3,000 tourists who were scheduled to visit Tamil Nadu and Kerala, kickstarting their India tour from Chennai, have called off their plans, said K Pandian, state chief of Indian Association of Tour Operators.

"There were six groups of Italian tourists each consisting of 25-27 individuals and two Japanese groups. Coronavirus has proved a disaster for the tourism sector… and has led to largescale cancellations not seen in the last two decades," he said. Several tour operators and hoteliers are suffering monetary losses, he added.

Due to the virus spreading across the world, the Union government had announced that people travelling from Korea, Iran and Italy or having a travel history to these countries since February 10 may be quarantined for 14 days on arrival in India. "Not just travel restrictions, many do not want to venture out of their country out of fear over contracting the disease," Pandian said.

Tamil Nadu has received the highest number of inbound tourists in the country consecutively for the last four years. The peak season for foreign travellers is between October and March. Approved Tour Guides Association president P Asoka said that approximately 20,000 inbound tourists would have booked their trips for March. "Most of these travellers are from European countries including France, Italy and UK, besides North America. The numbers are dipping because of Coronavirus, a havoc for the tourism sector," he said.

Another tour guides association official said that 50 % of their booking have seen cancellations. Secretary of Tourist Guides’ Federation of South India, Charles M, said that the tourist groups that are handled by members of their association are associated with more than 10 tour operators specialising in inbound tourism. "In some cases, hardly a few individuals are part of group tours. There is also an impact on free independent travellers from abroad," he said.

For tour operators, the virus that emerged out of the blue is proving to be a double-whammy as thousands of Indians have put off their foreign trips for the upcoming summer vacation. Southeast Asian countries are the worst hit for the tourism industry, while European countries are putting up travel restrictions, he said. City-based tour operator Sriharan Balan said several travellers from Tamil Nadu think flying out of India is a health risk. "We were pinning our hope on European countries. Those destinations have also been hit," he said.


