Coronavirus in Agra: Four members of shoe exporter’s family ‘cured’
2020-03-16
AGRA: Four members of Agra-based shoe exporter’s family who tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19) were said to have been recovered from the virus and discharged from Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital on Saturday. After being discharged, one of the family members said that doctors have asked them to “avoid social gatherings for a few days and maintain a high level of hygiene and sanitation”.

The four members returned home on Saturday evening. Notably, six members of the family who had returned from Italy in the last week of February were quarantined on March 3. Two other members of the family are still at the hospital.

Recalling the experience of their 13-day recovery, the family members praised the arrangements made by the doctors along with efforts of the Centre, the state government and district administration to control the spread of the virus.

Six members of the shoe exporter’s family were recently transferred to the hospital in Delhi from Agra district hospital. They were the shoe exporter (aged 44), his father (72), mother (62), wife (37), son (16) and younger brother (38). Except for the shoe exporter and his son, the other four members were discharged on Saturday. The father and son also reportedly tested negative. Another sample was then collected. A final test report was awaited.

The shoe exporter’s younger brother told TOI, “Doctors at the district hospital in Agra and Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital took good care of all the family members. We were kept in separate rooms. There was no television, but mobile phone was allowed. Isolation was a little depressing for all of us. We are happy to return home now. Both Central and state governments are doing a commendable job in preventing the spread of Covid-19. We want to thank the district administration as well.”

The shoe reporter’s father said, “Efficiency of doctors helped us to fully recover in a short span of time. We have been advised by doctors to avoid social gatherings for a few days and maintain hygiene. I hope my son and grandson will return home soon. I would like to suggest everyone to follow health advisory issued by the government.”

