Covid-19 positive man ‘escapes’ from Delhi to UP’s Budaun
2020-06-12
Bareilly: A 24-year-old man, who was tested positive for Covid-19 in Delhi on June 3, left for Budaun’s Kakrala town on June 8. The man, a tempo driver, was later found in his hometown Kakrala on Thursday and shifted to a Covid-19 level one hospital in Budaun’s Ujhani only after health department in Budaun received an alert from their counterparts in Delhi on Wednesday.The man was staying in Mahavir Enclave. He visited a government hospital in Delhi on June 1 after he sustained an eye injury. His samples for Covid-19 were collected and was found positive on June 3. However, the youth took a bus ride and reached Budaun on June 8 morning and went to Kakrala in a tempo. He later went to two hospitals in Budaun on June 9 and 10 for eye treatment.Budaun's chief medical officer Dr Yashpal Singh told TOI, "Though the patient fled from Delhi on night of June 7, we were informed only on June 10. We have found the patient and his treatment has started at Covid-19 level one hospital. We are trying to trace the people who came in contact with him."SHO of Alapur police station, Krishna Gopal Sharma, said, "Even after returning to Budaun, the patient did not inform anyone that he has been tested positive. We are waiting for a complaint to lodge an FIR against the man."Sadar sub-divisional magistrate, Parasnath Maurya, said, "We have sealed Kakrala and have declared the area as a hotspot."When contacted, the Covid-19 patient claimed, "I went to the hospital in Delhi for eye surgery but I learnt that I have been tested positive for Covid-19. I was told to call the helpline number. I didn’t get any response after trying for 30 minutes. The nurse at the hospital told me to visit another hospital. When I went to another hospital in Delhi, doctors asked me about my condition. I told them that though I am Covid-19 patient, I have pain only in my eye. I was asked to quarantine myself at home. I faced problems there and so, returned to Kakrala. The bus was almost empty and I stayed separately from my family and locals."The patient’s brother who has now been placed under institutional quarantine said, "We had no idea that he was tested positive for Covid-19. My brother has been living in another empty house since his arrival in Kakrala."This is the second such incident to be reported here. Another man who died due to Covid-19 on Tuesday had left Delhi for Budaun’s Myau and was booked by the police.