Chennai: Covid mimics Kawasaki in some kids, say doctors
2020-05-09
CHENNAI: Ten days ago, doctors at the Kanchi Kamakoti Childs Trust Hospital, a designated Covid-19 paediatric hospital, thought an eight-year-old patient had Kawasaki disease - an illness that causes inflammation in blood vessels throughout the body. The boy, however, test Covid-19 positive later and was discharged on Friday after a week’s treatment.

Doctors at the hospital said they tested the boy, a resident of East Tambaram, for Covid-19 only because he had respiratory infection. "It is mandatory for all hospitals to test patients admitted with severe acute respiratory infection. So we sent his samples from the ICU but did not strongly suspect Covid-19," said hospital medical director Dr S Balasubramanian. 

The boy had fever spike for nearly a week and was treated at another private hospital before he developed severe chest congestion. "Doctors there suspected Covid-19 but test results then were negative. When he came to us, he had red eyes, breathing difficulty, skin rashes, red lips and tongue and low blood pressure," said hospital’s chief intensivist Dr Balaramachandran. He was moved to an isolation room in the ICU and given high frequency oxygen along with IV fluids. "It looked like a clear case of Kawasaki. Some doctors said it could be toxic shock syndrome. But emerging literature from the west indicated that this could be Covid-19 as well," he said.

A lot about the SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, is still under research. "There are different symptoms it is presenting itself with. Studies say it could be triggering Kawasaki-like inflammatory responses in some children," a senior paediatrician said.

Even as Covid-19 results were awaited, doctors treated the boy for Kawasaki. "They said there was no treatment for Covid-19 but did not want to ignore their suspicion that it could be Kawasaki. They wanted to give him medicines that protect his heart. We agreed," said the boy’s father. He was also given antibiotics, intravenous immunoglobulin and low dose aspirin to prevent clots. 

After the fever failed to subside, he was given Tocilizumab, used to treat rheumatological fever. "He settled well. He was tested negative twice in the last two days," said Dr Balasubramanian.

His parents and younger sibling are negative but have been advised to stay in quarantine for 14 days. 


