Covid-19 screening at two more centres in Kolhapur
2020-05-13
KOLHAPUR: Considering the huge inflow of travellers into the city, the Kolhapur Municipal Corporation (KMC) has decided to begin screening of people with mild symptoms at two more centers — Isolation Hospital and D Y Patil hospital. 


At present, people entering the city are asked to get their screening done at the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje civil hospital. Those entering the district have been asked to get their check-ups done at two Covid Care Centres — Ichalkaranji and Gadhinglaj. 

Now, with two more screening facilities in the city, total eight facilities have been opened up in the district and the city.

The CPR hospital, which treats Covid-19 suspects and confirmed patients, is facing staff shortage. Moreover, the hospital is witnessing a surge in the number of patients coming in for healh check-up as a number of people are travelling to their hometowns and, for that, they have been asked to undergo medical check-up and get fitness certificate from the concerned medical facility. 

Civic chief Mallinath Kalshetti said, “We have screening facilities ready at two other hospitals — Isolation Hospital Shendapark and D Y Patil hospital. We have asked the staff at the entry points to ask the travellers to get screened at any of these two hospitals. We have also appointed four nodal officers to manage the travellers coming into the city.”

According to primary estimates, around 9,000 people have entered the city since the lockdown have been eased. Authorities estimate that equal number of people are expected to enter the city in the coming days. Currently, those entering the city from Pune and Mumbai are advised to get screened, however, citizens are getting panicked with the rising number of Covid-19 cases and the inflow of travellers into the city. They have asked the local committees to place all travellers in quarantine facilities. 

A senior district administration official, on the condition of anonymity, said, “There are less number of quarantine wards in the city and the district which are insufficient to accommodate a lot of people. Advisory has been issued to the staff on ground to let travellers coming from places other than Pune and Mumbai to go home and observe self-isolation. However, we have reported that cases are increasing in other districts as well and the people stranded there are inadvertently been asked to go home without screening. We have asked the local committees and volunteers to ensure the travellers stay at home for at least seven days and that they are checked for Covid-19 symptoms.”


