Covid+ man flees quarantine facility, found after 13 hours of nerve-racking search
2020-04-08
Meerut: In a shocking incident, a 65-year-old Covid-19 positive man from Nepal fled from the community health centre in Baghpat after breaking a window pane of the first floor and using bedsheets as rope even as policemen and health staff stood guard at the gate. The patient, who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin, was later found with the help of locals at a brick kiln after 13 hours of a frantic and nerve-racking manhunt.Inspector general (Meerut range) Praveen Kumar told TOI, “Timely circulation of the patient's details on the social media helped us catch him before it could lead to colossal damage. He was identified at the brick kiln, three kilometres from the health facility, by the locals who immediately informed us. Initially, he tried to run away and it was again a challenge to convince him to turn himself in as he could not be touched. It was an unprecedented situation for police department, which is trained to catch criminals. But somehow we calmed him down and then the health team took over. He was brought back to quarantine centre.”“He was admitted to the community hospital in Baghpat on April 4. He was part of a group of 27 people from Nepal, who had attended the Delhi Tablighi Jamaat gathering. He managed to flee from the hospital after breaking a window pane and using his bedsheet," Baghpat chief medical officer RK Tondon said.Denying a security lapse at the quarantine facility, district magistrate Shakuntala Gautam said, “There is only a special team of doctors that can walk into the quarantine wards and nobody else, including security staff, is allowed inside. We had policemen posted at the facility’s gate but he managed to escape. We will certainly strengthen the security at other centres after the incident.”“It’s a learning experience. Security cannot be set up outside a quarantine ward owing to the fear of contamination, but technology can come in handy. We are working on a model where all such facilities can be monitored at a control centre through CCTVs. Any unusual activity can be addressed in real time,” the IG said.The Markaz Nizamuddin gathering in Delhi has been linked to 30% of novel coronavirus cases across India. States have been tracking down and quarantining members of Tablighi Jamaat.Till Sunday, Uttar Pradesh had reported 278 cases, about half of which were linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi's Nizamuddin. The state has so far reported three deaths – one each in Basti, Meerut and Varanasi.