Coronavirus scare: Patna schools start sensitizing pupils
2020-03-13
PATNA: City schools have issued guidelines for their students to follow regarding novel coronavirus in the country. They have limited the number of gatherings, including the morning assembly, in order to maintain the prescribed one-metre distance between students.


The schools are conducting awareness drives in which children are being repeatedly instructed to maintain distance, wash hands frequently with soap and water, use sanitizers, keep handkerchief over mouth while coughing and sneezing among other instructions issued by the government of India.

Several private schools are closed as the final examinations are over for up to Class IX. As board examinations are going on in CBSE and CISCE affiliated schools, they have ensured one-metre space between children’s desks.

Rajiv Ranjan Sinha, principal of Baldwin Academy, said, “In each classroom, only 24 students are allowed and one teacher during the Class X and XII board examination. We are taking all precautionary measures. Students are allowed to wash hands during the exam and there is also one-metre gap between each desk.”

Data on individuals aged 18 years and below suggest that there is a relatively low attack rate in this age group (2.4% of all reported cases), according to the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). It, however, stresses on taking precautionary measures regardless of the low rate of infection among the young.

International School (ICSE and CBSE wings) organized an awareness programme against coronavirus at its main campus on Thursday. The symptoms and precautionary measures were demonstrated to students. An informative video was also shown at its smart classroom to add more clarity. The school distributed masks to students and instructed them to follow the precautions. School director Farhat Hasan instructed students to spread awareness among their family, friends and the society.

KK Kunjachan, principal of St Karen’s Secondary School, said since the school is closed, the administration is updating the precautionary measures on school mobile application for students.

Principal of DAV Public School Khagaul, HK Singh said, “Time-to-time, the teachers make students aware about the common symptoms of Covid-19, which include fever, cough, shortness of breath and severe cases of infection can cause pneumonia.”

The schools are also advising students not to attend the classes if they are feeling sick.

Instructions and precautions have also been issued for government-run schools by the Bihar Education Project Council (BEPC), a wing of the education department. The BEPC state project director, Sanjay Kumar Singh, has instructed district education officers and district programme officers to share information pamphlet of Covid-19, furnished by the Centre, which would come handy to teachers, to sensitise the students.

