Covid-19 may end in Punjab by July: Study
2020-05-23
CHANDIGARH: Punjab's worst phase of coronavirus pandemic is expected to be over soon and it may even end by the first week of July, predicts a study by Central University of Punjab, Bathinda and Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla.

By using classical susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model, the study, “Covid-19 Epidemic Forecast in Different States of India using SIR Model” indicates that the high growth phase of infection in Punjab will be over by second week of June, the curve will start flattening thereafter and the pandemic is expected to peter out by the first week of July with an estimated number of 3,300 people getting infected.




Data till May 12 was used to make the prediction and these estimations may become invalid if large fluctuation of data occurs in coming days. As on May 21, 2,028 people across the state were virus-positive.

The study states that Punjab has relatively good control over the epidemic, largely due to the strict prevention measures taken since March 22. Punjab was the first state in the country to impose curfew.

As far as other states are concerned, the epidemic in Kerala is in its final phase and is expected to end by first week of June.


Over by July, says study Study predicts upper and lower bounds of spread
Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir are predicted to get rid of Covid-19 by second week of August.

Delhi might have to wait till mid-October for it to end while the outbreak might end in West Bengal, Odisha by last week of November and first week of December, respectively.

The same group has also done another study --mathematical model based Covid-19 prediction in India and its different states – to predict the lower and upper bounds of spread till June 10.

The number of cases in Punjab till May 1 was 585, while the tally mounted to 1,700 within one week due to the influx of a large number of pilgrims returning from Nanded, Maharashtra.

As per the prediction based on data till May 12, on the lower side 2,548 people will get infected by June 10 and there may be 60 deaths, while on higher side 48,048 people could get the virus and 165 deaths may occur.

The study conducted by Mukesh Jakhar, Jaspreet Singh, Ashok Kumar, all from department of physics, school of basic and applied sciences, Central University of Punjab and PK Ahluwalia, department of physics, Himachal Pradesh University, recommended that the prevention measures need to be followed strictly, which will help in controlling the spread of the pandemic, failing the number of patients and deaths may rise exponentially.

"Our study provides an insight into the possible number of expected patients and deaths in coming months.

“This can help the governments to take appropriate preventive measures to manage the spread of deadly virus and go down the flattening curve," said Dr Ashok Kumar.


