Covid-19: At 10 new cases a day, G-South ward positive tally rises to 78
2020-04-08
MUMBAI: Covid-19 cases in G-South ward rose to 78 on Monday from 68 the previous day and 58 two days before, showed data made available on Tuesday.


New cases in coronavirus hot spots Worli Koliwada, Prabhadevi and some other areas resulted in a daily increase of 10 since Saturday in G-South ward, leaving other affected civic wards in the city far behind.

 

E ward, which includes Mazgaon, Nagpada and Byculla, had a positive count of 48 on Monday, 30 fewer than G-South. D ward, which includes Tardeo, Girgaum, Walkeshwar, Malabar Hill, Altamont Road, had 43 cases.

Most of the new cases in G-South were from Worli Koliwada, Adarsh Nagar, Janata Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Jijamata Nagar and BDD chawls. The BMC did not give any information on what had come of its efforts to identify the index case, or the first case from whom the infection spread.

Assistant municipal commissioner of G-South Sharad Ughade was unavailable for a comment on what was causing the spike in coronavirus positive cases.

Local MLA Aaditya Thackeray said on Twitter that on Tuesday “with the help of @1rupeeclinic 5144 people in Worli Koliwada were screened for symptoms. 12 were found with high grade fever”.


Today, with the help of @1rupeeclinic 5144 people in Worli Koliwada were screened for symptoms. 12 were found with… https://t.co/opD4OCz0YL— Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) 1586270979000
He further tweeted: “Tomorrow too, this drive will continue, till all the residents are covered. This is the second such drive in Worli Koliwada. Along with supplies of essentials as kits, separate kits for senior citizens across Worli, we are focussing majorly on the containment of Covid 19. The spike in cases is being seen as we chase each case with contact tracing, testing and isolating carriers. The only way to contain covid on a larger scale, as seen globally, is to take the health aspect head on. That’s exactly being done. Survey more people, test the suspect cases, realise where they are and restrict the spread.”

The BMC also began disinfecting localities like Jijamata Nagar, Kamble Nagar, Markadeshwar Nagar, Mariamma Nagar and surrounding areas. Officials said disinfection of Pochkhanawala and Worli seaface areas was also in progress.

The BMC said it also planned to cover Lower Parel, Prabhadevi and Elphinstone.

