Covid-19 test, treatment in city pvt set-up still a distant dream
2020-03-18
Nagpur: Even though government of India has decided to allow private laboratories accredited by National Accreditation Board for Laboratories (NABL) to conduct tests for novel coronavirus (Covid-19), Nagpurians are not going to get this facility in near future.

At present, the city has only one laboratory that fulfils all conditions for Covid-19 tests. However, the health department has not issued any directives in this regard yet.

Similarly, Maharashtra health minister Rajesh Tope said on Tuesday that private hospitals can treat Covid-19 positive patients in their isolation wards. However, no private hospital in the city has isolation ward that meets the required criteria for Covid-19 treatment. This means suspects and patients in Vidarbha willing to undergo tests and treatment in private hospitals will have to rely only on government set-up at least for a considerable period.

At present, only government labs are permitted to conduct Covid-19 tests and positive patients are treated in isolation wards of the government hospitals only.

Central guidelines allow testing only for symptomatic individuals with travel history to affected countries. There are many who are symptomatic, but do not fit the current criteria. Central government has said that all such persons who wish to undergo tests can do so in private labs. But the city has only one such lab ready for conducting the tests after getting a go ahead from health department.

“Several labs in Nagpur have NABL-accreditation, but this is not enough to conduct Covid-19 tests,” said Dr Madhavi Deshmukh, vice-president of Vidarbha Association of Medical Microbiologists (VAMM). “Labs must have necessary equipment, ambience, isolation facilities, technicians trained in National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, and the testing agent which is to be provided by government agencies,” she said.

Presently, Dhruv Pathology and Molecular Diagnostic Lab is the only one in Nagpur where the tests can be started immediately.

“We have trained technicians, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) machines with open platform. We use same ABS system which is used in Indira Gandhi Government Medical College & Hospital (IGGMCH). I have personally informed health department that our lab is fully equipped and willing to conduct these tests. Authorities have asked us to wait as the state is yet to release permissions for private labs,” said Dr Shailendra Mundhada, managing director of Dhruv Lab.

Dr Sandeep Yadav, president of Maharashtra Association of Practising Pathologists and Microbiologists, said there are only a few such labs in the state. “As there are only some labs that fit into the government criteria at present, instead of allowing private labs, government should rather focus on strengthening lab facilities at GMCHs,” he said.

Private hospitals not ready: VHA

Many Covid-19 patients may be willing to get treatment in private hospitals, but no corporate hospital in Nagpur is designed for it, said Dr Anup Marar, secretary of Vidarbha Hospitals Association (VHA). 

“We can’t provide separate isolation, separate air conditioning and oxygenation to Covid-19 patients. Instead, we have suggested government to take over one full hospital with less occupancy. Other hospitals will provide necessary infrastructure and trained staff, if necessary. We can’t admit these patients in our existing set-ups,” he said.

During swine flu outbreak, many private hospitals experienced that patients admitted to other wards left as soon as they came to know about serious patients being treated in the same building. Because of this, not many private hospitals will come forward to treat Covid-19 patients.

Govt Is Only Hope

Centre has permitted private labs to conduct Covid-19 tests

The test, which is conducted free in govt labs, may cost up to Rs9,000 in pvt set-up

State health minister has permitted pvt hospitals to treat Covid-19 positive patients

But, not many private labs or hospitals in Nagpur fulfil required criteria

Labs may have NABL accreditation, but don’t have PCR machines, separate premises etc

Corporate hospitals don’t have separate entrance, isolation wards, separate oxygenation, air conditioning and trained staff to treat such patients


