COVID-19 scare: IIM-Ahmedabad cancels convocation
2020-03-13
AHMEDABAD: India’s premier B-school IIM Ahmedabad (IIM-A) on Thursday announced the cancellation of its annual convocation. The official press release cited the advisory issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare and the World Health Organization for the move.


‘In view of the advisories issued by the ministry of health and family welfare and the World Health Organization, to avoid large gatherings since the eruption of the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak, we have decided to defer the annual convocation scheduled for March 21, 2020,’ read the release. 

 
 

‘The decision has been taken to preclude any risks to students and their extended families and friends as well as to the faculty and employees of the institute.’

IIM-A officials said a total of 498 students of PGP, PGP-FABM, PGPX and FPM courses were to get the degrees at the convocation. “An announcement regarding dates for receiving degrees will be made soon, students can have their pictures clicked while receiving the degree. But it will be spaced out over several days, so that probable spread can be prevented. 

Respective course office would arrange for the disbursing of gold medals and academic honours as well,” said a senior official.

IIM-A has provided hand sanitizers outside dorms and classrooms and has engaged the student health club ‘Panacea’ to organize awareness events with faculty members, students and families on campus, said officials. Sources said the institute is keeping close watch on exchange students coming from and going to destinations abroad.

The B-school is the first to cancel major academic events in the city while several academic conferences and workshops by various city and state-based universities are under a shadow. 

63 samples negative 

As on Thursday afternoon, Gujarat laboratories had tested 65 samples. In all, 63 have tested negative and the results for two are pending, state health department officials said. The officials said that they are receiving more than 500 calls daily on the fever helpline of which about 200 relate to COVID-19. As on Thursday, 2,611 travellers have been screened at airports of whom 1,217 have completed the 14-day observation period. On Thursday, 250 more travellers were screened, said health department officials. Civil Hospital said no new case was registered till Thursday evening. 

