Covid-19: Weekly vegetable markets shut in Hubballi-Dharwad
2020-03-19
Hubballi: Officials’ attempt to shut the weekly vegetable markets at Ashok Nagar and Lingaraj Nagar over the Covid-10 precautions met with resistance from vendors, leading to fracas at these two places on Wednesday.

In the morning, officials of the HDMC’s health department and police personnel were ready to shut the market at Lingaraj Nagar. As vendors arrived with vegetables, HDMC personnel tried to convince them to return. The vendors were agitated at the advice, stating that their investment will go waste. They told the authorities that they should have first shut the APMC from where they procured vegetables.

As a heated argument ensued, police intervened and warned the vendors. However, the vendors tried to sell vegetables to nearby households. The HDMC officials warned the buyers of booking cases against them.

Vendors set up makeshift shops after officials left the area. However, officials returned to warn the vendors, saying the vegetables will be loaded to the HDMC garbage vans. Then vendors tried setting up shops at other places, but officials chased them away. The drama continued till the afternoon.

Neelavva, a vendor who has a 4-year-old daughter, cried over her helplessness, saying she lost her day’s earning. HDMC officials and police personnel educated her about Covid-19 and helped her pack the vegetables.

A similar situation prevailed at the weekly vegetable market in Ashok Nagar. Vendors requested the authorities to allow them two hours of selling but were denied the permission and told to sell the vegetables wandering the streets.

Meanwhile, people were frantic in their effort to buy vegetables as uncertainty prevailed over the resumption of weekly vegetable markets. They also fear sky-rocketing prices of vegetables in the days to come. Some people were lucky to get vegetables for a lesser price, but most of them were left disappointed.

“We are decongesting weekly markets by asking vendors to sit at distant places. Citizens have said they will face difficulties if weekly markets are banned. Vendors have also requested to allow their business. When we brought this issue to the notice of deputy commissioner Deepa Cholan, she allowed to balance requirement of essential commodities and avoid the wastage of vegetables,” said HDMC commissioner Suresh Itnal.


