Covid 19 patient with transplanted kidney recovers
2020-04-14
Siliguri: A 58-year-old Covid-19 patient from Kalimpong, who had undergone a kidney transplant 14 years ago, recovered and was discharged from a private hospital in Siliguri on Saturday. While four other Covid- 19 positive patients were released from the hospital, four more were released from Beliaghata ID Hospital on Sunday.

The man, a close kin of the 44-year-old-woman, who had succumbed to the virus on March 30, is probably the first Covid-19 positive person with a serious renal condition to survive the viral attack.

 He was released from Dr Chang’s Hospital in Siliguri where he had been undergoing treatment since April 1 along with five others of the family, including the two who had tested positive. Four other Covid-19 positive patients were released from the hospital on Sunday.

Even though the Kalimpong patient had tested positive, he remained asymptomatic. But since he had undergone a kidney transplant in 2006 and was exposed to the family member who died of Covid-19, doctors called him vulnerable and got his samples tested. He was admitted to hospital immediately after his test report confirmed Covid-19.The patient’s son Bijay Singh said his father had been under medication and underwent check-ups at an interval of every six months. 

“He had to lead a restricted life and his lifestyle is different from others in the family. Apart from the kidney transplant, he does not have any other medical history. He was asymptotic but tested positive for Covid-19. We were extremely worried for him but thankfully he has recovered,” he said. Three members of the family had tested positive on April 1. Gopal Krishna Dhali, a member of the health expert committee for Covid- 19 said the family members were released after they had tested negative twice and their health condition was found to be stable. 

The co-morbidities, however, could have been fatal, according to doctors in Kolkata. “A diabetic with a transplanted kidney will be more vulnerable to a Coronavirus attack than the rest. And the virus could do much more damage to such a patient since he or she is likely to have lower immunity, which makes the viral attack more severe, often fatal,” said Arindam Biswas of RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS).

Out of 11 Covid -19 patients at Dr Chang’s Hospital, seven have been discharged and the rest have been undergoing treatment. 


