Covid-19 death: Telangana man’s funeral held in Tvm
2020-05-31
T’puram/Alappuzha: The funeral of Anchayya, 68, a resident of Telangana who died of Covid-19 here on Wednesday was held at Juma masjid, Vallakadavu on Saturday. Anchayya, along with his wife Lekshmi and son Ravi, had reached the district on May 22 without valid travel documents. Authorities said that they were headed for Hyderabad and wrongly disembarked in Thiruvananthapuram. Anchayya is from Nalgonda in Telangana.

The three of them were shifted to Covid care centre at Poojappura. Anchayya was later moved to General hospital after he developed symptoms and died on May 27. His results came positive for Covid-19 on May 28. The swabs of his son and wife were collected and the results have been negative. 

Earlier, the collector held talks with the family members of Anchayya with the help of Narasimhugari T L Reddy, civil supplies director, and got their consent for burial at Vallakadavu Juma masjid. The family preferred funeral as per their religious custom. The funeral rites were done in strict compliance with the Covid-19 protocol. The officials said that the family members will be sent back to Hyderabad.

Joy’s body cremated 

The body of Jose Joy (38) of Pandanad in Chengannur, who died of Covid-19 at Alappuzha Medical Cosllege Hospital on Friday, was cremated at the gas crematorium of Alappuzha municipality on Saturday. The district administration officials said that though they first planned a burial in his church cemetery at Pandanad, they had to give up the plan due to the presence of water when dug around five feet there. 

“As per the Covid protocol, the grave should be dug to a depth of 12 feet. It was not possible to conduct his funeral in the cemetery due to the presence of water. So, with the consent of family members and head of the church, the body was cremated in the gas crematorium of the municipality,” said the officials.

Joy, who returned from the UAE on May 27, was under quarantine.


