Covid Hospital nurse, 11 others test +ve; Amravati count 164
2020-05-25
Amravati: A spike of 12 Covid positive cases on Sunday put the district administration on high alert which ordered for micro-planning in containment zones and listing of all chronic blood pressure and diabetes patients therein besides taking swabs of individuals down with fever for five or more days.

With the hotspots continuing to throw up positive cases unbridled, guardian minister Yashomati Thakur held an urgent meeting with the administration, ordering micro-planning in containment zones while collector Shailesh Naval made a tour of all isolation centers in these zones and ordered for listing all BP and diabetes patients therein and providing medicines to them besides taking x-ray of symptomatic cases and swabs of persons with fever for five or more days.

A 45-year-old nurse at Covid Hospital here and a five-year-old girl are among the 12 who tested positive for novel coronavirus on Sunday, taking the district’s count to 164, according to an official release.

The nurse, 11th corona warrior and the fourth from the hospital to contract the virus, had her swab taken when she was quarantined after putting in 10 days’ duty at Covid Hospital. Her swab tested positive today. A community health officer (a resident of Anant Nagar in Akola) of Covid Hospital tested positive on Saturday while two health workers (now recovered) had tested positive earlier.

Besides the nurse, three members of a family from Habib Nagar, females aged 5 and 30 and a male aged 33, also tested positive this morning after they were put in institutional quarantine when a 32-year-old male in the family tested positive on May 21. The fifth case of the day is also from Habib Nagar, a female aged 65, an official said.

With Habib Nagar reporting four cases today, its count has gone up to eight, including two recovered cases.

In the evening, seven more tested positive. They included a 19-year-old from Masanganj, the hotspot’s 24th case; a man and a woman aged 30 and 65, respectively, from Shiv Nagar, which has earlier given three cases, an 11-year-old girl from Al Hilal Colony, which reported a death on Saturday, and males aged 22 and 54 and a female aged 36 from Habib Nagar no. 1 locality.

The district’s count of 164 now includes 15 deaths, 76 recovered, 71 active cases and two referred to GMCH Nagpur.

“We received 171 reports today and 159 of them tested negative while 12 positive,” said Naval.


