Covid-19 positive migrants clueless about how they have contracted the virus
2020-05-24
BAREILLY: When a 28-year-old man reached Bareilly from Mumbai on May 17 by a special train and a bus, he thought that worst was over for him and he would be able to be with his family on Eid. However, after he asked his family to pick him up from a temporary shelter home where he was quarantined, officials told him that his pool test came positive. Later, his individual test report also confirmed positive on Friday night.

The asymptomatic patient, a native of Hafizganj in Bareilly, who was working as a 'zari' (hand-embroidery) artisan in Mumbai, said, “I am surprised that I have tested positive even as I never felt sick during the lockdown period. I don’t know how I contracted the virus.” 

Like him, 18 migrants, mostly from Mumbai and Rajasthan, tested positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly in the past one week. Besides, two relatives of migrants contracted the virus through two patients.

Another 24-year-old patient who travelled from Mumbai to Bareilly, along with a 24-year-old youth, said, “The lockdown rendered us jobless and we were surviving on food given by people. In such a difficult time, we desperately wanted to be with our family. We reached Lucknow by a special train and then we were sent to Bareilly in a bus. We couldn’t even meet our parents and siblings as we were transferred from the shelter home to a hospital.” 

“When I learnt that I have tested positive for Covid-19, I could not believe it initially because I am healthy and had not come in contact with any positive case,” he added. 

A 40-year-old man, who walked from Jaipur to Hathras and was later sent to Bareilly in a bus, said, “I along with my family members was quarantined at a shelter home in Bareilly. To my surprise, I tested positive but my wife and children tested negative. Though it is a matter of relief that my family is safe, I am clueless about how I have contracted the virus.”

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “When the migrants from other states are sent, they are screened for fever, which is not the only criterion, as asymptomatic patients do not show symptoms. These migrants carry the virus and may infect other travellers if social distancing is not followed in vehicles like trucks. We are collecting pool samples for the test of all the migrants. If the pool test comes positive, we collect individual samples of these people.


