Covid-19 patient who gave birth, infant faring well
2020-06-15
Mangaluru: A woman who tested positive for Covid-19 and delivered a baby boy at Wenlock Hospital is recovering. Her next swab sample will be drawn during the week, and if it tests negative, she will be discharged and sent home. The woman hails from Kinnigoli in Mangaluru taluk, and had returned from Maharashtra in an advanced state of pregnancy.

Referred to Wenlock Hospital from a private hospital, as she had returned from Maharashtra, a Covid-19 hotspot, health authorities, as a matter of norm, tested her for the novel coronavirus, and she was found to be positive on Wednesday. When she went into labour the next day, doctors performed a Caesarean operation to deliver the child. She is the first Covid-19 patient in the district to deliver a baby, while under quarantine, said district health authorities.

Dr Ramachandra Bairy, district health and family welfare officer, said that with no known history of transmission of this virus in the womb to the unborn child, it is unlikely that the child will contract the disease. The anti-bodies that the disease generates in a person, the mother in this case, will prove to be a protective shield for the infant, Dr Bairy said, adding that care has been taken at the hospital, to ensure she does not infect the infant through fomites.

Unlike in AIDS where HIV is known to transmit from mother to the child in 20-30% cases, through the placenta, Dr Bairy said the infant could be tested once the mother tests negative, to ascertain if maternal antibodies through the blood have prevented transmission or not. With the woman having undergone a C-section, Dr Bairy said she will remain in the hospital for at least 7 days, during which time her second swab report is expected.

Noting that there are no more such cases, Dr Bairy said two pregnant women who had earlier tested positive, have since been discharged after treatment. Incidentally, Dakshina Kannada, in the initial days of the pandemic, had witnessed a situation where a 10-month old infant had tested positive, while the child’s mother and grandmother, who were its primary contacts, had tested negative. Infants are not separated from mothers in such cases, Dr Bairy said.


