Covid-19 scare: DCA issues orders against hoarding meds
2020-03-06
Vijayawada: The Drug Control Administration (DCA) has issued an advisory to pharmaceutical companies and pharmacies in view of the Covid-19 positive cases reported in the country.

The DCA directed chemists and pharmacists not to hoard 58 medicines that were identified as essential drugs in treatment of Covid-19 patients.

The Director General of DCA, A Mallikarjuna reviewed the preparedness of the DCA in dealing with the Covid-19. 

He constituted a Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) headed by him with deputy director (DD) and assistant directors (AD) of three different wings as members.

The CMU will monitor availability of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) and Key Starting Material (KSM) for manufacturing of essential drugs identified by the union government. Mallikarjuna said that raw material required for some of the APIs and KSM is imported from China. As the supplies were affected with Covid-19 outbreak in China, there were concerns over availability of raw material for making the essential drugs.

Mallikarjuna allayed the fears of raw material shortage as the inspections conducted by DCA confirmed that abundant raw materials available with the manufacturers and the supplies of essential drugs will not get affected in any manner. 

In view of the larger public interest in the wake global health concerns, he directed the pharmaceutical companies manufacturing APIs not to hoard or block the supplies to take undue advantage of the situation.

On the other hand, the DG also directed the chemists and pharmacists across the state not to overcharge face masks and sanitizers in view of increased demand. He advised to keep adequate stocks in their stores and not to increase prices for public interest. 

He appealed to people to be careful and maintain personal hygiene as a preventive measure and asked to lodge complaints if any chemists over charge masks of other products by calling on 9490153357. 

He warned that stringent action will be initiated on those who resort to illegal practices.


