Mumbai: Covid ‘hospitals’ at BKC, Worli to get deans
2020-05-15
MUMBAI: The jumbo makeshift Covid care centres coming up at MMRDA ground in BKC, and NSCI Dome and Mahalaxmi Race Course in Worli—being prepped to function as full-fledged hospitals—will have medical deans at the helm.

In addition to the 1,008-bed Covid care facility nearing completion in BKC, the MMRDA has plans for a second one with another 1,000 beds. Meanwhile, the combined beds strength at NSCI Dome, which currently has 500, and the facility coming up in Mahalaxmi Race Course will be 1,400. That apart, NSCI Dome will have a 70-bed ICU, of which 40 will be modular and 30 mobile. A dean will be given the charge of both NSCI and Mahalaxmi centres. Another dean will head the 1,008-bed facility at MMDRA, of which 504 will have oxygen support too.

“These mammoth medical centres will almost work like hospitals. So, a decision has been taken to appoint deans to supervise them,” said Manisha Mhaiskar, principal secretary, who is on a deputation to the BMC. She added the process of recruitment will begin shortly. Civic authorities also plan another 500-bed facility on the J J Hospital campus in Byculla.

Dr T P Lahane, who heads the Directorate of Medical Education and Research (DMER), said the super-speciality building could be converted into a Covid hospital. “We are looking at it as an option,” he said.

Moreover, in what will be a major boost to beds in the western suburbs, MMRDA will develop yet another 1,000-bed facility, including a 100-bed Covid ICU. Metropolitan commissioner R A Rajeev said, “Work on the second facility will begin after handing over the first facility to the state government. The second facility will have 1,000 beds, 10% of which will be for an ICU.”

Sources said the state government might have wanted to add more facilities in BKC due to its proximity to red zones such as Dharavi and Kurla that have seen a huge spurt in Covid cases. In the first 1,008-bed facility, which is likely to be handed over on Saturday, washrooms and toilets will be available for patients within the premises itself. A laboratory is also being prepared to examine patients in the hospital. X-ray and ECG facility will be available too.

Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray had requested MMRDA to assist in the modular quarantine and isolation facility in order to ramp up beds for Covid preparedness. Jupiter Hospital, Thane, will provide medical facilities as part of corporate social responsibility activity towards this quarantine facility at BKC.

Lahane said over 4,500 private doctors who have shown willingness to participate in the Covid fight are likely to be placed in these upcoming hospitals.


