Covid-19 scare exposes poor infrastructure of zilla parishad schools
2020-03-15
AURANGABAD: As a precautionary measure to prevent Coronavirus from spreading in schools, the zilla parishad administration said that it will reserve special funds for setting up suitable infrastructure in its schools. Subsequently, it has come to fore that the schools lacked basic infrastructure for several years.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In a meeting held earlier this month, deputy divisional commissioner, Aurangabad, instructed the teaching and administrative staff of ZP schools about the measures to be taken for preventing spread of Covid -19. 

In the meeting, the schools were informed that necessary arrangements for hand washing must be made at schools and anganwadis. The schools were asked to ensure that sufficient water and soap or hand wash be provided to the students. Also, the schools were instructed to educate the students on the importance of washing hands regularly.

Schools were also told that they could use grants for the making the resources available for students as well as staff. 

The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009, under Section 19 enlists norms and standards a school must follow. It mandates the schools to ensure that drinking water facility and sanitation facilities, including toilets and hand washing facilities, are available at the schools. However, many ZP schools in the district lack these basic facilities, said health activist Vilas Jadgale.

Jagdale, a homeopath, said that the lack of facility for washing hands is not merely related to coronavirus. “The lack of hygiene in children leads to diarrhoea and even typhoid. This further leads to reduction in immunity which makes them vulnerable to infections,” he said. Tanks that store drinking water for children in schools are also rarely cleaned and that is why they develop algae and other impurities, he added.

When asked, Aurangabad ZP CEO Mangesh Gondavale agreed that hand washing facilities should be available at schools at all times. Gondavale, who took charge of his office recently, said that he will see to it that the schools have soaps/hand wash, hand washing stations and sufficient water.

According to Mahesh Labde, a teacher and activist, the government has stopped sending hand wash or soaps for the last three years. Subsequently, the teachers in the school shell out money from their pocket to ensure that toiletries are made available for students, he said. “As midday meal is served in schools, the students must wash their hands before eating,” Labde said. 


