Covid-19 worst catastrophe faced by the tourism industry: TAAI
2020-03-08
PUNE: The Travel Agents Association of India (TAAI), the nodal travel and tourism association in the country, has dubbed the spread of Covid-19 as the worst catastrophe the tourism industry has ever faced, with travellers dropping travel plans due to virus fears.


Jyoti Mayal, president, TAAI, told TOI that business has virtually come to a standstill after the spread of Covid-19. “Many jobs are at stake and it will be difficult for the industry to survive as more than 50% of the annual business is conducted during April–July every year,” she said.

Mayal said that the association was finding ways to ease the situation for travellers and appealed to the government to release a circular to airlines to grant waivers on rescheduling charges and cancellations on “compassionate” grounds.

“With the Covid-19 scare all over the globe, travellers are panicking and cancelling their trips. Tourism boards in many countries have released travel advisories, while events are being cancelled, flights curtailed, and tourist attractions shut. Corporates are also putting their travel plans on hold,” said Mayal.

She added that there have been many cancellations/disruptions in flights worldwide and even the International Air Transport Association (IATA) has requested aviation regulators for an immediate suspension of rules governing airport slots. “Further, the IATA has demanded flexibility for airlines to adjust their schedules, keeping in mind the global crisis. Only a few airlines operating from India as well as other airlines globally are waiving off the charges. Travel agents are trying their best to help customers by offering credit notes for a later date travel or help them get refunds on cancelled flights. But most airlines, hotels, luxury trains etc are not offering refunds,” she added.

Another TAAI source said, “Travellers need to be patient. In the approaching holiday season, outbound travel can be replaced with domestic. Health and life of customers is of utmost importance, but the uncertainty of the situation being faced by travel agents is genuine and customers need to understand the same.”

Meanwhile, travel app ixigo has announced a full refund for all flight bookings to China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Iran, Italy, Spain, Singapore, South Korea and Japan. The policy is applicable on both one-way and return bookings for travel dates up to March 31, 2020.

Aloke Bajpai, co-founder and chief executive officer, ixigo, said, “In the context of this global emergency, we have rolled out a policy to help travellers who wish to cancel or postpone their trips. We are providing a no-questions asked full refund on the countries most impacted by Covid-19, irrespective of the airline’s own policy in this regard. We will continue to monitor the situation and extend the waiver, if the need arises.”


