Covid still an enigma, so prevention must: Experts
2020-05-09
PRAYAGRAJ: The novel coronavirus has spread across 187 countries and the lockdown to check the pandemic has made people inquisitive about ways to protect themselves and their loved ones.

Since research is on full swing in top institutes worldwide to unravel the mystery of the virus unknown till the outbreak in China, TOI spoke to a number of experts about the findings and its survival on surfaces like veggies, fruits, wood, metals.

Dr Archana Bajpai, a research associate at Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, who is an Allahabad University alumna, said, “A study carried out by independent researchers and Prof. Alex W H Chin of the University of Hong Kong and published in the Lancet journal has shown that coronavirus is unstable at high temperatures. It has a long lifespan at low temperature like 4°C, but it is extremely sensitive to heat. Its survival is reduced to 50% in one day at 37°C and it gets completely killed in five minutes at 70°C.”

Studies do not support assertions about sitting in sun or taking hot bath preventing infection as these only kill virus on surface and not the one that has entered body, cautioned Bajpai, who did her masters in biomathematics, bioinformatics, and computational biology from AU.

“The study says the virus has a life span of 24 hours on wood and cloth, 48 hours on glass and more than four days on steel and plastic. So, one should not touch metal rods or wooden bench on going out,” she said.

Another AU alumnus Vipul Gupta, now a research associate at Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, said, “A study, published in New England Journal of Medicine by Dr Van Doremalen and Bushmaker of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, USA, and Morris of Princeton University, has shown that the virus does not survive on copper for more than four hours.”

“Unwrapped fruits, vegetables should be washed thoroughly under running water and left to dry,” said Gupta.

“In India, food is cooked on high temperature, hence the virus, if any, gets killed during cooking. This is why freshly-cooked takeaway food delivered with minimum contact can be safe,” he added.

Prof S I Rizvi of biochemistry department, AU, said, “The main difficulty in dealing with novel coronavirus is that it is absolutely new and researchers are still grappling to study its stability. The most intriguing trait of this virus is that it does not cause any symptoms in 80% patients. Thus, lockdown was the only effective way out to pin the virus in confined areas.”

Prof I R Siddiqui of chemistry department, AU, said, “Scientists and doctors worldwide are doing their best to develop a vaccine. Till the time a safe vaccine is developed, the only way to prevent its spread is to follow social distancing, avoid crowds, washing hands, sanitization, etc. The vegetables and fruits purchased from market must be thoroughly washed, preferably first with potassium permanganate solution and then with sufficient clean water.”


