COVID-19: Ahmedabad elderly couple placed in isolation
2020-03-05
AHMEDABAD: A couple from Satellite in Ahmedabad, both 60, were admitted to SVP hospital and kept in the COVID-19 isolation ward on Wednesday for observation. The couple had returned from Japan a few days ago and the woman started showing COVID-like symptoms.

A few hours after she was admitted, her husband too was hospitalized after he complained of cold symptoms. The blood samples of the couple have been sent for tests to BJ Medical College.

 
 
Gujarat has sought permission from the Union government to set up two more COVID-19 testing facilities, in south Gujarat and Saurashtra. Currently, the samples of suspected coronavirus patients are being tested only at BJ Medical College.

Principal secretary, health and family welfare, Jayanti Ravi, told TOI on Wednesday: "We do not have any case of coronavirus in the state yet. But just to be fully prepared, we have sent a proposal to set up COVID-19 testing facilities." She said the clearance was yet to come through.

Meanwhile, a 23-year-old city woman who had been admitted to the isolation ward of the civil hospital tested negative for COVID-19, on Wednesday evening. Till date, all Gujarat samples which have been tested for COVID-19 at BJ Medical College have tested negative. "The woman returned from Singapore on Tuesday. She complained of sore throat and other COVID-19 symptoms," Ravi said.

The state government on Wednesday intensified the screening of international passengers and buttressed facilities at government hospitals. Ahmedabad civil hospital has been designated as the base hospital for tackling the outbreak, and 29 isolation wards have been set up and equipped with ventilators. 

Besides, isolation wards have been set up at every medical college and district hospital in the state. "The state is geared up to deal with coronavirus. We have 576 isolation wards and 204 ventilators in place," commissioner of health Jai Prakash Shivhare said on Wednesday. Besides airports, all shipping ports are also being closely monitored. Till date, 1,454 passengers have been screened from 24 ships, according to the Gujarat health department.


