Covid cases continue to pour in from western UP; 5 in Agra & Meerut reports 12
2020-05-28
AGRA/MEERUT: Even as Covid-19 cases from western UP's major hotspot Agra showed some signs of slowing down, cases from Meerut and other parts of the region continued to pour in, till Wednesday evening, with Muzaffarnagar reporting its first Covid death.

At least five new cases surfaced in Agra, taking the district's tally to 875. Two patients of Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI), a patient suffering from chest pain and vomiting at SN Medical College, an ICU patient of a private hospital and an 18-year-old student were among those infected. The affected areas, on Wednesday, were Bodla, Sadar, Chipitola, Balkeshwar and Paliwal Park locality. 

Nine patients were discharged. Out of the 875 cases, 88% have "recovered", while 76 remain active. CMO RC Pandey confirmed, “So far, 766 people have recovered and discharged.”

In Meerut, at least 12 cases were reported, taking the tally to 399 which included one found in Kanpur. A 78-year-old woman from Subhash Nagar also died, taking the toll to 24, according to Dr SK Garg, principal of LLRM Medical College. “The deceased woman had respiratory problem, septicaemia and diabetes as comorbidity,” Dr Garg added.

“The 12 positive cases in Meerut included six PAC jawans, brother of a BJP member whose driver had earlier tested positive and died, one Nagar Nigam employee, one nephew of a positive case who had died two days ago, and three others,” said Dr Raj Kumar, Meerut's CMO.

Eleven fresh cases were reported from Muzaffarnagar, taking the tally to 61. Muzaffarnagar's DM Sevakumari Jayarajan said, “All the positive cases are migrant labourers who had come from Tamil Nadu." Muzaffarnagar reported its first Covid death on Wednesday, with the passing away of an 83-year-old woman who was also suffering from kidney ailment.

While Hapur reported 16 new cases, taking its tally to 138. There were 10 from Delhi Gate, four from Pilkhuwa and two from Garh, including a doctor at community health centre and a hotel employee. Also, one positive case was reported in Shamli, one in Baghpat and two in Saharanpur. There was one death reported in Baghpat as well. 

Three people tested positive in Bijnor. All are migrant labourers. According to Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav, total tally is now 83 with 36 active ones.

There were also 15 new cases reported in Moradabad district, taking the district tally to 197. Here, among the new cases, three are said to be Mumbai returnee bar dancers. Also, among the 15, one was a 50-year-old patient who died, but his report arrived later. In neighbouring Sambhal, four fresh cases emerged - all of them are migrants. Tally in Sambhal has reached 72 now.

Moreover, three new cases were found in Pilibhit, taking the tally to 44, with 14 recoveries.


