Covid Yoddhas join cops in fight against street wanderers
2020-05-24
NAGPUR: A man coming from Timki, declared as containment area, was sent back by the Covid Yoddhas (warriors) from Kachipura Square, after he failed to offer any satisfactory explanation for coming there. They later reported about his presence to the concerned police station.

Risking their lives, these warriors are seen at major squares working shoulder to shoulder with the police officials in regulating the traffic and also helping in maintaining law and order situation in the city. Wielding sticks, they check all vehicle riders and tell them to strictly maintain traffic rules and regulations. 

The warriors force many to go back home if they are not wearing masks, helmets or carrying licence. They also ensure that only two persons travel in a four-wheeler — passenger on the rear seat — to maintain Covid distancing.

A group of about 15 young and old citizens has joined the Bajaj Nagar police station as Covid Yoddhas after a call was given by chief minister Uddhav Thackeray to citizens to join the fight against deadly coronavirus. 

They can be seen at Rahate Colony, Kachipura, Chhatrapati, Deekshabhoomi, Shankar Nagar and other major squares in morning and evening hours.

“They are of big help to our police force which can’t man all the major squares due to manpower shortage. Our personnel are with them always, which includes women officers,” Bajaj Nagar police inspector Kshirsagar, who has joined the warriors on many occasions, said.

Shashank Chobe, a volunteer, said they are willingly helping police who are fighting this pandemic, away from their families. “We work from 8am to 10am and then from 4.30pm to 7.30pm. As per directives, we question everyone passing through the designated areas and check their documents,” he said.

According to another volunteer, Prasad Kokje, they find many people, particularly youngsters, roaming unnecessarily and carrying fake or false medical prescription, as old as three years. “We request them to go back home to avoid getting infected by the deadly virus,” he said.

No questions are asked to doctors and nurses if they are in uniform, said Uday Deshkar. “We also don’t stop food delivery boys. For all other passers-by, we insist on producing the documents or genuine reasons to venture out of home,” he said.

Another volunteer Ashwin Patrange adds that they are also supported by nearby residents. “Many a time, they reach out to us with water bottles and fruits.”


