Covid-19 +ve man booked for giving wrong info, spreading disease to others
2020-04-18
Nagpur: Shanti Nagar police have booked a 51-year-old Covid-19 positive person for giving wrong, misleading information to Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) that led to spread of the disease. The man is a nephew of the 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura, who was the city’s first victim of Covid-19, and is currently undergoing treatment at GMCH.This is the city’s first case in which a positive patient has been booked. Following a complaint from assistant commissioner of NMC Satranjipura zone Vijay Humne, Shanti Nagar police registered offences against the person under section 182 (use of lawful power of public servant), section 187 (intentionally omit to give assistance), section 188 (disobedience to public servant), sections 269, 270 (negligent and malignant act likely to spread infection or disease dangerous to life), section 290 (public nuisance), all under IPC, and sections 2, 3 and 4 of the Epidemic Diseases Act-1897.The 68-year-old had died on April 5 at IGGMCH and his samples tested positive on April 6. He was buried on April 7. NMC’s complaint and the FIR say the nephew had officially taken possession of the deceased’s body and was among the four present during burial on April 7. Therefore, the NMC team had also quarantined him. On April 8 and 9, NMC team had asked him details about his contact with the deceased.“He told the NMC team that neither him or anyone from his family had met the deceased since long. He also said he went to the house of the deceased in the evening on April 6, after learning about the death, and did not enter inside. He said he completed burial as immediate family members of the deceased were under quarantine,” said Humne’s complaint. The complaint adds the man tested positive on April 11 and his wife tested positive on April 13. “We could have contained the spread of virus had he given correct information. We could have isolated him and his family members had he given correct information which would have prevented spread of disease,” Humne’s complaint said.The NMC did not trace or quarantine his family members on April 7. The family members were quarantined after he tested positive on April 11. Humne said, “He also hid information about his business of tours and travel apart from cushioning work.”TOI had on April 11 reported that the nephew of the deceased runs a tours and travel agency. Also, on April 14, TOI had reported details of his tour to Mecca between February 4 and 14, and a tour to Bareilly from March 19 to 23.After TOI’s reports, NMC traced and quarantined 32 more persons who were his close contacts.NMC additional medical officer health Dr Praveen Gantawar said, “The man used to meet the deceased frequently but informed our team that he and his family members had not met the deceased since long. Fortunately, we had examined and quarantined him. We are yet to finalize the person from whom the deceased got infected. The deceased himself had no travel history as per his immediate family members. But his nephew is one of the suspects as he had travel history,” he said.After he tested positive on April 11, NMC swiftly expanded the containment zone with the epicentre as his house at Bairagipura.NMC officials also said, “Immediate family members also gave wrong information. Our team learnt about all their close contacts from sources and residents in the area. We could trace and quarantine 58 persons initially in touch with the deceased, of which 28 tested positive,” they said.INFO* 68-year-old died at IGGMCH on April 5, his samples tested positive on April 6* Nephew performed funeral on April 7, was quarantined* NMC team asked for close contact details of nephew on April 8 and 9* Nephew told NMC team he or his family members had not met deceased since long* Due to this NMC did not trace or quarantine family members and close contacts* Nephew tested positive on April 11, and his family members were quarantined* His wife tested positive on April 13* NMC learnt about travel history of the person, so 32 more were quarantinedNMC’s Complaint* Man gave wrong information that he, his wife and other family member did not meet deceased since long though he used to meet deceased frequently* Man said deceased was his uncle so he went to house of deceased on April 6 evening, but did not enter house and did not meet any immediate family members. However, it was revealed he was always in contact with immediate family members of the deceased* Man also hid information about his business of tours and travels apart from cushioning works* NMC could have traced and quarantined family members of the person if he had given correct information on April 7. NMC quarantined immediate family members only after he tested positive on April 11* His wife tested positive on April 13* NMC also learnt about his foreign and Bareilly tours. Then, NMC quarantined another 32 family members-----------------------------------------BOXConfusion over address of accusedShanti Nagar police have mentioned the address of the nephew as Dalalpura, which created confusion on Friday. NMC assistant commissioner Vijay Humne said, “Police booked the same person against whom NMC lodged a complaint. He is a resident of Bairagipura. We lodged a complaint with Shanti Nagar police station. (Address of accused was not mentioned in NMC’s complaint).”Police contacted NMC saying the person’s house was falling under Lakadganj police station. Then, NMC sent complaint to Lakadganj police station. “Shanti Nagar police registered FIR with address of Dalalpura. ACP of two police stations is the same, and said it required just a formality of transferring the case from Shanti Nagar police station to Lakadganj police station,” Humne said.