Covid scare brings fortune for astrologers
2020-05-25
JAIPUR: The coronavirus pandemic has brought uncertainties in the life of people. Massive layoffs across various industries, dwindling economy and a bleak outlook have left many people worried. So, in quest for finding a solution to their problems, they are falling back on astrologers and tarot card readers through online sessions.

Astrologer Pandit Purshottam Gaur from Jaipur said that people are contacting him from all over the state and world about issues related to coronavirus. “The number of queries, be it online or through phone, has gone up significantly. Many people want to know when this pandemic will come to an end and if they will be infected by it or not. Due to the lockdown people are facing financial problems. Many people are contacting to find advice of their business or future of their children in jobs,” said Gaur.

Another astrologer Manav Jain said that people wanted to know if they will lose their jobs or not. Besides, they want to know when this problem will end, he said.

Not just general public, doctors and health workers are contacting fortune tellers to know whether they will get infected by the virus.

Seema Sablok, a tarot card reader from Jaipur, said that in lockdown, 30% calls are from doctors and health workers.

“Doctors are in front-line fighting the disease. So they are worried about their safety. I charge Rs 100 per question. Being in this business for the last five years, my regular clients are approaching as well as new people. Majority youngsters are inclined towards tarot card reading and I am getting regular queries about the upcoming examinations or whether their CA examination will be held this year. Pandemic has created scare among people,” said Sablok.

Many women and newly married couples are approaching to find solutions of marital issues that have surfaced during this lockdown period.

Himani Agyani, another tarot card reader from Jaipur, said “I am dealing with clients facing domestic abuse or frequent fights between married couples. Many teenagers are booking online sessions to know if they or their family will get infected with the virus. There is significant increase in queries online during lockdown. These are tough times that are making people anxious,” Agyani said.


