Covid-19 woman’s son alleges delay in dialysis
2020-04-17
Vadodara: Allegations by the son of a coronavirus patient that the dialysis of his mother was delayed at the GMERS, Gotri Covid-19 hospital have sparked a controversy. The hospital defended the move saying that the woman did not need the dialysis urgently.

According to the woman’s son Rohan Narvekar, he had gone to a subsidised private dialysis facility on Wednesday with his mother who needs dialysis twice a day. The facility insisted on a Covid-19 test before conducting the procedure.

The lady was then taken to the SSG Hospital (SSGH) that has the only testing facility in central Gujarat. The hospital said that the samples for the test will have to collected at GMERS, Gotri. Narvekar claimed that they had to wait from about 1.30pm to 4pm for getting the test done. He added that no social distancing was maintained at the place where people were waiting for sample collection.

The woman tested positive on Thursday morning and was rushed to GMERS. The son claimed that the dialysis was also delayed and his mother kept claiming that she was feeling uncomfortable.

Officials of GMERS Medical College and Hospital at Gotri admitted that there was a delay in providing treatment to the dialysis patient. 

“A vehicle was sent to bring the technician who lives in Nadiad. But he had gone somewhere and could not be traced for one or two hours. Now, he has come and is warming up the machine. Dialysis of the patient will start at any moment,” said Dr Minoo Patel, the honorary advisor of the hospital.

Patel said that by and large social distancing norms are maintained at the flu corner when screening of patients is carried out. But at times those waiting for tests do not follow the norms.

Nodal officer for hospital Dr Chirag Rathod too released a video claiming that there was no emergency condition needing immediate dialysis. He even said that pressure was wrongly being created to ensure an early dialysis. The explanations don’t throw light on how the condition of a patient needing dialysis in emergency would have been managed?

In the evening, officer on special duty for Covid-19 Dr Vinod Rao announced that SSG Hospital would also admit Covid-19 patients and will have a capacity of 200 patients in a week’s time.-


