Covid-19 shifting back to cities: Govt
2020-06-09
Lucknow: The coronavirus pandemic is slowly shifting back to cities after recording its presence in the rural arm, said state government officials on Monday, adding that the onus of Covid-19 prevention now lies with the urban population. 

According to experts, the progression of Covid-19 in UP may be divided into four legs—arrival of foreign travellers, Tablighi Jamaat attendees, health workers and, hospitals and migrants. 

The infection making a comeback to cities marks the beginning of the fifth leg. “Prevention is the only reliable arsenal and hope, especially as the country is nearing a peak,” they said. Urging citizens to take preventive behaviour seriously, officials said that while they have clear indications that the situation in villages is under control, the risk of spread has moved to cities, where both population density and general activity are high especially with everything opening up. “At the moment, the most important contribution towards curbing spread of coronavirus is needed from those living in cities. This is because the wave of migrant cases is on the decline and in fact it will fade away in a few days. The new gush is coming in urban districts, particularly in Meerut division,” said principal secretary health and family welfare Amit Mohan Prasad.

Prasad added, “It is important that urban residents stay extra cautious and work towards prevention of coronavirus spread. This becomes especially crucial as lockdown has almost ended and business as usual is all set to take over. The fact that population density in cities is higher than villages adds to the importance.” The official Covid-19 bulletin showed that 176 of the 412 new cases reported on Monday belonged to six districts in Meerut division with Gautam Buddha Nagar and Ghaziabad accounting for 100 cases. 

Health officials suggested that any kind of unnecessary public interaction, meetings and movement outside homes must be avoided. 

“Extra attention must be paid to preventive measures like wearing masks, washing hands with soap and water for at least 30 seconds and following cough hygiene,” an officer said. About the Covid-19 wave declining in villages, he said that state health department got a mega exercise conducted to see if the ‘nigrani samitis’ were working well and also to assess if home quarantine was followed by isolated migrants religiously.

“For this, general residents from 72 villages across 18 districts where the number of migrants was high were tested. The villages selected had at least 50 migrants living there for at least 15 days. The 1,700-odd samples tested negative, suggesting that the risk in villages was under control. It also speaks for the fact that surveillance has been on the right track so far,” Prasad said.


