Quarantined ship: Special flight to bring back Indians today
2020-02-26
MADURAI: The Indian embassy in Japan on Tuesday asked Indian crew members on board Diamond Princess, a cruise ship quarantined at Yokohama port after some patients had tested positive for coronavirus infection (COVID-19), to be ready to be airlifted in a chartered aircraft on Wednesday. The Indian crew members were sent mails in this regard along with terms and conditions for the evacuation eight days after they were given forms asking them to express interest for premature evacuation from the ship.


A copy of the advisory available with TOI added that the flight was tentatively scheduled for February 26 evening. Pre-disembarkation process is expected to start around 2pm. The crew members have been advised to pay attention to the announcements made on board Diamond Princess. The advisory states that only those who have not tested positive in the PCR (polymerase chain reaction) test, conducted by Japanese authorities, would be evacuated.

Individuals should also have given consent by filling in the forms that were sent by the embassy to them on February 17 for leaving the ship and returning to India before the expiry of the mandatory Japanese quarantine period. Those who have not filled in the forms should fill them before 10am on Wednesday.

Repatriation is subject to clearing the mandatory medical check-up by an Indian medical team, the advisory said. It added that individuals should also follow instructions from officials of the Indian government, aircraft crew and medical personnel on board the flight and are requested to wear face mask.

They should undergo a mandatory 14 days quarantine on arrival in India. Stating that transportation from Yokohama port to Haneda airport would be by road, the embassy added that the vehicle would not be allowed to stop anywhere during the around 20km journey.

Crew on board, who did not want to be named, expressed concern over 14 more days of quarantine they would have to undergo in India. “We have been quarantined in the ship from February 4. On February 17, we were given forms for leaving the ship with the condition that we would have to undergo 14 days quarantine on reading India,” he said. “But Wednesday will be nine days after we submitted the forms. So an additional 14 days from Thursday will make it a total quarantine of 37 days. The government should consider this and reduce the quarantine period in India as only those who have tested negative for COVID-19 and certified by the Japanese health authorities will be brought to India,” he added.

The 138 Indians who were on board Diamond Princess included 132 crew members and six passengers. The embassy tweeted on Tuesday evening that PCR test results for all Indian nationals have been declared and two more tested positive, taking the total to 16.

