Covid-19 scare: UP forest dept to monitor wildlife
2020-04-08
BAREILLY: In the wake of a report about a tiger testing positive for Covid-19 virus in a New York zoo, the ministry of environment, forest and climate change has directed principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF), UP, to ensure the well-being of both forest staff and we.

Under the guidelines, forest officials will have to wear masks and observe proper sanitisation when they enter the tiger reserves and sanctuaries.

The foresters have also been ordered to monitor health of carnivores. For the purpose, the forest department has been told to keep an eye on big cats with the help of camera traps. If any animal displays symptoms of Covid-19, then it is to be treated as per the guidelines set for the purpose.

In case any carnivore is found dead in the forest, then its samples must be collected and sent for tests.

Foresters must undergo health check-ups to ensure that they are free of the infection before interacting with villagers living around the forests.

The guidelines also require that villagers avoid routes that go through the forests.

Confirming that they had received the guidelines, deputy director of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, (buffer), Anil Patel told TOI, “We have received guidelines which would be followed by tiger reserves, wildlife sanctuaries and the zoos across the state. We had already restricted the movement of villagers in the forest area and now, patrolling will be intensified to curb human activity inside the forests. Except forest officials and support staff, with proper sanitization, no one will be allowed to enter the forest area. Camera traps will be used to monitor the condition of carnivores. If any carnivore exhibits symptoms of Covid-19, then it will be provided treatment. A committee of wildlife veterinarians along with range officers and forest guards will be formed to regularly monitor the condition of carnivores.”

World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), two NGOs that provide regular support to foresters, have also been advised to follow the guidelines. Dr Daksh Gangwar, WTI, said, “We have been advised to gear up with Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) while conducting autopsy, medical examination and rescue of wild animals as they may be carriers of the disease."

Dr Brijendra Yadav, veterinarian, Lucknow zoo, said,

“We have prepared a quarantine ward for the animals in the zoo on the instructions of our director, RK Singh. In case any animal shows any symptoms of Covid-19, then it will be kept in quarantine and its samples will be sent for testing. All the staff will be properly sanitised before entering the zoo and all will have to wear masks, gloves and disposable apron while feeding animals. Even the vehicles used for transporting food will be regularly sanitized with sodium hypochlorite solution. Our director has ensured that we have sufficient PPEs available at the zoo.”


