Covid-19: Manufacturing companies too opting for work from home model
2020-05-26
INDORE: Crippled by the Covid-19 pandemic, industries are re-engineering to adopt customized work from home (WFH) model as an alternative to survive the slump and reduce operation cost.

Following cues from information technology firms, many manufacturing industries of Pithampur are transitioning to WFH concept to keep business alive in crisis. Industries are drafting customized models of WFH suiting their production line and requirement to keep production running in safe environment amid limited resources.

Many firms have even commenced online training for employees for remote assistance.

Saurabh Sangla, vice-chairman, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Madhya Pradesh State Council and ED, Signet Group said, “We have set a WFH model for our company which is a new concept for any manufacturing industry. Employees from sales, marketing, branding and accounts will operate from home while people involved in manufacturing will report to work place. This will give flexibility to employees and as well as keep operations running in crisis time.”

Manufacturing industries have asked support, accounts, human resources, finance, sales and marketing team to work from remote locations excluding production team.

Many industries said they noticed a sudden jump in productivity and commitment from workers in this new work arrangement while some industries claimed WFH model is not feasible for manufacturing units and pharmaceuticals.

Pratibha Syntex, vice president, human resource HS Jha said, “Based on our experience and work model, we have come up with WFH policy for our employees. We are calling just about 40 per cent employee to factory every day while rest coordinate from home. Our work efficiency has improved and this is reflecting on our work and decision making capacity.”

Industry players said, WFH will give flexibility to employees and aid industries in reducing the cost of operations by curtailing on electricity, transport facility, housekeeping, security and other meager arrangements that combined together make up a large sum of expenses.

Dinesh Mishra, head of corporate affairs at SRF Ltd said, “Keeping in view of Covid-19 and MHA guidelines, we are adhering to the policy of minimum manpower in plant. Being a manufacturing plant, we can allow only a reasonable chunk of employees to operate from home engaged with purchase, payroll, finance and dispatch departments.”

A few pharmaceutical companies said they have trained their marketing teams to connect with doctors and dealers through online mode for product marketing avoiding door-to-door visits for at least 4-5 months.

