Covid-19 outbreak: No FIR in Pimpri Chinchwad for two days; Pune crime dips
2020-03-24
PUNE: Not a single first information report (FIR) has been registered by the Pimpri Chinchwad police since Sunday, while Pune city has witnessed a drop in the registration of cases, from an average 25-30 FIRs per day to 15-20 over the past few days. 


The Covid-19 outbreak and the steps taken to contain it have forced people to stay indoors, which has largely contributed to a drop in instances of burglaries and vehicle thefts, said police. 

The Prime Minister’s appeal for ‘Janata Curfiew’ on Sunday evoked a positive response from citizens of Pimpri Chinchwad and Pune, as they stayed at home with mostly policemen and police vehicles on the roads, police said. 

“On Monday too not a single FIR has been registered in our jurisdiction. Post the outbreak of Covid-19, there has been a considerable decline in crime rate. There is a decrease in property offences, as most people are at home. Street crime too has come down, as very few people have ventured out since Sunday,” Pimpri Chinchwad’s assistant commissioner of police (crime) Shridhar Jadhav told TOI. 

“About two weeks ago, we were registering over 25 FIRs each day. Now the number has reduced to 12 per day. Police presence on the roads is also one of the main reasons for decline in the crime rate,” Jadhav added. 

Pune too witnessed a considerable dip in reported crimes. 

“The city police have registered fewer house break-in and vehicle-theft cases. People are at home and their vehicles are not on the roads, affecting these two types of crime,” Pune’s additional commissioner of police (crime) Ashok Morale said.

The city police started receiving fewer complaints since March 18 (21 FIRs) and since then, the trend is of a continuous decline. The police registered 18 FIRs each on March 19 and 20. The number of FIRs reduced further on March 21 to 11. On March 22, the police registered 10 complaints, while on the day of the ‘Janata Curfew’, police registered only three FIRs.

“Many people are following the work-from-home policy, which has contributed to a lower number of vehicles at public parking spaces or on public roads. This has further reflected in fewer crimes like burglaries and vehicle thefts,” Morale added.

On a daily basis, the police register six to nine cases of burglaries, he said and added, “There is a decline in the number of minor body offences as there are fewer people are on the road.” 


