Covid-19 fear in Gujarat: Sanskarinagari stares at shutdown
2020-03-21
VADODARA: Within hours of the city registering two positive Coronavirus cases, police commissioner Anupam Singh Gahlaut on Friday imposed section 144 in the entire city. 


District collector Shalini Agrawal too announced imposition of section 144 in the entire Vadodara district prohibiting gathering of five or more persons at any place. 

All public gatherings, rallies, lok melas, circus, large gatherings have been prohibited till further orders through this notification. “We have asked all malls, multiplexes, gym, sports complex, dance classes, club houses, swimming pools, auditoriums, marriage halls, party plots among others to remain closed,” she said, adding that guidelines for restaurants, eateries and sweet and snacks shops have also been issued.

The district collector has also issued orders to stop all activities at Jan Seva Kendras. “People should apply online for all their documents,” she said. 

The city police too will spread awareness and prevent rumour-mongering about Coronavirus threat in the city using public address systems from Saturday. Regular announcements will be made asking citizens not to gather in large numbers and take precautionary measures.

“Once we get guidelines from the health department, we will start making announcements through our public address system. Citizens will be asked to stay indoors, not to gather in large numbers and refrain from spreading rumours,” Gahlaut told TOI. When asked if the police will intervene on Sunday’s ‘janta curfew’, Gahlaut said that the cops will advise Barodians to avoid public places.

“Hundreds of youngsters gather and play in Navlakhi Grounds every morning. On Sunday, we will appeal to them not to gather there. Also, parents should avoid taking their kids out in open grounds or other public places,” Gahlaut said. He also said that cops involved in on-field duty have been given masks and asked to follow all precautionary measures. 

