Covid-19 tests in industrial districts skewed
2020-04-11
Ahmedabad: A highly industrialized state like Gujarat, when looking at a phased opening of the lockdown in future, faces a major challenge. Many industrial districts, including those we call the Golden Corridor, of the state are yet to mobilise Covid-19 testing to gauge whether large population, including labour, can consider it safe to return to the factories and whether it will be safe for population when movement takes place.

While Ahmedabad has begun random vigorous testing of its population with 2,067 Covid-19 tests, it also led to discovery of a cluster of aysmptomatic cases. A similar situation in other district will throw open a whole new box of challenges. 


In Valsad district with a population of 18 lakh which has the Vapi industrial town only 54 were tested and just 7 people were under quarantine. In Vadodara district which has 42 lakh population, with 15 industrial areas only 599 tests performed out of which six Covid deaths were reported mainly from city and already 2,500 are under quarantine — the highest in the state. 

In many districts including the tribal districts and industrial districts the number of those quarantined and the number of tests performed, are highly skewed. The number of tests performed in districts like Amreli, Kehda, Kutch, Rajkot, Jamnagar and Valsad, which have high industrial clusters have fairly low testing per lakh population. 

Kutch district, which has a population of 21 lakh, has 13 industrial estates, has performed just 54 tests of which four tested positive but 2,225 people are under quarantine, which is the second highest in the state after Vadodara. Neighbouring Amreli district which has 7,085 industrial units registered have performed just 20 Covid19 tests, there are no Covid positives but interestingly, 1,189 people are under quarantine. Jamnagar, which has the world's largest petroleum refinery, has conducted 103 Covid19 tests of which only 1 has turned positive and 328 have been quarantine. 


