Covid-19 exposes Kochi’s dependence on China
2020-03-13
KOCHI: Whether it is Onam or Christmas, Kochi’s retail market depends on products manufactured in China and shipped from a handful of ports—nine of them—to Kochi. The electronic and electrical equipment flooding the markets during festivals invariably come from China or are assembled in India using critical components coming from that country. For Christmas or Vishu, even the crackers come from China. It doesn’t stop with goods stuffed in retail shops –furniture, auto parts and roof tiles too come from China. 

Kochi-headquartered Kottaram Trading Company, which markets kitchenware and home décor products, sources products largely from China. “We import 600-700 containers of products from around the world, of which 60% comes from China,” said Antony Thomas Kottaram, director, Kottaram Trading Company. 

The variety of products that an average Malayali uses in his daily life, which has origins in China, is astonishing. For instance, the January 2019 list of imports from China through Cochin Port runs up to 12 pages and includes goods like fans, furniture, sanitary wares, steel pipes, lightings, tea, polyester chips, steel sinks, DVD players, TVs, gift articles, induction cookers, gas stoves, LED lamps, tents, spare parts, wheel chairs, roof tiles, hair conditioner, bathroom cabinet – the list just goes on and on. 

In China, there are towns or provinces specialized in certain products, said MK Ansari, chief executive officer of Kochi-headquartered Providence Exim India, that sells premium bath and sanitarywares under the brand Kriztle. 

While Guangdong, a Southern coastal province, is famous for ceramic products, Zhejiang, another coastal town focuses on machinery, furniture and sanitarywares. On the other hand, Hubei is known for its furniture and tiles and Shenzhen is home to high-tech technology products – mainly mobiles. Once the document that provides information regarding the particulars of the goods to be delivered is sent to a Chinese company, it will take 45-60 days to complete production of kitchenware, said Kottaram. “It will take another 18-24 days for shipping them to Kochi. With Wan Hai, a shipping liner, running direct lines to Kochi, it will take only 14 days now,” he added. 

