Covid infected women deliver healthy babies at Jaipur hospital
2020-05-01
JAIPUR: A woman, who has been infected with Covid-19, delivered a healthy baby at Jaipur’s Zanana Hospital on Wednesday evening. It is not an isolated case as many such infected women from different coronavirus hotbeds of city are giving birth to healthy babies. 

According to government figures, 25 pregnant women were admitted to Mahila Chikitsalaya which is well equipped to deal with such cases. Some of these mothers (whose Covid-19 positive reports came late) breastfed their infants, however, the babies were tested negative for the virus. 

The doctors of Mahila Chikitsalaya are surprised to notice that these newborns have not contracted the virus from their mothers. Just like in HIV and Hepatitis, there are chances of vertical transmission of virus from infected mother to the babies, but in Covid-19 case, the doctors have discovered that there is no vertical transmission of virus from infected mother to their newborns.

Dr Shalini Rathore, nodal officer for Covid-19 at Mahila Chikitsalaya, said, “It is surprising but true. There is no evidence of vertical transmission of virus from infected mothers to babies. It is a matter of study which we are conducting to find out what prevents them from contracting the virus from their infected mothers when they are in their womb. It could be the antigens which are passed from mothers to babies, thus preventing them from getting infected. Infants start producing their own antibodies after six months of their birth. These are all matter of research,” said Rathore.

Pregnant women from hotbeds in Jaipur such as Ramganj, Shastri Nagar, MD Road and other nearby districts are brought to Mahila Chikitsalaya. The doctors examine them as they reach the hospital and take their sample for Covid-19 test. Almost all the pregnant woman brought to the hospital were asymptomatic. These women do not have any symptoms of Covid-19 such as fever and cough. But, they are tested positive for coronavirus. We treat them for five days with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin. Majority of them have recovered.

However, the doctors also discovered that in normal delivery, the Covid-19 positive women do not develop any complication but in caesarean delivery, in which operation is required, such women develop complications. Such a woman had died who was brought to Bharatpur in serious condition. Her baby had died before delivery. The woman underwent operation, but didn’t survive. 

Those infants born to infected mothers are kept in nursery till their mothers get cured of Covid-19. The hospital provides milk to infants from their milk bank.


