Covid-19 cases cross 2,000 mark in the city
2020-06-07
Surat: While cases are spiralling in the diamond city, there is also a silver lining as majority of the freshly infected patients are with co-morbidites, said municipal commissioner Banchanidhi Pani. He said that as they have no serious conditions, they can be treated with primary care only. 

Pani informed that eith 77 fresh cases recorded on Saturday, Covid-19 cases crossed the 2,000 mark in the city. Limbayat and Katargam continue to remain the hotspots with 19 and 18 cases detected respectively from the two areas.

“Analysis of cases from the last couple of days has suggested that most cases are detected among the prisoners and criminals after the court ordered compulsory testing for them, and also among pre-operative surgery patients and pregnancy-related surgeries cases,” said Pani.

Pani also highlighted that the definition of super-spreaders in the city has now changed post ‘unlock 1.0’. “After the vegetable vendors, we are now getting more cases among bus drivers, xerox shop owners among the like,” he said.

The SMC has increased overall active surveillance across the city with the deployment of 1,692 health teams, 55 fever clinics and 20 on mobile testing vehicles. 

Pani said that SMC will get 20 more mobile testing vehicles from the state government to increase surveillance and test on people to immediately start primary treatment. “We want to detect cases in the early stages,” he said.

According to Pani, APX survey of the co-morbid patients and aged patients have started in the Athwa zone. The doctors have been asked to give patients information on the Gemini application. 

“We have started home-based treatment from Rander at Dr Samir Gami’s clinic. Not all positive patients needs to be hospitalised. Only those will oxygen issue will be admitted,” said Pani.

Pani informed that the civic body is actively involving with the housing society presidents in Katargam and East zone-B for getting their support in spreading the awareness. 

Meanwhile, two Covid-19 positive patients including a 78-year-old woman from Limbayat and 63-year-old man from Katargam succumbed to the infection on Saturday. 

Box

Surat Covid-19 metre

Total Positive cases: 2,035

Total death: 80

Total discharged: 1,282

BOX: 

Zone-wise Covid-19 cases in Surat 

Zone Cases

Limbayat 661

Katargam 367

Central: 283

Udhana 262

Varachha (A) 247

Rander 101

Athwa 68

Varachha (B) 46


