Covid-19 spl parcel train to pass through region on April 1
2020-03-30
Nagpur: The Indian Railways has geared up to meet the demand of essential commodities by increasing the number of parcel trains.

Parcel trains are vital for mass quick transportation of medicines, medical equipment, masks, food items, etc across the nation.

Eight parcel trains are already operating on crucial routes since March 29. The railways have now decided to extend them on 20 more routes. One of the special trains will pass through Nagpur on April 1. Schedule of another parcel train between Kalyan-Santragachi is yet to be announced.

The Covid-19 special will start from Kakaria (Gujarat) on March 31 and reach Nagpur on April 1 at 9pm via Jalgaon and Bhusawal. It will have stoppages at Gondia, Durg, Raipur, Bilaspur, Jharsuguda, Tata Nagar, Kharagpur and Sankrail (Kolkata). 

“Railways is offering its unhindered services of parcel trains for transportation of essential commodities and other goods required to meet the needs of citizens in the wake of Covid-19 ,” said Central Railway spokesperson SG Rao.

Both Central Railway and SECR are working out their own plans for running these parcel trains. They are reaching out to prospective clients through various modes of communication, including advertisements.

Industrial houses, companies, any interested groups, organizations and individuals can avail these services. Interested parties can approach the parcel offices for registration.

In the meanwhile, the SECR has started quarantine facility of 11 beds at his civil defense hostel at Motibagh for suspected coronavirus patients.

“Our control office is working round-the-clock to run freight trains and is also planning the empty rake balance of passenger trains, so that when passenger rain operations start link rakes are available at originating stations,” said SECR DCM Anurag Singh.

As reported by TOI, the Central Railway, Nagpur, is converting entire rake of 24 coaches for keeping Covid-19 suspects and patients. The Railway Board on Saturday has also asked the zones to recruit para-medical staff on contract basis with a condition that it should not exceed the sanctioned strength of the cadre.

As the Railway Board expects increase in the number of coronavirus cases, the divisions have also been asked to recruit either retired para-medical staff or make fresh appointments. 

Railway guards to donate 2 days salary

The All India Guards Council (AIGC), a registered trade union representing guards of the Indian Railways, has decided to contribute Rs65 crore towards the PM-Cares Fund to fight Covid-19. Over 32,000 guards will donate their 2 days pay. The amount is to be recovered from the salary of April and May.

“Despite discharging their duties in most baneful service conditions and the virus risk, the freight train guards also have come forward to contribute,” said SK Shukla, AIGC leader.


