Covid-19: Odisha to paste stickers on houses of 3,600 people in home quarantine
2020-03-24
Bhubaneswar: The state government on Monday decided to paste stickers outside the houses of people supposed to be in home quarantine to ensure that they do not step out.

At present, around 3,600 people who have arrived in the state from abroad on or after March 4 are under home quarantine. The government decided to paste stickers outside the houses of such persons after several foreign returnees were on Sunday booked in Bhubaneswar, Cuttack and Sambalpur for violating home quarantine norms.

The stickers will be pasted on the houses by the respective district administrations on the basis of lists provided by local police stations. The move is also expected to prevent the social boycott of such persons.

“The district administrations will ensure that the concerned households get uninterrupted supply of essential commodities,” the government said.

The condition of the two Covid-19 patients in the state — a 31-year-old man with a travel history to Italy and a 20-year-old man who returned from the UK — is stable. No positive case has been reported in the state in the past four days.

The Naveen Patnaik government also extended the lockdown to 14 of the 30 districts in the state from five districts and eight towns on Saturday.

On Saturday, the state had announced a lockdown for Khurda (of which Bhubaneswar is a part), Cuttack, Ganjam, Kendrapada and Angul districts, besides the towns of Puri, Rourkela, Sambalpur, Jharsuguda, Balasore, Jajpur Road, Jajpur town and Bhadrak for a week till March 29. The government on Monday extended this to cover the full districts of Puri, Sambalpur, Balasore, Jharsuguda and Jajpur, Nayagarh, Jagatsinghpur and Bhadrak and Dhenkanal. Over 50% of the state’s 4.5 crore population now come under the restrictions.

Tightening the curbs on public transport, the government on Monday also blocked intra-state and city bus transport services. Movement of intra-state buses was stopped from 11 am on Monday, while city buses will stop running from midnight on Monday, said the government’s Covid-19 spokesperson, Subroto Bagchi.

Banks and insurance companies have been asked to reduce attendance in offices and manage with 10 per cent staff till further orders.


