Covid-19-hit Tamil Nadu bans creation of new govt posts in bid to save Rs 700 crore
2020-05-22
CHENNAI: Facing a compelling need to regulate expenditure due to rising cost of Covid-19 control measures and falling revenue, the Tamil Nadu government on Thursday announced a clutch of austerity measures, including a ban on creation of new posts in all departments in the state for a year.


According to an official estimate, the fiscal control measures would help save Rs 700 crore this year. “The government has made a detailed study and is taking necessary action to minimize fiscal stress so that the expenditure on welfare schemes and capital work is ensured to revive the economy,” chief secretary K Shanmugam said in his order.

All general transfers, except mutual request transfers, will be on hold. Departments can neither purchase new computers or accessories, except to replace old and dysfunctional systems, nor new vehicles.

Leave travel concession — extended to families of employees once every four years — shall stand deferred for all categories of staff and teachers. Departments must hold regular meetings through video conferencing and teleconferencing as permission for official travel will be restricted, the government order said.

Order bans foreign travel at govt’s cost

The order had also banned foreign travel programmes at government’s cost and all flight travel within the state unless the cost of airfare is less than or equal to the cost of eligible train fare. Resident commissioners of Tamil Nadu House will attend Union government meetings in New Delhi as far as possible, while flight travel in executive class is not permitted for officers of any grade.

The state has recently announced deferment of dearness allowance hike to 2021 and suspension of earned leave encashment. “The present move is part of expenditure containment measures of what the government thinks are frills. It is a symbolic move to show the state is minimizing its own expenses. We also have to act on state rationalization committee’s report, hence creating new posts does not make sense,” a senior official said.“For now, vacancies, where it is needed, will be filled. Also, recruitment against existing vacancies in entry-level posts, including appointments on compassionate ground, shall continue with the approval of staff committee. Promotions and recruitment by transfer shall continue,” an officer said. Some representatives of JACTTO-GEO, an umbrella body of TN government staff and teachers, accused the bureaucrats of using more vehicles than the stipulated limit and increasing the burden on the exchequer.


