Covid -ve woman turns +ve taking care of +ve daughter
2020-05-06
Nagpur: A 35-year-old healthy woman from Satranjipura, who had got admitted herself in IGGMCH Covid-19 isolation ward on April 20 to look after her 11-year-old positive daughter, has now caught the infection. Fortunately for the mom, her daughter is now negative and has been discharged. The woman will have to spend at least 14 more days in the isolation ward.TOI on April 22 had reported about the woman admitting herself for her daughter’s sake. Her report came negative on April 21, a day after she was admitted, but she remained in hospital to be with her daughter.The woman is only person to be tested positive from the district on Tuesday, taking the total to 161 and Satranjipura’s tally to 102.The woman was staying with 27 positive persons, including her daughter, in the isolation ward since April 20. She did not get any special room or ward despite testing negative. The woman and her daughter were asymptomatic. She was tested along with her daughter on Monday as she was staying in the isolation ward for 15 days.The woman told TOI, “I requested doctors here to also give me medicines and test my samples. I would have tested positive earlier.”Though she was staying with her daughter, the woman had to share washrooms with other patients. The woman added, “I am worried about my younger daughter who is 7-year-old. The elder daughter is 15-year-old. My husband is at home with three children. They are facing problems in preparing food.”The NMC had quarantined five members of this family as they were neighbours of 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura. Only the 11-year-old girl among them had tested positive.A man from Sangam Nagar also reportedly got admitted in the GMCH isolation ward with his seven-year-old positive son on Monday despite being negative. On May 2, another negative woman from Satranjipura had got admitted with her 16-month-old girl (positive) in the IGGMCH isolation ward.Earlier, a woman from Mominpura had got admitted with her five-year-old son even though her reports were awaited. After a day, woman also tested positive.One person from Khamla had stayed with his daughter at IGGMCH Isolation Ward despite having turned negative and recommended for discharge on April 11. In this case, both were positive when they were admitted on March 27. They were discharged on Tuesday.There are no restrictions from the administration or special arrangements at Isolation wards for such persons who get admitted to take care of their very young children.