Covid-19 victim was Iskcon devotee
2020-03-12
Kolkata: Monks and devotees of the International Society of Krishna Consciousness (Iskcon) remember him as the ever-smiling “young” man of 80, who would come visiting at least once every year. 

This was his pilgrimage. Manohar Krishna Prabhu was missed this year when he informed he would be away in the wake of the coronavirus scare. No one knew then that he would soon succumb to the virus. 

Prabhu, one of the senior most devotees of the Iskcon order, died in London, bringing a pall of gloom over the ongoing Gour Purnima festivities in both Mayapur and Kolkata. Krishna is the sixth UK national and the first one of Indian origin to have died of Covid-19.

Krishna and his family moved to London from Gujarat many years ago and embraced Iskcon about 25 years back. The family was always present in every congregation that the London center organised since its initiation, devotees in city said. 

Krishna loved to spread the word of Geeta and read the Bhagvatam in every gathering and distributed copies of the Geeta among foreigners, trying his best to explain to them its universality. 

“He called his annual visits to India his pilgrimage because it gave him an opportunity to visit the Iskcon temples at Vridavan, Kolkata and Mayapur. We couldn’t believe our ears when we read that Prabhu is no more. He was a pillar of our London centre, better known as the Bhaktivedanta Centre at Watford, London,” said Radharaman Das, spokesperson of Iskcon, Kolkata. 

Interestingly, Bhaktivedanta Manor is an estate that belonged to George Harrison of the Beatles, who donated it to Iskcon after he got interested in Indian spirituality. His son is also in the ICU, and has been affected by the virus it was said. The two got infected by an Italian, who visited them over sales of some equipment. 

Prabhu was loved by all in both city and Mayapur, because of his affable nature. “He had retired from his business and devoted himself to the service of Iskcon,” Das said. 


