COVID-19: China slowdown set to shake Indian market sectors
2020-03-12
AHMEDABAD: The ripples of the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak across certain countries are likely to hurt various manufacturing and market sectors in India, where imports from China stand at US $70 billion.


China and some countries in South-East Asia have been the worst affected by the disease accounting for approximately 90% of the cases reported so far.

A March report by rating agency ICRA titled ‘Ripple effect of COVID outbreak to impact India Inc',’ says sectors like automotive, pharmaceuticals and others stand to lose, while those like steel and oil and gas stand to gain from the coronavirus outbreak fallout.

Given that China’s share of global GDP standing at 17% is substantial, a cascading effect of China’s slowdown on the global economy is inevitable as China and South-East Asia are key suppliers and consumers of certain products, the report said.

Supply disruptions of key raw materials in pharmaceuticals, electronics and renewable energy sectors will affect production in India if the situation persists, the ICRA report states. These sectors have a direct or indirect import dependence on affected markets for components or sub-components.

COVID-19 could cause demand disruption and price corrections in sectors like cut and polished diamonds, cotton yarn (textiles) and seafoods where the affected markets are large importers from India. There will also be effects on commodities like oil and gas, metals, among others, according to ICRA.

In the current scenario, where dropping and lengthening of payment cycles is expected, an entity’s liquidity position is of paramount importance to support its credit profile.

“ICRA expects entities with weak liquidity buffer relative to its upcoming debt service obligations to report significant weakening of their credit profile over the next couple of quarters,” the report stated.

Automotive

China supplies 27% of India’s auto components, valued at US$ 4.5 billion. Critical items like safety components, fuel injection pumps, EGR modules, electronic components, turbochargers etc, are sourced from countries currently affected by coronavirus. Currently, companies have overall inventory for a few weeks, but lack of a single critical component can affect production

Pharmaceuticals

Import dependence is high at 60% for API requirement, of which China accounts for 65-70%. For some intermediates and key starting materials (KSMs), China is the sole supplier. Domestic API manufacturers have supplies till mid-March, beyond which production and prices including that of raw materials will be affected if the situation continues. 

Solar energy

India imports approximately 70% of its requirement of photovoltaic (PV) modules from China, which controls about 80% of the global supply of solar panels. Shifting to other suppliers is currently next to impossible. Thus, execution timelines for ongoing solar projects are likely to be affected and costs of PV modules expected to go up.

Gems & jewellery

While China buys around 14% of polished diamonds from India, a larger proportion of exports from India (35%) are routed via Hong Kong. The problem was compounded as the shutdown occurred during the peak sales period in China. Increased inventory levels and supply glut may lead to price corrections as well.

Textiles

Of the cotton yarn produced in India, 30% is exported, and one-third of that goes to China. With China locked down, yarn realizations have corrected 2-3% since beginning of February. Domestic spinners may lose their competitive edge in the global market if the situation persists. In the long term, sectors like apparels can benefit.

Steel

Benefiting from the situation, domestic steelmakers have effected two price hikes since February, given the likely decline in steel imports to India in Q1 FY2021. Indian mills have the opportunity to increase market share in exports to key markets as well, given the restrictions in trade flows from Korea, China and Japan.

Oil & gas

With the demand for oil and petroleum products waning in the wake of the COVID outbreak in China, international crude oil prices have dropped. Distressed cargoes are being offered to large consumers such as India, with refining companies in China unable to deliver. Profitability of upstream companies is likely to be affected.

