Covid-19 beds almost full, Noida waits for new unit
2020-04-01
NOIDA: It was good fortune that helped the Noida administration avert a crisis on Tuesday, a situation where there would be no beds in its hospitals for Covid-19 to accommodate a new patient.


The city, which has emerged as UP’s hotspot with 41 cases so far, was lucky to record three positive cases on Tuesday after averaging seven a day since Saturday. Only seven free beds now remain available in its two isolation wards — five, effectively, as one of the units has to sanitise its beds for two days — and there won’t be any additional ones till at least Thursday morning when the new one at Sharda Hospital becomes functional.

Noida’s coronavirus infections have predominantly come from a single contact chain of Cease Fire employees — 29 of the 38 so far. It has spread to Ghaziabad, where one more Cease Fire employee tested positive on Tuesday, and as far as Bareilly, where five new cases on Tuesday were linked to the chain.

Preparations have begun on a war-footing to have a 100-bed Covid-19 unit ready on the Sharda campus but the oxygen pipeline there is still being installed. During the Uttar Pradesh chief minister’s visit on Monday, Sharda University, which runs the hospital, was asked to install a separate oxygen pipeline for the isolation ward. “We are trying our best to get the facility ready as soon as possible. Everything except the oxygen pipeline is in place. Once installed, we can take in new patients from Thursday morning,” a spokesperson for Sharda University told TOI.

Noida’s healthcare apparatus was overwhelmed by a sudden spike in novel coronavirus cases since March 24.

Asked how additional patients will be managed if there are over five patients on Wednesday, district magistrate Suhas LY, who has just taken charge, told TOI, “I’m sure we will be able to manage something.” He said the administration was trying to get the new 100-bed facility functional. “We have still not had any patient who would need an oxygen cylinder. In case we do, there are over 20 cylinders. The pipeline work is also being done at the new hospital on a war-footing and we are trying to get it ready at the earliest,” he added.

For Covid-19 patients, there are two hospitals in the district with 20 beds each — Government Institute of Medical Sciences (GIMS) in Greater Noida and the child PGI (SSPHPGTI) in Sector 30 of Noida. As of now, after discharging five patients, GIMS has 18 occupied beds while child PGI has

15. However, GIMS will not be able to take in more patients for the next two days. That leaves five beds at PGI.

None of those who tested positive for Covid-19 in Noida on Tuesday was linked to Cease Fire. They included a woman and her son in Sector 37 — the son’s uncle had recently returned from Switzerland. The third case was an 81-year-old man in Sector 28 with no travel history.

The Cease Fire employee who tested positive in Ghaziabad is a resident of Duhai in Muradnagar. He is the third Cease Fire employee to test positive in the district.


(Additional reporting by Aditya Dev in Ghaziabad)


