Covid care centre ready in Kasaragod
2020-04-07
Kannur: Kasaragod district is set to impart excellent treatment to Covid-19 patients with state-of-the-art Covid Care Centre (CCC) at Government Medical College getting ready, said Alkesh Kumar Sharma, principal secretary of department of Industries.

“All medical facilities and the service of medical professionals are in place so that the district can handle any emergency situation,” said Sharma, who is the special officer to oversee the corona-containment activities in Kasaragod district, after visiting the CCC on Monday. “If there is no drastic increase in the number of patients, the district will be able to get rid of the pandemic, and if everybody promptly follows the government’s instructions, we would be able to bring the scenario under control,” the special officer said.

To begin with, there are around 200 beds and 10 intensive-care units here which could be scaled up, said Kasaragod district collector D Sajith Babu. He said the other buildings of the medical college, which is still under construction, would also be ready soon.

The CCC is managed by a 26-member team of medical and healthcare professionals from Thiruvananthapuram Medical College, and would be supported by the healthcare professionals from the district, who would be deputed here.

A few Covid-19 patients were shifted to the new facility on Monday afternoon.

With this facility becoming functional, the district hospital at Kanhangad would be treating other patients, said Dr AT Manoj, district surveillance officer. “We would shift the Covid patients at the district hospital to elsewhere so that the regular patients from the district could come over here for treatment,” he said.

The decision comes in the backdrop of the people from the district facing difficulties to get treatment in hospitals in Karnataka. Nine people from the border areas of the district had lost their lives in the last few days after they failed to get proper treatment since Karnataka had denied them permission to enter Mangaluru, where the people of many parts of Kasaragod go for treatment.

Those who need to undergo dialysis can contact the district hospital and also Kasaragod General Hospital, where more technicians have been appointed, officials said. 

Meanwhile, the people’s representatives in the district and the KSEB would give Rs 12.47 crore for improving health facilities in the district. Of this, Rs 9.6 crore from the CSR fund of the KSEB would be utilized to purchase modern equipment for the medical college.


