Covid-19 in Agra: Black marketers rule as demand for N-95 soars
2020-03-05
AGRA: After six people from Agra tested positive for Covid-19, demand for N-95 masks have increased manifold and taking advantage of the situation, unscrupulous traders have started black marketing it. Some people who thronged medical shops on Wednesday to buy masks claimed that sellers were charging up to Rs 750 for a piece of N-95 mask, which usually costs Rs 75-90. 


Shopkeepers claimed there was a short supply of all types of N95 and triple-layer masks. Most shops also said there was a shortage of hand sanitizer. According to the sources, various medical storekeepers in Rajamandi and Fuwara market on Wednesday took advance payment of Rs 200 to Rs 300 for providing N-95 mask on Thursday. 

President of the Agra chemist association Ashu Sharma said, “Reports of spread of coronavirus have created a panic situation among the citizens in the city. After six people of Agra tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday, demand for N95 masks and hand sanitizers soared. There is a shortage of masks and sanitizers. Wholesalers have placed major orders to meet the increased demand. The situation is likely to normalise within this week.” 

Head of TB and chest diseases department at SN Medical College, Dr Santosh Kumar, said, “Wearing N95 mask is a good precaution from coronavirus infection, as it can be useful in protecting the wearer from bacteria and virus." 

Chief medical officer (CMO) of Agra, Dr Mukesh Kumar Vatsa, said, “We have N95 masks for the hospital staff. For attendants and others, we have three-layered masks that can also be used. We have now ordered more N95 masks.”

Additional district magistrate Prabhakant Awasthi said, “Following complaints of overpricing of N95 masks, drug administration officials have been directed to check the available stock with the wholesalers. They have been directed to ensure that no black marketing of N95 and sanitizers takes place. People must not panic and follow the advisories issued by the health department.” 

Drug inspector Rajkumar Sharma said, “We are doing rounds of the markets and talking to shopkeepers, wholesalers and customers. There is a shortage of N95 masks in the city, but shopkeepers can't charge more than the maximum retail price. We have warned the sellers that strict action would be taken against them if they were found black marketing masks and sanitizers. In case any complaint of overpricing is found correct, the licence of the seller would be cancelled.”

