Covid-19 cases rise by 28 to reach 1,487 in Aurangabad district
2020-05-31
AURANGABAD: The district administration said Covid-19 cases increased by 28 on Saturday. Currently, Aurangabad has 481 active Covid-19 cases, while 937 patients have already been discharged from hospitals. There have been 69 Covid-related deaths in the district till Friday, the district administration said. 

On Saturday, the new cases were detected in Juna Bazaar (2); Muzaafar Nagar, Hudco (1); Vyanktesh Nagar (1); Surana Nagar (2); Naralibaug (2); Shivshankar Colony (2); Hamalwadi (1); New Vasti Juna Bazaar (1); Bhawani Nagar, Old Mondha (5); Manjit Nagar, Akashwani premises (1); Shivaji Nagar (1); Osmanpura (4); Rahemaniya Colony (1); Roshan Gate (2); Naregaon (1); and Nyay Nagar (1). Eighteen men and 10 women were among newly diagnosed patients.

Arvind Gaikwad, the nodal officer for media interaction at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), said of the 81 Covid-19 patients admitted at the dedicated Covid hospital at GMCH, 26 are in critical condition. Two other patients have been discharged, Gaikwad said.

Until Friday, the district had tested 11,251 swab samples, and on Friday alone, 212 swabs were collected for testing. 

During his visit to the city on Saturday, Aurangabad district guardian minister Subhash Desai said the administration has been able to contain the spread of the virus in rural areas. He asked the administration to work towards bringing the district in the green zone by controlling the spread in the city. Subsequently, he gave directives to strengthen the Covid-19 task force and conducting ward-level fever check-ups to address the fear among residents. He asked the administration to take the help of private doctors in doing so. 

He added that those without ration cards will also be provided 5kg rice by the government during the lockdown.

Aurangabad Municipal Corporation administrator Astik Kumar Pandey told the district guardian minister about the measures the civic body is taking to break the chain of virus transmission.


