Covid-19: Restaurants cut jobs, seek rent, tax sops
2020-03-18
BENGALURU: The restaurant industry faces an existential crisis as consumer footfall and revenue is down 60% on an average even as online food delivery orders have reduced about 20%, according to half a dozen industry executives that TOI spoke to. The development is a direct result of more people staying at home with the onset of Covid-19. 


Leading restaurant owners have initiated talks with their landlords for a change in rental arrangements. They are considering a revenue-sharing agreement, based on monthly sales, with the landlords since overall revenue is going to tank further in coming weeks. 

National Restaurant Association of India (NRAI) president Anurag Katriar, who also runs multiple restaurants like Indigo, has sent a letter to the Mumbai excise commissioner, saying it should extend existing liquor licence validity and its renewals by three months. The reason cited is that the outlets are incurring losses and won’t have capital to pay for renewal fees, which is also 15% higher than last year.

Restaurant owners are considering salary cuts across the board to stay afloat, while a few smaller outlets have already let go of some of their staff, according to NRAI executives. The association has around 10,000 members, many of whom run large national chains. If things keep becoming worse, the industry — which employs 7 million people — could see job losses of 1 million, according to Katriar.

The regional arms of NRAI are in the process of issuing an ‘advisory’ to partner members to shut their restaurants over the next two weeks in order to contain any possible risk of community spread of the coronavirus. “We realise it will be a big financial burden on us (issuing advisory to voluntary shut restaurants). But there is a huge risk to the public and our staff. We are requesting power utilities for discounts, seeking moratorium from loans taken from banks and an interest-waiver,” added Katriar.

Some of the restaurant owners are asking their staff to utilise their paid leaves while restaurants remain shut or with very little operations to service online orders. Leading restaurateur Manu Chandra, who runs Toast & Tonic and Monkey Bar, among other brands, said it’s a “recession on steroids”. 

He added that the effects of coronavirus outbreak are hugely tangible — with a 50-80% drop in revenue and footfalls. “So, we will have to implore our landlords to be considerate in these very, very difficult times. Nobody wants to lay off people. But if there is no way to pay them, then how does one continue to employ them,” he added. 

While the situation looks grim, industry executives said the next two weeks are crucial in terms of the fate of the sector, which may take longer to recover if the virus spreads faster in India. They are hoping for a government stimulus to come through to survive what is being seen as the biggest crisis they have ever seen. 

At the same time, orders on both major platforms Swiggy and Zomato have fallen by 20% over the weekend, according to one of the sources briefed on the matter. While both players clocked close to 1.5 million orders each in the previous Sunday, the number fell to around 1.2 million last Sunday as customers limit contact with strangers. 

“The delay of IPL will also have a significant impact on online food delivery growth as it is equivalent to Diwali sales for e-tailers, which helps set a new benchmark,” said one of the sources briefed on the matter. Swiggy and Zomato spokespersons did not reply to emailed queries from TOI. 


