‘Covid-19 threat extraordinary situation, needs strong steps’
2020-03-27
Nagpur: Worried over a circular to various departments asking them to accept pay/treasury bills till March 27 only towards the outgoing financial year, the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court on Thursday censured the concerned authorities for issuing such a diktat at a time when all offices are working with depleted strength of just 5% staff.

The HC also reminded them that all government officials are busy in dealing with coronavirus threat.

“This is an extraordinary situation and requires extraordinary measures, which go beyond the stereotypes. I would expect that finance and treasury authorities would take sufficient steps to reasonably meet the extraordinary situation created due to spread of such infectious disease in the country,” said Justice Sunil Shukre.

The directives came while hearing a plea by CH Sharma and others regarding inadequate facilities at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH). 

Citing Covid-19 infection threat, the director of accounts and treasury at Mumbai had issued a circular on March 24 fixing March 27 as the deadline for acceptance of all pay/treasury bills by the concerned district treasuries and sub-treasuries. 

Though the case was not listed, it was on the insistence of amicus curiae Anup Gilda, who presented the circular in the HC, that the plea was taken up for urgent hearing.

“When it’s admitted in the circular that all offices are working with extremely depleted strength, it would be unreasonable on authority’s part to expect that they, constrained by depletion of staff members, would be able to meet the deadline. The reasonableness of the action could have been seen had the authority extended this date beyond March 31,” the judge said.

While requesting the director and principal finance secretary (accounts and treasury), to reconsider the deadline, Justice Shukre added that the circular apparently seems to be arbitrary and against principle of rule of law, well enshrined in constitutional scheme. 

“This arbitrary aspect of the communication has a potential of adversely affecting efforts of various medical authorities and also the administrators of various departments in containing Covid-19 spread. Presently, all of them are focused on its containment. They may find it difficult to shift their focus, maybe for a temporary period, to such matters, as preparation of various bills and their submissions take time,” the judge said. 

Box — 


