Covid scare dampens Eid shopping spirit in Ajmer
2020-05-24
AJMER: Long queues of women at the bangle shops in Naya Bazaar in the city were common before Eid. However, this year, the shops remain deserted in the wake of the pandemic amid the fear of being infected. On Saturday, just before Eid, the markets lacked the usual hubbub that engulfs the place. 

Naya Bazaar is a shopping hub during festivals like Eid or Diwali. On Eid, people in large numbers from across the country come to offer prayers at the Ajmer dargah. 

Madar Gate, Khailand and Station Road markets are open, leaving the curfew areas of Dargah Bazaar, Ganj and Diggi Chowk. Amid the fear of pandemic, people are hesitant to come out and shop. 

“The people are terrified as Mochi Mohalla has been a hotspot in Ajmer and people do not want to take a risk,” said a source. Suaha Lal, a bangle shop owner in Naya Bazaar said that not a single customer has come to his shop in last two days. 

“Since the last 40 years, our sales went up to Rs 1 lakh per day before the festival of Eid,” said Suaha Lal. 

Women would come in groups, looking for bangles in different designs and patterns, and would buy without much bargaining, but the situation is different this year, with hardly any buyers. Shops selling clothes are facing the same fate. 

“Customers are not coming in. We open our shops in the morning and go back without any sales,” added Ghanshyam Das, who owns a shop that sells chunnis at Madar Gate.

Another reason being cited for the markets facing a lull this year is that many are low on cash due to the lockdown and with businesses being shut. 

“At Dargah Bazaar and the surrounding region, the main earning is through the devotees coming to the dargah, but from March 23, the dargah is closed and no one is coming to offer prayers,” said a khadim. He said that people may not have the money to purchase new things. 

Meanwhile, the district administration and police have made arrangements for social distancing and masks for people shopping in the markets.


