Covid-19 scare in Kerala: Retailing takes a hit in Kochi
2020-03-10
KOCHI: With the confirmation of Covid-19 presence in Kochi and Pathanamthitta, the footfalls in the local malls and retail shops have come down. 

Deepak L Aswani, chairman, Kerala chapter of Retailers Association of India, said that there is already a decline of 20-25% in footfalls in local retail shops. “During the last few days, footfalls have come down; in fact, many of the malls are going a almost empty. Wherever there used to be a crowd, it is not happening now – people are getting little scared.” 

“However, it is not as bad as is what is portrayed. On the social media this scare is going on — there was a WhatsApp message being circulated which said that things would be bad towards the end of this week. Further, from today onwards, you have this caller tune on phones being changed [to the Covid-19 precautionary warning] and that is creating an even bigger scare,” he said. 

“We haven’t come to the crisis part yet, this is only the beginning. It is inversely proportional — as the crisis goes up, the less will be the number of footfalls in shops,” said Aswani, who is also the co-chairman of the Kerala chapter of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (Ficci).

Aswani cited the tourism industry as another victim of Covid-19. “Earlier the flights [that brought in tourists to Kerala] were full, but they are not so packed nowadays,” he said. 

According to staff at the Centre Square Mall, the decline is 20%, compared to a normal day of the current season. “Footfalls had been coming down and the trend was noticed for the last three days. It first came down when Pathanamthitta incident came to light and then news is out that Kochi is affected too,” said Shameer, a staff at Centre Square Mall, Kochi. 

Shibu Philips, business head, Lulu Shopping Mall, said that the footfalls on Sunday and Monday were normal, compared to that of the same day, previous year. “We don’t have a decline in footfalls. Basically, March is an exam season, but with the pre-primary and primary schools shutting soon, footfalls will come back.”

“Malls have taken all the precautions — we have supplied sanitizers to customers at the security desk. Also, we have deployed a squad who is sanitizing the lifts, lift buttons, escalators and food court tables to keep them clean and safe as possible,” Philips added.

