Covid 19 scare: Thermometers, hand washes at jail to check inmates
2020-03-17
Aurangabad: The state prisons department has requested the courts to stop summoning inmates for regular hearing and trial, and instead carry out the process via video conferencing in a bid to avoid transmission of the novel coronavirus.

The HC has issued an advisory in this regard, following which, the prison superintendents from across the state have started reaching out to their respective Principal District Judges.

The state has nine central prisons, 31 district prisons, 19 open prisons, one open colony and 172 sub-jails. There are two separate prisons for women at Pune and Mumbai, apart from two open prisons for women, situated at Pune and Akola.

U T Pawar, the superintendent of Yerawada central prison in Pune, told TOI they would be carrying out all the hearing and trial of the cases through video conferencing only from Tuesday.

As on date, about 5,800 inmates are lodged in the prison, and all those being remanded to Yerawada, either after conviction or after being remanded in judicial custody are being screened by the medical officer posted at the prison, sanitized, before being taken in, he said.

As a precautionary measure, all the prisons are mandatorily screening all the accused or convicts, before letting them inside the prison premises. At Nagpur central prison, which has over 2,400 inmates, apart from screening and recording temperature of the suspects and accused reaching the prison, they are also being made to wash their hands, face and feet using soaps kept at the newly installed water tank at the prison’s entrance gate.

When contacted, Nagpur central prison superintendent Anupkumar Kumre said, “In addition to screening and sanitizing prisoners at the entrance gate, we have also set up multiple drums of boiled water in which clothes of all the inmates are being soaked before being washed. The clothes are further being washed in water with disinfectants.”

In addition to this, to boost immunity of the inmates, Nagpur central prison has included lemon and amla to their diet. The authorities have also started mixing liquid disinfectant in the water tanks so that the inmates get disinfected while bathing.

Authorities at the Aurangabad central prison have also started serving lemon water and leafy vegetables to the 1,100 inmates in the premises. “All the accused being remanded to our prison are being screened at the entrance gate using electronic thermometer. They are also being made to wash their hands, face and feet before entering,” Aurangabad central prison superintendent Hiralal Jadhav told TOI.

He has also made a representation to the principal district judge, Aurangabad with request to carry out all the hearings and trials of the inmates through video conferencing only.

The Aurangabad prison authorities are separately recording names of those freshly remanded to the prison, so that they can be monitored for any symptoms of coronavirus and action taken.


