Covid crushes students’ dreams to study abroad
2020-06-04
PATNA: Many students from different parts of the state, who had dreamt of studying in foreign universities, have dropped their plans because of the Covid-19 pandemic. While some are highly disappointed, others have not lost hope and decided to reapply next year.

Bodh Gaya resident Shubham Jaiswal, who is a final year MArch student at the Indian Institute of Technology-Roorkee, got admission offers from three reputed international universities, but he had to decline them. 

He told this newspaper, “My project has been selected by the University of Pennsylvania, Seoul National University and National University of Singapore. However, I did not accept their offer letters because I will have to spend a huge amount of money on travelling to any of the three places and staying there. Unfortunately, I did not even take part in the IIT’s placement drive because I was eyeing foreign universities.”

Media student Abhilasha Kumari’s dream of studying in the University of Sheffield was also shattered when her parents asked her to cancel her plan. “I was ecstatic when I received an acceptance letter to be part of a fellowship programme in the first week of March. But my parents did not allow me to go to England because of the pandemic,” the Boring Canal Road resident said.

Abhilasha, however, is determined to reapply next year. For now, she is looking for a job so that she gains experience in the field of journalism.

Shubhendra Kumar, a native of Vaishali, has also cancelled his plan to study international business administration in a foreign university because of the “health risks involved”. “As soon as I got an offer letter in February, I applied for a loan. Sadly, it is of no use and now, I am trying to enter a reputed business school in India,” he said.

Meanwhile, some students, who were selected for internship programmes outside India, have found a way out amid the pandemic. Firdous Alam, a BArch student at the National Institute of Technology-Patna claimed, “The internship offer I got from a private firm in Vietnam was cancelled because of Covid-19. So, I joined an online programme being run by an Indian company.”


