Lucknow: Covid-19 outbreak forces GRP to seal barracks & lines in Charbagh
2020-06-03
LUCKNOW: Nine days after the first personnel of Government Railway Police was diagnosed of Covid-19, district authorities finally acted on Tuesday and sealed the barracks and lines of the forces in Charbagh.

The decision comes after TOI highlighted how slow response had led to the escalation of the outbreak, infecting as many as 26 jawans since May 24. These cops were deployed at Charbagh railway station to manage migrant workers coming via Shramik Special trains. Many migrants have been diagnosed with the contagious disease.

Besides GRP cops, two Railway Protection Force constables deployed at Charbagh station and three of their family members have also been found to be infected with novel coronavirus.

The tally of railway cops and their relatives testing positive is now 32—the third highest figure originating from a common place after Sadar and Kaiserbagh, which have so far have reported 115 and 95 cases, respectively.

In all, 240 GRP jawans were posted at Charbagh railway station. While those found positive were admitted to hospital, about 60 were quarantined at two centres in Lucknow. An additional 50 who were staying in barracks were asked to vacate them for sanitization. 

Of these, 49 went home in different parts of the state on their own while one stayed back at GRP lines. Before leaving, 20 of them voluntarily got tested for Covid-19 on Friday. The reports released on Monday found nine positive. 

This created a flutter among authorities as this means the jawans travelled with infection, posing risk of passing it to others. Their co-travellers are being traced for testing.

“Of the nine diagnosed, one was staying at GRP lines in Charbagh and was admitted to Lokbandhu hospital. We contacted CMOs of the districts to which the remaining eight belonged and got them admitted in hospitals,” said chief medical officer Dr Narendra Agarwal.

Though all nine are asymptomatic, their family members and contacts have been home quarantined and are being tested, he added.

Dr Agarwal also said that the 30 others on leave will also be tested in their districts. 

“We are tracing people who might have come in contact with jawans while they were travelling,” he said.

Additional district magistrate (east) KP Singh said that on the CMO’s recommendation, GRP barracks have been sealed along with a portion of GRP lines.

“The administration will help people living in the areas in getting essential supplies,” he said. 


