Nagpur: Covid-19 school shutdown to hit drivers ferrying kids hard
2020-03-20
NAGPUR: With educational institutes shut till March 31 in the wake of coronavirus outbreak, school van and auto drivers are staring at financial loss which, they say, could get extended assuming that many parents won’t send kids to school “just for a few days” in April either.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Drivers say many parents have already started telling them that payment would be done till second week of March only (till the schools functioned) and not entire month.

Afsar Khan, president of School Van Drivers Association, said, “The shutdown has caused us major loss as parents are expressing their reservations regarding paying for the full month. Our vehicles are financed by banks and we have to pay the EMI on a regular basis. We even have to provide for our families and it now seems a difficult task considering the Covid-19 circumstances. We are also bound to pick up and drop only school kids so we can’t shift to being a regular taxi or cab.”

Another driver Abdul Salim said without his only source of income, things will be difficult. “On an average, most of us earn Rs20,000-Rs25,000 per month. My EMI itself is around Rs12,000 and the remaining is barely enough for running a household. We are thinking of approaching banks and asking for moratorium on EMIs for at least two or three months,” said Salim.

Uday Ambulkar says he is already over-leveraged his financial condition. “I own an auto and a van which ferry total 45 students in various shifts. EMI for auto is Rs3,000, van Rs7,500 and without income, I will be in a bind. Till now, four parents have agreed to pay the full amount for the month and I hope others will also consider similarly,” said Ambulkar.

Another enterprising driver Shyam Sontakke purchased two extra vans, to take his fleet to three, but is now worried about the fixed expenses. “I drive one vehicle myself and pay around Rs15,000 each to drivers of the other vehicles. Now, there is no way I can pay them that amount if income stops. Apart from this, banks won’t be lenient with me regarding EMIs,” said Sontakke.

Driver Prakash Deotale said a negligible number of parents would understand their situation. “There are parents who don’t pay if their child is sick and does not go to school, so why will they pay when school itself is shut down. I am wondering how we will cope with this because this is the only source of income for all of us,” said Deotale.

Even for big players, the going is tough. Samar Jog, owner of a large school bus fleet, said, “Though schools have shut down, our fixed expenses like salaries of drivers, cleaners and back office staff continue. Many of us have spent heavily, and rightfully so, on deep sanitization of buses to ensure safety of students. We have not discussed this issue with parents, but I feel that they must consider this special situation and not think of deducting transport charges.”

