Covid-19 cases in city cross 250 mark, death toll 5 now
2020-05-04
Kanpur: The Covid-19 case count in the city crossed the 250 mark with 17 fresh cases being reported on Sunday, and the tally rising to 252.

The coronavirus continues to target police personnel in Kanpur with as many as 11 more cops, including the PRO of SSP/DIG and an LIU lady inspector, tested positive in last 24 hours, taking the total tally of infected policemen to 24.

The city’s Covid-19 death toll also increased to five when the report of a 75-year-old woman who died on Friday morning, came positive on Sunday.

“We received reports of total 186 samples from Covid-19 lab of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Memorial Medical College and KGMU, Lucknow, on Sunday morning. The samples of 17 people have tested positive for novel coronavirus. All of them have been kept in isolation and their treatment has started,” said chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla.

“The report of 75-year-old woman from Ranjitpurwa, who died on Friday morning at Covid 19 ICU of Lala Lajpat Rai hospital, is also positive,” he added.

A sanitisation drive was carried out at the ICU wing of LLR hospital while a health team started quarantining her family members. A disinfection drive was also carried out in Ranjitpurwa locality, where the elderly woman lived, the CMO said.

“The number of infected policemen reached 24 with 11 more cases reported on late Saturday night,” Dr Shukla added.

“They all have been admitted to Lala Lajpat Rai hospital. The sudden spike in the count of corona positive cases among police personnel — our front line warriors — is worrisome,” the CMO said.

They are being monitored and are in the care of best medical professionals, he added.

“The entire premises of their offices and residential accommodation were sealed and designated as containment zones. Frequent disinfection measures are being taken as per protocol to contain spread by breaking the chain of transmission,,” said a senior health official.

The office of SSP/DIG and the command office premises have been put under strict lockdown. Stringent quarantine and safety protocols have been enforced for personnel and their families, with door-to-door screening, he added.


