UP: Covid-19 causes fifth death in Agra, district tally rises to 172
2020-04-17
AGRA: A 65-year-old kidney patient, who was tested positive for Covid-19 on April 10, died at Sarojini Naidu Medical College (SNMC) on Thursday. This was the fifth case of Covid-19 death in Agra. Also, 23 new positive cases were reported, taking the district's tally to 172.


Saleem Ahmad, a resident of Nai Basti Dhuliya Ganj, contracted the infection probably from people who had attended the Jamaat event in Delhi, according to district administration. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The man was suffering from chronic kidney ailment and systemic hypertension for the past four years. He was a contact of Tablighi Jamaat members. He tested Covid-19 positive on April 10. On the same day, he was admitted to the isolation ward of SNMC. A team of physicians and nephrologist attended to him. 

He received two hemodialysis on April 10 and 14. On Thursday, his condition suddenly deteriorated. Doctors tried their best, but could not save him. He had renal failure and died of heart attack." On Tuesday, a 57-year-old man suffering from breathing problems died at SNMC. A lab report later found him to be a Covid-19 positive case. Earlier, three women who were admitted to SNMC and a private hospital on National Highway 2 with multiple medical conditions, too, were tested with the virus after their deaths. 

Ten out of the total 23 Covid-19 positive cases confirmed by the district administration on Thursday belong to Fatehpur Sikri block. All these people are contacts of a local tour guide who tested positive earlier in the week. Four are health staffers, including three ward boys of SN Medical College. Three cases are linked to a private hospital. Another two cases are linked to a private clinic and two cases are related to Tablighi Jamaat event. 

“All the 23 people tested Covid-19 positive have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people," the Agra CMO added. 

Notably, out of the 172 coronavirus cases in Agra, at least 73 are linked to people who had attended the Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts. At least 11 patients have overseas travel history. Remaining are all contacts of the people tested positive earlier. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 172 Covid-19 cases have been found in Agra. Out of these, 144 are active cases. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being identified and screened. The area around their houses are being sanitised. We are doing massive sampling to identify all the infected people and send them to institutional quarantine."

On Thursday, Firozabad reported two more Covid-19 cases, increasing the tally to 26. Chief medical officer of Firozabad district Dr SK Dixit said, “The duo had come in contact with Tablighi Jamaat members. They have been shifted to an isolation facility. In the district, a majority of Covid-19 cases are liked to the Jamaat.”

