Hyderabad: Covid-19 steals Akshaya Tritiya sheen, jewellers pin all hopes on online sales
2020-04-26
HYDERABAD: On Akshaya Tritiya all that glitters is usually gold. But the nationwide Covid-19 lockdown has ensured a washout this year with gold sales expected to be down by over 95-98%.

Jewellers point out that the biggest deterrent is the poor buying sentiment due to Covid-19 worries and the lockdown has only wiped out whatever little demand there was for the yellow metal, the high prices notwithstanding due to the global uncertainty. Gold was quoting at over Rs 4400 per gm for 22carat and over Rs 4800 per gm for 24 carat in Hyderabad on Saturday on the eve of Akshaya Tritiya.

“With all stores closed there will be no sales. We got some queries and pre-bookings from regular customers, but its a fraction of normal Akshaya Tritiya sales. In any case, jewellers have only old stocks of jewellery and coins and hardly any raw material or artisans to make new jewellery. There is no buying sentiment as customers are more preoccupied with their struggle to survive,” said Darshan Gupta, partner, Mangatrai Jewellers.

“In 20 years of experience I haven’t seen such a washout Akshaya Tritiya. We have been getting couple of customers calls daily asking if our store will open,” said Srinivas K, operations manager, Manepally Jewellers.

With all stores closed, the only saving grace has been online sales for large jewellers like Tata Group’s Tanishq and Kalyan Jewellers, who are wooing customers with gold rate protection and making charges discount offers. TS Kalyanaraman, CMD, Kalyan Jewellers, said while a majority of Akshaya Tritiya sales is traditionally driven through showrooms, this year website traffic has seen three-fold jump due to their ‘gold ownership certificate’ offer, indicating that consumers are adapting to purchasing gold online.

Ajoy Chawla, CEO, jewellery division, Titan Company Ltd, said though online sales typically account for less than 1% of sales for traditional jewellery players, Tanishq’s online sales jumped three to four-fold this year. “We launched the online gold rate protection offer because 54% of our festive season buyers said they were interested,” he said.

In Vijayawada too, some jewellers tried to woo customers with special pre-booking discounts but saw poor response. “The lockdown has affected everyone financially. People are busy buying essentials, not thinking about gold,” said G Suman, gold trader from One Town area.


