Covid-19 doesn’t stop buying of goods for National Games
2020-04-25
PANAJI: The coronavirus pandemic has brought the world to a standstill but work on the 36th National Games to be held in Goa later this year should not stop.


That is the message that the state government has relayed to its departments through a circular on Thursday.

There have been numerous postponements since the National Games were allotted to Goa in 2008. While the coronavirus pandemic could be the latest reason to seek another postponement – not Goa’s fault for the first time – procurement of goods and services will continue.

“Given the dilemma (surrounding the hosting of the National Games), the functional area heads as active stakeholder are required to cooperate and as practical as possible invite (request for proposals and expression of interests) RFPs/EOIs that have been approved, which is entirely independent to the dates of the hosting, so that there is no further delay in procurement of goods and services. Further, other planning and processes may also continue and the RFP/EOIs yet to be drafted may be proceeded with,” states a circular issued by National Games CEO J Ashok Kumar on Thursday.

Last week, representatives of 14 national sports federations had a conference call with union sports secretary Radhey Shyam Julaniya where it was made clear that not even camps can be staged until June-July. Sporting activities will be the last to resume when normalcy returns. The state government, however, is hopeful.

“The government at present is much concerned about the Covid-19 pandemic’s effect to people’s lives, livelihood and the economy. The government also observes that in a number of states with the measures implemented at present, the situation is being controlled, if not entirely overcome.

“Considering the scenario, at this juncture, it may be impulsive to think on a postponement, as the duration of this fight against the virus is unknown or unpredictable,” states the circular.

According to the circular, the government is holding discussions with concerned stakeholders and a “positive resolution would evolve in about five weeks from today.”

