Covid-19 outbreaks may turn endemic, fear doctors
2020-02-16
KOLKATA: Covid-19, the disease caused by novel coronavirus that has taken more than 1,300 lives across the world so far, could turn endemic in India like the seasonal flu and strike again with devastating consequences, fear experts. 


A similar pattern has been noticed in at least two of the common coronaviruses that affect people.

And, without a drug or a vaccine to counter the deadly virus, another outbreak could have a considerable impact, though there could be fewer deaths.

“It is indeed one of the three major possibilities,” said K K Aggarwal, former president, Indian Medical Association (IMA). “While it could be a ‘hit-and-run’ case or a one-off outbreak, there is a high chance of the outbreak recurring. This has been observed with other strains of coronavirus. And if, indeed, the novel strain turns endemic, it will be no different from the common flu. It could turn out to have seasonal behaviour, flaring up in winter like the flu,” he added.

The epidemiological definition of ‘endemic’ is ‘something that is characteristic of a particular population, environment, or region’.

While early studies into novel coronavirus seem to indicate that it may burn itself out in a few months, if it turns endemic, it would come back next winter. That happened with the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, which hit the world in two seasonal waves.

The only saving grace would be that a second attack will have a lesser impact, said Aggarwal. “It should cause fewer deaths when it recurs. In any case, the coronavirus doesn’t have a mortality rate of more than 2% to 3%, which is the same as that of any other seasonal flu. The only big difference is that our immune systems can’t fight it yet, unlike the other flus,” he explained.

Irfan Akhtar, a specialist in the infection control department of the Czech Rehabilitation Hospital in Abu Dhabi, also felt that there was a possibility of the virus turning endemic. “It could be dangerous, since our immune systems are not geared to fight the virus yet. It will take time to develop an antibody. It is highly contagious, which makes it spread faster than the other strains, and leads to death. That is why we need to develop an antiviral drug soon. A vaccine, too, will eventually have to be developed,” he said.

The novel coronavirus will not be any more dangerous than other coronaviruses once it can be countered with drugs, added Akhtar. “Any virus of the group eventually attacks the lungs or the kidneys. A repeat outbreak could be deadlier, since there is nothing as yet to counter the virus. That is why we need to develop a medicine for novel coronavirus, or a vaccine.”

It could take two years to develop a vaccine while an anti-viral drug could be developed even sooner, said Aggarwal. “Once we have a vaccine and a drug, it will be like any other flu,” he said.

It will take six months to a year for the virus to be studied and an antiviral drug to be devised, said consultant Arindam Biswas. “But the human system will eventually develop an antibody in due course. It happened at the time of SARS. We had two outbreaks — in 2003 and 2015 — but the virus has since fizzled out. It hasn’t turned endemic. I don’t think novel coronavirus will, either,” he said. But there is a persistent danger as long as the virus is active and being transmitted, he added. “The worrying aspect is that 40% of those affected are between 50-55 years of age, who are not immuno-compromised. This means the virus can affect people who are perfectly healthy. Usually, the largest number of those to be affected by viruses have immune deficiency,” he added.


