Agra: Covid hotspots get ‘green zone’ tag now, lockdown norms to be relaxed
2020-05-01
AGRA: The Agra district administration on Thursday re-categorised 11 areas, formerly marked as Covid-19 hotspots, into “green zones”, after no new Covid-19 case was reported from these areas in the last 28 days. 

Thus far, the district administration and police were enforcing a strict lockdown in these areas, with barricading to stop any movement. Now, chemist and grocery stores will be allowed to operate in these areas. Maintaining social distancing protocol, people will be allowed to come out to fetch their daily needs. 



District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “Over the last 28 days, no new Covid-19 case has been reported in 11 areas earlier marked as hotspots when 27 positive cases had surfaced in total from these neighbourhoods. After strict enforcement of lockdown, we have managed to stop the spread of infection in these areas. So, all these areas are now being downgraded as green zones. This does not mean there won’t be any lockdown there. However, there will be some relaxations to allow operation of shops selling essential items.” 

“In areas marked green zone, distribution of ration will start on May 1. Around 60,000 residents of these areas are eligible beneficiaries under the PDS scheme,” he added. 

According to data shared by the DM, 1,793 families in total were put under home quarantine these 11 hotspots. All of these people have completed 28 days in home quarantine, while the 27 people who were tested Covid-19 positive from these areas have all been declared cured of infection and discharged from hospital. 

The list of areas which have been declared green zones include Masterplan Road in Khandari, the area in the vicinity of Hotel Crystal Sarovar, Nagla Padi on NH 2, Railways Colony in Agra Cantonment, Kamla Nagar, Eminent Apartment, Mohanpura, Krishna Vihar in Jeevani Mandi, Khari Jumma in Fuwarra locality, Charsu gate and Maghtai village in Bichpuri block.


