Covid-19: UP makes registration must for all pet shops
2020-06-12
AGRA: In the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak, the Uttar Pradesh government has made it mandatory for all pet shops and dog breeding centres to register themselves with the state animal welfare board to prevent cruelty to animals and curb the spread of any disease. The order was issued to all district magistrates in the state on Tuesday. 


Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) ex-secretary and UP state animal welfare board veterinary officer Neelam Bala said that the Union ministry of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries had recently issued a circular stating that all pet shops and dog breeding centres should ensure that they are registered with the state animal welfare board concerned before resuming business after the Covid-induced lockdown. 

"Registered shops have to maintain a proper and healthy environment for animals and send detailed reports to the board every month. This will prevent cruelty to animals and illegal breeding apart from curbing diseases. Compulsory registration will also ensure that pet lovers take home healthy animals," she added. Bala also said that there are at least 600 pet shops and dog breeding centres across Uttar Pradesh and the number could be more as only 45 districts have submitted their data so far. 

According to the UP government's order, pet shop owners would be charged Rs 5,000 as fees for registration, which has to be renewed every five years. The same fees would be charged for dog breeding centres too but they would have to renew the registration every two years. 

The order also states that any pet shop or centre that fails to register with the state animal welfare board within 60 days would be sealed.

The veterinary officer said that the state government's directive is to ensure strict implementation of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Dog Breeding and Marketing) Rules, 2017 and Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Pet Shops) Rules, 2018. Welcoming the move, Ramavtar Singh, manager of People For Animals (PFA), Agra, said, "Registration will prove to be an effective way to crack the whip on errant dog breeders and pet shop owners thereby preventing cruelty to animals."


