Covid beds running out in Delhi private hospitals
2020-05-24
NEW DELHI: About 80% of beds earmarked for Covid-19 patients in eight city private hospitals are already taken, with 507 of a total of 631 occupied. Top hospitals like Apollo (Sarita Vihar), Max Smart (Saket), Fortis (Shalimar Bagh) and Sir Ganga Ram City and Sir Ganga Ram Kolmet in Pusa Road are almost full . 



A senior doctor at Apollo hospital said they have around 80 beds for Covid-19 patients. "All of them are full. We have a few additional beds for suspected cases and one or two patients have tested positive there too," he said.

 A spokesperson at Max Hospital, Saket, said they had earmarked 160 beds for Covid cases. "Because the demand was higher and over 90% beds were running full, we added 34 more beds on Saturday." 


There’re still enough beds in 6 designated govt hospitals

The demand for admission is very high. But we are only admitting patients with serious illnesses," Dr D S Rana, chairman, board of management at Sir Ganga Ram hospital (SGRH) said. Two hospitals, Sir Ganga Ram Kolmet and Sir Ganga Ram City, have been designated for Covid-19 treatment. Both have 79% occupancy.

"At this rate, we don't know how are we going to adjust our own healthcare workers who test positive for the disease. There is a serious crisis of ICU beds as well," said a doctor at one of the Covid-19 designated hospitals, who did not want to be identified. An official at Fortis Shalimar Bagh said all the ICU and other beds earmarked for Covid-19 patients at their hospital are full. 

Some hospitals that have lower occupancy rate include Maa Durga Charitable Trust (80%), Batra (48%) and Cygnus (20%). They were designated for Covid-19 recently and, on Saturday, Cygnus hospital witnessed a fire incident after which many some of the Covid-19 patients had to be shifted.

Delhi has a total of 14 hospitals that have been designated for Covid-19. Of this, two are state-run, four are centre-run and eight are private hospitals. These hospitals have enough beds available. For example, Lok Nayak hospital, which is run by Delhi government, has close to 2,000 beds, of which about 27% are occupied at present by Covid-19 positive cases. Some other beds at the hospitals have suspected cases. Similarly, AIIMS (Delhi and Jhajjar) have 407 Covid-19 positive patients admitted at present, though their combined capacity is much higher.

"Delhi is a high income state. Many people do not want to go to government hospitals. They are willing to pay but, unfortunately, there aren't enough beds available. The government should do something about it to prevent a crisis situation," said Alok Mathur, whose family members were diagnosed with Covid-19 recently. After Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat, Delhi is the fourth most affected state due to Covid-19. Epidemiologists say the situation may get worse in the coming days as the epidemic curve is still on the ascendant. "Elderly, and those with co-morbidities must stay at home. They should take extra care to prevent the infection," doctors say.


