Covid-19 affect: Madurai sports cleaner look
2020-03-21
edited

Madurai: As people in city have been staying inside homes in view of Covid-19, the roads and public places have become cleaner with lesser waste being disposed on the roads.

The Sathamangalam Road, Kamarajar Salai, Arapalayam and streets around the Meenakshi temple, which had perpetual overflowing garbage bins, looked much cleaner on Friday morning. The Madurai Corporation produces about 650 tonnes of garbage per day. While domestic wastes contribute to 50% of this generated garbage, the remaining 50% comes from commercial, industrial places and hospitals.

While workers of the corporation collect the household waste, the bins on the roads usually overflow with garbage from eateries, marriage halls and other establishments along the roads. “Unsegregated waste being dumped by people outside the bins was a permanent site on many streets, but now that seems to have reduced,” said A Asokan of Bibikulam

Corporation commissioner, S Visakan said that they had intensified cleaning in the city as part of Covid-19 preventive measure because hygiene and sanitation were the most important aspects of prevention. Visakan said that he had also spoken to representatives of the sanitary workers and asked them to help them to tackle the situation. “We are also providing them with protective gear,” he said.

Meanwhile, statistics show that there is a marginal dip in the garbage generated in the city for the past five days since public places have remained closed. On March 16 - 698 tonnes of garbage had been collected and it went down to 657 tonnes the next day, 638 tonnes on March 18, 605 tonnes on March 19 and on Friday it was 611 tonnes.

S V Pathy, founder of the centre for environmental services said that there was a dip of about 15 % in garbage collection in the last one week. “People seem to have realized that garbage could result in poor hygiene and have started dealing with it in a better way through proper disposal,” he said.

Pathy said that the government should scrap the 18 % GST for environmental services such as theirs, which could help them to employ more workers in times like this and keep the city clean.


