Covid-19 cases in south Rajasthan have Indore connection
2020-04-09
JAIPUR: Most of the Covid-19 cases in southern parts of the state, including Udaipur, Banswara and Dungarpur, have an Indore connection. Jhalawar reported its first Covid-19 case, as two persons who had travelled to Indore and returned to Jhalawar, tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. 


On April 2, a 16-year-old boy, who stayed at a hostel in Indore, returned to Udaipur and tested positive for the virus, said a health department official.

The next day, his three relatives also tested positive as they all came in contact with the boy. The health department immediately took preventive measures to contain the spread of the disease. Since April 3, no more person tested positive from Udaipur.

Since the southern part of the state shares border with Madhya Pradesh, a lot of people returned to the state.

In Dungarpur on March 27, a man and his son, who had travelled from Indore in a motorbike as they did not find any other mode of transport, tested positive when they reached their hometown.

According to the health department, they were staying in Indore for their livelihood. On March 25, they reached Aaspur of Dungarpur district riding their bike. They were screened for Covid-19 and admitted to the government-run hospital on March 26 where they tested positive.

In Bikaner, a 60-year-old woman, who was physically challenged and have comorbidities such as hypertension, died recently. “We checked her travel history. But, initially we did not find any such travel history but later we found that her husband and her brother-in-law had travelled to Indore recently. There is possibility of her being infected from her husband,” said Dr Devendra Chaudhary, joint director, Bikaner.

On Tuesday, five other persons, who were in close contact with the woman who had died in Bikaner, have also been found infected with the virus.

In Banswara, 10 cases have been reported. The health authorities claimed that there were mass gatherings held in Banswara from March 10-20 in which people from Indore and Mumbai were invited, said a health department official.

A lot many people have come to these areas from Indore in recent days and they have now become a nightmare for the state health authorities. At least 10 positive cases reported from these areas have Indore connection. In fact, the first positive cases in Dungarpur and Udaipur were linked to Indore. Even the woman who died in Bikaner had Indore connection as her husband had visited Indore recently.


