Covid spreads as patients hide ‘contacts’
2020-06-06
TRICHY: Tracing the contacts of Covid-positive patients remains a major task for public health department officials as the infected people reveal their contacts only during a thorough inquiry. The case of a Chennai returnee to Trichy is a classic example of how the viral infection spread surreptitiously from him to at least 14 contacts unknowingly. 

The district administration had on May 31 declared that a 37-year-old female staff nurse of Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) tested positive. A couple of days later, her husband also turned positive and got admitted to the hospital. 

The district administration and the doctors were under the impression that the nurse got infected from the Covid-19 positive pregnant women in MGMGH and her husband contracted the disease from her. Detailed investigation revealed the real source of infection to be a Chennai returnee to the hospital in Manapparai where her husband was working as lab technician. 

An old woman of Kannudaiyanpatti was under treatment at the hospital where one of her sons came from Chennai to take care of her. As he had stayed there for seven days, six of their family including the woman tested positive. The viral infection also spread to the husband of the nurse and two more staff members of the hospital. The hospital was fumigated and the staff were admitted to MGMGH. 

As the nurse and her family were residing in an apartment at Beema Nagar, the public health department tested 36 residents of the building. It was revealed that three of them tested positive for Covid-19. In all, eight people including the nurse and her husband were infected. 

On Friday, Trichy collector S Sivarasu visited Kannudaiyanpatti village and educated the local body staff and villagers on protecting themselves from Covid-19. A senior doctor involved in contact tracing said the patients keep mum about their contacts until the officials inquired. “They won’t volunteer to give us information. We can get it only at the time of inquiry and then our teams trace them,” said a doctor who did not want to be named. 

