Covid-19 cases in Delhi: CM Arvind Kejriwal sets up task force
2020-03-05
NEW DELHI: Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Wednesday set up a task force to tackle the spread of the novel coronavirus in the capital. The task force is chaired by the chief minister and includes top officials of all departments concerned, the municipal corporations and Delhi Police. 


At the first meeting on Wednesday, Kejriwal directed officials of all departments and civic bodies to ensure that measures such as surveillance and screening were implemented on a war footing. 

 
कोरोना वायरस के खतरे को देखते हुआ एक स्टेट लेवल टास्क फ़ोर्स का गठन किया गया  मुख्यमंत्री @ArvindKejriwal स्वयं क… https://t.co/9t4PwEvuWt— AAP (@AamAadmiParty) 1583321133000 
The AAP government is making elaborate arrangements to check the spread of the virus, the chief minister said after the meeting. There is no need to close schools now and such a decision may be taken later if required, he added. The government will also crack down on black-marketeering of masks.

There is no need to panic, Kejriwal emphasised, but urged people to take precautions to prevent the virus from spreading. While appealing to the people of Delhi to avoid large gatherings and crowded places, he also said, "Please wash hands frequently, and avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unclean hands." The chief minister said he hoped that Delhiites would fight the coronavirus the way they fought against dengue.

 The municipal corporations and New Delhi Municipal Council are contacting hotels to reach all visitors from abroad and screen them, he said. Delhi government will also run an awareness campaign in all schools through the education department. 

 "We have allotted responsibilities to separate departments and officials. We have to work in an emergency mode to prevent an outbreak," Kejriwal said, adding that the government had identified 88 people who came in contact with the only Delhiite to be tested positive so far. "All of them are being screened," he added. 

 The 19 Delhi government and six private hospitals, where adequate arrangements were made to tackle swine flu, are getting ready to handle an influx of patients. Isolation beds and isolation wards are being created to provide adequate treatment, Kejriwal said. 

 While two labs at AIIMS and National Centre for Disease Control are already testing samples, two more facilities are being readied at Lady Hardinge and Lok Nayak hospitals, the chief minister added. "We have sufficient N95 masks and kits for distribution. Proper dissemination of information regarding the virus is also required," he said. 


