Covid-19 tests: State crosses 2 lakh mark
2020-05-14
Amaravati: Setting a new record, Andhra Pradesh has crossed the two lakh mark in Covid-19 tests.

The state has screened 2,01196 people for Covid-19 in the last two months. AP has so far screened 3,768 people per million population.

Tamil Nadu is second with 3,447 tests per million among all the states while Jammu and Kashmir leads among the Union territories with 3,980 tests per million. Senior officials of the health department presented the details to chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Wednesday during the review on Covid-19 containment measures at the camp office.

The chief minister reiterated that all non-Covid-19 emergencies should be attended to without any laxity. He enquired about the measures initiated to provide assistance to patients of other health emergencies.

The officials said they have made all arrangements to extend support to pregnant women, chemotherapy and dialysis patients and health staff were in touch with all such patients and bringing them to the hospital as per fixed schedules.

The chief minister asked officials to release pending Arogyasri bills to hospitals once every three weeks. He said they have cleared all dues of the previous government to private hospitals and there should not be any pendency for Arogyasri bills henceforth.

The CM also asked officials to implement the Arogya Asara scheme without any deviation. Officials said the government had procured 1,060 ambulances for 108 service and is readying them for launch by July 1. The CM directed officials to immediately buy two-wheelers for expansion of YSR telemedicine services in rural areas.

The chief minister directed officials to encourage the local sale of marine products to bail out aqua farmers. He said at least 30% should be domestic consumption from any produce — agriculture, horticulture and marine — in order to provide better prices to growers.

The CM asked fisheries minister Mopidevi Venkata Ramana to negotiate with marine merchants in other states and take steps to export stocks. The CM asked agriculture, horticulture and marketing officials to focus on construction of cold storages and processing units to provide remunerative prices to horticulture produce from the Rayalaseema region.


