Covid-19 scare: Steep duty hike push toy trade into deep trouble in Kolkata
2020-02-16
KOLKATA: Partha Roy, a resident of Northern Avenue, went to Fariapukur last Sunday to buy a remote-controlled toy to gift his nephew on his birthday. He was looking for the same one he had earlier bought for one of his relative’s son. But to his surprise, Roy looked around but could not find it at 10-15 odd toy shops in the vicinity. He had no other option but to buy something else for his nephew. 


Roy is not the only one. Many buyers visiting markets at China Bazaar, Bagri Market or Fariapukur are having a tough time buying items for kids. A virtual stop in import from China in the wake of a massive hike on import duty on toys, and the coronavirus scare have hit the toy trade hard. 

 
 
Vikash Jain, the vice-president of West Bengal Exim Association, pointed out that the customs duty has been hiked from 20% to 60% in the Budget from immediate effect. Besides, only 10% of the total import from China are now coming to India. “The shortage has pushed up the prices of most toys by 25%-30%. The number of varieties available now has also gone down. We have stock of imported toys that will last 30-40 days,” he said. He added that the coronavirus scare has also taken a toll on import f Chinese toys.

Currently, over 80% toys that are sold in city markets are imported from China, Malaysia, Hong Kong, the UK and Germany. Bengal is a Rs 1,000 crore market for toys while Kolkata alone account for Rs 700-750 crore. There are over 4,000 retail shops for toys in the city and the state figure is 10,000. The retailer and small vendors are now apprehensive that this steep hike would destroy the industry.

Souvikk Ghosh, a toy retailer in Fariapukur felt the industry will cease to exist gradually. “The customs duty hike is from immediate effect, so even if some distributors have old stock, they will turn costly. Soon it will be difficult to get buyers,” he explained. 

Duty hike and coronavirus scare are killing the trade, Sumit Bhalotia of Venus Impex agreed, echoing Jain and Ghosh. “We are heavily dependent on import because there are hardly any indigenous manufacturing in India for sophisticated toys,” he said.


