Covid-19 spreads to 28 districts as Chittorgarh & Rajsamand report cases
2020-04-26
JAIPUR: Covid-19 claimed two more lives while 49 tested positive across the state on Saturday. Rajsamand and Chittorgarh reported their first cases as the total number of infected rose to 2,083 in addition to 34 deaths.

According to the health department, the number of cases being reported daily has reduced. “There has been no reduction in the number of tests being done daily but cases have been reducing. Those who are saying the number of positive cases in the state have come down because of reduced quantum of testing are wrong,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). He added that earlier there was an unusual spike in the number of cases because the results of 4,000 samples sent to a private lab in Delhi to clear the backlog were reported within a span of 24 hours to 36 hours.

Jaipur reported its 19th Covid-19 death after a 65-year-old woman, who was a resident of hotspot Yogi Ka Tiba in Ramganj, died at Sawai Man Singh Hospital here. She was rushed to the hospital on Thursday with complaints of breathlessness in addition to pre-existing coronary artery disease.

In Kota, a 32-year-old man who was initially admitted to New Medical College and Hospital and later referred to MBS Hospital on April 22 with pre-existing diseases such as chronic renal failure and hypertension, tested positive on Saturday, a day after he died. 

Positive cases reported from various districts include 15 from Jaipur, Jodhpur (10), Ajmer (6), Jhalawar (5), Kota (5), Dholpur (2) Bharatpur (2) and one each in Dungarpur, Jhunjhunu, Chittorgarh and Rajsamand. 

“Eight cases were reported from Ajmer in the morning, out of which two were duplicate as Ajmer Medical College collected the samples of two patients twice and sent to Udaipur Medical College with different sample IDs on same day. In the evening we re-calculated and reduced two cases from Ajmer district,” said Singh.

With constantly increasing deaths in SMS Hospital due to the virus, the health department is planning to introduce plasma therapy. Health minister Raghu Sharma said doctors had completed preparations and as soon they will receive the permission from the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) to begin plasma therapy to serious patients.

He said the doctors at SMS Hospital have collected blood samples of patients who have been cured. “The Covid-19 patients of stage 2, who are serious and need additional therapy apart from medicine, will be treated with plasma therapy,” .

Sharma said after nod from ICMR, the government will give its go-ahead for plasma therapy to doctors.


