Covid curve: So far so good but need to keep guard up
2020-06-01
With fifth round of lockdown kicking in from Monday, health and administrative officials in western districts of Tamil Nadu are bracing for a possible surge in Covid-19 cases in the region. Western districts were better in terms of containing the spread of the virus, largely due to fewer people visiting Koyambedu market, one of clusters in the state, and absence of major influx of people from other states till a week ago. But the situation appears to be changing. Coimbatore may not be having any active cases as per government records, but the district has seven people undergoing treatment in hospitals. They were not accounted for in the district’s tally because they flew down from various metros and were detected immediately upon arrival at the city airport. However, this might change as district borders are being opened, say health officials. Salem, which had no active cases till third week of May, has started getting fresh cases as scores of people came in from other states. Now, Salem has 123 active cases, 49 of them declared as Covid-19 positive on Sunday. Salem collector S A Raman says more cases could come up in the district in the coming days. “Rules for people’s movement have been relaxed, allowing more people to enter the district,’’ he said. Some people sneak into the district in motorcycles, coming from as far as Chennai. They avoid arterial roads to evade check-posts and hence don’t come under testing mechanism put up at the borders. “So, there could be increase in the cases,’’ he said. Fresh Covid-19 cases have started trickling into Erode too, which now has two positive people undergoing treatment. Namakkal had its first death due to the infection on Friday night which was notified in the bulletin on Sunday. The deceased had visited Andhra Pradesh sometime back. He returned on May 28, got admitted in the hospital and died by the time test result came. A health official in Namakkal said that often people obtain passes for inter-district travel for only two, but more tend to travel using the same pass. “Security personnel at check-posts check if people travelling in cars have passes, but sometimes don’t look the number of people allowed. We have quarantined 11 such people who came from Chennai,’’ he said. Meanwhile, the engines of the industries have started slowly picking pace. The small industries in Coimbatore do complain of manpower shortage and lack of financial support from banks, but Tirupur garment units have found a foothold in medical textile sector to emerge as key suppliers of PPEs and masks across the country. Industrial cluster in Hosur too has gathered momentum, if not fully. Easing of more restrictions in Lockdown 5.0 will enable the industries to step up production. The central region of the state witnessed a big chunk of cases from the TJ cluster while Ariyalur and Perambalur were the worst affected by the Koyambedu cluster. Now, the region is affected by an influx of positive cases from Maharashtra.At least 84% of the total Covid-19 cases reported until May 31 in Tamil Nadu were from northern districts, including the state capital Chennai that has emerged as the hotspot. Again, 91% of Covid-19 deaths were reported from the northern region as on May 31.