Covid impact: Fumigation, disinfection costs double
2020-04-30
CHENNAI: Disinfecting and fumigating factory floors and offices just ahead of reopening after the lockdown has pushed up the costs by more than double. 

Updater Services, the country’s largest facilities management provider, has seen its demand double. "Apart from one-time fumigation, companies have booked us for daily fumigation services too. With higher demand, the pricing has risen up by 25%," said Managing director Raghunandana Tangirala.

The cost for one-time fumigation is now revised to Rs 4-Rs 5 per sq ft, and Re 1-Rs 1.50 per sq ft for a daily service.

Apart from chemical disinfectants, even natural ones are gaining acceptance. "We are currently supplying such disinfectants to major temples, manufacturing units, corporate offices, government spaces and even sending them abroad," said Abhaya Kumar Jain, founder-chairman of Nanolife. The green nanotechnology company’s products have been certified "safe and effective" by the directorate of Indian Medicine, he said. 

E-home maintenance company Housejoy has increased prices by 10%-20% in fumigation services during the lockdown. "This is partially due to disinfectant workers demanding higher wages, since they fear exposure to this deadly infection," said founder and chief executive officer Sanchit Gaurav. Housejoy offers fumigation services for homes and offices. "We charge about Rs 4 per sq ft for commercial entities, while for home the price starts from Rs 1999 onwards," he said.

Trained technicians with proper PPE (Personal protective equipment) like chemical masks, goggles and gloves are being deployed. Aerial disinfection will also be carried out as well, where the targeted area - ACs and ventilation systems - will be exposed to the disinfectant for an hour. "Usually, a fumigation process would take 1.5-2 hours, and we advise companies to opt for an overall disinfection once every three days, irrespective of the daily sanitation process which they follow," he added.

Courier service provider Blue Dart Express (part of Deutsche Post DHL Group) said it fears higher exposure to infection as it sees high footfalls from the public. Its CMO and head of business development Ketan Kulkarni said they had a separate Covid Fund which covers these sudden expenses. "We have tied-up with a national fumigation service provider for our facilities in metro cities, and with local agencies for tier 2 and 3 cities. We have teams trained to clean frequently touched surfaces - machines, door handles, trolleys. We also follow social distancing norms, maintaining a 6-ft separation across all our facilities, besides staggered break timings to avoid crowding."


