Covid-19 affects popularity of Surti saris
2020-03-22
Surat: As the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) has taken the country in its grip, the popularity of Surat’s famed saris has faded with the textile traders in the country’s largest man-made fabric (MMF) wholesale market witnessing about 65% glut in the demand.

Apart from the high-end designer saris costing over Rs 5,000, Surat is the biggest centre for low-cost saris targeting rural women. It is here in Surat that saris in the range of Rs 200 to Rs 300 are made. These saris have a huge market in the rural areas of several states, including Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, West Bengal, Chennai etc.

Industry sources said that buyers from different parts of the country, mainly from Delhi and Mumbai have stopped coming to Surat due to the lockdown and fear of coronavirus spread. As the demand for saris has dipped across the country, the wholesalers in other markets have started cancelling their pre-booked sari orders.

The low-cost sari business has been hit hard with the demand dipping by over 80% in the last few days. The buyers, mostly from Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar have cancelled the orders for cheap saris in the range of Rs 200 to Rs 300, which are sold in the rural areas.

According to an estimate, Surat supplies about Rs 60 crore worth of saris per day to different parts of the country, which includes about Rs 20 crore worth of low-cost saris in the rural parts across the country. However, coronavirus outbreak has reduced the business to less than Rs 25 crore per day.

There are about 170 textile markets housing more than 75,000 textile shops located at Ring Road and Salabatpura the centre of sari trade.

President of Federation of Surat Textile Traders Association (FOSTTA), Manoj Agarwal said, “The coronavirus outbreak has broken the back of the sari traders in Surat. The overall sari trade has declined by almost 65% as the buyers have stopped placing orders fearing huge losses with the customers shying away from the retail stores”

The sari traders in the city are also facing payment crisis with the buyers extending the deadlines due to the coronavirus outbreak. According to rough estimate, payments to the tune of over Rs 1,000 crore have been stuck due to the pandemic.

Sardar Bitta Singh, a sari trader at JJ market told TOI, “Two days ago, some of our buyers from Delhi cancelled orders for Rs 5 lakh worth of designer and low-cost saris due to coronavirus outbreak. Many buyers are approaching us on phone to cancel their pre-booked orders. There is money crisis as buyers are not making payments on time”

Echoing similar sentiments, Rajnish Lilah, a sari trader at Kuberji park textile market at Ring Road said, “Good business was anticipated for the upcoming Akha Trij, wedding season and the summer vacation. However, the coronavirus outbreak has cast a dark shadow on the sari business. We are facing cancellations of pre-booked orders of saris worth Rs 10 lakh in the last few days”


