Covid-19 positive convicted prisoner dies at SNMC
2020-05-10
Agra: A 60-year-old convict of Agra central jail who tested positive for Covid-19 died during treatment at the SN Medical College (SNMC) here on Saturday afternoon.

Ever since, the convict had tested positive, samples of 12 inmates who had come in contact with him were collected. They have tested negative. The reports of 16 jail staffers, placed under home quarantine, are yet to be received. 

So far, 24 patients have succumbed Covid-19 in Agra district. 

A resident of Jhansi, the convict who died was found guilty under IPC section 506(2) (punishment for criminal intimidation) and 302 (punishment for murder). He was shifted to Agra central jail on December 14, 2019. 

According to jail officials, the convict was admitted to the emergency ward of SNMC on May 3. He had high blood pressure and suffered a brain stroke. His samples were collected and sent for testing on May 4. He was confirmed Covid-19 positive on the evening of May 6. 

VK Singh, senior superintendent of Agra central jail, said, “Around 12 noon, we were informed by the SNMC authorities about his death. We have informed the higher authorities about the matter. As the deceased had tested Covid-19 positive, we have sought directions whether a post-mortem of the prisoner should be conducted or not.”

Singh added,“As a precaution, we have quarantined 14 inmates who had come in contact of the deceased in a separate barrack. Besides, 16 staff members have been home quarantined. We are ensuring regular sanitization in all the barracks and other parts of the jail premises. Suitable cleanliness is being maintained. Besides, social distancing protocol is strictly followed." 

According to sources, the prisoner may have got infected at the government hospital. Screening, testing and treatment of Coivid-19 patients takes place at SNMC. 

Earlier, 12 staff members of the hospital, including four junior doctors and a senior resident doctor, had tested Covid-19 positive.


