Covid spread slow, time to strengthen economy: CM
2020-06-10
LUCKNOW: Days after UP won praise from Pakistan’s media for slow spread of coronavirus infection, chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Tuesday said the situation should be used as an opportunity to strengthen the state’s economy and generate employment for lakhs of migrants who have returned home during lockdown.

The government is preparing a software that will keep a check on the number of people getting employment through government’s measures during lockdown. It will also contain the record of the number of people to be employed in near future.

Additional chief secretary (home) Awanish Awasthi said, “The CM has said that as the rise of cases in UP is slow, it is a good opportunity for the state to take some strong measures to strengthen economy.”

“The CM has said a comprehensive programme should be prepared to create employment opportunities for workers in various departments to provide work to street vendors and generate employment in MSMEs and big industries. Avenues for work should be found for carpenters, plumbers etc,” Awasthi said.

The CM said a survey should be conducted on the current rate of employment in agriculture and allied sectors, MSMEs and big industries and the potential to increase jobs in these sectors.

“In the survey, the number of people who can be provided employment for six consecutive months, and more, should be determined. The CM has said that the software which is being developed should contain information on how many people got jobs and how many can be employed in specific sectors,” Awasthi said.

The state is also reaching out to street vendors, asking them to register with local bodies so that once a special scheme is developed for them, they can avail of facilities like subsidies and loans. The scheme is being prepared and will be implemented soon.

The government has signed MoUs with industry bodies for generation of at least 11 lakh jobs in a year and has already received interest for about 1.5 lakh vacancies in real estate sector and about 2 lakh in readymade garment sector.


