Covid-19 scare: Pondicherry University shuts down
2020-03-17
PUDUCHERRY: Pondicherry University has suspended all academic, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities including classes, tests, examinations and library services till March 31 or until further orders. All the common facilities such as the library and gym et al will remain closed. 


The university administration has instructed all the students to go back to their respective hometowns. They will be allowed to return to the university only after the academic activities resume, said a circular issued on Monday. All the hostels and messes will be closed after 24 hours of the issue of the circular.

 The administration has directed the teaching and non-teaching faculty members and officers not to travel abroad or to entertain relatives and friends from abroad. It directed the people staying on the campus to report their travel history to the health centre. People with travel history to any Covid-19-affected countries or in contact with such persons in the last 28 days must report to the authorities concerned so that they may be quarantined at home for 14 days to prevent transmission of the virus. 

People with signs and symptoms (cough, fever or difficulty in breathing) must call state/UT helpline Union health and family welfare ministry's helpline at 011-23978046 or visit public health facility with a mask or mouth covered. 

Earlier in the day, health minister Malladi Krishna Rao who chaired a meeting of officials of the territorial administration to review the preparedness of the government machinery to prevent the incidence and spread of the coronavirus, said the government has taken adequate measures to avert an outbreak and has allotted Rs 7.5 crore for the directorate of health and family welfare to procure life-saving drugs, masks and necessary equipment. He said more than 400 isolation beds have been arranged in government and private hospitals. 

Rao, who also holds the portfolio of tourism, said the government will suspend its campaign to attract domestic and foreign tourists to prevent a large number of people visiting the territory in wake of Covid-19 scare. He said there is no incidence of coronavirus in Puducherry so far. The Asha (Accredited Social Health Activists) will undertake a door-to-door campaign from Tuesday to enlighten the people on the prevention of the spread of the virus. 

He said the government has started collecting details of foreigners staying in the guest houses, hotels and restaurants and perform medical examinations. He appealed to media to play a pro-active role in creating awareness among the people on 'dos and don'' ts' in containing the spread of the virus. 

He said there is a proposal to declare holiday for schools (up to Class 9) and colleges in Puducherry as a precautionary measure. There are more than 60,000 students in private and government medical and engineering colleges and Pondicherry University and most of the students hail from other states. The government has already declared a holiday for students up to Class 5. 

The Puducherry and Cuddalore administrations conducted a joint operation along the Puducherry-Tamil Nadu border and circulated pamphlets to create awareness on the prevention of the outbreak of the virus. 


