Coronavirus scare clips 'Wings India 2020' to solely business event
2020-03-09
HYDERABAD: Wings India 2020, the biennial flagship event of the civil aviation ministry to be held at the Begumpet airport this week, is on track, but the event will leverage digital communication modes for many of its meetings and avoid public gatherings amid the Coronavirus scare, said Union ministry of civil aviation joint secretary Usha Padhee here on Sunday.

Telangana IT and industries principal secretary Jayesh Ranjan said the event that was earlier supposed to be a four-day event starting March 12, will now be crunched into a to three-day event to be held during March 12-14. He pointed out that the general public will not be allowed this time but the aero show will take place as planned.

When asked about the number of delegates expected to attend the event, he admitted that the number will be less this year but refused to give a figure saying more clarity will emerge in 2-3 days. In the 2018 edition of Wings India around 700 delegates, including representatives of 14 airlines and major aircraft manufacturers, participated.

“We have several elements in the event to ensure that those who are not able to travel can join via videoconferencing. For instance, we had a ministerial session, where some ministers were from coming from abroad but now they will participate through video conferencing or send us a video message. We will be focusing on the state ministers who will be attending the session,” said Padhee, who was in the city to meet state government officials and inspect the arrangements being made for Wings India 2020.

She said many international delegates have already been advised to avoid travel and instead participate via video conferencing and Wings India 2020 will be more of a business event than a public one. “The focus will be on ensuring that the business quality or outcomes of the meetings is not impacted in any way,” she said. Padhee said that the state government has been very proactive in tackling the Coronavirus scare so far and is well equipped to cope with any crisis.


