Bengaluru: Covid +ve Ayush student does project work, attends online classes from hospital bed
2020-05-15
BENGALURU: Testing positive for Covid-19 may entail at least two weeks of isolation in hospital but that doesn’t mean disruption from one’s routine, believes a 20-year-old Ayush student from Padarayanapura. The girl has been completing assignments and regularly attending online classes from her bed in the isolation ward of Victoria Hospital’s Trauma Care Centre. 

A second-year student of Bachelor of unani medicine and surgery at a college in a neighbouring district, the girl doesn’t want to miss even a single online session and is more concerned about studies than her Covid-positive status. She attends the classes for four hours every day. Before dinner, she’s busy with assignments and project work for 2-3 hours.

The student has not disclosed her Covid-positive status to her college or teachers. “I make sure the video mode is off when the classes are going on. A couple of my friends do know I am in hospital. But I’m absolutely fine. I don’t have any symptoms. Not even fever for a day. Why should I miss classes unnecessarily?” says the girl, who will be the first doctor in her family. 

When she recently needed a black pen to write assignments, the hospital in-charge had to go out and search for it. “No stationery shops were open in the vicinity as KR Market (where the hospital is located) is a containment zone. We somehow got her a couple of pens. I appreciate the girl’s studiousness,” said a doctor. 

The girl was earlier told she can’t take her assignment papers back home as they could be contaminated. However, seeing her passion, the authorities told her that hospital staff would help her disinfect all the sheets when she gets discharged. 

Her entire family — parents, brother and younger sister — is in the Covid-19 ward. “I have no clue how we all got infected. First, my brother tested positive. We were all sent to quarantine. When we underwent tests on the 12th day of quarantine, four of us were found positive,” she added. 

Her sister who is pursuing BSc from a city college also attends online classes occasionally. Some asymptomatic patients in the Covid-19 ward think several such patients can be treated at home. However, given the containment zone they come from, there’s no chance of taking such risks, say health department authorities.

