Covid-19: Bihar too finds faults in rapid test kits
2020-04-22
PATNA: After the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) asked states on Tuesday not to use “faulty” anti-body rapid test kits for two days, Bihar health department too said there were defects in the kits recently received from the Centre. As of now, real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method is used to conduct Covid-19 tests in Bihar.


The ICMR asked the states not to use rapid test kits after Rajasthan complained about faults in them. 

“We conducted trials of the kits at Nalanda Medical College and Hospital. The results of the tests conducted even on Covid-19 positive cases came negative. We are of the view that the accuracy of these kits is doubtful and we have communicated the same to ICMR as well,” Sanjay said. 

Sanjay had issued a statement on April 18 about supply of 6,240 rapid test kits to Bihar by the Union ministry of health and family welfare. “It’s an antibody-based kit. The department is formulating a comprehensive strategy for its use,” Sanjay had tweeted.

Meanwhile, another senior official in the health department said the ICMR has developed a portal on which the state governments can register their test centres and label the rapid test kits for proper documentation. “The states will get two days to complete these formalities,” the official said.

ICMR, the apex medical body in India, had announced the introduction of the antibody-based rapid test kits for Covid-19 on April 4. These kits can be effectively used for conducting blood tests on people having influenza-like symptoms in Covid containment zones, border entry and exit points and large gatherings.

Well-known physician from Muzaffarpur and an expert in studying acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) cases, Dr Arun Shah said rapid test kits cannot be very effective in diagnosis of Covid cases, but they are useful for screening those who have recovered from the infection.

“A rapid antibody test is conducted to diagnose presence of two antibodies – IgM and IgG. If a person is infected with any viral or even bacterial infection, his body initially develops IgM antibody. The same happens in the case of Covid-19 virus. The antibody IgM can be detected from the seventh day after contracting the virus. IgG, on the other hand, is developed after a person recovers from the viral infection. Thus, such rapid test can be effective in screening the individual with history of infection and the ones who develop natural immunity for the virus.” 


