Hyderabad: Covid-19 patient’s cremation stirs row, wife tweets he’s missing
2020-05-22
HYDERABAD: Twenty days after a 42-year-old grocer died of Covid-19 at Gandhi Hospital, his wife has claimed her husband was missing, while the government clarified that civic authorities performed his final rites after informing their relatives.

A controversy erupted after Madhavi tweeted claiming “her husband was missing” after admission at Gandhi Hospital and even tagged IT minister KT Rama Rao on Wednesday night. 

After the post went viral, Gandhi Hospital authorities said that relatives were informed and health minister Eatala Rajender said that the wife and her two daughters, who were also under quarantine, were not immediately informed as relatives cautioned that she may go into shock on hearing the news.

Madhusudhan (42), a grocery store owner from Vanasthalipuram, was admitted to Gandhi Hospital on April 30 and died on May 1 evening. His father, Eswaraiah, too fell prey to Covid and died on April 30. Eleven members of the grocer’s family had turned up Covid-19 positive. 

After the death of Madhusudhan, authorities shifted his wife Madhavi and their two daughters to institutional quarantine on May 2. Without informing immediate family members, Madhusudhan was cremated at a graveyard in Taher Nagar of Vanasthalipuram on May 2 by GHMC officials as per standard operating procedure (SOP) for Covid deaths. As per the SOP, immediate family members can see the Covid patient’s body through a glass partition. 

“I spoke to my husband around 12.30pm on May 1 over phone. He spoke to me normally and said the facilities at Gandhi Hospital and treatment were not satisfactory. He asked me to bring water bottles to him. On May 2, I was informed about the death of my husband while being shifted to Gandhi Hospital. When I wanted to go to the mortuary to see my husband’s body, they assured to show it to me. However, that did not happen,” Madhavi told TOI.

“On May 4, I contacted Vanasthalipuram police enquiring about my husband. They informed me that cremation had already taken place. I do not understand how they can cremate him without informing me,” Madhavi said, adding that she and her daughters were discharged from Gandhi Hospital on May 15 after treatment for Covid-19.

“Madhusudhan was admitted to Gandhi Hospital on April 30 at 7:45pm with positive diagnosis of Covid and as his condition was serious (bilateral pneumonia with ARDS). He expired on May 1 at 6.03pm. As per procedure, the family members were informed and as per protocol the body of Covid patient was handed over to police. The body was cremated by GHMC,” Gandhi Hospital superintendent Dr M Rajarao clarified in an official communique.

Later, health minister Rajender also clarified the immediate family was not informed keeping in view their health and well-being.

“Madhusudhan’s father Eswaraiah came to Gandhi Hospital on April 29 and he died on April 30. Within 24 hours, family members were identified and placed under quarantine. Among them, 11 tested positive for Covid-19. Madhusudhan, who was admitted on April 30, died on May 1. We informed police and municipal administration as the family members were undergoing treatment at hospital and not in condition to perform final rites. After consulting their relatives, who said that his wife might go into shock if she learns about the death of her husband, we did not immediately inform family and performed the final rites. There was also no chance to keep the body in a freezer. After recovering from Covid-19, it is not proper for family members to blame authorities and doctors who are risking their lives to treat Covid patients,” the minister said. 

Currently, the house of Madhusudhan and surrounding area, comprising about 15 houses, is part of a containment zone in Vanasthalipuram. 


