Covid-19 has not peaked in Maharashtra or Mumbai, say doctors
2020-05-02
MUMBAI: On the first-ever four-digit rise in the state’s 24-hour tally, Dr Anup Kumar Yadav, who heads the National Health Mission, said there was no cause for alarm. “This has happened due to a combination of factors such as the fact that we are testing more people as well as the nature of the virus. It is the natural progression of Covid-19,” he said. The Covid-19 experience from other countries has shown cases rise exponentially in a matter of weeks.


Doctors and experts said Covid-19 hasn’t peaked yet in the state or city. An official from the state medical department said the lockdown period helped the state build adequate infrastructure in case the outbreak worsens over the next few weeks. “We have ensured beds come up with oxygen support and we have more ventilators,” said the official.

The state recorded 26 deaths, of which five were from Mumbai. The state’s total death toll now is 485.

Health minister Rajesh Tope said even as cases were rising in some parts of the state, the rate of recovery too was going up and the case fatality rate was steadily coming down. He said that as on Friday, 1,879 people were discharged and the state had a recovery rate of 17%. Also, the case fatality rate was down to 3.4%. CM Uddhav Thackeray said the lockdown had helped in keeping the numbers in control. Mumbai’s death toll now is 295. Its figure of five deaths on Friday was lowest for the city since April 17. Of the deaths, 3 were of men and 2 of women. One of the dead was below 40 years old, while two were in the 40-60 age-group and two others in the 60-plus age-group.

Dr Sadhana Tayade, who heads the state directorate of health services, said despite the rising tally and toll, there were a few good developments. “While most metros, including Mumbai and Pune, are still in the red phase, doubling time of the infection has increased and death rate dropped,” she said. In Mumbai, BMC officials said doubling time had increased from 7 to 10 days. In Pune, the toll inched closer to 100 with 7 deaths. But the state update recorded 10 deaths and officials said 3 could be deaths that occurred previously but were added on Friday. The cases in Pune region have climbed to 1,783, with 99 deaths.

Thane recorded its worst 24-hour figures, with 3 deaths and 34 cases. In Navi Mumbai, a doctor was among the 20 new cases. 3 deaths were reported from Jalgaon and 1 each from Sindhudurg, Bhiwandi, Nanded, Aurangabad and Parbhani. One death of a UP resident was recorded in Mumbai.

