Covid closure costs 140 mkg tea worth Rs 2,100cr in Bengal, Assam
2020-05-26
Kolkata: The outbreak of Covid-19 and subsequent lockdown for 62 days have caused a total loss of 140 million kg (mkg) tea leaves worth Rs 2,100 crore as estimated by the Indian Tea Association (ITA), the oldest and the largest planters’ body in India.

“Based on feedback received from ITA member gardens, it is estimated that in Assam and West Bengal, the total loss in production for the months of March, April and May would be around 140 mkg, which would entail a loss in revenue of more than Rs 2,100 crore based on last year’s North India auction prices,” the premier tea industry body said in a release.

The industry has lost entire first flush and a part of second flush output. According to ITA, the huge loss in revenue has aggravated the financial stress of the ailing tea sector with cost of production increasing rapidly. 

As the lockdown has hurt the industry’s ability to fulfil its financial and statutory commitments, Tea Inc has urged the Union commerce ministry as well as the state Governments of Assam and West Bengal for extending a financial package to the tea sector in terms of interest subvention, enhancement of working capital limit, relief in payment of electricity charges and payment of PF dues. 

The various relief packages announced by the government has so far yielded little for the tea industry, ITA said.

The tea industry for the last few years has been witnessing continuous rise in cost of production without corresponding price increase. While input costs in the last five years have increased a CAGR of 7%-10%, the growth in prices have been 1% resulting in large number of tea estates incurring losses. Teas continue to sell well below the cost of production leading to severe distress among the producing community.

In North India, production in Assam and West Bengal has been estimated to have declined by 65% for the period of March-April and it is estimated that production would further decline by 50% in May.


