Patna: Covid positve tiger spooks pet lovers
2020-04-09
PATNA: The reports of a zoo tiger testing positive for coronavirus in the US has pet owners in the city, especially those with cats, spooked about the possibility of their furry friends contracting the disease.

According to the animal experts at Patna zoo, mammals, especially cats, primates and ferrets, are likely to be infected with the Covid-19 virus.

Veterinary doctors in Patna are getting calls for consultations from pet owners asking about precautions that need to be taken to keep their pets safe. The vets have recommended that pet owners keep their pets indoors.

Dr Bhartendu Vimal of Bihar Veterinary College told this newspaper that there are possibilities that the coronavirus is “zoonotic in nature”, which means it can transmit from humans to animals and vice versa . “Pet owners need to keep an eye for any abnormal behaviour or symptoms shown by their pets especially cats, ferrets, monkeys and even dogs,” Dr Bhartendu said.

He added: “People should avoid taking their pets for walk. They should also maintain social distance with their pets and avoid hugging or allowing them to lick your hands or face.”

Shilpi Gupta, a resident of Makhaniya Kuan said, “I try to keep my cat Sultan at home, however, sometimes he manages to escape. I am worried after seeing the news about the tiger who got infected by the virus. The veterinary doctor has told me to clean the cat’s fur and paws with a soaked towel with Dettol solution.”

Danish Rizwan, a resident of Jagdeopath, who owns two Persian cats and four weasels, said he consults a vet twice a week. “Both my cats, Simba (7-months- old) and Snowy (5-months-old) are doing fine. I give them bath on alternate days, by mixing Dettol solution in their bathing water. I even make sure that they remain in one room and do not go outside,” Rizwan said.

He added: “As far as the weasels are concerned, I keep them locked in the cage. In addition, I sanitise the area every day in the morning as well as in the evening.”

A resident of Boring road, Devopriya Dutta, said she stopped giving non- vegetarian meal to her tabby cats, Sundar and Sundari. “I also have one canine. I only give them lukewarm food especially, milk and rice, bread, paneer and other pet food. I give them a bath twice a week and make sure they remain indoor,” she said. 


