Covid curbs trigger dismay: Lucknow zoo refuses entry to kids below 10 years
2020-06-10
LUCKNOW: After being shut for more than two months due to the lockdown, Lucknow zoo was thrown open to the public, though with restrictions, on Tuesday. However, turnout remained low and those who came were a little disappointed as entry to kids below 10 years of age and to those above 65 years was not allowed. 

Many other services, too, had not been resumed. 


 

Zoo authorities had not mentioned the age bar when the reopening was announced. On Tuesday, when people arrived, they saw a signboard announcing age-related entry restrictions at the gates. 

As a result, compared to the average 5,000 visitors that zoo usually saw every day, only 45 people visited till evening. 

Ajay and Anjana, siblings aged five and six years, were seen returning home disappointed with their parents. 

“The kids were going crazy after remaining isolated at home for so many days. I brought them here today thinking zoo would be safe, but found that kids are not allowed,” said Rakesh Chaudhary, a Hazratganj resident. 

As per new rules, against the average daily footfall of 5,000, only 1,500 visitors will be allowed per day in three slots with 500 people in each. The timings for the three batches are—8.30am to 10.30am, 11.30am to 1.30pm and 3pm to 5pm. The aquarium, nocturnal house, souvenir shops, food court, canteen and toy train have been temporarily shut for public.

However, many people enjoyed their visit. 

“I have never seen so many butterflies in the Butterfly Park here. We clicked many photographs,” said Aditri Chaturvedi, a freelance photographer, who visited the zoo after five months. “I missed popcorn and snacks while strolling around and of course, the toy train and aquarium,” she added. 

“What can be better than taking a walk amid nature and wildlife. I missed my daily walks in the zoo during lockdown,” said Dheeraj Kumar, a morning walker from Narhi. 

Neelesh Dixit, who came with her 22-year-old daughter to take a stroll, said, “Staying cooped up in our house had taken a toll. This is not the best time to venture out but hearing the birds and monkey calls was exciting.” 

“Last June, we recorded footfall of 2 lakh over the month. We are hoping that footfall will increase gradually,” said zoo director RK Singh. 

Entry tickets can only be bought online on the zoo website. 

“There were some glitches on it which have been corrected,” Singh added.


