Coimbatore: Coronavirus positive cases spike to 29 from 1 in district in 1 day
2020-04-02
COIMBATORE: Two days after TOI reported that 28 people from the district who attended the Tablighi Jamaat meet in New Delhi are likely to test positive for Covid-19, health secretary Beela Rajesh on Wednesday confirmed that 21 people from Mettupalayam, six people from Annamalai and one person from Podanur tested positive for the virus.


Sources say test results of seven from Annur and 14 from city limits, who also attended the Delhi meet, are awaited.

The district administration and health department initially received a list of 61 people who attended the meet and managed to trace 57 of them. However, since Tuesday morning, many attendees who didn’t feature on the list, have come forward for tests voluntarily after they developed symptoms.

“We have 90 people in admission so far. Sixty people in ESI Hospital, 21 in Mettupalayam GH and nine of them in Annur GH. All the 21 patients in Mettupalayam GH are attendees of the meet in New Delhi and have tested positive. Seven more people in ESI Hospital, including six attendees of the TJ meet from Pollachi, have also tested positive,” collector K Rajamani said. 

“We are awaiting the results of seven more people admitted and isolated in Annur GH and a few more people in ESI Hospital. These people whose results are awaited have also attended the meet," he said.

The 28 cases declared on Wednesday alone spikes the number of Covid cases in the district from one to 29 in a single day. 

Officials expect it to go up further on Thursday, when more cases get reconfirmed in other labs in the state. “The numbers will further spike once results of those from Annur and corporation limits arrive,” a health department official said.

Besides, the Tablighi Jamaat delegation, the Erode Railway Hospital doctor’s husband also tested positive for the virus on Wednesday. 

He has anyway been under quarantine at ESI Hospital since his wife developed symptoms on Thursday last week. The doctor, her mother, maid and 10-month-old son had tested positive on Sunday. Besides the doctor’s family and Tablighi jamaat returnees, the Spain returnee and one from Tirupur, who returned from London, are also undergoing treatment for the virus.

“The symptoms of the patients who attended the New Delhi conference seem to be more severe than those who returned from abroad and even the doctor’s family,” said a CMCH doctor. 

“While the girl who returned from Spain is asymptomatic, the doctor’s family and the Tirupur patient’s symptoms are much milder,” he said. “However, the New Delhi returnees’ families are yet to develop symptoms, so they have been advised quarantine,” he added.

The health department who is now working on tracing contacts of the 28 new positive cases is also planning to initiate the containment plan around them. “This includes drawing a 5 km radius around their houses and going door to door to check for people suffering from fever or shortness of breath. However, since 21 of them are from Mettupalayam, their 5 km radius for many of them will be common. The same applies for Annamalai. So, we are confident about being able to pull it off,” he said.

