Covid-19 drives customers away from city’s markets
2020-03-17
Thiruvananthapuram: For traders in the city, the microscopic coronavirus was the proverbial last straw. Major markets in the city – the Chalai bazaar and the Connemara market at Palayam – wore a deserted look on Monday, which is a stark contrast to the otherwise vibrant markets after weekend. 

Traders at Connemara market said that business got a severe beating since Friday after Covid-19 cases were reported in the district. There is no business at most shops and nearly half a dozen shops have temporarily stopped functioning. 

Ayub Khan, a trader at Connemara market, said that business has been witnessing a sharp decline since demonetization. “For the past two months, there is not much business here. After Covid-19 cases were reported, many traders have temporarily closed shops and sent staff on leave,” he said. 

Another trader, Shaju, said that his textile shop now employs only two workers against the previous count of seven. 

He said that all traders in the district are affected. 

Chalai bazaar, one of the most vibrant markets in the district, too is severely affected. Abdul Majid, treasurer of Vyapari Vyavasayi Samiti at Chalai, said that footfall has dropped after government announced closure of educational institutions due to spread of Covid-19. “It is a very serious issue. All traders are affected. Some traders told me that it would be great if they could at least pay salaries of staff,” he said. 

Majid said that it was difficult to take protective measures like wearing of gloves or masks as people would fear entering the shops. 

“We look forward to March and April as it is the time of temple festivals and marriages. However, due to regulations in assembly of people in the wake of Covid-19 outbreak, such programmes are being called off and our sales have dipped. We have been forced to cut down on our orders due to reduction in sales,” said Mohammad Siddique, a trader based in Chalai and vice-president of merchants’ union, Chalai-Kothuval unit.

Susheela, a vegetable vendor of Palayam market, said that she had to destroy huge quantities of decayed vegetables as there were only a few buyers. “How long will this last? No one is coming to the market. Many shops were shut and staff are sent on leave,” she said. 

Fish vendors too are hit. “I come to the market at 8am and return after sales by noon. Now, I can’t go back even after sunset. My husband is bedridden and that is why I come here without a break. I have no idea where this is heading,” said Sherly from Kochuveli. 

Rise in Covid-9 cases coupled with bird flu has also affected the poultry business. 

Trade union member of Connemara market, Liju, said, “There is huge drop in footfall. This deserted market can speak for itself about the situation”. He added that retail chains could survive, but poor traders have no money left to purchase stock. 


