Bihar: Covid-19 pushes startups into survival mode
2020-05-07
PATNA: Most of the startups in the state are struggling to survive during this nationwide lockdown to tap new markets. 


Cofounder of a real estate business in Kankarbagh , Prakhyat Kashyap said, the lockdown has burdened him with too many issues “From paying rent to the land owner to giving salary to the staff, the lockdown has added to my struggles. Besides, the profit that I have made in the last two years is not enough to pay everyone,” he said.

The entrepreneur, who recently extended his business in cities like Indore, Ranchi and Gurgaon said that a number of investors backed out after the lockdown.

Sharing similar woes, Aditya Chandra, founder of a food delivery firm, who had more than 300 regular customers, said he is suffering loses ever since the lockdown was implemented on March 25. “We were basically running three segments—online, subscription and offline. Apart from the regular 300 customers, a lot of students from other states used our platform for ordering food. We also used to provide food to hundreds of people in government as well as private events. Now that everything has stopped, we are not able to generate any income,” Chandra said.

Meanwhile, the industries bodies said that startups require investors to function, which is not possible keeping in mind the current situation. Abhishek Kumar, general secretary of Bihar Entrepreneurs Association said that there are over 50,000 startups in Bihar. “Except for startups in agriculture and health sector, all other are at losses,” he said.

Abhishek, who has been holding several webinars with entrepreneurs said, “It is very important to keep them motivated. As most of them are still growing and trying to understand the market, a crisis like this might de-motivate them. Meanwhile, Bihar Industries Association (BIA) president Ram Lal Khaitan said entrepreneurs are dependent on the support of banks and government. These startups will not be relieved unless they receive support from government and banks,” he said.

Industries minister Shyam Rajak said that the department is working to solve the problems of startups and small enterprises in the state. “We have even appointed a new officer for looking after their issues. Hopefully, we will solve them soon,” he said.


