‘Covid-19 has spread, hasn’t become deadlier’
2020-03-19
Q. COVID-19 has been described as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. What does that mean? What is UNICEF doing?

A: Characterising COVID-19 as a pandemic is not an indication that the virus has become deadlier. Rather, it’s an acknowledgement of the disease’s geographical spread. UNICEF has been preparing and responding to the epidemic of COVID-19 around the world, and is working with governments and partners to stop transmission of the virus and keep children and their families safe.

Q. Does COVID-19 affect children?

A: As this is a new virus, we are still learning about how it affects children. We know it is possible for people of any age to be infected with the virus, but so far there are relatively few cases of COVID-19 reported among children. But the protection of children and educational facilities is particularly important.

Q. Can pregnant women pass coronavirus to unborn children?

A: At this time, there is not enough evidence to determine whether the virus is transmitted from a mother to her baby during pregnancy, or the potential impact this may have on the baby. This is currently being investigated. Pregnant women should continue to follow appropriate precautions to protect themselves from exposure to the virus, and seek medical care early, if experiencing symptoms.

Q. Is it safe for a mother to breastfeed if she is infected with coronavirus?

A: Considering the benefits of breastfeeding and the insignificant role of breastmilk in the transmission of other respiratory viruses, the mother can continue breastfeeding, while applying all the necessary precautions. For symptomatic mothers well enough to breastfeed, this includes wearing a mask when near a child (including during feeding), washing hands before and after contact with the child (including feeding), and cleaning/disinfecting contaminated surfaces – as should be done in all cases where anyone with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 interacts with others, including children. If a mother is too ill, she should be encouraged to express milk and give it to the child via a clean cup and/or spoon – all while following the same infection prevention methods.

Q. How to protect school kids from COVID-19?

A: One of the best ways is to simply encourage regular handwashing with soap, for at least 20 seconds. Focus on communicating good health behaviours, such as covering coughs and sneezes with the elbow and washing hands. If schools are closed, it is important for students to follow a timetable for study, play and leisure activities so they keep themselves occupied, safe and healthy.

Rusdia’s Dos And Don’ts 

DO 

Talk about the coronavirus disease 

Talk about people “acquiring” or “contracting” COVID-19

Speak accurately about the risk from COVID-19, based on scientific data and latest official health advice

Talk positively and emphasise the importance of effective prevention measures, including following our tips on hand washing

DON’T

Talk about people ‘transmitting COVID-19,’ ‘infecting others’ or ‘spreading the virus’ as it implies intentional transmission and assigns blame

Attach locations or ethnicity to the disease. Remember: Viruses can’t target people from specific populations, ethnicities, or racial backgrounds.

Repeat or share unconfirmed rumours

Use hyperbolic language designed to generate fear like ‘plague’, ‘apocalypse’ etc.


