Jaipur: Coronavirus hits coolies as fewer trains choke their earnings
2020-06-14
JAIPUR: Operation of fewer trains has badly hit the income of coolies at Jaipur station. Since resumption of rail traffic, 178 coolies of Jaipur station have not been able to earn proper wages to feed their families. While passengers don’t find it safe to carry extra luggage, coolies are carrying sanitizers and wearing masks to build confidence.


“Usually April, May and June are the months when we witness crowded trains. This is mainly due to school and college vacations and summer wedding season. This is the time when each coolie earns Rs 500 to Rs 1,000 per day. However, after Covid outbreak, we started sitting idle and the condition has not changed much even after resumption of rail traffic,” said Abdul Salam, a coolie who has a family of four sons, three daughters and wife. 

Salam said either passengers are carrying very less luggage or are reluctant to hire a coolie. “Today, I earned merely Rs 200 when I had gone to serve on Jaipur-Mumbai superfast. In the evening, I will check Aashram Express and Jodhpur-Howarh Express at night to see if I get a few customers,” he added. 

“Iss time to fursat nahin hoti thee ab khaali baithey hain (Earlier, during this period we had no time, and this time we are sitting idle),” said Shafi Mohammad. 

Despite all odds, the coolies are sensible enough to help their colleagues. “We try to help those who have large family and are old. As a precaution the railway authorties have stopped the coolie who are above 55 years of age,” said Rudmal Saini, another coolie. 

Coolies praised railway authorities for providing them ration packets. “During lockdown, railway authorities arranged grocery packets containing wheat, edible oil and pulses for daily use which helped our families. We are also taking every precaution. Some NGOs and social groups also distributed sanitizers,” said Abdul Salaam, another coolie.

Coolies hope gradually passengers movement will increase and life will limp back to normal.

