Covid-19 helpline officials find ittough to deal with ‘flu patients’
2020-03-15
Bareilly: “I have sneezed a dozen times, I want to give my sample for coronavirus test. Please guide me on how my sample can be collected,” said a caller to the staff of the helpline number of novel coronavirus (Covid-19) in Bareilly. It is not a lone instance as the helpline number here has been flooded with calls with people suffering from fever or cold or cough – all volunteering to give their samples for coronavirus test.“They are often rattled and we make efforts to calm them down,” an official said. Officials said samples of those people are being collected who has travelled abroad or came in contact with suspicious cases. Officials said people should not panic and consult nearest doctor as most of the cases are of influenza.On Saturday, district epidemiologist Dr Meesam Abbas said, “The spread of novel coronavirus has created panic among a section of people. A few people who are suffering from common cold or fever want to get tested for Covid-19. However, people who have returned from abroad or came in contact with suspicious cases are at risk of novel coronavirus, if symptoms of fever and cold appear in them. We have been getting many calls daily from people volunteering to give their samples. It takes time to pacify them and we recommend them to visit their nearest doctor. We even received calls from other states, including Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan.”Apart from helpline number, people with fever or cold are also turning up at district hospital with demand of getting tested.Dr Vageesh Vaish, senior consultant and physician at district hospital, said, “Due to lack of awareness, people think that if they have fever or respiratory disorder, it could be novel coronavirus. A 28-year-old man who recently returned from Mumbai came to district hospital on Saturday as he wanted to get tested for Covid-19 after he had fever. I asked him to come again on Monday. In such cases, we refer these people to rapid response team which has been constituted in every district for novel coronavirus. The members of rapid response team will examine the patient and will take a call if sample needs to be collected or not.”