Covid cases in jail where Shoma lodged worry kin
2020-06-05
Nagpur: Two years after activists — Nagpur University professor (retired) Shoma Sen and lawyer Surendra Gadling — were arrested in Bhima-Koregaon case, their kin say the lockdown has left them clueless about their well-being in jail. They were already complaining of a slow progress in the case.

Over 150 inmates have tested Covid positive in the Arthur Road jail in Mumbai where Shoma was shifted in February.

“I could not go and meet Shoma in jail during the last three months. Neither did I get any letter from her during this period,” says her husband Tushar Kanti Bhattacharya, who lives in Nagpur.

It will be exactly two years of Shoma and Gadling’s arrest on June 6 when the two activists were picked up from their homes at Nagpur by Pune police, after a high drama.

The case has been transferred to National Investigation Agency (NIA) after Maha Vikas Aghadi (MVA) came to power in the state ousting the BJP.

Bhattacharya, who lives alone in the city, said when his wife was in lodged in Yerawada Jail in Pune, he used to make monthly visits and give her medicines as she is suffering from glaucoma. In February she was shifted to Arthur Road Jail in Mumbai.

“Now I have no idea whether she is getting the medicines or not. The drugs need to be kept in a cold storage. Earlier, I used to go every month travelling in an air-conditioned compartment keeping the medicine in an ice-box,” says Bhattacharya.

Even the letter he sent could not reach Shoma, says Bhattacharya. “I had sent a letter through Speed Post and when I checked through a tracking app, I found that it had not moved out of the post office in Mumbai,” he alleges. A month after Shoma was shifted to Mumbai hail, Covid lockdown was imposed.

Shoma’s daughter Koel Sen, who lives in Mumbai, said she last met her mother on March 2. After that she had a couple of minutes’ conversation over telephone on May 2. “My mother said she was sharing a barrack with 60 others,” said Koel. “We could not talk much in the two minutes,” she added.

After Shoma was shifted, two Covid positive cases were detected in the jail. One was a female inmate and other a doctor. “My wife has various comorbidities, which makes it riskier for her,” says Bhattacharya.

Shoma’s friends have also expressed concern over the situation.

Professor of English and stage artist Supantho Bhattacharya said, “Professor Shoma Sen is a legendary teacher and social activist of international repute of our times. The very fact that an academician of her stature could be locked up like a common criminal for two long years without any substantial charges against her, reveals the injustice.” 

Former principal and head of department of criminology and correctional administration John Menachery said the court and police must find out the truth of the case as soon as possible. “I am not sure if charges against her are bailable or not, but there has to be a deadline for undertrials. There has to be a deadline for undertrial detention and bail should be granted if trial goes on beyond that deadline. It is sad that not just in Shoma’s case but in many cases people are languishing in jail for years on end. Justice delayed is justice denied,” he said.

Nagpur District Congress Committee general secretary Sandesh Singlkar said the terms ‘committing terrorist act’ or ‘anti-national activities’ had been loosely and selectively used because of the political pressures in this case. “Demonizing lives of innocent people is definitely not the purpose of law. I know Shoma Sen as a person working to make society more democratic. If anyone is guilty, he or she must be punished but without using any due process of law criminalizing people just on the basis of suspicion is violation of fundamental rights,” he said.


