Covid-19 alert: Gujarat adds record 280 cases and 12 deaths in a day
2020-04-19
AHMEDABAD: Gujarat added one-fifth of its total Covid-19 cases in a single day on Saturday — a record 280 new cases in 24 hours of which 239 or 85% were registered in Ahmedabad alone. Gujarat now has 1,376 positive cases. The state also recorded 12 deaths in a day – highest so far – taking the death toll to 53. The deaths were recorded from Ahmedabad (4), Surat (2), and one each from Aravalli, Bhavnagar, Vadodara, Panchmahal, Anand and Gandhinagar.


According to health aggregators on Covid-19, Gujarat with 280 cases recorded second highest positive cases in India on Saturday, second only to Maharashtra's tally of 377. Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), said that majority of the cases have been reported from known hotspots in cities such as Ahmedabad, Vadodara and Surat.



“The new cases have been reported from areas such as Behrampura, Chandlodia, Dariyapur, Danilimda, Manek Chowk, Isanpur, Navrangpura, Motera, Nikol, Saraspur, Gomtipur, Jamalpur, and Kubernagar in Ahmedabad,” said Ravi. “We again want to tell citizens that figures are a result of aggressive testing in hotspots but people need to exercise more caution,” she said.

‘Situation worsening in Ahmedabad’

Ahmedabad civic chief Vijay Nehra on Saturday warned the situation is getting worse in the city by the day as people steadfastly refuse to understand the gravity of the situation. “People are still getting out of their homes during lockdown and curfew. While majority are abiding, 5% of society is still not obeying rules,” he said.

As on Saturday evening, Gujarat carried out 26,102 tests out of which 2,664 were in past 24 hours. Mass testing was carried out in parts of Ahmedabad on Saturday. “The testing and calibration of different rapid antibody testing (RAT) kits received from the central government on Friday is being initiated. A large number of health department workers are also trained to carry out the tests. Those found suspicious in these tests would be probed further,” said Ravi.
