Covid outbreak brings good business for home delivery startups
2020-04-03
Trichy: The Covid-19 lockdown has brought about a level-playing field for the local startups to cash in on the situation and launch door delivery facility. The startups target customers who stay indoors through social media platforms to door deliver goods. The overwhelming response for door delivery service has pushed the entrepreneurs to scout for more delivery boys.With local grocery stores catering to public in their neighbourhoods ever since the shutdown, small-time local entrepreneurs see an opportunity in establishing their business by serving people during the lockdown. City-based business establishments have entered into joint ventures to deliver their products to the people in need. "There has been a tremendous response from the people than anticipated, so we have restricted our service within Srirangam and Thiruvanaikovil. Paneer has become the most sought after commodity," N Ramesh, managing director, Vethaa Milk, said. City-based Cake Bee confectionary group has joined with Vethaa milk to supply bread and rusk to residents of Srirangam who place orders through the helpline number 95855-16681.Number 1 tollgate-based B&B Organics is another startup that promised to deliver groceries on the same day in Trichy city. The startup takes orders between 10 am to 3 pm and delivers between 6 am to 12 pm on the same day or the next day if there are too many orders. Trichy Mandi is another startup that has been delivering eight varieties of rice in the city since the lockdown. "We have been receiving a minimum of 15 calls a day demanding rice bags. With only one delivery person, we still manage to deliver the orders the same day," V Tamiliniyan, cofounder of Trichy Mandi, said. The startup delivers rice at the doorsteps for free. The door-delivery startup said that city police have issued vehicle passes to supply the essential commodities to people.With people glued to the social media platforms, the startups have been sharing flyers on Facebook and WhatsApp platforms. With the soaring demand, the only challenge for the startups is to recruit delivery boys to take up the orders and deliver them on time.