Covid-19: WHO, USCDC now training teams
2020-03-07
GANDHINAGAR: The World Health Organization (WHO) and US Centre for Disease Control (USCDC) in New Delhi are training all state and central government rapid response medical teams to prepare them for coronavirus infection. Rapid response teams (RRTs) from Gujarat are also attending the training and have been in Delhi since Friday. 


Training to medical teams at district level is being imparted through video-conferencing. Until now, no positive case of coronavirus infection has been detected in Gujarat. 

 
 

“Our RRTs are in Delhi receiving training from experts of organizations like WHO and CDC Atlanta. Simultaneously, district RRTs are also receiving the same training through video-conferencing,” Jayanti Ravi, state principal secretary, health and family welfare, said in Gandhinagar on Friday. She added that six RRTs, representing six zones of the state, are currently in Delhi.

Meanwhile, the state government has issued instructions to private hospitals in the state to set up quarantine facilities for suspected COVID-19 patients. The instructions have been issued as passengers arriving on international flights prefer to visit private hospitals after developing symptoms of coronavirus. Over 3,700 doctors affiliated to the Indian Medical Council have been contacted in case of any exigency.

“Apart from the government hospitals, all the district collectors have been instructed to advise all private hospitals in the area which are linked with government through Ma Vatsalya and Ayushman Bharat schemes, as well as other private hospitals, to create isolation wards, beds and ventilators so that the facilities are more than adequate. However, we strictly advise the citizens to approach government health institutes in case of symptomatic ailments,” Ravi said.

A state health official said that while Ahmedabad civil hospital has been designated as the base hospital in the state for tackling the epidemic, isolation wards equipped with ventilators have been set up in every district for suspected coronavirus patients. “The entire state is right now prepared and ready with a total of 576 isolation beds and 204 ventilators,” said Ravi.

Ravi said that apart from COVID-19 testing facilities being available at B J Medical College, Ahmedabad, the central government has now given permission to start a testing facility at Jamnagar as well. 

