Covid claims 14th victim in Amravati, 11 recover
2020-05-23
Amravati: The novel coronavirus (Covid-19) on Friday claimed its 14th victim and added six more positive cases even as 11 fought it out successfully and returned home from the Covid Hospital all cured.

A 30-year-old Covid positive youth from Patipura died late on Thursday night. Admitted to Covid Hospital with cough, cold and fever, the youth had tested positive on May 16 and has been under treatment since then. As his health went from bad to worse, he was put on ventilator. He breathed his last at 11.10pm on Thursday, said hospital sources.

Fourth patient from Patipura, the youth became the second casualty from his locality after the home death of a 95-year-old woman on April 21, who had tested positive two days later.

The Patipura youth’s death was also the sixth at Covid Hospital before or during treatment. The rest eight were home deaths, according to civil surgeon Dr Shyamsunder Nikam.

Masanganj and Lalkhadi localities, both hotspots, gave a positive case each today to take their count to 21 and 10, respectively. A seven-year-old boy, who had travelled with his family from Indore in Madhya Pradesh to Lohogaon village in Nandgaon Khandeshwar, was reported positive by Indore administration.

He has been brought to Covid Hospital while nine members of his family have been put in institutional quarantine and their swabs have been sent for testing, said an official.

Today's case from Masanganj is a 50-year-old woman, who is learnt to be a lemon seller. The 10th case from Lalkhadi is a 19-year-old boy.

A 23-year-old boy from Shiv Nagar, third from the locality, a 29-year-old youth from Itwari Bazar close to Masanganj hotspot and a 50-year-old man from Bhatkuli, the first from this tehsil, also tested positive on Friday night.

Meanwhile, the Covid Hospital gave a warm farewell to 11 patients — six female and five male — on Friday as they triumphed over the dreaded virus. The 11 include four from Masanganj and one each from Kholapuri Gate, Nandgaon Peth, Paratwada (a cop), Uttamnagar, Lalkhadi, Belpura and Ambika Nagar, the last two being health workers at Covid Hospital here.

Meanwhile, the Covid ward here has 53 active cases now and eight of them are said to be in critical condition. Two are on ventilator and six, including a pregnant woman and a kid, are on oxygen, said a source. 

The district’s Covid count has now touched 145, including 14 deaths, 53 active cases, two referred to GMCH Nagpur, and 76 recovered. 


