Covid-19 cases surge in Kottayam, six in two days
2020-04-26
Kottayam: Three more persons were confirmed with Covid-19 in the district on Saturday. Now, the total number of Covid patients currently in the district has risen to six.

A 50-year-old lorry driver from Manarcad, a 55-year-old woman from Sankranthi and 60-year-old mother of the health worker who was earlier confirmed with Covid-19 in Panachikkad are the three new positive cases.

Earlier, a woman from Pala was confirmed with Covid in Idukki district. She was later shifted to the government medical college hospital (MCH) here. The other two cases are a headload worker in Kottayam market and a health worker in Panachikkad district.

All six have been admitted in the Covid treatment centre at MCH here. The lorry driver who was confirmed with Covid-19 on Saturday has been driving interstate trucks. Health officials said the person was under home quarantine after arriving from Maharashtra on March 25. 

The Sankranthi resident had arrived from Sharjah over one-and-a-half months ago. The samples of the mother of the health worker was taken for lab test as she had come into contact with the Covid-19 confirmed son. 

Confusion continued over the source of infection of the headload worker in Kottayam market. Initially, it was thought that he had contracted the virus from the truck driver who had come from Tamil Nadu. A person, who travelled with the driver had got down in Palakkad, was earlier confirmed with Covid-19. So naturally, it was thought that the driver too had contracted the virus and the headload worker had got infected from him. But now, the driver has been tested negative for Covid-19. 

Many who had visited Kottayam market turned panicky after the headload worker was confirmed with Covid-19. The control room has been receiving several calls. District medical officer have advised all those who visited the market in recent days having breathing difficulties, throat pain and fever to contact the tele consultation number 7034322777. 


