Covid fight caught in red tape and kit shortage in Telangana
2020-03-26
HYDERABAD: Though Telangana government has been taking stringent measures to contain spread of coronavirus for the past few weeks, shortage of testing kits and red tape seems to be hampering its fight against the infection. Going by statistics provided by the health department officials, just 4% people identified with symptoms were tested for Covid-19. Reason: Acute shortage of testing kits.


Since January last week, 77,045 people had arrived at the RGI Airport from various foreign destinations. After thermal screening, 17,283 passengers were identified with some symptoms such as cough, cold and fever. When it came to sample collection, only 764 passengers were tested and of them, 699 were negative for Covid-19. Till March 24 night, 39 people tested positive for coronavirus. In the last two weeks, those who came from abroad were told to be in 14-day mandatory home quarantine and stamped accordingly.

“The state government is not procuring kits from manufacturers directly. The kits are being supplied by the Centre through Pune-based National Institute of Virology (NIV). Though the number of positive cases are less, tests have to be conducted on suspect cases,” a senior health department official said.

Apart from shortage of kits, cost of the test was also a major concern as each test kit costs anything between Rs 4,000 and Rs 5,000, sources said. According to WHO guidelines, all patients in hospitals with acute respiratory problems, shortness of breath, cold, cough and fever should be tested apart from high-risk patients. 

As of now, Covid-19 tests were being conducted at Gandhi Hospital, Osmania Medical College (OMC) and Fever Hospital. Even if the government wants to conduct more tests, more laboratories have not become operational. Though the Centre gave the nod for Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), the CSIR laboratory has not started conducting actual tests. “In a day or two, coronavirus testing will begin at NIMS and IPM. CCMB is also in the process of starting tests,” director of medical education (DME) Ramesh Reddy told TOI on Wednesday.

Officials said tests were being done on people who had direct contact with positive cases (family members, friends and colleagues) and surrounding areas. In Karimnagar and other places, such a strategy was adopted, another health department official said. 

Meanwhile, private hospital and laboratories have expressed their readiness to treat patients and conduct Covid-19 tests. The Centre has reportedly permitted three hospitals and diagnostic laboratories to conduct tests. However, there has been no official communication regarding it to the state government so far.


