Andhra Pradesh: Covid-19 survivors urge people cooped up at home to be positive
2020-04-06
VIJAYAWADA: While the number of Covid-19 positive cases continues to rise in the state, the cure and discharge of five patients over the last few days has raised hopes among those battling the disease.


All five are the first five cases of Covid-19 in Andhra Pradesh and the first cases in their respective districts—Visakhapatnam, Krishna, Nellore, Prakasam and East Godavari. 

The first Covid-19 case in the state, a foreign returnee in Nellore, was reported on March 12 but the patient has recovered since. A 65-year-old male from Visakhapatnam, reportedly with other comorbidities such as hypertension and diabetes, is the oldest among the five to beat the disease. 

The 24-year-old male from Vijayawada, who had a travel history to Paris and was discharged on Saturday, said that complete compliance with the treatment and medical advice is key to complete recovery. 

“There is no reason to panic over the pandemic. If anyone develops any symptoms similar to Covid-19, they should immediately seek medical intervention. The medical authorities discharged me after my two consecutive samples tested negative for the disease,” said the youth.

The 22-year-old youth from Rajahmundry, who was discharged on this Friday, said he volunteered to undergo the Covid-19 test after a fellow passenger on a flight contracted the disease. The youth told TOI that doctors at the Government General Hospital, Kakinada took x-rays everyday and carried out other medical tests. 

“It is better to self-isolate in the best interest of the person in particular, and society at large,” said the youth. Another youth who was discharged on Friday in Ongole expressed similar opinions . Speaking to TOI from the hospital, a 49-year-old female Covid-19 patient from Visakhapatnam, who acquired the disease after her 65-year-old husband tested positive following his arrival in the city from Saudi Arabia, said her relatives and doctors are motivating her to stay strong. 

“Citing the example of my husband, who was completely cured even after having several comorbidities, the doctors said that I will be completely free of the virus and will be sent home soon,” she said.


