Covid-19 fears loom large over tendu leaves collection
2020-04-18
Nagpur: Though the state government has exempted removal of tendu patta from restrictions imposed during lockdown, Covid-19 pandemic has badly hit auction in Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.

In Maharashtra of the 279 tendu units, only 105 units were sold after 5th round of auction process. In Maharashtra the tender for 6th round for remaining units of e-tender was postponed twice and finally it was opened on April 15, 2020 and approval is awaited from the government.

“Our 6th round was to be held on March 23 but it was put off for April 1 and later to April 15, due to Covid-19. Of the 105 units sold, we hope to generate 1,39,250 standard bags fetching royalty Rs23.20 crore, apart from results of 6th round,” said APCCF (tendu) TK Choubey.

In Chhattisgarh, of the 984 units, 605 units have been sold. In MP of the 950 units, only 650 were sold. “In both the states now they will offer material on first-come-first-serve basis,” sources said.

Senior forest officials said there is slump in the market for last 2-3 years owing to old stock with traders. Another major reason is coronavirus restrictions which banned transport and movement of labour too. 

“It is only now government realized tribals would be put to huge loss of wages, tendu patta extraction has been exempted from lockdown. If these restrictions had been removed before auctioning process started traders would have wholeheartedly participated,” said some leading traders from Chhattisgarh and MP.

As lakhs of tribals are involved, tendu patta collection has a political link. The government realized too late. In Maharashtra alone during last season over 1.80 lakh families benefited from tendu collection. These families from Vidarbha region would get Rs10.61 crore towards bonus, which is a major earning source for labourers.

The Central and subsequently state governments exempted tendu collection and its transportation on April 15 while auction process started when coronavirus had started to peep in. However, the circular doesn’t specify any guidelines on safety measures to be taken during collection.

“Tendu collection is one part but major activity is bagging of leaves. It is a specialized job where in 4 feet distance at least 7 workers are needed to stuff leaves in jute bags without being damaged. While packaging how the contractor will maintain social distancing?” asked traders.

“Secondly, we are running short of jute bags which are mostly procured from Kolkata. Due to lockdown for a month, there was no production. This is a big issue as tendu patta cannot be packed in plastic bags,” they said.

Maharashtra forest officials admit that tendu traders had written to the department to postpone the auction process due to Covid-19 as getting labourers will be a problem. Lots of poor villagers and tribal people are dependent for their livelihood from tendu leaves and minor forest produce (MFP) collections.

In the latest guidelines of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) issued on April 16, as well as state government on April 15, 2020, collection of MFPs have been exempted in PESA areas as well as in non-PESA areas during lockdown period.


