Covid-19 lockdown: ECR adopts village in Rohtas district
2020-04-05
PATNA: The East Central Railway (ECR) has adopted a village in Rohtas district for supply of essential commodities and fulfilment of basic needs of the poor during the 21-day lockdown to prevent spread of coronavirus. 

ECR chief public relations officer (CPRO) Rajesh Kumar said railway employees of the signal and telecom (S&T) wing working at Dehri-on-Sone under the ECR's Mughalsarai division have taken the initiative to serve the residents of Mundiyar village under Akorhigola block in Rohtas district. 

Trained railway staff have launched an awareness campaign in the village to ensure adherence of precautionary measures by the villagers. 

"A dedicated team of railway employees started this community service from April 1 and they have been visiting the village every day to distribute essential commodities, including rice, wheat and vegetables among the villagers. The railways is also supplying safe drinking water bottles and snacks to the villagers," the CPRO added.

Mughalsarai additional divisional railway manager (ADRM) Atul Prasad, who is looking after the community service at Mundiyar village, said that the railways has formed a "corona warriors' team under the supervision of senior railway employee of Dehri-on-Sone Birendra Pasad.

"Twenty-five employees are voluntarily working to fulfil the basic needs of the poor in the village. These employees work after their duty hours with full enthusiasm. Railways intends to set up a medical camp in the village in due course of time," he added. 

Health staff of railways distributed 1,000 face masks, 500 soaps and sanitizer bottles among the villagers so far. They also hold counselling sessions at the village.

"Police and the district officials have extended full cooperation to the railways in distribution of essential commodities among the villagers. The railways will continue this service till the end of the lockdown," the CPRO said.

Meanwhile, Railway Protection Force (RPF) posted at different places in ECR's five divisions have so far distributed 22,000 food packets among the poor. 


