Covid-19: Congress alleges foul play in ration kit distribution
2020-04-08
RUDRAPUR: Alleging foul play in the ration kit distribution scheme, the Congress party on Tuesday attacked the BJP government and demanded a probe. Former Congess MLA Tilak Raj Behar has alleged that the scheme, which aims at helping the down-trodden and the needy amidst the Covid-19 scare, is being misused to help people who are close to district officials. 


The statement comes a day after a functionary of the Devbhumi Traders' Union (DTU) submitted his resignation to the senior office-bearers claiming that the ration kits for the poor was procured at a high price causing a loss to the public exchequer in times of such a crisis. 

Vijay Futela, city general secretary of DTU, resigned from his post on Monday and wrote a social media post regarding the alleged scam. Futela told TOI, “The district administration had asked for quotation to supply 4.66 lakh ration kits to the needy across Kumaon region. I quoted the price at Rs 710 per kit but the work order was given to another trader who is affiliated with RSS and who had quoted the price at Rs 800 per kit for the same commodities. Moreover, the officials did not even float the e-tender for the same and the work order was given over the quotation only (a copy of which is with TOI).”

He further said that this is a crime under Disaster Management Act (DMA). “When I took the matter to social media, I was served notice by the authorities and they also ordered me to supply 20,000 kits at the price I had quoted. They threatened me that if I don’t follow their order, they will book me under the DMA. I have agreed to supply the kits and I will also be donating profit I generate from it to the CM’s relief fund.” 

Behar questions as to why the administration gave the contract to the trader who quoted a higher price. “A scam is being carried out in guise of helping the poor. Such a scam cannot take place without the connivance of administration. The public exchequer has lost crores of rupees due to the scam. Congress demands the state's chief minister to form a special investigation team to probe the matter and all the officials involved in the scam must be transferred for a fair investigation,” he said.

Meanwhile, Sanjay Juneja, president of Pranteeya Udyog Vyapar Mandal (PUVM), told TOI, “The administration’s intentions behind this scheme were never right. They never called PUVM, the biggest traders' union of the state. We have ample members and industrialists who are willing to help the needy and the cost of the kits would have been far more less. This is a scam and it should be investigated.” 

Local BJP legislator Rajkumar Thukral has also asked the senior officials of the district administration to intervene and conduct a probe of the matter. However, the District Supply Officer Shyam Lal Arya did not respond to the calls made by TOI. 

