‘Covid insurance’ in place, TV shoots to start on June 10
2020-06-05
Kolkata: At a meeting between stakeholders of the state’s television industry and minister Aroop Biswas on Thursday, it was decided that shooting of Bengali serials will restart from June 10. However, though no child actor under 10 will be allowed to shoot, those above 65 can join work provided they agree to give an undertaking expressing their willingness. In case of any infection on the sets, the state will take the onus of treatment.

Federation of Cine Technicians and Workers of Eastern India (FCTWEI) president Swarup Biswas said, “For the first time in the history of Indian cinema, a guideline has been drawn up to provide a Covid-19 life insurance plan of Rs 25 lakh for each person present on the floor. In case of technicians, the broadcaster and producers will share the cost of premium. In case of artistes, the broadcaster will pay 50% and the producers will pay 40%. The remaining will be paid by the artists’ forum,” Biswas said. Besides, FCTWEI will provide a set of three masks, a face shield and a 500ml bottle of sanitizer to each technician.

The composition of the 35-member unit on the set was also decided on Thursday. On Sunday, another round of meeting is expected to streamline the issues related to film shooting. “We expect to streamline everything and start film shooting by June 10 too,” Biswas said. 

“On Sunday, we will discuss how the premium will be paid for film artistes since we will not have any broadcasters for films,” said Arindam Ganguly, the general secretary of West Bengal Motion Picture Artists’ Forum.

Incidentally, the ban on kissing and hugging might not have a huge impact on serials that largely rely on mythology or dialogue-driven scenes with close-ups. Also, not too many serials will be affected by the guideline barring child actors below 10 since 80% of Bengali serials don’t have them as protagonists. “Schools are closed. How can we allow them to come for shooting? For senior actors, coming to shoots depends on their discretion,” said Ganguly. Actors have also been asked to take their costumes home and use their own make-up. Producers will bear the cost of individual make-up kits for those who can’t afford them.

Technicians will be given assignments on a rotational basis so that no one loses their jobs. “Most technicians have their own bikes and cycles to commute. If someone stays far away, FCTWEI will arrange for their conveyance. We are against accepting payment without doing work. Only technicians present on the floor will have to be paid,” Biswas added.


