Covid-19 scare: SEC defers Andhra Pradesh local polls, CM Jaganmohan Reddy cries foul
2020-03-16
VIJAYAWADA: The State Election Commission (SEC) on Sunday postponed local and civic body elections in Andhra Pradesh for six weeks citing Covid-19 scare, sparking a political row. The ruling YSRCP has decided to challenge the SEC's decision in Supreme Court. 


Coronavirus outbreak live update


Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy, who termed SEC decision as "unilateral", later also called on governor Harichandan Biswabhusan and complained about the "irrational move". 

"The notification, issued in utter secrecy and without consultation with either chief secretary or health secretary, is contradictory in nature as elections were postponed over coronavirus, but in the same breath senior officials from Guntur and Chittoor districts were transferred and collectors asked not to take up house site patta distribution work. It seems that the SEC is working at the behest of others and is reading out the script prepared by others," Jagan said.

The SEC later in the evening issued a statement clarifying that it had acted against certain government functionaries "as per the dictum of Supreme Court". "All the safeguards available to a judge of high court are applicable to the state election commissioner. To attribute motives for the acts of a constitutional functionary are highly regretted and will only weaken the institution," the SEC statement said. 


Only one positive case in AP: 
Jaganmohan Reddy

Jagan alleged that “ever since YSRCP won several seats unanimously, TDP along with its friendly media has been conspiring to stall polls to save its face and also to deprive the state of central funds worth ₹Rs 5,000 crore, which we have to forfeit if polls are not held before March 31”. He said for the 9,600 posts, 50,000 nominations were filed and 2,000 YSRCP candidates were unanimously elected for MPTCs.

Jagan alleged that former CM N Chandrababu Naidu had conspired to postpone the polls as TDP was staring at defeat. “We have complained to the governor and will also explore other options as we were elected with a majority of 151 seats in the 175 member house. But if elections are postponed and officials are being transferred, what should the elected representatives do,” he asked.

Jagan said as far as coronavirus was concerned, in AP of the 70 samples taken, only one case was tested positive and the state has taken effective steps.

Earlier, state election commissioner Nimmagadda Ramesh Kumar clarified that the election process was postponed, but not cancelled. “Unanimous nominations will stand good and the candidates will be declared as elected. The remaining process will be continued as per fresh schedule,” he said.

Chandrababu Naidu alleged that Jagan was not bothered about the coronavirus, which has killed many across the globe.

