Covid-19 impacts periods, albeit indirectly, observe experts
2020-05-30
MANGALURU: Covid-19 and the resultant lockdown has been impacting our lives in extraordinary ways. 

Now, experts have observed that it affects periods too, albeit indirectly.

City-based gynaecologists have observed a reduction in the number of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) cases in the last two months. PCOS is a commonly found condition that affects a woman’s hormone levels and causes irregular periods or menstrual issues. 

Dr Vidhyashree Kamath, consultant gynaecologist, KMC Hospitals, Mangaluru said: “During the pre-covid days, one in every five cases that I would examine any given day was related to PCOS. Young women — mostly IT professionals, or college students pursuing professional courses and living in hostels — often complain of menstrual issues. Most of these are motivated women who do not find time for regular exercises and lived mostly on junk food. With most of them returning home during the lockdown, they have managed to eat healthy and stay fit.”

A 26-year-old IT professional who was on medication for hormonal disorder for the past 18 months has managed to regularise her menstrual cycle and attributes it to a much healthier lifestyle during the lockdown. There are similar cases that Dr Vidyashree has encountered. 

“PCOS is associated with infertility and we have seen a lot of women conceive spontaneously without any fertility treatment during the last two months. They have been under treatment for more than a year. We have observed nearly 50% reduction in calls related to PCOS. The stress level has reduced, and couples are spending more time with each other. Several woman with PCOS have adapted to a healthy lifestyle during this lockdown and hope this remains their new normal,” she said. 

Dr Madhushree Vijayakumar, consultant, obstetrician and gynaecologist, Motherhood Hospitals, Hebbal, Bengaluru, said, “We too have noticed a decline in PCOS cases. During the lockdown, PCOS patients have been able to focus on their health, eating habits and exercise and as a result there has been remarkable improvement in their condition. 

“Since most of them are working from home they are less stressed, have balanced and timely meals as opposed to their earlier schedule of erratic timings and consumption of heavy, oily or junk food. This has created a positive change and impact on the woman suffering from PCOS,” she said. 

Two of her patients who were unable to conceive for the past one and a half years due to PCOS, have conceived. “I have physically examined both my patients, and I am glad to say that both of them and their babies are doing fine,” she said. 

