Covid cases soar in east UP region with migrants’ influx
2020-06-08
Varanasi: The huge influx of migrant workers from various states to Varanasi and surrounding districts increased the number of Covid-19 cases which had been quite less during the lockdown.

The novel coronavirus cases suddenly started rising after migrants started returning via roads and Shramik Special trains later.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal told TOI on Sunday, “In Jaunpur, the number of migrants returning from Mumbai, Gujarat, Delhi and NCR has gone above 2.34 lakhs, the highest among all districts of this region. There has been an alarming rise in number of Covid-19 cases in Jaunpur in just 20 days.”

Only 17 infected persons had been found in Jaunpur since the beginning of lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic in March till May 17, but in just 20 days the positive cases have increased to 264. As many as 36 positive cases were detected in the district on Saturday.

“The return of migrants in high numbers to Jaunpur is not unexpected as migration from here to other states and Gulf is very high. But, the rise in Covid-19 cases is alarming for us,” said Agrawal.

Among the total cases in Jaunpur, 90% are migrants who have returned to rural belts. The good thing is that there has been no community transmission among locals due to the migrants so far and the new cases are of migrants only.

Due to the high number of cases, a Covid Level-1 facility with 450 beds has been set up in Jaunpur, while Varanasi has 1,000 beds in L-1, L-2 and L-3 facilities, he said.

Banaras Hindu University microbiology laboratory officials said up to 1,700 samples had started coming from 10 linked districts of Varanasi zone while the lab’s testing capacity was only 1,000 samples per day. Maximum samples had been coming from Jaunpur and started increasing backlog.

“We had to link Jaunpur with KGMU, Lucknow, to reduce load on BHU lab,” the commissioner said.

In Varanasi, around 60% cases are in city areas, said Agrawal. As the figure of infections in migrants is increasing, an app is being developed locally for real time monitoring of admissions, discharge of patients at L-1, L-2 and L-3 facilities and availability of beds.

There were 10 cases in Azamgarh and 27 in Ghazipur till May 17, but both districts crossed 150-mark in past 20 days.

ADM Azamgarh Guru Prasad Gupta said, “More than 83,000 migrants returned by trains and buses. As per rough estimate, the total number of migrants who have returned is above 1.50 lakh. Maximum cases are being detected in migrants.”

District magistrate Mau Gyan Prakash Tripathi said, “Over 65,000 migrants have returned. There were only three infected persons in Mau till May 17 but now the tally has gone above 57.”


