Bengaluru: Covid-19 fears stoking OCD relapse, say doctors
2020-04-09
BENGALURU: A 38-year-old city doctor has stopped going to work. Nursing a morbid fear that hospitals are a source of contamination, she doesn’t even step out of her room and keeps off everyone, including her children. Her husband, also a doctor, has to go through the rites of cleanliness, including washing currency notes, on her insistence. 


The woman is among the Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) patients witnessing a relapse in the wake of coronavirus concerns. Covid-19’s handwash mandate and OCD can be the worst of combinations, say psychiatrists who are witnessing patients’ struggles. Endless handwashing, fear of the virus and illusions about its presence on their hand are forcing many psychiatric patients to spend hours in front of the washbasin, they say.

“The patients now have supporting facts that only heighten their fear and obsession,” said Dr Mahesh Gowda, psychiatrist, director, Spandana Health Care and Rehab Centre. He has been seeing 3-4 cases of OCD per day during the lockdown. The woman-doctor is one of his patients.

Another 19-year-old woman who had managed to claw her way out of OCD after discontinuing her studies for two years is now in the thick of a worse lapse. “The girl is a cleanliness addict. She had recovered well with medicines and therapies. The fear of the virus has now made her situation difficult as she thinks it’s on her hand. When she came to see me just before the lockdown, she used to wash her hands a minimum of 100 times a day,” said Dr Vinod Kumar, psychiatrist and head, Mpower, The Centre. 

OCD patients who had shown signs of recovery or were doing well are back to being haunted by their obsessions. “They are a lot more troubled now. In some cases, there is a combination of Illness Anxiety Disorder (IAD) coupled with OCD. In cases that I have come across, there is an irrational fear of contamination. Getting them back to normal is tough now. I have seen 12 such cases in a week,” added Dr Vinod. 

He cited the example of a 30-year-old man with IAD, who had a fear of cardiac diseases. He now thinks he has Covid-19. The man had travelled in Metro and believed he had contracted the virus. When his throat began itching, he thought it was nothing but Covid-19. 

