Covid-19 projection is right, collective efforts can curb cases
2020-04-28
The administration has projected that number of coronavirus cases in next 10 days during peak of Covid-19 can be 75,801 in Vidarbha. Noted HIV specialist in city Major Dr Milind Bhrushundi said collective efforts of people, police and administration can reduce this number. 

Do you agree with the Covid projections? 

Yes. I think this it’s very methodologically done statistical projection. They have considered all possibilities like post-lockdown behaviour of people. I think, this is highest number of patients our region can have as the administration has considered the worst condition in this projection. We can reduce this number considerably. 

How can we reduce the number of patients? 

It’s collective effort of administration, police and public. So far, the municipal commissioner and his team has done fabulous job in contact tracing and contamination. Now, it’s up to people. In case lockdown gets some relaxation or lifted partially in unaffected areas, it’s up to the people of these localities to restrict the spread of coronavirus. They must follow social distancing, wear masks and report to doctors if anyone of them develop symptoms. 

Administration claims it has all infrastructure and beds to deal with projected number of patients. So, should we go for lockdown relaxation?

Administration may have beds and machines as per the projected number of patients but what about doctors? Men behind machines are most important and number of doctors is very limited. Moreover, we can have only young doctors at Covid hospitals as seniors are not allowed. If projected numbers of patients get admitted in hospitals, they may infect doctors and health workers too. Hence, it’s our responsibility to take utmost care and follow social distancing, masks and hand hygiene as new normal. 

Don’t you think projected number of 75k-plus is scary for common people? 

Not at all. Looking at our population and its density, this number is very less. An average Indian, without lockdown, can infect 800 people around him in 14 days. Even in lockdown, one patient can infect 2.5 people on an average. So, these numbers are realistic. But, to cheer all of us, I can share with you a data driven estimation of end-date of Covid-19 done at Singapore University. As per this study, Covid-19 will end in India by May 24. So, there is no need to get scared. Just follow the rules. 


