Coronavirus scare: Man, 47, in isolation ward at GRH
2020-02-21
MADURAI: A 47-year-old man from Sivaganga district, who returned from Singapore a week ago, has been admitted to the special isolation ward at Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) on Wednesday evening. Though doctors and health department officials have said on Thursday that there is no cause for any worry, his sample has been sent for testing for COVID-19. 

The man was initially admitted to a private hospital in Madurai on February 18 with symptoms of respiratory illness. Soon after the hospital notified the health department about the man’s arrival from Singapore, he was shifted to the GRH on Wednesday evening. “He did not have fever, sore throat, running nose or any other symptom of upper respiratory tract infection. He was suffering from wheezing which usually indicates asthma,” said a senior doctor. Hospital staff said that he was admitted to the isolation ward as a precautionary measure.

The doctor said the patient was treated mainly for dehydration and had minimal support for breathing. “He showed symptoms that were more like asthma exacerbation rather than viral infection. He has so far remained conscious. If his condition improves, we will remove him from non-invasive ventilation on Friday,” the doctor said. After initial diagnosis which pointed towards pneumonia or allergy, samples have been sent for testing for H1N1 and COVID-19.

Meanwhile, a 28-year-old man from Virudhunagar district was treated at the isolation ward with symptoms of running nose and sneezing and a history of travel to China around 14 days ago. “He had no symptoms of COVID-19. His complaints were more of an allergic reaction. He had already completed his quarantine period. We alerted health officials to monitor him and sent him away,” said a doctor.

District health officials have requested the public not to panic and asserted that all measures are in place. In Madurai, around 85 people are under home quarantine for COVID-19. So far, no person in Tamil Nadu has tested positive for COVID-19. 

