Covid-19 hits cornea harvest, transplant; waitlist for corneal operations lengthens
2020-06-14
HYDERABAD: Eye harvest has been affected due to the Covid-19 pandemic in the last three months, further pushing the waitlist for corneal transplant. Eye surgeons could not take up corneal donation from the dead due to Covid-19 lockdown and associated risk of transmission of novel coronavirus.


According to doctors at LV Prasad Eye Institute in Hyderabad, the decrease in the collection of cornea will increase the burden of the pre-existing gap of demand-supply of corneal tissue. They, however, said the pandemic is an opportunity to brainstorm innovative methods for long-term storage of corneal tissue, especially for an emergency like the current one, in the future. A research publication shows that most of the eye banks in India have discontinued collection through the hospital corneal retrieval programme, which is a major source of cornea collection.

In their research publication in the latest issue of the scientific journal, ‘Indian Journal of Ophthalmology,’ Sunita Chaurasia and Namrata Sharma of LVPEI, Hyderabad, and Sujata Das of LVPEI, Bhubaneswar, said ophthalmologists need to “fall back on alternative procedures like glycerine preserved cornea as an interim measure of managing the globe threatening conditions. Although we do not have surplus optical quality tissue, we can plan to preserve tissues either in glycerol or gamma irradiation, which have been discarded due to causes other than seropositive reasons.”

They said in view of uncertainties over restoration of eye banking activities, there is a need to establish guidelines on ways to restart eye banking activities in the future. Donor cornea, however, carries the unknown and unquantifiable risk of transmission of disease to the recipient. Since there is a risk of transmission via ocular surface, it carries a risk of transmission to the recipient.

“Each eye bank has to come up with a plan that works in a specific geographical location keeping a track of the updates on the stage of spread of the Covid-19 in the area. Stringent safety measures need to be adopted by the eye bank technicians that would include PPE during donor cornea retrieval. The eye banking activities should be initiated in a calibrated manner where no active cases are reported,” they suggested.


