Covid-19: Thiruvananthapuram puts a pause on Smart City’s e-auto scheme
2020-03-04
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The rapid spread of Covid-19 (coronavirus) across countries has affected the launch of the prestigious project to launch e-autos in the capital as part of Smart City project. 

Smart City Thiruvananthapuram (SCTL) had given purchase order to Kerala Automobiles Ltd (KAL) and finalized an agreement for the purchase of 15 e-autos to be driven by women. SCTL collaborated with KAL after a round of tenders, which failed to produce fruitful results. 


 

Official sources confirmed that KAL is expecting supplies for e-autos from China, Japan and South Korea which need to be assembled here. While the delivery was expected at least by February, the threat alerts being issued in the wake of incidents of coronavirus cases in Korea, Japan and China affected the supply of goods from ports in these countries. “We are constantly in talks with them to procure the delivery. The fact is that the lockdown has affected movement of goods globally and we have been told that they expect to lift the lockdown soon,” an official source said.

China is the major supplier of lithium batteries required for e-auto. KAL plans to launch 100 e-autos in the state by March, of which 15 e-autos will be supplied for the capital city as part of Smart City project. As per technical specifications, KAL has to supply D+3 seaters, fully battery operated e-autos which can attain a top speed of 55km per hour and full charging within 6 hours. The vehicle will be fitted with telematic devices which will be connected to an integrated command control centre where it can monitor and report information related to each auto, including vehicle-identification data, daily distance run, routes, timings, energy consumption, fleet operator ID. 

Lithium-ion battery (48V) with battery information system (BIS) and motor with specific conditions are also enlisted among the technical specifications. Official sources said that various goods are being procured from different places and shipped from ports in Asia before it is assembled. The indefinite nature of alerts in some of the countries has been necessitated by fresh emergence of virus outbreak cases. KAL is looking forward to have the required materials shipped at least by the middle of March so that assembly process can begin and delivery can be done.


