Covid-19 woman from Botad gives birth to healthy baby
2020-04-28
RAJKOT: Motherhood for this 29-year-old Covid-19 positive woman Nazma Salot has come as a mixed bag of blessing. In her ninth month of pregnancy, when she was waiting for her baby to arrive, the news of her testing Covid positive arrived first.


Therefore, on April 24, Salot was shifted to a temporary hospital created in the guest house of Sarangpur temple, but immediately the next day she had to be transferred to Bhavnagar’s Sir T hospital in a critical condition. Here, she gave birth to a healthy baby on Monday, which was immediately separated from the mother for fear of infection. And now, unlike all mothers, this new mother has to console herself seeing her newborn only through the virtual window — that of a cellphone. Doctors are taking extreme precaution for the infant and is fed mother’s milk only after it is checked for bacterial infection and goes through proper sterilization process. Meanwhile, they have also sent the baby’s sample for Covid-19 test and the result is expected by Tuesday. 

It all happened within 24 hours, when the hospital administration got news of the Salot being transferred there for deliver. A labour room and an operation theater was created in the isolation ward to perform C-section on the woman, who also had high blood pressure. 

The operation on time saved both the mother and the child. The baby boy weighing 2.8kg is healthy and normal, said hospital sources. 

For Salot, her journey to the Bhavnagar hospital in the ambulance too was fraught with danger as she started getting labour pains midway near Vallabhipur. 

Talking to TOI, Hardik Patel, a hospital administrator said that a doctor guided the emergency medical technician (EMT) in the ambulance over phone while they sent a doctor to Vallabhipur. “We also alerted the police to clear roads so that the ambulance could reach the hospital at the earliest,” he said. 

“The delivery was very risky because of her co-morbid condition and Covid infection. However, the hard work of doctors and nursing staff resulted in a happy ending,” Patel added.

