COVID-19: Three test positive in 24 hours, six others await reports
2020-03-22
Vadodara: The number of positive COVID-19 cases in Vadodara went up to three in just 24 hours by Saturday morning with the sample of one more patient testing positive of the deadly virus. Reports of six others are being awaited.

On Friday, an NRI businessman from Spain and a 62-year-old woman who had recently travelled to Sri Lanka had been confirmed to be infected with the virus, while on Saturday, a 52-year-old male who had co-travelled with the woman was also confirmed to be infected. Sources said that the duo were part of a group of couples from the city which had recently travelled to Sri Lanka.

Sources said that of the three positive patients, one had been kept on ventilator on Friday evening while two others are on oxygen.

The six others whose reports are awaited include a 22-year-old girl who had recently travelled to the United States. She was admitted in the isolation ward of state-run SSG Hospital on Saturday. Two others are relatives of patients who had travelled to Sri Lanka.

“We had screened 140 passengers, of whom 63 have cleared their observation period. Total 77 are still under observation. Reports of six suspect cases are being awaited,” said Dr Uday Tilawat, chief district health officer, Vadodara.

“One patient who was already admitted in our hospital has been shifted to the isolation ward because of new guidelines issued by the government that all those who have serious chest infections should also be screened for COVID-19,” said Dr Rajeev Daveshwar, medical superintendent of SSG Hospital.

This patient does not have any foreign travel history, nor has he travelled outside Vadodara in the recent past. “Reports of all these four patients are being awaited,” he said. By Saturday evening, the government hospital had screened 160 new individuals.

Gujarat’s deputy CM Nitin Patel had also visited the hospital to check its preparedness. Patel asked the authorities to cordon off the entire area surrounding the isolation ward.


