Covid-19 Relief: NMC stops snapping water connections of defaulters
2020-03-22
Nagpur: Water supply is crucial to prevent the spread of Covid-19 and hence, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has stopped disconnecting defaulters from Saturday. 

The civic body has also stopped attaching properties of tax defaulters to avoid violation of section 144 of CrPC. 

In the aftermath of Covid-19, the cash-strapped NMC’s recovery of property tax has dropped. Cases of sale deeds of plots and flats have also come down.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI that he issued directions on Friday not to disconnect water connections of defaulters till further orders.

Taking serious cognisance of huge arrears of water bills, the NMC has launched a drive to snap water connections of all defaulters. Nearly 1,640 connections were disconnected.

On Thursday and Friday, there was tension in Mankapur and Futala following disconnection of water connections. People requested the NMC team not to disconnect water supply till end of Covid-19.

On Friday, MLA Vikas Thakre rushed to Futala and stopped NMC’s disconnection drive. He lodged a complaint with CP Bhushan Kumar Upadhyay, stating that a team of 20, comprising 15 from NMC and 5 from the police department, started the drive despite enforcement of section 144.

“Already, people are tense due to Coronavirus. They need water to wash hands regularly and also keep their premises clean. Instead of focusing on wealthy defaulters, the NMC is harassing poor people, some of whom have received bills amounting to lakhs of rupees,” he said.

NMC standing committee chairman Vijay Zalke sent a letter to administration directing it to stop the drive. “Disconnection will resume only after the end of Covid-19. People will have to come out of their homes for water and so, the decision has been taken to defer the drive,” he said.

The NMC has also stopped attaching properties of tax defaulters from Saturday. The action requires a team of over 5 people so the civic body stopped it to avoid violation of section 144.

NMC’s property tax recovery has also been affected. Against the daily collection of Rs1.5 crore, the NMC’s revenue dropped to Rs92 lakh on Friday. Generally, towards March end, NMC’s revenue increases but recovery has been hit hard due to the lockdown. The NMC has kept its collection counters open at all the 10 zone offices and the head office as well.

NMC assistant commissioner Milind Meshram said people should pay tax by using NMC’s online system. “Only 15% of the taxpayers are using it. We have provided an online payment facility on NMC’s website. We have also launched a special app. No extra charges are levied if the HDFC payment gateway is used online,” he said.

The stamps and registration department said, “Each of the nine registry offices used to record 25-30 sale deeds daily. Now, the number has come down to 18-20 per day since the last three days. Online facility is available and should be used by all. Only 45% cases are coming through online,” the department said.

IN A NUTSHELL

* NMC stopped disconnection of water connections of defaulters considering that water is crucial to prevent spread of Covid-19

* NMC also stopped attachment of properties of tax defaulters to prevent violation of section 144

* NMC property tax recovery dropped from Rs1.5 crore to Rs92 lakh per day

* Sale deeds of plots and flats also reduced

* There is no impact on water bills recovery


