Covid-19 recovery rate stands at 63.25% in Kashi
2020-05-31
VARANASI: With the registratioin of 166 Covid positive cases from March 21 to May 29, Varanasi has achieved Covid-19 recovery rate as 63.25% and fatality rate as low as 2.4%.


Of the total 166 positive cases registered, 63 are migrants in Varanasi. In neighbouring districts, migrants returned from Maharashtra, Punjab, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Delhi and other states are taking the graph higher. After the union health ministry, on May 26, released the country’s figure of Covid recovery rate as 41.61%, TOI on Saturday took stock of the same in Varanasi and surrounding districts.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal informed, “Varanasi recorded 166 positive cases till Friday night. Of it, 112 have been cured and discharged from hospitals while four have died. Active cases have reduced to 50 in isolation wards of DDU district hospital and BHU hospital. This shows the current recovery rate as 63.25% while fatality rate as 2.4%.”

As per records of district administration and CMO, first case in Varanasi was reported on March 21 when a migrant of Pindra area who returned from Dubai, tested positive. After the Tablighi Jamaat attendees and other natives returned to the district, many more were found positve and contact tracing led to a further rise in the Covid graph. The number of infected persons reached close to 30. Thereafter, a drug wholesaler emerged as a super spreader and infected 12 personas, while 13 infected policemen also added to the tally. Besides, many contacts of infected persons were left untraced.

When the influx of migrants from Maharashtra, Delhi, Gujarat and other states started from mid May, many of them, specially those returning from Mumbai started dominating the tally. Similar trend was evident in neighbouring Jaunpur and Ghazipur, where the positive cases came to light after many TJ attendees were found infected. The graph did not rise further for sometime. However, in past 20 days, both the districts have witnessed a massive rise in the Covid number.

Commissioner Agrawal said, “Currently, there are 103 cases in Ghazipur and 159 in Jaunpur. In Ghazipur, 37 have become cured while 66 are being treated. But in Jaunpur, the number of active cases are 132. Patients of both the districts are being treated at level-1 facilities.” “Recovery rate in Ghazipur and Jaunpur are low as maximum cases have come to light in the past fortnight,” added Agrawal.

Chandauli was the last district of the state which opened its account in the state’s tally of Covid-19 cases on May 14. Till Friday, the commissioner said, Chandauli recorded 21 cases. All positive patients in Chandauli are migrants, said the officials. 


