Covid-19 testing gathers pace in West Bengal, NICED bats for more
2020-04-15
KOLKATA: The state government has tested over 3,000 Covid-19 samples till Tuesday, with nearly 1,000 being tested in the last three days, a senior state health department official said on Tuesday. Around 659 samples were tested till April 1 and on Tuesday, this figure stood at 3081, the officer said, adding that there will a sharp rise in the number as the state intensifies testing at high-risk spots.




As criticism mounted after NICED director Shanta Dutta expressed concern over the “less samples” coming to NICED for tests, the state official said, “The numbers are indicative that after ICMR changed the testing protocols and permitted more facilities to conduct tests in Bengal, the numbers have spiked.” Even on Tuesday, Dr Lal PathLabs Ltd received a nod from ICMR for Covid-19 testing. Bengal now has six government and six private testing facilities.

TOI had reported on Monday that the state government has started sending more samples to ICMR-NICED from Sunday for Covid-19 tests. The NICED director, however, stressed that Bengal needs to test more. “It is high time we start conducting tests on people residing at microspots identified by the health department. Tests must be conducted even when people don't show symptoms. This will help us find out if there has been any case of community transmission. And conducting swab tests is not a big deal,” Dutta said. “We must also start conducting door-to-door tests in Bengal, which has a dense population. This will help us get a clearer picture on the degree of contamination,” she said. “If we were to compare, the number of tests conducted in other states is far higher...it is a state subject and the government has to take a call on this,” she added.

Dutta’s statement has sparked a volley of political criticism. BJP state president Dilip Ghosh has already spoken on the issue. CPM state secretary Surjya Kanta Mishra alleged while Bengal’s population is 7% of the country’s population, the tests in Bengal has only been 1.5% to the total tests conducted in India. The Bengal government hasn’t formally responded to this. “Initially, samples were sent to NIV Pune. Later, NICED Kolkata started testing. Later, sanctions were given to SSKM and SPM. More tests are taking place with more facilities getting testing nod from ICMR. These are avoidable comments,” a senior officer said.


