Covid-19 patient leaves Bhosari facility, brought back in 2 hours
2020-03-17
Pune: A man testing positive for Covid-19 escaped from a designated quarantine facility in Bhosari late on Saturday night, sending the health as well as the police authorities into a tizzy.

The infected individual fled the facility around 11pm and went to his home before visiting a friend’s house in the neighbourhood, police said. 

It took the police as well as the health authorities about two hours to track and bring him back to the quarantine facility in Bhosari. He has now been put in the isolation ward.

Additional commissioner Ramnath Pokale of the Pimpri Chinchwad police said, “During the two-odd hours when he was out of the hospital, the man came in contact with four persons, including three of his relatives. All the four persons are being monitored by the health officials.”

Pokale said the man had returned from a foreign country recently. “He was admitted to the Bhosari hospital two days ago after developing Covid-19 symptoms. His throat swab sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) has tested positive for the contagion on Saturday night,” he said.

A police team comprising assistant commissioner Ram Jadhav, senior inspector of the Bhosari police Shankar Autade swung into action soon after receiving an alert about the incident. “The hospital authorities had the details and contact numbers of his relatives. While a police team rushed to his house, another got information that the man had visited his friend’s house in Bhosari,” the officer said.

When the patient was returning to his home, the police team surrounded him. “But, we did not touch him,” Pokale said, adding that he was taken to the facility in an ambulance by the health officials soon after.

The Pimpri Chinchwad police have deployed bandobast outside the hospital to avoid such incidents, he said.

Public health expert Pawan Salve, chief of the health department at Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation said, “The person is a confirmed case of Covid-19. He left our hospital in Bhosari (where he was quarantined) without informing us. We found him near his home and brought him back. We have traced those who might have come in his contact to rule out the contagion spread.” 

He said, “People should not panic. Fear and anxiety about a disease often lead to social stigma. This is a stressful time and all should cooperate.”


