Covid rush at govt hosp leads to rehab for 4 schizophrenic siblings
2020-05-24
Nagpur: Many government hospitals have been converted into Covid-19 treatment facilities and non-Covid patients are being referred to other hospitals. This has inconvenienced many patients but proved beneficial for four schizophrenic siblings from Pulgaon earlier this week. 

Studies say that around 1 in 100 people in a community develop schizophrenia. This case is rarest of rare as all four siblings are suffering from schizophrenia, say experts. 

Turned away from a government hospital in Sewagram due to Covid rush, a schizophrenic patient reached Acharya Vinoba Bhave Rural Hospital (AVBRH), Sawangi Meghe, last week. Here, she was treated in proper psychiatry ward. Now, her sister and two brothers, who too are suffering from similar disorder, are set to get treatment.

“We are planning for psychosocial rehabilitation such as involving them in candle making, drawing-painting and gardening because there is no earning member in the family. They rely on pension of their deceased father who was a railway employee. Their mother is the only normal member in the family,” said professor Dr Pradeep Patil, HoD of Psychiatry Department of the hospital who shared this unique case study with TOI on the eve of World Schizophrenia Day.

“This 30-year-old unmarried girl from Pulgaon in Wardha district came to us earlier this week with complaints of poor oral intake, delusion about hearing voices, fearfulness, using abusive language, and irritability. She was admitted to female psychiatry ward and psychiatric treatment was initiated,” said Dr Patil.

During investigation, it was revealed that patient’s three siblings too are schizophrenic. “They are patient’s two brothers and an elder sister. Their eldest sister too used to be schizophrenic but she died, they said. Now, two sisters are admitted in our hospital for schizophrenia,” Dr Patil said. 

“On further inquiry, we came to know that the maternal uncle of this patient also suffered from symptoms of schizophrenia. But their mother and father had no symptoms. This is rarest of rare case of five siblings with this disorder. I have came across such case for the first time in my 25-year-old career,” said Dr Patil.

Dr Madhuri Thorat, medical superintendent of the regional mental hospital, too was amused on finding out about the case. “I have seen two or three brothers or sisters in family having schizophrenia, but this case is one-of-its-kind,” she said.

Veteran psychiatric Dr Sudhir Bhave said that it’s a known fact that siblings exhibit similar symptoms but four of family is very rare. “Schizophrenia is genetic. In this case the family is fortunate that they will get proper treatment now,” he said.

Schizophrenia is a mental condition which affects normal functioning of the brain. The condition interferes with a person’s ability to feel, act and think.

Some schizophrenic patients recover completely and find an improvement in their symptoms. But others continue to suffer for a prolonged period and the distressing symptoms can last for years.


