Covid-19 testing labs in Dhanbad & H’bag soon: Banna
2020-04-10
Hazaribag: Two more facilities to test Covid-19 samples will soon be set up in Hazaribag and Dhanbad, state health minister Banna Gupta said on Thursday when the positive cases in Jharkhand rose to 13 from four in a single day. 

Talking to reporters after a review meeting with district officials during his visit to Hazaribag, Gupta said, “We have urged the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR ) to set up at least four more laboratories in the state to speed up the testing of Covid-19 samples. Two are already functional in Ranchi (Rims) and Jamshedpur (MGM). We have plans to begin testing in Dhanbad (PMCH) and Hazaribag soon. A proposal has been sent already in this regard.”

Gupta added that the proposal for setting up a testing centre in Hazaribag was raised by deputy commissioner Bhuvanesh Pratap Singh as the district has witnessed the highest number of migrants coming back, soon after the lockdown came into force. On the sudden spurt of cases, Gupta said, “It is alarming and we will act more swiftly to speed up sampling and provide other medical assistance to keep the virus from spreading further.”

He criticised the Union government for lack of any cooperation with the state in the latter’s fight against Covid-19. He said, “Modi ji held video conferences with the chief ministers twice but not even for once did he speak to Hemant Soren. Modi ji continues to remain silent despite our pleas to provide us medical kits for there is a grave shortage of them. I would urge him to give equal importance to Jharkhand.” 

Meanwhile, while on a visit to Ramgarh on Thursday, Gupta said that despite the surge in the number of positive cases of Covid-19 in the state, the virus has not crossed stage two in Jharkhand. “The number of cases rose from Ranchi and Bokaro today but we are still doing better than other states to contain the virus since it has not crossed from stage two to three here.”

He added that he has requested the Union health ministry to provide medical equipment and is for its arrival. He further said, “The government would take help from PSUs and private companies in Jharkhand to use their corporate social responsibility funds for the fight against Covid-19.” 


