Delhi: Covid-19 +ve man violates lockdown, village sealed
2020-04-11
NEW DELHI: Deenpur village near Chhawla in southwest Delhi has been declared the capital’s latest containment zone after a resident infected by the novel coronavirus violated home quarantine norms and interacted with several other people in the locality. 

The person, a politician, is also charged with hiding information about this visit to the Alami Markaz Banglewali Masjid in Nizamuddin for the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in March. He has reportedly infected two other members of his family.

Police have registered an FIR under the Indian Penal Code dealing with violation of public order and under the Epidemic Diseases Act. Cases under Section 188 of IPC (Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) and the Epidemic Act invite a jail term of six months and a fine of not less than Rs 1,000.

The person had been placed in quarantine in his residence under the Chhawla police station by the health authorities. During physical verification of home-quarantined persons recently, he was found absent from his residence. 

"Earlier, during questioning, he hid the facts about his travel and movements. After analysing his call detail records and through physical enquiry, we determined that he had been at the Jamaat meeting in Nizamuddin,” said DCP Dwarka Anto Alphonse. “But even during the repeated medical and police enquiries, he did not disclose these facts to the authorities.”

Two of his family members have tested positive for the coronavirus and his irresponsible behaviour has jeopardised the health of the local community. As a fallout, the affected area was declared a containment zone.

"Dwarka district police has been diligently enforcing the lockdown and home quarantine to contain the spread of infection. Comprehensive surveillance and information gathering through physical verification and technical monitoring are being ensured,” Alphonse said. 

Meanwhile, Delhi Police has booked 200 people across the city in the past 24 hours for violating home quarantine. The highest violations were in southwest Delhi with 39 bookings, followed by 36 in Dwarka, 30 in central Delhi, 22 in east Delhi and 14 in northwest Delhi.

The cops are keeping track of the mobile phones of infected people ordered to observe home quarantine after being treated at a hospital to ascertain whether they are following the directive not to move out of their houses. Apart from this, markers have been stationed outside their homes to stop visitors.

The cops are being assisted by the Special Cell and Special Branch in monitoring the locations of the quarantined people’s mobile phones throughout the day to detect contraventions. Their family members have also been warned about breaching the norms. Police said criminal cases are likely to be registered against any quarantined person found outside his or her residence.


