Covid-19 aid: Beary artistes refuse to submit Aadhaar number
2020-05-18
Mangaluru: Though the state government has announced Rs 2,000 each for artistes across the state, the Karnataka Beary Sahitya Academy is finding it difficult to ensure that beneficiaries from the Beary-speaking community in Dakshina Kannada receive this amount.

According to Rahim Uchil, chairman of the academy, the reason is that most of the artistes are not willing to submit their Aadhaar number. Uchil said,“Many of them are inspired by the slogan ‘kaagaz nahi dikhayenge’ (we will not show our papers), and are not submitting their Aadhaar number. As a result, the academy could not transfer government benefits to the bank accounts of many artistes in the district.” 

“We have sent a list of nearly 600-700 artistes to the government. A majority of the artistes have sent their names and contact numbers, but not mentioned their Aadhaar number in the application. They are being brainwashed by some organisations not to submit documents. Those organisations have been insisting that people not avail benefits from the academy. Meanwhile, the academy is creating awareness among artistes, and insisting that they submit their Aadhaar numbers. In fact, most of them have bank accounts linked to their Aadhaar numbers. However, we cannot transfer benefits to their account, without their Aadhaar number. Many artistes have told me that they are reluctant to submit their Aadhaar numbers to the academy, due to the fear that it would be used for the National Register of Citizens (NRC),” Uchil said, adding that the academy has been convincing Beary community leaders, and are creating awareness through social media, to promote the government scheme that benifits artistes. 

“The government’s intention is to help poor artistes through the Kannada and culture department. The Aadhaar number is necessary here, only to identify beneficiaries. We have already transferred government benefits of Rs 2,000 each to the bank accounts of 257 artistes and writers from the Beary-speaking community. At present, Beary writers, folk artistes, drama artistes, singers and musicians are eligible to avail the benefit. We have also requested the government to extend the benefits to ‘moilanji’ (mehndi) artists. The academy has already distributed grocery kits sufficient for one month to 140 families of artistes,” Uchil said. 


