Covid-19: Corbett Tiger Reserve cancels 3,000 bookings
2020-03-18
Dehradun: After Uttarakhand reported its first Covid-19 positive case on Sunday, the state forest department announced on Tuesday that it would ban the entry of outsiders in forest areas. Also, the authorities at Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR) have decided to cancel all the 3,000 bookings that they had received from March 18 to March 31, though the move would cause a cumulative loss of Rs 1 crore to the tiger reserve.

CTR was opened in October 2019 for this season and since then it has already earned Rs 7 crore, with around 1.65 lakh tourists visiting different zones of the park, according to officials.

While there are fewer advance booking at Rajaji Tiger Reserve (RTR) as compared to CTR , some in the former were cancelled by would-be visitors themselves in the wake of the coronavirus scare, said a source.

Confirming the decision to cancel the bookings and refund the money, CTR director Rahul (who goes by his first name only), told TOI, “The move to cancel the bookings has been taken to ensure the safety of everyone. We have decided to cancel around 3,000 bookings and would refund amounts totalling to over Rs 1 crore.”

Corbett is one of the most-visited tiger reserves in the country, and has the highest density of big cats (around 250, as per a 2018 estimate). Recent high-profile visitors to the park include the Swedish royal couple -- King Carl XVI Gustaf Folke Hubertus and his wife Queen Silvia Renate Sommerlath -- who came for a visit in December 2019.

Director of Rajaji Tiger Reserve (RTR) PK Patro confirmed that a decision has been taken to ban the entry of outsiders into the reserve till the end of this month. According to a source, from November 2019 till date, 33,000 tourists visited RTR so far this season, and a revenue of Rs 68 lakh was generated.

Meanwhile, chief wildlife warden Rajiv Bhartari said the forest department is hopeful that the coronavirus situation will be under control by March 31, after which visitors can visit the parks in the state. “The Government of India is constantly urging people to maintain social distance and avoid travel plans. Even the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) has shut all its monuments and museums for the public. Therefore, it is time that we in Uttarakhand protect our world heritage sites, wildlife, workforce, as well as tourists, from the virus by closing these public zones,” said Bhartari.

Incidentally, many states like Maharashtra and Kerala have also decided to ban the entry of outsiders in forest areas. 


