Covid-19 patient, 50, dies while trying to flee isolation centre in Firozabad; kin say he was assaulted by medical staff
2020-05-29
Agra: A 50-year-old Covid-19 patient died under suspicious circumstances while trying to escape from an isolation facility in Firozabad, even as his mother and daughter, who were also quarantined with him, alleged that he died due to physical assault by hospital staff and policemen.

The family will never get to know how the man died. “Since Covid-19 infected patient’s corpse does not go for post-mortem, we assumed that distress patient died of heart attack and coronavirus infection. He has no major injury due to jump from first floor lintel,” said Dr Alok Kumar, chief medical superintendent of Firozabad district hospital where the incident happened.

The Covid-19 patient was admitted to an isolation facility in the hospital along with his pregnant daughter and septuagenarian mother. While his daughter was brought there on May 18, the man was admitted on May 25. According to sources, the victim was kept on third floor isolation ward.

On Wednesday night, the patient allegedly jumped out of the first floor window after a scuffle with the staff as he wanted to go out. The distressed patient was caught, but died more than seven hours later on Thursday morning.

The CMS said, “The victim was distressed after testing coronavirus positive. On Wednesday night, he had a scuffle with medical staff of isolation ward as he wanted to leave. Later, he broke the aluminium grill of the third floor window and climbed down the pipe to the first floor, from where he jumped down and again assaulted the security guard with a metal rod.”

“He was rescued about two hours later, as the medical staff was scared of him and police team reached to him after wearing PPE kit. Later, he was taken to L2 isolation facility located at Firozabad-Agra border where he died on Thursday morning,” said Dr Alok.

However, the victim’s relative alleged that he was assaulted by medical staff and policemen.

“My father died of physical assault and not of coronavirus. On Wednesday night, he was in distress and I had asked the doctor to sedate him so that he could calm down. But my father told me that he was been assaulted and locked inside another room,” his son alleged.

The CMS also told TOI that a few days back, the victim’s pregnant daughter too got into a scuffle, while she was moved to a separate room after complaining of labour pain. Later, she was shifted back to common isolation ward.


