Covid-19 lockdown: MHA asks states to make people aware of penal provisions
2020-04-03
NEW DELHI: The home secretary on Thursday requested states to widely circulate information on penal provisions in the Disaster Management Act as well as the Indian Penal Code for violation of lockdown guidelines and asked law enforcement agencies to take suitable action under these provisions.

The latest communication from home secretary Ajay Bhalla to chief secretaries came a day after he asked states/UTs to implement the lockdown measures issued by the MHA in exercise of powers under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, “in letter and spirit, without allowing any exception”.

On Wednesday, Bhalla had, in another letter to states, asked them to create fact-checking mechanisms at their level, on the lines of a dedicated portal set up by the Centre, where people could verify facts and unverified news promptly. He also called upon states/UTs to ensure provision of shelters/relief camps for migrant workers with basic amenities like food, medicines etc, as desired by the Supreme Court.

The home secretary, in his letter to chief secretaries on Thursday, reminded them of the SC’s observation that it “trusts and expects that all state governments, public authorities and citizens of this country will faithfully comply with directives, advisories and orders issued by the Union of India... in the interest of public safety”. He particularly cited Sections 51 to 60 of the Disaster Management Act as well as Section 188 of IPC that provide for punitive action — imprisonment or/and fine — against any person violating the containment measures for the Covid-19 pandemic.

“It is requested that for the attention of public authorities and citizens, the penal provisions under the DM Act and IPC should be widely circulated and for violation of lockdown measures, action under relevant provisions of DM Act and IPC shall be taken by the law enforcement authorities,” the home secretary said.

Section 51 of the DM Act provides for maximum one-year prison term (two years if it endangers life) or fine for anyone who obstructs a government servant; Section 54 provides for up to one year in jail for false warning; Section 52 and 53 entail up to two years in jail for false claims and misappropriation of funds. Punitive action is also laid down under DM Act for offences by government departments and companies and for officers failing in their duty. Section 188 of IPC provides for up to six-month prison term of fine, or both, which is further extendable to two years if it endangers human life, for anyone disobeying an order duly promulgated by a public servant.
