Covid-19: College teachers, students make the switch to remote learning
2020-03-20
Coimbatore: With all higher education institutions ordered to remain closed till March 31 to prevent the spread of Covid-19, colleges in the city have taken up online teaching and assessment methods to make sure academic activities aren’t affected.With no students on campuses and hostellers returning home, colleges have started using online tools and apps such as Google Classroom and MyKlassroom for coordinating classroom activities. Teachers also livestream lectures or record and upload them on platforms such as YouTube. Some of them also use popular social media platforms such as WhatsApp to clear doubts.College representatives said they had used online platforms earlier for specific classroom purposes, but now have taken up using them full-time.Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science switched over to online mode of conducting classes from Wednesday. “Classes would be conducted online with live lectures, video and audio. PowerPoint presentations and other learning resources would be shared using Google Classroom. Formative assessments using Kahoot! and Hot Potatoes would be followed,” the management said. College principal K Karunakaran said on Thursday, 80% of the students connected online for live classes. “Teachers record lectures and upload them so those students who can’t get connected for live classes can access the resources later,” he said. “We are planning to use online platforms for conducting seminars and quizzes, and are mulling to conduct remote online exams.”Colleges of Sri Krishna Institutions also conducted online classes from Wednesday. While some teachers livestreamed lectures, others uploaded their lectures on YouTube. For clearing doubts, they used Google Classrooms and WhatsApp. A Alagarsamy, head of the department of Social Work at the Sri Krishna Arts and Science College, said they have started using online platforms to complete the remaining portions. “All our teachers were online by 11am and started interacting with students over WhatsApp, clearing their doubts. We collect assignments in mail, post PPTs in MyKlassroom and clear doubts in Google Classroom,” he said. Colleges such as the Government Arts College, meanwhile, have been conducting practical exams as scheduled. Principal K Chithra said they were mulling to postpone exams. Meanwhile, the University Grants Commission has directed all higher education institutions to reschedule examination and evaluation work after March 31.