Covid-19 sends people rushing for Vitamine C supplements
2020-04-12
MADURAI: The demand for immunity boosters, including vitamin C supplements, siddha concoctions and even fruits such as oranges has gone up as there is a false belief among the public that it will protect them from contracting Covid-19, even though there is no scientific backing.

“Recently, we found many people buying vitamin and health supplements in various forms such as powder or pills that are available over the counter. People prefer to chewable Vitamin C supplements as they believe that it will prevent respiratory illnesses. Even the costly brands are flying off the shelves,” said a pharmacist from Kamarajar Salai. Both pharmacists and doctors said that there is little concern about overdose of such supplements.

“These supplements will boost immunity to a certain extent for those who are vitamin deficient. However, it is of no use to those who are already fit and healthy. It is recommended mainly to those who have co-morbid illnesses and are lacking proper nutrition,” said Dr R Ramesh, a general physician.

Similarly, fruits, especially those particularly rich in vitamin C such as oranges, grapes, and guava are selling fast despite high prices.

Apart from supplements, many are also finding refuge in Siddha concoctions. Recently, a Ministry of Ayush advisory recommended the use of nilavembu and kabasura kudineer concoctions to build immunity. Nilavembu is already popular for its use to prevent dengue fever. “Kabasura kudineer, which was previously known for its use to fight swine flu, is helpful to build immunity,” according to Siddha doctors.

“There is a spike in the sale of kabasura kudineer powder after the ministry advisory. Through WhatsApp, many are seeing videos of doctors recommending the use of such herbal remedies to fight Covid-19 and come to buy. Even if there is no proof, it gives somewhat of a placebo effect and positivity I think,” said a pharmacist from Anna Nagar.

Building immunity

Recommended Vitamin C per day

90 mg for men

75 mg for women

Fruits rich in Vitamin C

Orange, lemon, guava, grapes, pineapple, strawberry and papaya

Kabasura Kudineer dosage for prevention

Children (1-12): 5-10 ml

Children (13-18): 15 ml

Adults: 30 ml

Concoction ratio: 4:1 of water and powder (Consume within three hours)


