Covid-19: Amid migrant exodus, ICMR revises testing strategy
2020-05-19
NEW DELHI: Amid heavy movement of migrant workers across the country, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has revised its Covid-19 testing strategy to include all returnees and migrants who show symptoms for influenza like illness (ILI) within seven days of developing the ailment. 



Besides an urgent drive to check migrant workers for flu and fevers, all symptomatic frontline workers involved in containment and mitigation of Covid-19 will also be tested through the gold standard RT-PCR test given the large number of such persons including Asha workers and municipal officials involved in the exercise.

So far, this procedure was applicable only for symptomatic healthcare workers. Under the revised strategy, RT-PCR tests would also be extended to cover all hospitalised patients who develop symptoms of ILI. The council, however, stressed no emergency clinical procedure, including deliveries, should be delayed for lack of testing. But a sample can be sent for testing simultaneously if the person showed symptoms prescribed in the guidelines.

The guidelines also state that asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case are to be tested once between day five and day 10 of coming in contact, as per the new ICMR testing strategy. Asymptomatic contacts of a confirmed case were being tested once between day five and day 14, so far.

Officials said the strategy has been revised in view of wider relaxations and provisions for restarting economic activities under the fourth phase of lockdown which have also raised concerns of a rise in cases. So far despite clusters with high incidence of disease in various cities, India has avoided community spread that would result in a sharp exponential rise in cases.

“There is a heavy movement of migrant workers, who need testing once they reach their destination. The containment activities also have to be ramped up and states have been asked to deploy substantial workforce for surveillance and mitigation as we open up economic activities in all zones. So, certainly more testing and aggressive testing will be required, even as we have to do it in a reasoned way,” an official said.

The death toll due to Covid-19 rose to 3,029 and cases climbed to 96,169 on Monday, registering an increase of 157 deaths and a record jump of 5,242 cases in 24 hours since Sunday 8 am on the back of rising numbers in Maharashtra .

ILI case is defined as one with acute respiratory infection with fever more than or equal to 38 degrees Celsius and cough, while a SARI case is one with acute respiratory infection with fever more than or equal to 38 degrees Celsius and cough and requiring hospitalisation, the ICMR stated.

Till now, people with ILI symptoms living in hotspots or containment zones, patients of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) and symptomatic healthcare workers were being tested for coronavirus infection as per guidelines.

All asymptomatic individuals with a history of international travel in the last 14 days and all symptomatic contacts of laboratory-confirmed case are also being tested.


