Covid-19: Several temples in Uttarakhand ban entry of devotees
2020-03-20
NAINITAL: As the novel coronavirus scare grips the country and number of positive cases continues to rise, several temples across the Himalayan state have been closed for the devotees.


These include the famous Kainchi Dham Temple and Haidakhan Ashram in Nainital, the Jageshwar Dham in Almora, Patal Bhuvneshwar in Pithoragarh, Sai Baba temple and Sakya College in Dehradun along with all the temples in Pauri Garhwal district, including Neelkanth Temple in Rishikesh. Apart from these, several small and large temples have also taken suo motu initiative to remain closed till the coronavirus is brought under control.

Speaking to TOI, an official of the Nainital district administration said that the decision to ban the entry of devotees in the Kainchi Dham and Haidakhan was taken keeping in mind the fact that many foreigners visit the temple and the mass gathering there can lead to transmission of the virus. “The temples are famous across the world and a number of tourists even from abroad visit them. Therefore, it has been decided to completely close them for the devotees since because of these gatherings, there are chances that people may get infected,” said the official.

This comes after the administrations in several districts had already banned mass gatherings, including both Nainital and Dehradun. The district administration of Bageshwar has also asked the government to regulate the Purnagiri Mela and the Udham Singh Nagar district administration has also cancelled the Chaiti Mela in the Maa Balasundari Temple.

Meanwhile, Bhagwan Bhatt of Jageshwar Dham Temple Management Committee said that the temple will remain closed till March 31. However, the aarti and essential services will continue. “We have decided to close the temple for devotees till March 31 so that there is less chance of people gathering at the temple, and therefore, transmitting the virus. However, we have decided that the aarti and other essential services will continue by priests inside the temple,” Bhatt said.

Bhatt added that even the hotel owners around Jageshwar Dham have agreed that they will comply with the orders and not provide rooms to tourists till the situation returns to normal.


