Covid-19 cases spike in Udaipur, five sanitation staff infected
2020-05-12
UDAIPUR: Tension continued to grip the city as 49 new positive cases were reported on Monday, taking the total tally of corona-infected patients in the district to 182. Five of the 49 tested positive on Monday are sanitation workers.


“Total samples tested so far is 4,386. of which 4,206 have been found negative. So the total positive remains 182 till 7pm on Monday,” CMHO Dinesh Kharadi said in a medical bulletin.

The medical and health department collected samples of the close contacts of the positive cases, while the district administration strove hard to ensure supply of essential items, milk and vegetables in the curfew-bound areas in and around the city.

Among the new positive people reported on Monday, five are sanitation workers of the Udaipur Municipal Corporation (UMC), which is a cause of concern for the authorities. Taking precautionary measures to contain the virus spread, UMC has decided to do away with the two-time sweeping schedule of the city streets. The cleaning will be done just once a day now for the entire lockdown period.

The UMC has appealed to the people to cooperate and not dump trash in public places or in the neighborhood. Twenty-six sanitation workers reported positive on Friday as they had come in contact with the home guard’s family in Kanji ka Hata area. Two ladies of the family were sanitation workers. The UMC had sent all the 1,750 workers on two days’ leave. Five of the sample reports of the sanitation workers were found positive on Monday thus triggering fear of further community spread.

On Saturday and Sunday the garbage collection remained disturbed due to the workers having remained away from work. On Monday, the authorities decided to modify the cleaning system.

“We have decided to change the cleaning strategy looking at the present lockdown condition. Since most of the shops, commercial establishments and institutions are shut, hence sweeping during evening time will remain suspended for some days,” Paras Singhvi, deputy mayor said. He also said that since the entire municipal area has been declared a containment zone for two weeks, public movement too would remain restricted. There would be not much garbage or litter in the street and hence sanitation workers too would get some relief working once a day, he said.

Of the total 182 cases in Udaipur, 131 are from Kanji ka Hata alone and Helawadi colony here is inhabited mostly by the sanitation workers. Many of the residents are employees of the UMC. 

