Covid-19 scare in Maharashtra: Officials on alert ahead of Holi, Gudipadwa
2020-03-09
KOLHAPUR: The Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation (MSRTC) is facing a unique challenge this holiday season. With the number of passengers expected rise, the corporation will also have the added responsibility of ensuring everyone’s safety by taking all necessary coronavirus-related precautions.


According to Rohan Palange, the Kolhapur divisional controller of MSRTC, they are awaiting more instructions from the district administration.

“So far, we have received general precautions like the importance of sanitization, avoiding crowded places, avoid touching face etc.. But whether to lower the number of trips or stop certain routes is yet to be announced,” he said.

He added that the Kolhapur depot has around 800 buses that make around 6,000 trips in which around 3 lakh passengers commute daily on intra-city and inter-city routes. “And these are our buses, operating from our depot. If we added buses that arrive and operate from other depots, then the number of passengers and trips will be very high,” he said, adding that so far there has been no decision on the provision of masks to conductors or drivers.

Sangli, Satara, and Kolhapur district administrations are on high alert ahead of Holi and Gudipadwa festivities. The collectors of the respective districts have requested people to refrain from mass gatherings and organising events on these occasions.

Abhijeet Chaudhary, the Sangli collector, told TOI: “Citizens should avoid mass gatherings. Even though we have not received any request for social events, such events are not the need of the hour. We are making sure citizens get to know the dos and don’ts of controlling the infection.”

He added that the posters and digital boards are being installed across the city for the citizens’ information.

While the district health department officials from Satara said they have informed the hotels and resorts in the Mahabaleshwar and Panchgani to report any foreign tourists who have travel history from coronavirus-hit countries. Sanjay Salunkhe, district civil surgeon, Sangli, told TOI, that they had taken five swab samples earlier last week, all of which have tested negative. “People do not need to panic. Everything is under control,” he said.


