Covid-19 effect in Bhopal: Khajuraho, Orchha temple closed for tourists
2020-03-18
BHOPAL: To check the spread of Covid-19, Khajuraho, a UNESCO heritage site, has been shut down for tourists on the directives of the state government. Besides Khajuraho, the famous Ram Raja temple of Orchha has also been closed down in view of the Coronavirus spread. 


In a bid to prevent assembly of large number of people and check any spready of coronavirus, Mahakaal temple in Ujjain was already shut down for the devotees earlier this week. In fact, the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) has shut down all its monuments across the country till March 31.

A group of French tourists that reached Khajuraho on Tuesday morning was a disappointed lot. Narendra Sharma, tour guide accompanying the group, said, “These tourists reached here from Agra; they are obviously disheartened to learn about the closure of the temple site. All the French tourists, however, understand the gravity of the situation and agree with the steps initiated to check the spread of Covid-19, were essential.”

One of the French tourists, Sronsos, told TOI, “ I have come all the way from France to Khajuraho; I had read a lot about these temples of archaeological importance. Having travelled this far, I could only see the temples from outside the gates. It is quite disappointing, but then I realise that such steps are the need of the hour to keep people safe.” Another tourist, Alley, also agreed with Sronsos and added, “ All of us will visit Varanasi before we leave for our country.”

About 100 kms away in Orchha, the Ram Raja temple was closed down for devotees. A notice board at the entrance of the temple informed the visitors that the temple was closed down to check the spread of Coronavirus till further order. However, a large number of villagers who have been reaching Orchha expressed anger over the decision. Some of them even claimed, “ No virus can infect the devotees visiting the temple.”

District collector of Niwari, Akshay Kumar Singh, however, made it clear that rituals of daily puja and the tradition of guard of honour to the deity will continue in the temple.


