Covid-19: Goa rushes to test Mangor Hill-like areas after 47 test positive in a day
2020-06-04
PANAJI: Goa’s active coronavirus tally saw its biggest single-day spike with 47 new cases, 42 of which were reported in the Mangor Hill containment zone. After 50 of the state’s 69 active cases came from the densely-populated area, chief minister Pramod Sawant said on Wednesday that the health department has been asked to conduct a screening survey in slums and low-cost housing clusters across the state. He also said that those displaying symptoms of influenza-like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) would be tested.


Sawant called the sharp spike in numbers a case of “local tranmission” and, after a meeting with senior health and administrative officials on Wednesday evening, ruled out the possibility of placing the whole of Vasco under lockdown. 



shooting down demands from many, including Vasco MLA Carlos Almeida. “We haven’t found a single case outside Mangor Hill,” he said. “It is a local transmission. If the infection was detected in various wards of the city, we could call it community transmission.” 

The CM said that 75 persons from outside Mangor Hill, all contacts of people from the containment zone, tested negative for the novel coronavirus. Meanwhile, the state administration has started tracing the contacts of all those who tested positive on Wednesday. “Our focus is on testing all the people of Mangor Hill,” he said, adding that people in Vasco who have fever and other Covid-19 symptoms should come forward to be tested. A testing facility has been made available free of cost at the Chicalim cottage hospital, he said, and it can conduct 2,000 tests a day.

Sawant also said that the health department was yet to trace the source of the infection, which afflicted six members of one family. “After discussion, we feel that perhaps the head of the family — the fisherman — came in contact with drivers of fish vehicles from Andhra Pradesh. The symptoms were first seen in the parents,” he said.

Among those who tested positive on Wednesday was a welder working at Kadamba Transport Corporation’s (KTC) mechanical unit in Margao. South Goa collector Ajit Roy then ordered staff of the unit to undergo Covid-19 tests. He said the welder wasn’t a KTC staffer. “We have asked all those working in the unit to go for the tests,” he said. 

Meanwhile, all three entrance points to the Mangor Hill area have been blocked, and locals have been supplied with essential commodities. 

The other five Covid-19 cases reported on Wednesday include two who travelled by road from Maharashtra. Two passengers who arrived in Goa by air from Dubai have also tested positive, as has one person who came to Goa from Hyderabad. One of the cases, a two-year-old child, will be accompanied by her mother in the Covid-19 hospital.

Sawant, referring to reports of two Dubai travellers testing positive, said that if they were allowed to go home instead of being placed in facility quarantine, they would have spread the infections to others. He was referring to a commotion at the Goa International Airport, Dabolim, on Tuesday, when some passengers on the flight quarelled with authorities and demanded to be sent home instead of quarantined. Sawant said that the government would take action against them at a later stage.


