Covid-19 in Karnataka: 1,308 people under home isolation asked to provide health updates
2020-03-15
BENGALURU: People in home isolation over Covid-19 concerns for 14 days in Karnataka should call the 104 helpline twice a day on their own, according to a new measure.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In all, 1,308 people are under home isolation in the state as on Saturday. Till now, helpline staff were supposed to call those under home isolation to check on their health. However, several people in home isolation that STOI spoke to said they had hardly got calls from the department staff.

 
 

A man, 34, who returned from China in mid-January, self-reported himself at RGICD and tested negative for the infection, said: “I was discharged soon after my report was negative. For the 28 days since I returned from China, I was under home isolation and I got calls only twice.” Health officials visited his apartment on one occasion. Another man who returned from Japan in February first week, said he had no symptoms and was not tested, but was registered with the helpline for home isolation. “I got calls only once in the first week. On the last day, I made a call and told them I was fine. I was told that I could get back to my normal routine,” he said.


Not all suspects are admitted

Given the jump in the number of suspected cases, not all with suspicion of infection are getting admitted in hospitals in the city, thanks to very few beds in isolation wards. Only cases showing severe symptoms are being admitted.

Those suspected are being asked to give samples and they are hospitalised only if they test positive, ahead of another confirmatory test. With this delay in hospitalisation, there are chances that the infection can spread, say experts.

“In case the person turns out to be positive, an ambulance is sent to his/her house to be brought to the hospital,” a source said. On Friday, the government made it clear that all those returning from affected countries will have to remain in home isolation for 14 days, whether they have symptoms or not.

