Covid-19 outbreak in Mumbai: Eight private hospitals can screen and collect swabs
2020-03-22
MUMBAI: People who just returned from foreign trips and have fever needn’t go to Kasturba Infectious Diseases Hospital, near Saat Rasta, for screening and testing. The BMC has allowed eight private hospitals to screen and collect swabs of travelers suspected to the affected by virus; one of these hospitals Hinduja Hospital is scheduled to start COVID-19 testing as soon as ICMR gives the green signal.

Eight other public hospitals (apart from Kasturba Hospital) have begun operate fever clinics where screening will people can walk in for screening of diseases.

``The idea is that allow people to go to hospitals closest to them for screening,’’ said BMC additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani. ``However, testing will be limited only to those who have COVID-19 symptoms along with a history of foreign travel or contact with an international traveler,’’ he added.

He said the private hospitals where screening and collection of samples has been allowed include H N Hospital, Girgaum; Wockhardt Hospital near Mumbai Central; Jaslok Hospital on Pedder Road; Breach Candy Hospital; Hinduja Hospital in Mahim; Kokilaben Ambani Hospital in Andheri; Nanavati Hospital in Juhu; and Fortis Hospital in Mulund.

Meanwhile, the four major hospitals – namely KEM Hospital in Parel, LTMG Hospital in Sion, Nair Hospital near Mumbai Central station and state-run JJ Hospital in Byculla – will hold 24x7 screening centres. Four peripheral hospitals of the BMC too will have these centres.

`` Around 25 tests were carried out in KEM Hospital on Saturday, but the number may increase on Monday,’’ said hospital officials. The number of tests in Kasturba Hospital will increase from 15 daily to 250 soon.

Meanwhile, the BMC plans to make a 30-bedded quarantine/isolation facility at its Acworth Hospital, Sewri. ``The hospital is not being used widely and is a clean and good facility for isolation,’’ said BMC officials.


