Covid-19 doubling rate begins to flatten in Rajasthan
2020-04-20
JAIPUR: Covid-19 graph has flattened in the state, authorities have claimed. A week ago, cases were doubling in around four days, but now that is happening in seven days, health department data says. 

After lockdown 2.0 began five days ago, the rate of increase in cases has slowed down, health authorities have claimed. According to them, the increasing rate during the first phase of lockdown would have taken the number of cases to 1,679, but strict measures have kept it at 1,351 (figures till Saturday night).




“We believe that by implementing an optimal mix of ruthless containment and aggressive surveillance, we have managed to flatten the curve of doubling rate of Covid-19 cases to some extent. It is just the beginning. If people cooperate with the directions of the state government and adhere to self-discipline, I am sure we shall overcome this too,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

According to health department figures, till April 11, 675 people tested positive. The cases doubled in the next seven days. Earlier, it was doubling in four. The figure shows that on April 7, there were 337 cases, which increased to 675 in next four days. Even before that, the cases doubled in four days. In first three days of April, the cases doubled from 84 to 165 cases.

On March 26, when the first case was reported in Ramganj, the doubling rate case was five days. It continued to be same till March 31. However, when the health department started detecting cases in clusters from Ramganj starting March 31, the doubling rate decreased to 3 days (till April 3). In next four days, cases doubled (till April 7). The trend continued till April 11. When health authorities started detecting cases in Ramganj, the cases doubled in short period.

Before Bhilwara reported its first case, the doubling rate was 18 days. But, from March 21 to 26, cases doubled in Bhilwara which reported reported 19 cases.

However, health department is taking all possible measures to contain the spread in the state by making maximum utilisation of lockdown 2.0. At present, there are 49 places across the state where curfew has been imposed. All these places have reported cases in increased numbers.


