Covid-19 wards set up in two more GHs
2020-03-14
Coimbatore: Though the district is yet to record its first case of Covid-19 and the state itself has recorded only one positive case, the spreading of the virus in neighboring Kerala and Karnataka seems to have made the state government increase its preparation to handle the virus. In Coimbatore, the public health department has set up two more exclusive isolation wards for Covid-19 suspected and confirmed patients.On Wednesday, the department set up two more exclusive Covid-19 treatment wards—one at the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital and the other at Pollachi Government Hospital. This is in addition to the first such ward set up at ESI Hospital. While the ESI Hospital ward has around 20 beds, the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital ward has around eight beds and Pollachi GH too has another eight. “Our Covid-19 ward is like an intensive care unit set up, equipped with centralized oxygen supply, ventilators, mobile X-ray units along with face masks, gloves and a set of fever treatment equipment that will not be used in any other ward,” dean Dr B Ashokan said. “Our ward is specifically for Covid-19 positive patients,” he added.Comparatively, the 20-bedded coronavirus ward at ESI Hospital is meant for quarantining. “That ward actually requires only television and access to food and books for patients to relax and wait it out. So, we plan to send suspected patients to ESIC Hospital and keep only positive and treatment requiring patients here,” added the dean.Besides this, the medical services department has asked every GH to keep a small ward aside to be ready to be converted into a Covid-19 quarantine ward. In Mettupalayam GH, they have set up a 10-bed isolation ward. This has centralized oxygen supply, beds, screen between beds, giving quarantine patients privacy, and a toilet. “We want people not to be afraid of quarantine, but to volunteer and come forward. We can only do that with presentable quarantine wards like that of private hospitals,” a health department official said.Meanwhile, the 60-year-old woman who returned from Umrah with a cold, tested negative for the virus on Friday. She is the fifth person in the district to be tested for the virus and turned out negative. 