Covid worries push people to telemedicine consulting
2020-03-19
Chennai: Staying in a hostel in Delhi, 23-year-old Rishabh Singh caught a cold and fever.“I was extremely worried. I then took an online consultation on DocsApp. The doctor checked with me about my symptoms, my whereabouts and later based on my symptoms assured me that I have common flu. He prescribed me some medicines and advised precautionary measures to stay safe,” Singh said.With the increase in the number of COVID-19 infections in India, online doctor consultation apps such as DocsApp, mfine and iCliniq are seeing a doubling in the number of consultations. Anxious users, who are avoiding the risk of hospital infection, turn to telemedicine to ensure that they are free from the pandemic attack. Globally, platforms such as Amwell and Teladoc Health are seeing a spike since the last month and now, the early trends are seen in India as well.“So far, we have witnessed over 10000 queries from all over the country. We have also witnessed twice the number of DocsApp Gold subscriptions as individuals reach out to consult for their near & dear ones too,” said Satish Kannan, co-founder, DocsApp. The company said it noticed a 178% increase in consultations for cough and cold indicating a sense of panic among people. Bengaluru-based mfine is seeing a 20%-25% increase in the consultations for coronavirus-related queries. Prasad Kompalli, CEO and co-founder, mfine said that the company has created a customised flow to assess corona infections and in the last week up to 2,500 have used it. “During the consultation, the tool collects basic information from users by guiding them through a set of questions to ascertain their state of health, the timeline of symptoms, age, and medical history, travel details and gauges severe cases through symptom mapping. It then lets a doctor consult with the patient over audio and video, instantly enabling doctors to see more patients without being exposed to the virus themselves,” he added. Same is the case with Coimbatore-based iCliniq which is also witnessing a 20% rise in consultations from Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad. “It is a black swan moment for us; this situation is helping the telemedicine industry. While we are not promoting ourselves in any way, we are trying to help customers who are in panic,” said Dhruv Suyamprakash, founder, iCliniq. To increase their reach, the telemedicine companies are either putting out advisories for their customers or partnering with communities to spread the word. DocsApp has extended its medical assistance to MyGate, Zee Digital, Seniority & will be working with more partners to spread awareness. iCliniq has put out a booklet explaining symptoms of flu and corona in detail to help allay the fears. “Summer is also a time when we see a rise in the number of flu infections,” added Suyamprakash. 