Covid-19: Tests delayed as private labs struggle to cope in Delhi
2020-05-21
NEW DELHI: Private labs in the city offering Covid-19 test are so stretched that some of them are giving patients two to three days’ time for sample collection — a waiting time that can prove fatal for those who have pre-existing illness and other complications.



“My 24-year-old son suffers from kidney failure. Doctors advised him dialysis last week but told us to to get his Covid-19 test done first. I called up two private labs to immediately collect my son’s samples from our home, but both refused, saying it will take up to two days’ time,” said Krishna Devi, a resident of Rohini.


She added that finally they contacted someone they knew at Ram Manohar Lohia hospital to get the test done. “The sample was collected on Friday. We are yet to receive the report,” he said.

The head of a prominent south Delhi lab which has a capacity to conduct 150 to 200 tests daily told TOI. “If our testing capacity is full, how can we accept more samples? The state government has already threatened action if results aren’t declared within 24 hours of collecting the samples,” he said.

Shweta Prasad (name changed), who lives in South Delhi, was diagnosed with early stage of pneumonia – which is a classical symptom of Covid-19, though it can be caused due to other infections also – during a medical examination by a general physician on Tuesday. “The doctor prescribed Covid-19 test. They referred us to a private lab nearby. When we reached there, the staff was initially scared and then they told us to registered online for sample collection which may take two days,” Prasad said.

She added: “I have two kids at home. I had to send them to a friend’s place while still waiting and trying to figure out where to get the test done.”

The owner of the south Delhi lab said unlike in the case of H1N1 pandemic, where the government had capped the price of tests but left the other issues to be dealt with by the labs concerned, in the case of Covid-19 they have been saddled with lot of paperwork. “We have to send reports to ICMR and Delhi government first, before sending the same to the patient. It requires extra time and manpower,” he said.

The head of another lab said the government had issued directives for authorisation of sample collectors from the district authorities which is adding to the delays. “Very few sample collectors have been authorised as yet, which is leading to delay in sample collection from homes,” said an official.

Among private labs, Dr Lal Path Lab has the capacity to process maximum 4,000 samples daily. However, the lab chain is able to less than a thousand tests due to the time frame fixed for sending results and other formalities involved.

Recently, the government had also ordered an inquiry into the lab’s results. The lab said it has sent clarification to the government in the matter.

When asked, a senior official in the Delhi government said not everyone needs to undergo testing for Covid-19.

“We have 16 sample collection centres across the city. Those who have Covid-19 symptoms and history of contact with an infected individual can either call helpline number – 1031 – for guidance on how to get the test done or approach these Covid-19 testing centres directly. A physician is also available at these centres to assess the patient’s condition,” the official said.

As per government data, 4,235 samples were collected for Covid-19 tests on May 18; 2195 by government centres and 2040 by private centres. Of this, 399 came positive. "In a city like Delhi which has so many Covid-19 cases, sample collection and testing facilities must be scaled up further," epidemiologists say, adding that the case load is likely to increase further in the coming weeks and, therefore, the demand for tests will also rise.


