Coronavirus fails to dampen Holi spirit in Bareilly
2020-03-09
BAREILLY: At a time when coronavirus (covid-19) scare has gripped the country and with confirmed and suspected cases being reported every day, Bareilly residents hardly seem to be deterred and have set the market abuzz with their shopping spree ahead of Holi. Preparation for Holika Dahan is going on in full swing and people in several localities were seen playing Holi, even as the festival a couple of days away. 


As people, including schoolchildren and college students, have started pouring colours on each other, doctors have advised them to avoid being a part of big gatherings and coming in close contact with people as a precautionary measure. 

Shopkeepers, in the meanwhile, said the footfall in markets is usual — like any other festival — and people are turning up to buy sweets, colours, etc. Besides, clubs, restaurants and hotels are being decked up and special arrangements are being made for food, parties, dance and various other activities in anticipation of high footfall. 

Talking about the preparations, director of Bareilly Palace hotel Shrawan Agarwal told TOI, “Fortunately, no coronavirus case has been reported in the region, so there is no major impact. Like every year, this year too we have received bookings for Holi, though there won’t be huge gatherings.” 

Owner of East Lite hotel in Civil Lines Nikhil Thapar, however, said they were avoiding bookings for Holi because of coronavirus scare. “People come in close contact while playing Holi, which should be avoided as a precautionary measure.”

Markets in several city areas such as Bara Bazaar, Civil Lines, Qutubkhana and others witnessed heavy footfall. “People are coming for shopping as Holi is just a day away. The number of visitors is likely to surge tomorrow. There is no significant change in the number of people visiting markets. Everyone seems to be in celebratory mode,’ said Amit Agarwal, a shopkeeper in Civil Lines. 

Meanwhile, taking a precautionary measure, the health department has set up a 300-bed hospital in Bareilly to quarantine suspected cases of coronavirus. Following the government instructions that such containment zone for hosting mass patients should be built away from the populous area, the 300-bed hospital has been set up in an under-construction building.

Advising people to take utmost precaution while celebrating Holi, Bareilly chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Vineet Shukla said, “There are high chances of contamination in social gatherings. While playing Holi people come in close contact with each other, which they should avoid as virus remain active on the wet surface. Even if people are attending parties and joining gatherings, they should keep themselves dry and avoid close contacts.”

