Covid-19 lockdown: Dehradun-based social groups support the needy
2020-04-04
DEHRADUN: Several social organisations and resident welfare associations have come forward to help those in need of aid during the lockdown in the city.


City-based NGO ‘Waste Warriors’ which works in the area of waste management has identified 600 families of rag pickers who had initially been left without food supplies when the 21-day lockdown began. These families are mostly settled in areas like Khudbuda, Bindal Chowk, Laxman Chowk and Chuna Bhatta. They have now been guaranteed supplies by the group for a month. The ration is being provided to the families in presence of local police.

One of the beneficiaries, Sangeeta, a rag picker living near Bindal river, said, “Ever since the lockdown was announced we could not move out to earn money. Ration at home was only sufficient for two days. I am relieved after receiving the ration.” Outreach manager at Waste Warriors, Naveen Sadana, said, “We realised that it was tough for the administration to reach out to every person in need. Hence, we identified these families and now the ration is being provided with the help of police.”

Another city-based group ‘Social Development for Communities Foundation’ which has installed plastic banks in the city has asked its workforce to distribute 2,000 food packets of cooked meals every day among the marginalised section. Founder, SDC Foundation, Anoop Nautiyal said, “Food packets are being prepared at Radha Saomi Satsang Beas, and then collected by staff members. The vehicles that we have been using for collecting plastic waste have now been converted into ‘food express’ after proper sanitisation. ”In addition, the resident welfare associations are doing their bit by collectively preparing dry ration kit for distributing it among the needy. The resident welfare association at Dalanwala has prepared over 200 kits. Mahesh Bhandari, president of Doon resident welfare front and a resident of Dalanwala, said, “This is only a small beginning. We have made 200 ration kits. We plan to prepare more in days to come. This is a time when daily wagers and homeless have nowhere to go and the ration must reach them immediately.”


