Covid-19 positive vegetable trader dies, quarantined kin bid final adieu from ambulance
2020-06-08
DEHRADUN: It was a heart-wrenching scene at Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH) on Sunday when the wife and elder daughter of the Covid-19 positive vegetable trader, who died late on Saturday night, were asked to bid him final goodbye from almost five metres away while locked in an ambulance.

The two were brought from a quarantine facility to GDMCH in an ambulance so that they could see the deceased for the last time but weren't allowed to step out of the vehicle and come close to the body kept outside the mortuary as they have also been tested positive for the virus. While the daughter of the deceased started crying uncontrollably on seeing her father’s body, her mother could be seen numbed with shock. The scene was such that even the staff members and doctors at GDMCH couldn’t hold back their tears.

Sandeep Rana, public relations officer at GDMCH, told TOI that the Niranjanpur Sabzi Mandi vegetable trader breathed his last at Doon Hospital late on Saturday night. He was admitted to the hospital on May 26. Since his family members have also tested positive and are currently quarantined, the body of the deceased was taken for cremation from the mortuary by distant relatives. Officials said that the trader’s twin brother and father have been tested Covid-19-positive as well. "While his brother remains in a critical state, his father hasn't even been told about the death as he is too weak to bear this trauma at present," said the brother-in-law of the deceased vegetable trader.

Those who attended the last rites told TOI that locals living close to Nala Pani opposed the cremation saying that the man lived close to LakhiBagh Crematorium and should be cremated there only. However, the cremation was done at Nala Pani after police intervention. 

According to the health department, more than 40 people directly or indirectly associated with Niranjanpur Sabzi Mandi have tested positive for Covid-19 in the last 10 days.

