Covid-19 cases breach 100-mark in Rajasthan; 4 patients in SMS hospital test negative
2020-04-02
JAIPUR: In the highest single-day rise, 27 new Covid-19 positive cases were recorded in the state on Wednesday taking the total count to 120.


These include 11 people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) meet in Delhi. While four are from Churu district, seven are from Tonk district. Meanwhile, the congested bylanes of the crowded Ramganj area here has become a nightmare for epidemiologists as 13 more persons tested positive for Covid-19. 

The infected are relatives of the first two persons who were infected with the virus. So far, 26 persons have tested positive for Covid-19 in Ramganj, with the first case reported on March 26. 

In addition, two more tested positive in jodhpur and one in Alwar. In Jodhpur, the health department officials found a 65-year-old person infected with the virus, but he did not have any history of travel to any countries nor any history of contact with any Covid-19 positive persons. 

“We are Investigating how he contracted the infection,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health.

One 61-year-old, who was evacuated from Iran and kept in quarantine at the Army Wellness Centre in Jodhpur, was also diagnosed with the disease. 

So far, 18 evacuees from Iran have been found infected with the virus.

The 13 who tested positive for Covid-19 in Ramganj have already been quarantined. 

“They are kept in RUHS hospital as they were in the contact list of the first two Covid-19 cases from Ramganj area. Since they do not have any symptoms of the virus such as cough or fever, they have been kept in RUHS and have not been shifted to SMS Hospital. Their treatment has started in RUHS hospital,” said a senior SMS Hospital doctor.

The health department has intensified the screening in Ramganj area with more teams being deployed to conduct the door-to-door survey.

At SMS Hospital, four more persons undergoing treatment tested negative for the disease. The doctor of a private hospital, who was the first to test positive in Bhilwara, as well as his wife have tested negative for the disease, said a SMS Hospital doctor. Besides, one person from Jhunjhunu and one from Jaipur, who came from Spain, has also tested negative. “Four persons undergoing treatment at SMS Hospital tested negative on Wednesday. who Now, 14 persons have been cured of Covid-19 at SMS Hospital. We have not reported any death due to the disease,” said a hospital official.


