Covid-19 cases in Anand spike to 33 as six more people test positive
2020-04-22
VADODARA/ANAND: The total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Anand district has reached 33 with six more patients tested positive on Tuesday. The six new cases include four from coastal town of Khambhat and one each from Petlad and Umreth.

Three women — aged 21, 35, and 63 years old — tested positive of the virus in Khambhat. The trio are residents of Dantar Wado area of Aling crossroads of Khambhat which has already been declared as containment zone in Anand district. 

The trio had come in close contact with a positive patient from the same locality. While two of them are being treated at Anand’s civil hospital, the elderly woman is being treated at Shree Krishna Hospital, Karamsad.

The fourth positive case from Khambhat is a 45-year-old man who is resident of Lambi Oti area, opposite Darji ni vadi. He is also connected with the family that has tested positive in Dantar Wado locality.

In Petlad, a 27-year-old man, who stays in a residential society located opposite to the civil hospital, has tested positive, while a 28-year-old man has tested positive in Umreth’s Kansara Bazaar area which had even earlier recorded a positive case.

Meanwhile, a 62-year-old man from Khambhat, who was admitted at Shree Krishna Hospital, Karamsad earlier this month was discharged from the hospital after his repeat test turned out to be negative. 

With this, of the 33 cases that Anand has recorded so far, four patients have been discharged, while two patients have succumbed to the disease. Of the rest, 16 are currently under treatment at civil hospital in Anand, nine at Shree Krishna Hospital, Karamsad while one each are being treated at N D Desai Hospital, Nadiad and S V P Hospital, Ahmedabad.

Four patients are currently being treated with oxygen support while the rest are normal, health officials said, adding that samples of 331 individuals have so far tested negative in the district.

While 1,502 persons are under quarantine at their home, 54 others are under quarantine at government facility.


