Covid-19 concerns hit blood banks
2020-03-13
Thiruvananthapuram: While the Covid-19 scare has affected everything from public transport to businesses, one sector which has been critically hit is blood banks. The blood banks of some major institutions here are running out of stock as people largely stay indoors as part of precaution. 

If the situation continues, blood shortage will affect surgeries at institutions such as Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology. The circular of Kerala State AIDS Control Society, which temporarily stopped outdoor blood donation camps till March 31, has affected the blood donation process.

The scare caused by Covid-19, which makes people avoid public gatherings and hospital visits, is the major reason for the shortage. Indefinite holiday for colleges, which have the largest number of donors, has also worsened the situation.

The blood donation camp held at Technopark campus on Thursday witnessed only four persons turning up for voluntary donation. This is in stark contrast with the usual case, where 60-70 donations happen during a single camp. 

Brijesh P S, co-founder of Tejus, which is engaged in blood donation among techies, said that Covid-19 scare was keeping people away. “Now, even companies are not forwarding information on blood donation to employees. This unnecessary scare would affect critical areas,” he said. Brijesh added that immediate intervention of government and ministers is needed to resolve the crisis. 

Assistant medical superintendent at SCT and blood bank in-charge Dr S Satyabhama said that interventions are needed. “Our daily requirement is 30-40 units of blood. There are emergency and scheduled surgeries. If the crisis continues, it will affect surgeries. I would like to appeal to the public who don’t have travel histories to affected areas and exposure to affected persons to come forward and donate,” she said.

Dr Meena D, professor and head, transfusion medicine department, Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram, said that the situation is unsatisfactory, but not critical. “Our requirement is over 200 units per day. The number of daily donations was around 100, which has got reduced to 50-60. Since we deal with lot of emergency cases, we have to use the stocked units. For example, we had to give around 20 units for a delivery happened at night. We also have to provide to neighbouring hospitals, if they report shortage,” she said.

Baby P S, senior manager, PR and CSR, Terumo Penpol, said that around 10,000 donations are needed in the district per day. “Each donation can be split into red blood cells, plasma and platelets. While medical college and SCT need more red blood cells, RCC requires platelets. There is a need for community blood banks so that all donations can be managed and requirements can be made judiciously,” she said.


