Covid-19 may cause lung ailments even after patient recovers
2020-04-01
Intishab.Ali@timesgroup.com

JAIPUR: Those recovering from Covid-19 have a long battle to win. Chances are high that they will develop pulmonary fibrosis, a group of disorders that cause progressive scarring of lung tissues. 

Health minister Raghu Sharma announced that 14 persons have already been tested negative for Covid-19 after undergoing treatment in government hospital.

Health experts claimed that virus infiltrates into lungs and damages it. Recently, a 69-year-old Italian tourist, who tested positive for Covid-19, recovered from the disease but he died of cardiac arrest. The doctors who treated him told that since he was already suffering from pre-existing lung diseases, Covid-19 further damaged it. 

Pulmonary fibrosis, is also known as fibrotic scarring, occurs when the lung tissues become damaged and scarred. “Even after a patient recovers from Covid-19, there are chances of developing interstitial lung disease, which will remain throughout his life,” Dr CL Nawal, senior professor (medicine), Sawai Man Singh Hospital, who was treating two Covid-19 patients who were brought from Jhunjhunu after being diagnosed with the disease, said. Both the patients later tested negative for the virus. 

However, doctors also claimed that the ILD due to Covid-19 is not progressive. “There are western literature available which shows that 80% of patients recover from the disease. However, in 15% of the cases, it damages the lungs and in 5% cases it damages lungs severely,” said Dr Virendra Singh, national coordinator, ILD India Registry, who is based in Jaipur said. 

Singh said fibrosis was present in swine flu cases too, who required ventilator support. “It is not that kind of ILD, which is progressive in nature. Since it is caused by virus, fibrosis is non-progressive. Once the patient tests negative, the virus will not damage the lungs further,” he said. 

However, Dr Narendra Khippal, senior professor (respiratory disease) SMS Medical College, who is helping Bhilwara doctors in providing treatment to Covid-19 patients said, “People who have comorbidities or underlying diseases such as diabetes, chronic kidney disease or having pre-existing lung diseases should remain careful. Once they are infected with Covid-19, there are high chances of them getting scarring on the lungs due to virus. Among these patients, the CT scan of lungs shows the presence of hazy lung opacity. However, among other patients who do not have comorbidities and underlying diseases, there are very less chances of fibrosis. Those five patients, tested negative in Bhilwara, we did not find any hazy lung opacity.”


