Covid-19 scare: Bars, restaurants to remain closed until March 31
2020-03-19
PUDUCHERRY: All bars and restaurants will remain closed from Thursday to March 31 as a precautionary measure to prevent the spread of coronavirus in the Union territory of Puducherry, said chief minister V Narayanasamy. 


Speaking to reporters on Wednesday Narayanasamy said the retail and wholesale liquor outlets will remain open. He said a 68-year-old woman from Palloor in Mahe, Puducherry’s enclave in Kerala tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday. He said the woman reached her hometown eight days ago after undertaking Haj pilgrimage. 

She had symptoms of fever, cough and breathlessness. She tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday afternoon. She has been undergoing treatment at an isolation ward in Mahe government general hospital. Her condition is stable, he said. 

Narayanasamy said the health officials have begun the process of tracing and screening the people who came in contact with her after her return. He said he along with health minister Malladi Krishna Rao will visit Mahe on Friday to review the preparedness of the government machinery in the prevention and spread of the coronavirus in the region. 

Meanwhile, foreigners and Indians, who travelled abroad and reached Puducherry after January 1 have been directed to voluntarily come forward and contact the special cell at the district collector office for health screening. 

Puducherry district collector cum magistrate T Arun said special clinics have been set up at the government general hospital, Jawaharlal institute of postgraduate medical education and research (Jipmer), all medical colleges and chest clinic at Gorimedu to screen them as per the protocol prescribed by the Union health and family welfare ministry. The field-level officials of the primary health centres concerned will monitor their health condition periodically. 

Arun imposed various restrictions under the Epidemic diseases act to prevent the spread of Covid-19 virus. The Centre had declared the Covid-19 incidence as a disaster under the provision of disaster management act, 2005. Arun directed the closure of anganwadi centres, schools and other educational institutions and training centres, malls, Sunday market (on March 22 and March 29), cinema theatres, beauty parlours, spa, clubs, discotheque, gyms, swimming pools, sports training classes, sports academy and centres, stadiums and betel shops with different kinds of pan/ghutka masala until March 31. 

Similarly, Sri Aurobindo Ashram, botanical garden, Bharathi Park, Chunnambar Boat House and government museum will remain closed for the visitors and tourists. 

Arun said medical and dental colleges and paramedical institutions will function and the services of the faculty members, paramedical staff members and students will be used to strengthen the healthcare system in the territory. 


