Covid-19 testing numbers rise in Ghaziabad, come down in Noida
2020-05-17
NOIDA/GHAZIABAD: The Covid-19 testing approach in the neighbouring cities of Noida and Ghaziabad has followed opposing trajectories. With fewer cases, Ghaziabad has stepped up testing and with more cases, Noida has slowed things down.


In the six weeks between April 1 and May 12, Noida added 177 cases and Ghaziabad 137. But while Ghaziabad tested 4,339 samples, Noida tested 3,107. And it’s not just that the absolute figures are lower in Noida — the distribution of sampling over time has also been inconsistent.

 

In the first week of April, Noida and Ghaziabad started out close — with 11 cases, Noida tested 346 samples and with 15 cases, Ghaziabad collected 364 samples. But as cases kept going up in Noida, the sampling became erratic. The week it reported the highest number of cases, 55, was also the week its testing fell to the lowest in the period — just 161 samples. In Ghaziabad, the testing numbers have been steadily going up — from 364 to 1,284 — with just one dip in the fourth week of April, when testing fell from 767 to 644. This coincided with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) advisory against rapid antibody tests, issued on April 22. Counter-intuitively, that was the week Noida stepped up its testing, with 946 samples.

So why the difference? The guidelines issued by the Union health ministry and the ICMR are binding but health officials in the two districts, it seems, have come up with their own interpretation of what the rules suggest.

Ghaziabad’s approach has been to step things up consistently. “Testing has been going up across the country and, concurrently, in Ghaziabad. The trend shows we are going in the right direction. The ICMR guidelines state primary and high-risk contacts should be tested. The idea is to break the chain of infection by identifying all people who have come in contact with a Covid-19 patient. That’s what we are trying to do,” state-appointed observer for Ghaziabad, Dr AK Paliwal, said.

Noida also said it has been following the ICMR framework. “We are conducting tests following ICMR guidelines. Earlier, we had taken a liberal approach to sample collection but now, the focus is on intelligent sampling. We take samples only when it is required,” Noida district surveillance officer Sunil Dohare said. A source added that this essentially means is that the focus has now moved from extensive testing to treating patients who need medical attention.

Public health experts were of the opinion that Covid-19 response teams may need to be more alert. “It is evident that the rate of infection is higher in Noida than in Ghaziabad. Intense surveillance and effective contact tracing are extremely crucial at this stage,” retired chief medical officer Ashok Mishra said.

While both Noida and Ghaziabad had been conducting random sampling and door-to-door surveys at one point, Noida has stopped. The rate of testing may go down further, a source said, with orders coming in to collect samples only from symptomatic individuals for the next three to four days.


