Covid-19 forces families indoors, brings board games back on the table
2020-03-24
CHENNAI: Michael Mozim’s fondest memories as a child are the days his father walked in with a new box of puzzles. There were times an unsolved piece of puzzle would keep him from moving on to a chore at hand for hours together. But over the last decade, social media and PS4 caught up with life, and the puzzles found a spot on the loft, as Mozim left for VIT to study computer science.

But ever since the lockdown, as life moved back into the slow lane and mothers, fathers, grandparents and children sit home together, the lost love for board games has been rekindled. Today, designated hours are spent by Mozim every afternoon solving at least one 1000-piece puzzle – in addition to a game of Scrabble, playing cards and Monopoly. "It suddenly feels like the years never passed by," he says. "It gets especially interesting when mom and dad join the game and make it competitive. These sessions remind us why we loved our game sessions as kids."

Even as on the one hand, virtual games gain popularity during the lockdown, families are finding a new sense of purpose and excitement learning and playing traditional games like pallanguzhi, on the other.

City architect Priya Narayanan has made it a point to slip in a game of Adu Puli Attam – a strategic two-player game – in between sessions of chess with her kids and husband. "I have fond memories growing up playing Adu Puli Attam and Pallanguzhi. My family loves board games already, and I realized it’s only a matter of igniting interest in newer kinds of games. And I thought, what better time to do it than now," says Priya.

At a time when people may have forgotten the pleasures of real-time interactions and slowing down, sitting together and playing these games brings loved ones together and lightens things up at an otherwise gloomy time.

When 29-year-old marketing professional Felix Calis started playing Poker with his roommates four days ago, it was simply to kill the long hours sitting at home. But now, he’s convinced they’ve gotten to know each other in a way they didn’t over the last many years. "It’s a strategy game and interestingly you learn to see how people think. We’ve not had time like this since we moved in. I think we’re going to plan these sessions even after things return to normal," he says.


