Covid-19 cases in Madhya Pradesh climb to 20
2020-03-26
Bhopal: As Madhya Pradesh reported its first death due to COVID-19 and six more positive patients –one each in Bhopal and Ujjain and nine in Indore—the total number of positive patients increased to 20 on Wednesday. All the four major cities Bhopal, Jabalpur, Gwalior and Indore have been put under curfew. 

In Gwalior, the curfew was earlier announced till March 25, but it has been extended for one month till April 21, with some riders. “Six reports were received today and all are negative, as a precaution, we are extending the curfew till April 21, in Gwalior, though it is being done with some relaxations related to essential services. Around 100 people have been traced who had come into contact with one positive patient of the city and all have been put in home quarantine. Situation is being closely monitored,” district collector Gwalior, Kaushlendra Vikram Singh told TOI. 

After nine patients were found to be positive, curfew was imposed in Indore too. Jabalpur is already under curfew. “A total of 366 people have been put under home quarantine and 21 are under hospital quarantine. One report was received today and it was negative,” district collector Bharat Yadav said. 

Besides curfew in the four major towns, the entire state has been put under lockdown till April 14. 

However considering that the crops in the state are ready for harvest, state government on Wednesday relaxed the movement of the vehicles used in agriculture during the curfew. In some districts, police had to take several measures like shaming the lockdown violators or taking action against them. 

Rumours also led to fear in some areas, including Ram Nagar town of Satna district, where a senior citizen Laxman Prasad Shukla was alarmed after his middle-aged son Bala Prasad Shukla, who had returned home after a long drive went to sleep after bolting the room from inside and wouldn’t wake up. Laxman Prasad spread the news that his son was probably suffering from Coronavirus. Soon teams of the health department reached there only to find that the man was actually asleep, said sources. 

In most of the districts, the administration is making arrangements for home delivery of essential commodities so that people remain at their homes, said sources.

 In several districts including Jabalpur, civic bodies drew circles in front of the grocery and medicine shops to ensure social distancing during purchase of goods, added sources. 


