Covid-19 takes a toll on tourism sector in Kerala
2020-03-17
KOCHI: The spread of Covid-19 and the resultant fear of foreign travellers are taking its toll on the tourism sector of Kochi. On Monday, the streets and shops of Fort Kochi and Mattancherry, the two main tourism hubs in the city, wore a deserted look with only a countable number of foreign tourists. Besides the decline in the inflow of new tourists, hotels and homestays now hesitate to receive booking by foreigners due to the fear of Covid-19 spread.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

While some hotels and homestays are discouraging online bookings, a few others are cancelling bookings by foreigners. The foreigners who are presently staying in Kochi too are unhappy with the situation and said they are cutting-short their trip and returning to their natives as most hotels are not taking bookings and their “travel plans were derailed by people’s fear that foreigners are carriers of virus”.

“We reached India in February end from France with a full-fledged travel plan across the south. We reached Kochi on Sunday evening and it was a bit hard for us to get a place to stay. The streets are deserted and we can see some fear in people’s eyes whenever we approach a shop or restaurant. We are not feverish and pretty healthy too but still the kind of reception we get here is disturbing. We were planning to travel to Alappuzha and Varkala but had cancelled our trip midway and are returning to France on Tuesday,” said French national Alice Nuel, while sitting with her companion Laure Lemarie at a restaurant in Jew Town.

Daniel Potut and Milina Hemid from Germany said that they had to contact more than 10 hotels in Fort Kochi to find an accomodation. “With all tourist attractions closed here there is nothing to do to spend time. Even good restaurants remain closed. We will return to Germany via Mumbai on Tuesday,” said Hemid.

The situation is affecting domestic tourists too with many hotels cancelling the bookings. “We reached Kochi from Rajasthan after confirming our stay at a homestay here. We reached here on Monday morning and found that the homestay had shut down. Now we are struggling to find another room as most hotels are not allowing walk-in bookings,” said a Rajasthani couple.

Homestay owners said the situation has affected the business largely but they did not want to take risk. “These tourists travel in many places and most of them are less concerned about the precautions as prescribed by the health officials. If they are infected, we also will get infected,” said a homestay owner.

