Pune: Covid-19 sample tests to start at Sassoon hospital from Friday
2020-03-20
PUNE: Experts at B J Medical College-attached Sassoon General Hospital are gearing up to start tests for the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection from Friday. 

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has certified the state-run medical institution to carry out the tests on the throat swab samples of the suspected persons. 

“Following the ICMR’s approval, we have received the required primers and probes from the National Institute of Virology (NIV) for conducting the tests. All test controls have been examined prior to interpretation of patient results on Thursday. We will start getting throat and nasal swab samples of the suspected patients to analyse them for the presence of the virus from Friday,” hospital dean and spine surgeon Ajay Chandanwal told TOI.

Three laboratories in Maharashtra are currently handling the task of testing samples of the suspected novel coronavirus patients. Of the three facilities, the Pune-based NIV is the apex referral laboratory, which gets samples even from South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries for confirmation of various types of infections, including the novel coronavirus.

Apart from NIV, one lab is currently being operated at the Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) in Nagpur and the other one at Kasturba Hospital in Mumbai.

“We have the required machinery, called polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We plan to purchase one more machine, if needed, to scale up the testing work. We can currently handle the load of 50-100 samples a day. We can churn out the results within four to six hours,” Chandanwale said. 

Maharashtra health minister Rajesh Tope on Wednesday announced eight new testing laboratories for coronavirus across the state. He said among these, the facilities at BJ Medical College in Pune and KEM hospital and Kasturba hospital in Mumbai would start fuctioning from Thursday. The minister said the additional laboratories would test 180-250 samples a day to reduce the burden on NIV.

One testing centre would be set up in Mumbai’s JJ Hospital and two at Haffkine Institute. There will be a facility each in Aurangabad, Dhule, Miraj and Solapur. 

