Covid-19: Six-month-old girl with congenital heart disease dies at PGI
2020-04-24
CHANDIGARH: The six-month-old girlchild, who had tested positive for coronavirus at PGIMER on Wednesday, passed away on Thursday.

Her family members, including mother, father and grandparents, have tested negative. As per doctors, the baby’s condition deteriorated on Thursday and she died at 12.47pm. The cause of death was reported to be refractory shock, pulmonary artery hypertension and Covid-19. Her last rites were coordinated through Red Cross, Chandigarh.

The child was suffering from congenital heart disease and was referred to PGIMER from a private hospital in Ludhiana for corrective surgery. After assessment by cardiologists and cardiothoracic surgeons, she was due to be taken up for open-heart surgery at the Advanced Cardiac Centre, where she was admitted on April 9.

As per PGI authorities, she was critically ill at the time of admission. “The patient was very sick and not fit for surgical intervention for reported pathologies. She was kept on a ventilator and required medication. Her state deteriorated over the days. She was tested for Covid-19 on April 20 and again on April 22, and the report suggested she was positive,” they said.

She was subsequently shifted to the Covid-19 facility in Nehru Hospital Extension on Thursday and received ventilator support till her last breath. The hospital authorities are not certain about how and from where the baby contracted coronavirus.

She was cremated at electric crematorium with the consent of her parents. The municipal corporation made all arrangements, said UT adviser Manoj Parida.


PGI staff negative

Following the child’s report, 54 PGI staffers were quarantined. All have tested negative for Covid-19. 


Report card
A total of 21 contacts of Sector 18-based Covid-19-positive patient have been sampled and all of them have tested negative.

Chandigarh-based contacts of a positive patient from Nayagaon, a PGI worker, who were sampled at GMH-16 on Wednesday, also tested negative

Nine more Chandigarh contacts of the Nayagaon patient were sampled at GMH-16 and their report is awaited.


