Covid-19 formalities push up travel time at Kolkata airport
2020-03-08
KOLKATA: Flight suspensions and advisory against travel to several countries has led to a drop in international flyer count at the Kolkata airport. But it has not improved the average time required for in-bound passengers to complete formalities and exit the airport. On the contrary, it is taking much longer now.


The reason, Kolkata airport officials revealed, is two-fold. First, flyers have an additional queue to deal with now. While they needed to clear immigration and then wait at the baggage carousal to collect their checked-in bags, they now have to queue up for a thermal scan that has been mandatory in the wake of the Covid-19 spread for all passengers arriving in international flights. And then, flyers have to fill up a form in duplicate that is adding to the wait time. 


 

“Earlier, passengers with travel history to the worst-affected countries — China, Iran, South Korea and Italy — were undergoing thermal screening. After the flights to China were suspended early in February, passengers requiring screening were few, numbering in hundreds. But since the introduction of universal screening, we have to now screen nearly 4,000 passengers daily. Though it takes less than a minute to clear a person, everytime there is a suspect, the queue has to stall for the passenger to be segregated and handed over for transportation to the quarantine centre at the ID Hospital,” an airport official explained. 

But what is adding to the delay in processing each passenger at both the medical desk and immigration is the time flyers are taking to fill a form in duplicate, declaring their name, passport and flight details, travel history, address of stay and contact number. While one form needs to be submitted at the medical desk, the other has to be handed over to the immigration officer. 

“We have handed the forms to all the airlines that operate to Kolkata for distribution on board before the flight lands in the city. But most of the passengers don’t fill it in the flight and wait till they land. This is particularly true with Indian passengers. This is resulting in delay,” the official said.

Following a meeting chaired by civil aviation secretary Rajiv Narayan Choubey on Friday where he urged airport directors to ensure faster processing of arriving passengers, Kolkata airport director Kaushik Bhattacharjee has urged all airlines to distribute the forms just after meals are served and make an inflight announcement that everyone needs to fill up the forms for sumbission on touchdown. 

