Covid sample testing kiosk begins functioning at Kottayam hospital
2020-04-14
Kottayam: The general hospital (GH) here now has a Covid-19 sample testing unit. A kiosk for this started functioning in the GH on Monday. Using this system, samples can be collected within two minutes without using personal protective equipment (PPE).If there is an exponential surge in cases, the kiosk will be useful in collecting samples from maximum people in less time. The three feet broad, four feet long and seven feet high kiosk is air tight. It is constructed using aluminium, mica and glass. There is an exhaust fan and light.The sample collector entering the kiosk will be wearing a face mask and gloves. The person will collect the sample from the person sitting outside the kiosk by pushing the hands through the gloves fixed on the glass board of the kiosk. The person who has to give the sample will hold the tube with the viral medium in which the sample is collected. The sample collected will be left in the tube by the sample collector. The person who had given the sample will then close the tube and leave the tube on the stand placed outside the kiosk. Every time after a sample is collected at the kiosk, hand gloves fixed on the kiosk and the chair where the person sat to give the sample will be disinfected. The kiosk was constructed for Rs 25,000 using Korean technology. The fund was provided by including this under the TB eradication programme. The kiosk has been set up near the corona isolation ward in the GH. The district medical officer said the possibility of installing similar kiosks in the general hospitals in Pala, Changanassery, Kanjirappally and in Vaikom taluk hospital will be looked into.Testing facility at MCHMeanwhile, the government medical college hospital (MCH) here will soon have a sample testing facility. According to MCH superintendent Dr T K Jayakumar, the facility will be ready by next week and around 50 samples could be tested at a time here. The training for the staff has been completed, he said. 