Covid-19 blanks out Telugu soaps, production halts
2020-04-24
Hyderabad: TV serial addicts in the Telugu states will soon miss their favourite shows as production of the new episodes came to a grinding halt from March 21.

“Episodes are shot much in advance, so there are some more which will continue to be telecast but these will last probably for two or three days,” a television producer said. Meanwhile, Telugu TV channels are planning to telecast movies in the slots where otherwise serials would have been telecast.

There are at least 70 fiction serials and another 20 non fiction serials that are not being telecast on various channels, according to Telugu Television Producers Council president A Prasada Rao. The serials are telecast for five hours during prime time which is 6 pm to 11 pm everyday in addition to at least three hours in the afternoon. There are nearly 7,000 people involved in Telugu TV serials production, including actors and technicians.

“Once things settle down, the production will continue, if necessary at a faster pace,” said a producer K Ramesh Babu who is also the treasurer of the producers council. As of now, on a given day at least two episodes are shot for a serial. 

Some of the most popular TV serials which people have been addicted to include Karthika Deepam, Intinti Gruhalakshmi, Vadhinamma, Mounaragam, and Prema Enthamadhuram. 

Such is the popularity of TV serials in the Telugu states that their publicity has literally overtaken the publicity that is given for new film releases. Though pasting of posters on walls and public places is banned in Telangana, the publicity material is seen everywhere in Hyderabad. The paid-for publicity also happens in the form of bill boards and at bus stops. 

There, however, is a lot of criticism for TV serials as the episodes are said to be dragging and viewers being unhappy about it. In the space that will be vacated by TV serials, 
Telugu film audiences will be able to watch movies. In the Telugu states, remakes of serials from other languages like Tamil, Kannada and Bengali are common because of their storyline. However, there are no dubbed serials. 


