Covid-19 scare in Chennai: Thermal sensors, namaste greet employees at offices
2020-03-10
Indian companies are hunkering down to take all possible precautions against Coronavirus. Multi-factory and facility corporations like Hyundai Motor India and Rolls Royce among others are taking measures that include screening employees while entering the premises with thermal sensors, asking them to say namaste instead of the handshake, punching attendance with cards than biometrics.


Hyundai Motor India, with 30,500 people (directly and indirectly employed) at its Sriperumbudur plant, is screening everyone who walks on to its premises apart from sanitising hands at all checkpoints and canteens.


“We started taking basic precautions a month ago. For the past 15 days, we have started a habit of namaste and all employees are being screened with non-touchable thermometers at the gates,” said S Ganesh Mani, director-production, Hyundai Motor India.

Apart from this all foreign travels are being cut down and many activities have been replaced by video conferencing.

Same is true for aerospace major Rolls Royce. “We have thermometers and we will scan everybody both at the factories and other facilities. All meeting tables have hand sanitisers as do office receptions,” said Kishore Jayaraman, president, India & South Asia for Rolls-Royce.

On Friday, Tata Motors Group put out a statement about its employees particularly since it has a large exposure in China thanks to Jaguar Land Rover. “Our first priority has been the health and safety of our employees. Shanghai-based JLR China & Chery Jaguar Land Rover staff have been working from home since the end of the lunar holiday.”

Not just factories, IT parks across Chennai are making temperature check with handheld thermometers on employees mandatory.

“We have been screening all employees for two weeks. All MNCs set up inside our premises have given their consensus to run these checks,” said an administrative official of tech park Global Infocity, Perungudi, that houses 20,000 employees.

IT SEZ Chennai 1 Etc Tower, which houses MNCs such as TCS, has begun screening employees on Monday with noncontact infrared thermometer.

“There were checks for Coronavirus on Monday at the gate. We had to wait in a long queue. The security had placed hand sanitiser at the entrance for use,” said a TCS employee.

“We are working closely with health institutions and are implementing the latest recommendations. We ensure that our staff have all information and support,” said a TCS spokesperson.

