Covid warriors on wheels: Thousands of ambulance drivers in UP haven’t been home for months
2020-06-04
MEERUT: For over 19,000 ambulance drivers and emergency medical technician (EMT) staff on the frontlines of Covid-19 fight in UP, it’s a tough life on the road. If it’s not gruelling shifts keeping them up at night, nostalgia for home is. Many have not visited their families for months and are forced to survive on food from roadside eateries or those distributed by local organisations as the tiny hospital quarters they are housed in do not have space to cook.

Otherwise momentous occasions — births and deaths in families — have passed without time for either celebration or mourning. Vipin Adhana, in charge of the ambulance service in Meerut district, was blessed with a boy on April 18, but 45 days passed before he could see him. “I wish I had been present during the birth of my first child but I was on duty here. I could not ask for leave,” he told TOI.

When Adhana did manage to go to his hometown in Gajraula on May 31 to finally hold his newborn, it was only for a day.

In Lucknow, a pair of brothers are still mourning their father’s demise and the fact that they could not be with their family in tough times. “The brothers, Ramesh and Ram, managed to reach their hometown of Basti just in time for their father’s last rites. After that, they had to immediately return,” said Brijesh Kumar, general secretary of Jeevandayni Swasthya Vibhag, UP ambulance workers’ union. 

Abhishek Mishra in Sitapur is quietly waiting for the situation to ease so he can take his ailing mother back home in Sant Kabir Nagar, 400 km away, to a doctor. “I spend all day ferrying patients to hospitals but I have been unable to take my own mother to one,” said the 25-year-old ambulance driver. 

UP has a fleet of 4,720 ambulances with each driver working a12-hour shift. But drivers said that during the pandemic they have to be available 24 x 7. 

Others admitted they were often worried about where the next meal would come from. The living quarters at hospitals and primary health centres provided by the health department are too tiny to cook, they said. Brij Mohan, a resident of Bareilly posted as an EMT in Ghaziabad, said 10 of them were living in two rooms at the Ghaziabad district hospital. “A person who runs a roadside eatery provides us with food when we return from duty late at night,” he said.

Bijnor district magistrate Ramakant Pandey said they have provided personal protective equipment (PPE) kits, masks, sanitisers to the staff in the district and have also made arrangements for restrooms and food near hospitals where ambulance staff was housed.


