Covid-19: Startup takes staff from B’luru to a TN farm to write codes
2020-03-13
Chennai: Fearing disruptions due to Covid-19, employees of VuMonic, a data analytics and market insights startup, ran away from Koramangala to work out of a cashew farm in a remote village in Thevaram (in TN) to release an important update (patch) for its ‘Insta Clean’ app which has more than 7 lakh users. VuMonic moved its operations lock-stock-and-barrel to co-founder Aravind Raju’s farm house nestled in the foothills of the Western Ghats. The reason: it was secluded and far away from congested big cities where people are more vulnerable to getting infected by Coronavirus. “We had an important release for ‘Insta Clean’, an email cleaning app, due for Monday. Last week, we had a few colleagues reporting sick and we were tense. That’s when we decided to move to Thevaram,” he told TOI over the phone from his farm. “Work from home is not feasible for small start-ups like ours. It works for large companies. We have to work in teams and in tandem. We had no choice and looking at the panic around Bengaluru, we moved a small group first and the entire team this week,” he said. Of course, there were issues. “Connectivity was poor. But that was hardly a problem, as most of our work does not require internet connectivity. On the flip side, we are seeing some very interesting changes in the lifestyle of my colleagues,” he said. The team connects to the net through a wi-fi that is available in the farm. For one, they are up for work at 7 am, as most farm hands start work pretty early in the day and they wind up by 3 pm or so. Post that, evenings are spent either going for a swim in the Periyar river or hiking in the Western Ghats. Food is prepared by a local village cook and comprises local cuisine. In short: the verdant settings of a mountain, a flowing river, chirping birds. Well that is, a post card photo frame that decorates the walls of an office or a house is now a work spot to sort out market insights issues.While the picturesque Thevaram was the first choice, the other option was to work from Sakleshpur in Karnataka. “I was comfortable with my farm,” said Raju, a engineering graduate from Lord Venkateswara College of Engineering near Chennai. The team consists of a Nigerian, a Sri Lankan and others from India. “We have one colleague from Vellore and no one else is from Tamil Nadu,” he said. For now, the team has not decided on when they would return to their base in Bengaluru. 