Covid: Frantic citizens call corpn, seek advice
2020-03-04
Chennai: As cases of people affected by corona virus across the country increase, Greater Chennai Corporation’s officials are getting calls from across the city and the state. Frantic callers are inquiring about precautions to be taken if they come across co-workers or neighbours who have symptoms of flu.

Senior officials in the health wing of the civic body told TOI that they got calls from Madurai and Ramanthapuram. This is because mobile numbers of all officials are available on the civic body’s website.

On Monday, a techie from an office on Anna Salai called and sought advice after he saw a few co-workers coughing.

“We ask them to take basic precautions like washing hands and wearing masks if necessary,” the official said.

The official said if corona virus is detected in the city, the corporation is ready. Preparatory works have been on for a few weeks now, he said.

Those who visited countries that reported cases of corona virus in the past few weeks are being tracked on a daily basis by the health department staff. Hotels have been asked to ensure that suspect cases are isolated for 14 days and that food for such guests are prepared separately.

All commercial establishments witnessing big crowds have been asked to intensify cleaning activities, with special focus on door handles.

A sensitisation meeting of private doctors in the city has been conducted. The corporation has kept a stock of personal protective equipment of around 500 N95 masks and 10,000 triple layer masks ready. The ground level health workers have been sensitised on the due course of action.

As of now, isolation wards are ready at Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital, Kilpauk Medical College and Stanley Medical College. The communicable diseases hospital in Tondiarpet is on standby.

The measures were reviewed by a joint secretary of the Union health ministry for Chennai and Pondicherry region on Saturday, the official said.


