Covid-19 & Meerut scissors’ changing fortunes
2020-06-06
MEERUT: Meerut’s famous scissors market saw an unexpected windfall when Covid-19 hit China around December 2019 and overall imports from the neighbouring country immediately plummeted by 12.4%. The demand for Meerut's scissors jumped by 25% for over two months before it hit the nadir when the lockdown was announced in the country.


Probably for the first time in three centuries, metal clanging stopped echoing in the bunch of archaic lanes of Meerut which housed hundreds of small units. Scissors made here have been cutting clothes, trimming hairs and slicing vegetables in households for generations across the country. The cheap and suave Chinese versions had trimmed the demand of these ‘desi’ hand-made scissors, but couldn’t kill it completely. The silence of lanes is deafening for over 70,000 people who are directly or indirectly employed by this market.

“China had already captured at least 65% of the market. Despite being famous across the country, our scissors faced tough competition from China due to their cheap rates. But we survived only because of our quality. In December, our orders increased by at least 25% because the import from China got hit due to the Covid-19 outbreak there. We increased our workers to complete those orders. But soon the disease also came here and the lockdown was clamped. The situation is grim now. We are unable to pay our workers we had hired to complete the orders,” said Sharif Ahmed, general secretary of Meerut Scissors’ Manufacturing Association.

Meerut scissors was the first handmade tool from micro and small and medium enterprises (MSME) in India to get registered for a geographical indicator (GI) tag.

Saeed Sheikh, vice president of the association, said, “I am a seventh generation worker in the scissors market. It is at least a 300-year-old industry. After the lockdown, we don’t know how much time it will take to revive again. First, demonetization, then GST, and now the lockdown has taken the soul of the market. Our workers are selling fruits and vegetables to earn a living. We don’t know whether they will return to the art or it will die a slow death now.”

With nearly 275 manufacturing units in the market which employ about 70,000 workers, the Chinese competition was already fierce. The lockdown due to novel coronavirus has simply made a deeper cut in the scissors industry. The lanes famous for its scissors, locally known as Kainchi Bazaar, haven’t seen any activity since the lockdown started.

Mohammad Shoaib Zameeruddin, an 11th generation scissors unit owner, said, “My unit produced 14 kg of scissors, which means 400 units every week. In December and January, the production doubled as the demand increased due to the dip in imports from China. However, due to the lockdown, we have not been able to fulfil the demand.”

