Coronavirus scare in Pune: Rumours on social media hit poultry farmers, 1kg of live chicken sells for Rs 10
2020-03-14
PUNE: Desperate poultry farmers in various parts of the district are selling a kg of live chicken for as low as Rs10 following rumours on social media linking its consumption with Covid-19. 


The farmers said they were facing almost 100% loss in the business, as there was no demand for farm gate chicken. A few weeks ago, one kg of live chicken was being sold in the range of Rs80 to Rs90. 

 
 
“I have faced loss up to Rs10 crore in the past few weeks, as there is no demand for chicken in the market,” said Pramod Hinge, owner of Urja Poultry farm, which has registration of over 600 poultry farmers from Ambegaon, Khed, Manchar and Shirur.

Hinge said, “Since there is no demand in the market, we load our chickens in vehicles and sell them in villages in Ambegaon tehsil at a very cheap rate,” he said. 

The animal husbandry department and the Indian Medical Association (IMA) have categorically said Covid-19 does not have any connection with chicken. “Since people had experienced bird flu virus in the past, they think that Covid-19 also spreads from chicken. Our staffers and farmers are reaching out to the people to improve the situation,” said Hinge, who is a member of the Poultry Breeders Welfare Association in Maharashtra, an independent body.

Vasant Kumar Shetty, president of the association, said poultry farmers in Maharashtra have faced about Rs700 crore loss in the past few weeks. “Since chicken is a food item, we cannot stock it for long. We have to sell them at whatever prices we can. We were selling a kg of chicken for Rs70 a few weeks ago. The prices have now gone down to Rs10-Rs20 across the state,” he added. 

The Poultry Breeders Welfare Association in Maharashtra has sought help from the state. “The government should compensate us for our losses. We do not know how to repay our bank loans, electricity bills and other monthly expenses. We will also approach the Centre for compensation,” Kumar said. 

An animal husbandry department official said the lack of awareness and misleading information of social media platforms have created the panic situation among consumers. He said, “Unless people realize this, the condition will not enhance.”


