Coronavirus scare in Telangana: SSC exams postponed
2020-03-21
HYDERABAD: In the wake of coronavirus scare, the Telangana high court on Friday directed the state government to postpone SSC examinations scheduled to be held from March 23 to 30. The HC, however, allowed Saturday’s (March 21) exam to be held as per schedule. The HC said it was not advisable to compel students to travel to exam centres and congregate for three hours amid the looming threat of the virus. As exams are scheduled to be held till April 6, government should assess the situation and re-notify the schedule, it said.


Education special chief secretary, Chitra Ramachandran, said the rescheduled exam dates will be intimated later.

A bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice A Abhishek Reddy gave this direction while hearing a public interest petition filed by M Balakrishna of Secunderabad, who challenged the decision of the SSC Board to go ahead with the exams, spread over three weeks from March 19 to April 6. The case will be heard again on March 30.

Petitioner’s counsel Kowturu Pavan Kumar urged the HC to direct authorities to review their decision in this regard. The bench, while directing the authorities to postpone SSC exams between March 23 and 30, asked the government to re-assess the matter on March 29. A high-level committee should review coronavirus-related situation and decide the next course on re-notifying the exams, the bench said.

Advocate general B S Prasad tried to convince the bench, saying that preventive measures, including disinfecting the exam halls, had been taken. The bench, citing a circular issued by the HRD ministry, said while it was important to maintain the academic calendar and schedules, it was equally important to look after the safety of students, teachers and parents.

“We have taken note of precautionary measures being taken by government. However, in view of the prevailing situation world over, we feel that exams should be postponed,” the bench said, considering the likelihood of further deterioration of health situation in coming days.

“Think of rescheduling exams slated to be held from March 31 to April 6 also,” the bench said. Reminding authorities about the great danger being posed by the virus, HC hoped they would be alive to the ground realities.

