Covid-19 claims 2 lives,67 more test positive
2020-05-03
Aurangabad: The Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) said 67 more persons tested positive for coronavirus from Aurangabad at its Virus Research Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) on Friday and Saturday, taking the total Covid-19 count in the district to 244. Two coronavirus-related deaths were also reported over Friday and Saturday, taking the death toll to nine.

On Friday alone, 39 positive cases were confirmed in the city. The new patients included 18 residents of the Mukundwadi-Sanjay Nagar, four from Noor Colony, four from Asefiya Colony, four from Gulabwadi-Padampura, three from Bhimnagar-Bhavsingpura and one each from Vijayshri Colony (Cidco N-5), Wadgaon, Mehmoodpura, Qile Ark, Bhadkal Gate and City Chowk.

On Saturday, the count further rose by 28. Those who tested positive for novel coronavirus on Saturday included five from Noor Colony, 11 from Baijipura, three from Kailas Nagar, two from Samata Nagar, two from Qile Ark, two from Town Hall and one each from Jai Bheem Nagar, Gautam Budhha Nagar and Sanjay Nagar. Municipal officer of health Nita Padalkar said the cases are from the containment zones created by the AMC. One of the new patients is a 17-year-old girl who had travelled to the city on a private vehicle from Rajasthan’s Kota. She has been admitted to a private hospital.

On Saturday, a 65-year-old woman from the Noor Colony died while undergoing treatment at GMCH. Arvind Gaikwad, nodal officer for media interaction at GMCH, said she was brought to the hospital in critical condition on Saturday. The cause of her death is bilateral pneumonia due to Covid-19 in case of diabetes mellitus with hypertension with hyperthyroidism.

On Friday, a 47-year-old man had died at GMCH. GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar said the cause of his death is pulmonary embolism secondary to Covid-19 associated coagulopathy with bilateral pneumonia with respiratory distress syndrome.

Of the 244 cases so far, 24 have recovered and nine have died. The remaining 211 patients are under treatment. As many as 21 cases are under treatment at GMCH, 121 at district civil hospital, 8 in two private hospitals and remaining are in the Covid care centre of Aurangabad Municipal Corporation, district information office said.

GMCH medical superintendent Suresh Harbade said the new building of the super-speciality block with 248 beds will be opened for Covid care soon.


