Covid-19: Muslim IAS, IPS officers urge community to cooperate with health workers
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: As many as 80 Muslim IAS, IFS, IPS and officers of allied services, many retired but mostly serving, have appealed to the Muslim community to “act responsibly and stand out as examples for fellow citizens in the fight against Coronavirus.” 


In this hour of crisis, the officers said, Muslim community should come forward and strengthen the hands of the government and follow the directions of the ministry of the health and WHO to fight the coronavirus.

Initiated by senior IPS officers Asif Jalal (Himachal Pradesh cadre), Najmul Hoda (Tamil Nadu cadre) and Mohammad Shayin, IAS (Haryana cadre), and endorsed by 77 other officers of the elite civil services, the open appeal is significant in the backdrop of events in Indore and elsewhere when members of the community pelted stones at health workers and clashed with police personnel. 

Referring to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation at Nizamuddin Markaz in Delhi in March, the officers said they were compelled to appeal to Indian Muslims that “they should not offer anybody an opportunity to accuse them for the spread of the epidemic in India.”

Noor Rahman Sheikh, IFS, consul General of India in Jeddah, Noorul Hasan, IPS (Maharashtra cadre) are among those who have appealed to the community. 

“Today on April 4, 2020, a national daily reported that 25 per cent of the positive cases of novel coronavirus reported in India are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation held in Delhi in March,” they said. Invoking Islamic scriptures, they said: “Suicide and courting danger and disease by one’s rash and negligent act is haram or forbidden. The virus does not remain confined to the body of the person who invited it to himself through his foolish act. It travels rapidly in the family and society, and brings indiscriminate deaths to innocents.” They added that the Prophet directed his followers to take steps to prevent the spread of epidemic and to protect oneself.

Urging Muslims to follow the public health guidelines, they said that social distancing should be maintained and congregational prayer should be avoided. “Muslims can pray collectively at the mosques after the pandemic dies out and the normal life is restored. Temporarily avoiding going to the mosque to prevent spread of the disease does not mean one has deserted the mosques permanently, as many believe. One can pray at home observing social distancing. Our responsible behaviour would help save the individual, his family and the country at large,” they said.


