Covid-19 patient dies, 18 more test positive in Kanpur
2020-04-21
KANPUR:A man died on Monday at Covid -19 ward at Lala Lajpat Rai hospital while being treated for suspected coronavirus has become city’s second Covid -19 fatality with his samples taken earlier confirming the infection, said chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla.


The man was admitted to the Covid -19 hospital on Sunday, and was shifted to ICU after his condition deteriorated. He, however, died on Monday, CMO said further.

Meanwhile, as many as 18 more people tested positive for coronavirus in the city on Monday, taking the number of positive cases to 75. Earlier on Sunday, 26 persons tested positive for the virus in the city. 

The active cases stood at 66 while death toll remained unchanged at one.

“The number of positive cases in the city is 75, as 18 more people have tested positive for Covid -19 in different parts of the city as per the test report received by the district health department from Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Memorial Medical College Covid -19 lab on Monday morning,” said Dr Shukla. 

“A total of 103 nasal and throat samples were sent to Covid -19 Lab at GSVM Medical College on Sunday. Report which we have received on Monday morning, however, confirmed 18 more positive for coronavirus. They all have been shifted for treatment to isolation ward of Covid - 19 hospital,” he added.

“The number of active case in the district, however, stands at 66, as seven persons including a 70-year-old US returned man and six Jamaatis, had attained normalcy after rigorous treatment at Covid -19 hospital. A 40-year-old man, who died in Neuro Science Centre at Covid -19 isolation ward at Lala Lajpat Rai hospital, is so far the only death due to the pandemic in the city,” the CMO told TOI.

“So, the death figure has remained the same. All the 66 active cases are at present undergoing treatment at Covid -19 isolation wards of Lala Lajpat Rai Hospital, Ursala Horseman Hospital and Sarsaul Community Health Centre,” he added.

District magistrate (DM) Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari, meanwhile, said people should cooperate with the authorities in following the norms of the lockdown and precautions and maintain social distancing.

Meanwhile, SP East Raj Kumar Agarwal said lockdown restrictions will continue in hotspot areas and red zones.


