Covid cases cross 100 in south TN
2020-04-03
Madurai: Fourteen people from the southern districts who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat religious conference in Delhi tested positive on Thursday, taking the total number of Covid-19 cases in these districts to 109. The latest cases include nine in Virudhunagar, two each from Ramanathapuram and Tuticorin and one from Tirunelveli.

Officials said that all of them were under isolation over the last two days in the respective districts after efforts were taken to identify those who attended the conference in Delhi last month. Close contact tracing has been completed for some of them whereas it is expected to be completed for the rest on Friday. In the wake of these 14 positive cases, close to one lakh houses in the four districts have come under the scanner of the district administrations and health officials under the containment plan. These houses are in addition to the 10,000 that under house quarantine.

The number of positive cases in Virudhunagar district has climbed to 10 with the new cases. “These nine people are among the 13 from the district who attended the religious conference. All the positive cases are from Virudhunagar, Aruppukottai, Srivilliputhur, Thiruchuli and Rajapalayam,” collector R Kannan said.

According to him, the families of these men are among the 1,877 houses that are under quarantine. “We have identified 42,000 houses within the 5km containment zone and 2km buffer zone from the houses of the 13 people who attended the conference and are monitoring them for influenza symptoms,” he added. Of the 13, four had already tested negative. Results are awaited for five more close contacts, who had voluntarily approached the officials. Those who tested positive are likely to be shifted to the tertiary care facility in Madurai.

Ramanathapuram district recorded its first two positive cases on Thursday. The two men from Paramakudi are among the 41 in the district who attended the conference. “Twenty-five of them have returned to Ramanathapuram, while 14 of them are in Delhi and two in Chennai,” collector K Veera Raghava Rao said.

Results for samples collected from 15 more people from the district including eight who attended the Delhi conference have been sent for testing. On Friday, samples will be collected from six more people who returned from the conference. “These suspects and confirmed persons are monitored in separate rooms in the government hospital. We have identified 93 people in the first line of contacts from the positive cases and have advised them on the dos and dont’s. Their houses have been quarantined and are guarded,” he said.

As many as 35,000 houses within the containment zone are being covered under door-to-door surveillance by 417 field workers from March 31 and will be done every day for 14 days in succession. House of 4,777 people who returned from other countries were quarantined, the collector said and added that 30-day quarantine has been completed for 2,639 houses.

Two new cases on Thursday took the total positive cases in Tuticorin district to five. Collector Sandeep Nanduri said that around 15,000 houses are covered under the containment plan and that 30 high-risk close contacts have been identified and will be subjected to test. Positive cases in Tirunelveli climbed to 30 with the one new case on Thursday. “More people who attended the conference are coming forward. So far 36 who attended the conference including those who tested positive have been identified,” collector Shilpa Prabhakar Satish said. Since most of them are from Melapalayam area in the city, “the locality continues to be cordoned off and every resident is under strict home quarantine and monitored,” she said.


