Covid-19: Neighbour of Tablighis' host among 2 new Dharavi cases
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: A 30-year-old woman from the housing society where Tablighi Jamaat members were hosted by a garment businessman before Covid-19 claimed him and a 48-year-old man from another place in Dharavi tested positive for the novel coronavirus on Saturday. The test results took the number of positive cases from Dharavi to five. 

While the BMC said her case was an example of community transmission, the woman claimed she had had no contact with the businessman, his family or the five Tablighi Jamaat members he put up in a flat he owned in a different building in their housing complex. 

The Jamaat members were returning from a religious congregation at Nizamuddin in Delhi in the second week of last month, an event that has emerged as the single-largest source of positive novel coronavirus cases in the country. 

The deceased man's guests and their family stayed three days. They flew to Kerala just before commercial flights were grounded. 

While the police informed their Kerala counterparts about them, the Jamaat members said to the Kerala police that they had returned directly from Delhi.

The BMC contended the claim, saying it had proof these members stayed in Dharavi. Officials believe the Jamaat members were the source of Covid-19 in the society. 

The BMC tested all contacts of the businessman after his death on Wednesday. His wife, daughters, son and doctor tested negative.

"We surveyed the entire society," assistant municipal commissioner Kiran Dighavkar said. "There are 162 senior citizens and 36 others with fever or cough and cold. We examined all of them and collected samples of some."

The 30-year-old woman's sample tested positive. "We will examine all the society member again as a result," Dighavkar said.

Dharavi is dominated by slums; even the nine-building society where the deceased lived is surrounded by slums. The society has 308 flats and 2,500 residents.

The remaining two cases in Dharavi had been found positive on Thursday, one a doctor living in the vicinity and working at Wockhardt Hospital and the other a municipal sweeper in the area whose residence is in Worli.

The BMC sealed all areas with positive cases.


