Covid-19: Southern Railways removes curtains from AC coaches
2020-03-16
KOZHIKODE: Southern Railways have started removing curtains from air-conditioned coaches and have stopped providing blankets to passengers as part of steps to contain the spread of Covid-19. 


Railways will, however, continue to provide bedsheets, pillow covers and hand towels, which are washed after every use. Fresh blankets will be provided to passengers only on demand.

 While the white bedsheets, pillow covers and hand towels are washed daily, the thick black or brown coloured blankets are not washed daily. 

"We have decided to stop providing blankets as a precautionary measure against Covid-19. The temperature in AC coaches will be set a bit higher, at around 25 degree Celsius, so that passengers don't feel the need for blankets. If needed, extra bed sheets will be provided," Palakkad divisional railway manager Pratap Singh Shami said.

Palakkad railway division authorities said that they have removed blankets and curtains from the 52 air-conditioned coaches in trains under the division.

The Thiruvananthapuram division removed the blankets and window curtains from 200 air-conditioned coaches in the last three days and will remove them from the remaining 220 coaches in the next three days.

"The blankets and window curtains are removed at the primary depot. We could not remove all these from AC coaches in trains, which departed to other parts of India before last Friday. Once it reaches Kerala, we will remove the blankets and other things. It takes six days for a long-distance train to reach their destination in other parts of India and return to Kerala," said a mechanical official in the Thiruvananthapuram division.

 Also, health department staff, along with railways, have started screening train passengers entering Kerala at Palakkad and Kasaragod. "We will be doing it either at the station or we will be sending teams that will screen passengers inside the trains," Shami added. 

Train passengers, especially those coming from Delhi, Bengaluru, Maharashtra, and Telangana, were scanned at Palakkad station on Sunday. Also, health administration is trying to source more thermal scanners for effective implementation of the programme.

Police and health department staff led by Kasaragod DSP P Balakrishnan screened passengers of the Mangalore-Coimbatore intercity express (22609) by boarding the train from Kasaragod and travelling upto Kanhangad. Trains coming from Mangaluru Central/ Mangaluru Junction/ Konkan side are being checked by the teams boarding from Kasaragod.

 Railway officials said thorough disinfecting of coaches are being done at the starting point of service. Also high-contact areas like door handles, water taps, and handrails are also cleaned frequently. 

 (With inputs from Sreemol TC) 

