Covid-19 upsets sub-inspector’s wedding plans
2020-06-12
Dharwad: Had everything gone according to plan, a police sub inspector was to tie the nuptial knot and enter wedlock in a couple of days. But Covid 19 has upset the plans and has landed the officer in KIMS hospital in Hubballi. 

The SI attached to Shankarapuram police station in Bengaluru was to get married at Athani in Belagavi district. After availing leave for a month, he had visited his fellow officers in Dharwad and Hubballi to invite them for the wedding. 

Before leaving Bengaluru, he had undergone a covid test at Rajiv Gandhi Hospital and was awaiting the result. When he was about to leave for Belagavi after meeting his friends at Hubballi and Dharwad, a caller from a Bengaluru hospital informed the officer about the him testing positive for Covid 19 and asked him to get admitted at KIMS in Hubballi. 

The district administration has instructed five persons including an SI in the twin cities who had come in primary contact of the officer to be home quarantined. Since the SI had also visited the suburban police station in Dharwad, the station was sanitized on Thursday. The swab samples of the sub inspector of suburban police station were sent for testing the result is awaited. 

New containment zones 

Deputy commissioner Deepa Cholan on Thursday declared Yalakkishettar Colony and Hukkerikar Nagar in Dharwad and Annigeri town in Navalgund taluk as containment zones and has sealed down the areas. The area within a 200 metre radius of the containment zones has been declared as buffer zones. 

The decision comes in the wake of a 31-year-old female (P-5970), a resident of Yallakkishettar Colony in Dharwad testing positive on Wednesday. She developed Influenza like illness (ILI) and was admitted at KIMS. She is a teacher at an English medium school in Fort area of Dharwad. Since she had also attended a teachers' meeting in the school last week, the authorities instructed all those who attended the meeting to get tested at the district civil hospital and be home quarantined for a week. 

A 40-year-old CRPF jawan (P-5972), a resident of Annigeri town in Navalgund taluk, a 29 year-old female (P-5969) and a resident of Shantiniketan Colony near Hubballi and a 26-year-old female (P-5971), a resident of Nekar Nagar in Hubballi have tested positive on Wednesday. 


