Covid-19 Impact: US Cos may require additional compliance to cover H-1B employees in their work from home policies
2020-03-18
Mumbai: The ‘work from home’ policy takes on a new dimension, if you are an H-1B worker in the US. Companies are seeking clarifications from attorneys on how H-1B workers can be accommodated in their ‘work from home’ policy. It may require additional documentation to be filed with the concerned authorities and an additional expense.

There are other aspects that are worrying the Indian diaspora. As has been done across many countries, the US Consulate offices in India have cancelled immigrant and non-immigrant visa appointments (which covers H-1B visas) from March 16, till further notice. Once operations resume, appointments can be rescheduled. Individuals have been asked to look up the embassy website to keep abreast of developments. 

The number of Indians in the US on H-1B visas is significant and runs into several lakhs. To illustrate: Country-wise data of H-1B visas allotted is available for fiscal 2017, during which 2.76 lakh H-1B visas (both for initial employment and visa extensions) or 75% of the total went to those born in India. Approximately, Indians are allotted 60% of the 85,000 H-1B cap visas that are issued annually.

A change in the work location, (say to the H-1B holder’s place of residence) is a material change under the immigration regulations. Speaking to TOI, New York based immigration attorney, Cyrus D Mehta said, “If workers work from home, and within commuting distance of their workplace, there should be no need to file an amendment of their H-1B petition. On the other hand, if the workers telecommute will be from a location outside the commuting distance from the workplace, and this was not contemplated in the original H-1B petition, then an amendment relating to the new work location should be filed.” Even in case of work from home, H-1B workers must be paid the required wage and must be performing duties related to the H-1B position, he added. 

Snehal Batra, managing attorney at NPZ Law Group dived into the legal technicalities, “A change in location of the H-1B employee’s place of employment to a geographical area not covered in the original Labour Condition Application (LCA) is a material change affecting eligibility under H-1B. For example, if an H-1B employee is under ‘self-quarantine’ or working remotely from home, but his or her residence is outside the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) of employment, a new LCA would be required to be filed and posted. Further, a new or amendment H-1B petition would have to be filed, not to mention there may be a prevailing wage difference. Staying within the same geographical area means the area within normal commuting distance of the place of employment or within the same MSA.” 

“There is also a limited, but flexible 30-60 day short term placement option granted by the US Department of Labour, which allows H-1B employers to assign their employees to job sites not previously contemplated or listed in the LCA, subject to certain additional criteria,” added Ashwin Sharma, an immigration attorney based in Jacksonville.

According to Sharma most employers are likely to file an H-1B amendment if the existing LCA doesn't already cover the H-1B worker's home as a job site, as the short-term placement option is fairly limited in scope.

“An H-1B amendment comes with costs attached – of $460 plus legal fees. However, it can be filed very quickly, and upon filing the H-1B worker can commence work from home,” Sharma stated.

Batra also pointed out that leave under the ‘Family and Medical Leave Act’, does not terminate the H-1B relationship with the employer, and the latter will be liable for paying the employee.

Arlington based Rajiv S. Khanna, managing attorney at Immigration.com summed up, “Most offices in major metropolitan areas are either allowing or requiring everyone to work from home. Normally, H-1B workers are permitted to only work from the location for which their H-1B has been approved. Under the circumstances, I do not see any issue with H-1B employees working from whichever location they are isolated in. Technically, the government can claim that certain places were not preapproved for H-1B employment. But there is an overarching public concern here that must be accommodated by the US Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and allied regulatory agencies.”

“However, if H-1B workers get terminated because their employers can no longer afford them, this will result in them being out of status after the 60-day grace period. If employers furlough H-1B workers, they must still pay them the required wage pursuant to the H-1B petition” Mehta said. 

