Coronavirus fear stalks gas victims in Bhopal
2020-04-22
BHOPAL: At a time when corona fear is palpable even among the healthiest, the mental state of gas victims — who have been in and out of hospitals ever since 1984 —could be understood, particularly after the death of seven gas victims in Bhopal, none of whom could be properly treated for Covid-19. 


Praveen Kumar Malviya, 65, a lawyer, still recalls the horror of that night in 1984 and as he talks of the ill-treatment meted out to gas victims, tears well up in his eyes. “I have respiratory trouble ever since my exposure to methyl isocyanide that night. I am better now but a weak man all the same. Whatever I have heard about coronavirus and its impact on lungs and respiratory system, I am obviously a bit scared but nobody has bothered either from Bhopal Memorial Hospital & Research Centre (BMHRC) or anywhere else to talk to me or guide me on what precautions I should take. Ashoka Garden, where I live, is a gas-affected area, but there has been no sanitation, no screening, no survey. They had taken away BMHRC also, but for the intervention of media and court”, he said. 

Suresh Sahu, 60, a merchant, underwent treatment at BMHRC after he suffered a heart stroke in March this year. His son, Abhishek, says “Coronavirus was already there when we came back from the hospital. But, let alone counselling my father or any of the family members, even diet chart was not given by the hospital. We know that history of heart ailment, diabetes and blood pressure adds to one’s vulnerability to coronavirus infection, but we are doing what we read in the media or hear on TV. We are keeping him away from other people, giving proper food and asking him to rest.” 

Santosh, 42, had his kidney transplanted at a private hospital in 2019. But now he regularly goes to BMHRC for medicines. He said “I have been using masks for more than a year, after the transplant. Obviously, I am more vulnerable to any kind of infection. Death of seven gas victims due to coronavirus has only added to my anxiety but nobody else seems to care. I had to run from pillar to post to get medicines when BMHRC was taken over by the state government”, he said. 

Activists’ groups have been pleading for extra care for gas victims during the ongoing covid-19 pandemic; they are now demanding that the BMHRC and National Institute for Research on Environment Health (NIREH), both of which have data of gas victims and their ailments, should reach out to them and counsel them on how to avoid contacting covid-19. However, neither the BMHRC nor the NIREH is doing it though director, NIREH, Dr RR Tiwari, said “There were counselling sessions for the gas victims till the lockdown was imposed; they would resume once the lockdown is lifted.” 

