Covid-19 cripples Kerala’s coir industry
2020-03-19
ALAPPUZHA: Covid-19 has severely affected the coir industry of the state following major foreign buyers refusing to accept the coir goods due to spreading of the virus.

The coir exporters from Kerala are facing slowdown on exports, cancellation of orders and even closures of factories. The major buyers of Kerala coir products are from USA, UK, Germany, France, Netherlands, Australia, Italy, Spain, Canada, Belgium and all these countries are facing crisis due to the spreading of Covid-19.

“In the last few weeks we faced multiple challenges. Many customers are cancelling orders anticipating slowing in business. Customers are also requesting for delayed shipments and extended payment terms from shippers. Overall slack in demand for the product is expected to last for at least 6 months,” said Vivek Venugopal, vice-chairman, Federation of Indian Coir Exporters Associations (FICEA).

Ambalappuzha and Cherthala taluks are the major hub of coir exporters in the state. There are over 200 exporting companies in these two taluks providing employment to 6,000 people. Apart from them, thousands of people are working in grassroot level of this industry, depending on these firms. According to Vivek, in January the monthly exporting of coir and jute goods from Kerala through Kochi was between Rs 120 crore-140 crore.

“In February, it was Rs 102 crore and in March it may reduce to Rs 60 crore-80 crore. If the situation becomes more serious, the exporting may cease, he said.

To tide over this turbulent time, FICEA has sought the intervention of the state government. They have submitted a letter to the coir minister T M Thomas Isaac in this regard. “Our first request is to include the 14-day quarantine in ESI Holidays so that we could direct sick workers to stay home and encourage them to come forward with symptoms. It will be a big relief for exporters and workers if the government bears ESI and PF share of both manufacturers and workers. Special discounts should be given for the purchases of products from coir corporation to encourage international buyers to continue buying our handmade products even during troubled times. Credit facilities shall be extended to regular buyers for an additional 2-3 months for purchases made from the coir corporation,” said the exporters.

According to a coir worker Sudhakaran of Muhamma, the coir industry has been struggling for many years. “The situation is getting worse and worse day by day due to Covid-19,” he said.


