Covid-19 impact: AGI glaspac expansion delayed but on
2020-06-06
Hyderabad: The Covid-19 outbreak and subsequent lockdown has delayed the expansion plans of AGI glaspac, the packaging products business of HSIL Ltd, by about 5-6 months but the company will go ahead with the expansion when the situation improves, a top official of the company said. AGI glaspac was to start the groundwork for its brownfield expansion in Telangana and a greenfield facility in the eastern part of the country in May this year but will now kick off the process only by the end of this year, AGI glaspac CEO & president Rajesh Khosla told TOI.

“The expansion is still on but things will be delayed by five months or so. We have plans to invest around Rs 700 crore in two phases in the greenfield facility in the eastern part of India and Rs 150 crore in expanding the existing facility in Telangana. The expansion is aimed at increasing total capacity to about 8-8.9 million bottles per day (bpd) by 2022,” Khosla said.

According to him, land has already been identified for the greenfield facility and formalities are under process but the project cost could escalate due to rise in prices of inputs like cement and steel.

Khosla said the company, which makes container glass for various segments like liquor, food & beverages, water, pharma, among others, is gungho about expansion plans as it sees new markets opening up globally due to an anti-China sentiment. 

“Post-Covid the geopolitics will be totally different and a lot of markets will open up for us. We are already talking to prospective customers from US and other markets who want to change their suppliers from China to India. A presence in the east will gives us access to ports for exports,” he explained.

He said not only is AGI glaspac looking at new segments like cosmetics and perfumes but also sees pharma sector emerging as a new growth segment given the government’s self-reliance push.

In Telangana, where AGI glaspac claims to house Asia’s largest single point factory for container glass (excluding China) at Bhongir, the company has a capacity for making 1,600 tonnes per day (tpd) of glass which translates to about 6.5 million bpd. 

“The proposed greenfield facility will add 400 tpd (1.6-1.7 million bpd) in the first phase and 350 tpd in the second phase, while the proposed Telangana expansion will add about 150 tpd of glass (0.7 million bpd), Khosla said.


