Covid-19 dampens Holi spirit in Agra
2020-03-09
AGRA: The coronavirus scare has hit Holi festival in the city. With seven residents testing positive for Covid-19 in the city and scores of samples being sent for tests every day, a majority of the city organizations have called off Holi get-togethers to avoid assembly of crowds. The celebratory spirit is missing this year, say wholesalers and retailers as the sale of Holi wares has fallen by 50% as compared to last year.

According to shopkeepers, they have not been able to sell even 10% of the stock of colors, sprays, water guns, masks, etc. The sale of sweets has marginally increased as against last year. 

Vinod Agarwal, a Bijlighar locality based wholesaler of Holi ware, said, “As compared to last year, sales have dipped by 50%. We have no Chinese items this time. All the products available were manufactured in Delhi-NCR. The cost of these products is at least 20% more than those made in China.” 

But more than the cost fact, the fear of contracting coronavirus is such residents donot want to go to public places and indulging in the usual Holi celebrations. 

The health authorities have issued an advisory to people to shun large gatherings to avoid catching the infection. “At Holi get-togethers, hugging and applying of colors cannot be avoided. People should prefer to stay at home,” said a doctor. 

Mayor Naveen Jain has also cancelled the annual Holi party organized every year by the civic body at city’s Paliwal Park. “Following the coronavirus scare, I will not be attending any programme on Holi and also advice citizens to stay at home and celebrate the festival with their family members,” he said. 

“Every year, I look forward to Holi. But this time, after hearing stories about coronavirus, I do not want other people to touch my face to apply gulal,” said Swati Mahajan, a college student. 

Anil Goyal, a senior citizen of Pratapura, said, “This year, not many people are keen on Holi celebrations due to the coronavirus. Even children are being told to avoid public places and large crowds. There is no point in taking any risk.” 

Housewife Vineeta Malik said, “As several positive cases of coronavirus have surfaced in Agra. I am very worried about the well being of my kids. I have been organizing Holi parties every year but have cancelled it this year.” 

