Covid-19: V O Chidambaranar Port allays fears on goods handling
2020-03-31
MADURAI: V O Chidambaranar Port in Tuticorin has stated that operations of the seaport are covered under essential services and are exempted from the nationwide lockdown to ensure that essential goods are available to public in a seamless manner. The basic commodities handled by the port include coal for thermal power generation, petroleum products, edible oil and food grains and mission critical medical equipment.


They requested people not to believe in rumours spread by uninformed elements with respect to ships and crew calling on the port. The port officials stated that they have also requested the Tuticorin district collector to take appropriate action against those spreading rumours. They said that bulk commodities and container are handled through mechanised means and it requires minimum human intervention or working in large groups.

As per the orders issued by DG (Shipping), vessels directly arriving from any port in China or transiting through Chinese ports are allowed for berthing only after quarantine period of 14 days from the date of departure of the vessel from the last Chinese port. Vessels arriving from ports of other affected countries as identified by the ministry of health and family welfare will also be permitted after 14 days of departure from those ports.

In case of vessels having seafarers who embarked from infected regions, the countdown of 14 days for the entire vessel will begin from the day on which the person embarked the vessel to arrive at the port here. Ship sanitation exemption certificate or the medicine chest certificate and the international health regulations 2005- nCoV 2019 should be sent by the ship agent prior to 72 hours of arrival to the Port Health Officer (PHO).

After scrutiny of the documents and screening procedures, clearance is granted by the PHO for carrying out discharge of cargo operations by the port. 

VOC port has clarified that no crew disembarking is allowed and no shore passes are issued to crew members to prevent them from leaving the ship and to ensure safe operations.

The ministry of home affairs and issued orders to keep the supply chain operating at the times of crisis and serve the needs of the public.


