Covid cases soar with migrants’ influx, more L1 hosps being set up in districts
2020-05-22
Varanasi: The massive spurt in Covid-19 cases in surrounding districts of Varanasi, especially among migrant workers coming from Maharashtra, Delhi and Gujarat, has pushed panic button in the administration and officials have started ground work for setting up more L1 facilities in all districts.

From Wednesday night till Thursday afternoon, 18 new cases emerged in Ghazipur, 16 in Jaunpur, 15 in Azamgarh, three in Chandauli and one in Mirzapur while infection in two was confirmed after their death in Bhadohi.

Providing details of new Covid-19 cases detected in Jaunpur, Ghazipur and Chandauli in past 48 hours, divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal said, “On Thursday, 16 new cases were reported from Jaunpur, including 15 migrants from Mumbai and one from Surat. They had arrived by train and their samples were collected on May 14 as they were symptomatic. The case tally in Jaunpur has reached 47.”

“On Wednesday night, 18 cases were reported in Ghazipur. Seven of them are from Pritam Nagar locality. It is for the first time that Covid-19 case has been detected in city. Other cases are from Revati, Devkali, Sevrai, Mardah, Mohammadabad and Karimuddinpur areas,” he added.

Among the 18, nine had returned from Maharashtra, six from Surat and three from Delhi. The case tally of Ghazipur rose to 54.

“Three new cases of Covid-19 were reported from Chandauli district. Two of them had returned from Mumbai and one from Gujarat, increasing cases in Chandauli to 15,” said Agarwal.

Bhadohi CMO Dr Laxmi Singh said the reports of an elderly from Sarpataha, Gyanpur, who had died in Rewa, Madhya Pradesh, and his body was brought for cremation, and a youth of Karod village in Suriyava, who died on May 11 after returning from Mumbai, have also come positive. All those who came in their contact have been quarantined and are being tested, Dr Singh added.

In Azamgarh, 15 new cases came to light on Thursday. DM Azamgarh N P Singh said all the new cases from Jahanaganj, Maharajganj, Palhani and Lalganj blocks are migrants.

In Mirzapur, a 40-year-old man of Naudiha, Lalganj, who had returned from Mumbai on May 13 with five friends in a truck, tested positive, pushing total cases to 23. CMO Mirzapur Dr O P Tiwari said the five friends of the man tested negative.

“An additional L1 facility has been established in Jaunpur after number of patients in Varanasi’s L1 facility rose over 70. As more cases are coming, the number of beds in L1 facility at Jaunpur is being increased from 100 to 450,” said commissioner.

Ghazipur has also been asked to keep its L1 facility ready to admit patients in case beds in Varanasi and Jaunpur become full.


