Covid-19 spread wreaks havoc on asset classes; investors tense
2020-03-22
Ahmedabad: When the world was already reeling from an economic slowdown, the fast spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, spike in cases and deaths – all with no known medicine or vaccination – is driving countries into lockdown mode, and wreaking havoc on global markets. Indian markets and investors too have not remained immune to this, irrespective of the asset classes they invested in. Several asset classes, be it stocks, mutual funds, crude, or currencies have yielded negative returns.Stock markets free fall erodes investors’ wealthInvestors’ wealth has been drastically eroded with equity markets falling 25% to 35% since February. All major indices like Sensex, Nifty, mid and small caps, bank index have suffered steep fall.“Such sharp decline reminded investors of times in 2008 when in similar fashion all asset classes fell sharply due to global financial crisis,” said Mumukshu Desai, director, Artham FinoMetry Pvt Ltd.“There is further room for correction and high volatility over the next three months. The risk of downside is more than the scope of upside. Investors should wait and watch till March 31. Whenever they start investing again, they should do it in a phased manner,” said Nilesh Kotak, a city-based stock analyst.Mutual Funds yield negative returns up to 33%Volatility of stock markets has impacted mutual funds across various categories, be it equity-based mutual funds or even hybrid ones. Several MFs have yielded negative returns ranging from 30-33% since February.According to financial analysts, the volatility of the equity markets over concerns of fallout of the Covid-19 pandemic on industry and economy has multiplied losses for a number of investors, particularly in the past two weeks.“Mutual funds erosion is directly linked to the share prices of stocks. However, the silver lining is that SIP has not reduced and has remained on the same line. Investors are in wait and watch mode; and thus, while there is no major withdrawal, there are no fresh investments either,” said Jayesh Vithalani, a city-based financial advisor.Gold turns volatileGold and silver prices have remained extremely volatile after the COVID-19 outbreak and spike in cases reported in India. After touching a peak of Rs 46,100 per 10 gram in the Ahmedabad market on March 7, gold price has declined by Rs 3,300 per 10 gram from its peak to close at Rs 42,800. Silver prices have come down from Rs 46,400 per 1 kg on February 1 to Rs 40,500 per kg on Friday.“Investors who lost hefty sums of money in the stock market crash heavily sold gold and silver from their portfolio to maintain liquidity, which led to a sharp fall in the gold and silver prices. However, despite the volatility, gold and silver prices are expected to go up, as globally investors will turn to these commodities as a safe-haven investment,” said Haresh Acharya, director, India Bullion and Jewellers’ Association (IBJA)Bank deposit rates declineBank deposits rates have also shown a significant decline with the RBI policy review. Since February, the country’s largest lender SBI has twice cut fixed deposit rates across multiple tenors for general customers as well as senior citizens.“After the RBI reduced its lending rates, the bank’s costs have to be aligned and therefore, the deposit rates have been reduced,” said Vikramaditya Singh Khichi, convener, SLBC – Gujarat. Sources said that in the wake of the the Covid-19 pandemic, if the RBI may further reduce lending rates in the upcoming policy review on April 4, there is further likelihood of decline in deposit rates. “This may be done to infuse more liquidity in the market to help cope with demand slowdown in the country,” said a financial analyst.Real estate investments unaffectedEven as other asset classes have yielded steep negative returns, real estate has emerged as a safer investment option in such a turmoil. “Real estate is unaffected with prices remaining stable, while investment value in other asset classes has gone down,” said Balbirsingh Khalsa, branch director, Ahmedabad, Knight Frank India.“Real estate, however, becomes less liquid as compared to other asset classes in such tumultuous times,” he said.The coronavirus scare has resulted in low footfalls and has temporarily affected sales. Given the current scenario, sentiment will be subdued in the first quarter of the next fiscal. “Given the massive erosion and panic in stock markets, there is a possibility of investors staying away from market for some time.” Nilesh Kotak, a city-based stock analyst“Time and again we have seen that strong Indian fundamentals — demographic dividend, diversified and consumption-based economy-have always helped Indian economy and in turn Indian stock markets have given handsome returns once the crisis gets over.” Mumukshu Desai, director, Artham FinoMetry Pvt Ltd.“Real estate is unaffected with prices remaining stable, while investment value in other asset classes has gone down.” Balbirsingh Khalsa, branch director, Ahmedabad, Knight Frank India“Safe haven investments in gold are expected to continue over looming uncertainty in other asset classes. The prices may remain volatile, but investors internationally will move to gold and silver owing to the ease of liquidity.” Haresh Acharya, director, IBJA