Covid-19 cases in Delhi: NDMC hospitals ready to deal with crisis
2020-03-05
NEW DELHI: As the number of Covid-19 cases mounts, preparations are on in full swing in five hospitals run by the North Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) to deal with the situation. 


 Hindu Rao and Kasturba hospitals have already created two wards each to isolate patients. Three others - Rajan Babu TB Hospital, Balak Ram Hospital and Maharishi Valmiki Infectious Disease Hospital - will set up similar facilities, an official told TOI . 

 Ashok Rawat, medical health officer of north corporation, said: "We may also create space to quarantine patients, besides setting up isolation wards at Balak Ram Hospital. But our main focus will be on information dissemination. We have around 5 lakh posters ready to be displayed in government offices." 

 Rawat maintained that while there was nothing to panic about, the public lead to support the efforts being made by the authorities. "For the last two and a half weeks, our department has been regularly taking details of foreigners staying at hotels and motels under its jurisdiction. We are sharing the same with the surveillance teams appointed by Delhi government. We are following the directions issued by both the Centre and the state government," he said. 

North corporation standing committee chairman Jai Prakash, meanwhile, convened a meeting of officials to assess their readiness to deal with the situation.

 In south Delhi, Delhi government's surveillance teams joined hands with south corporation officials to disinfect hotels where the tourists from Italy had been staying during their visit to the city. Kejriwal said the passengers who had come from Italy had stayed at Surya hotel in New Friends Colony. "Around 13-14 rooms of the hotel have been sealed to ensure that the rooms are properly sanitised. The same steps have been taken at The Grand hotel where they stayed afterwards," he said. 

SDMC has, meanwhile, decided to discontinue the morning assembly at primary schools. Biometric attendance has also been suspended at its schools and offices.

 "Like north corporation, we are also collecting information about foreigners visiting city hotels. Details of people suspected to have acquired the viral infection are being communicated to surveillance teams," a SDMC official said. He added that no cases had been reported in areas under SDMC jurisdiction so far. 

Doctors from SDMC's health department will participate in a joint training session to be organised by the Centre on March 6. At least 35 unipoles in its jurisdiction have been used to share information about the disease, another official said.

