Bhopal: Covid-19 warriors in ambulance most vulnerable to health risks
2020-06-08
BHOPAL: Ambulance staffers carrying Covid-19 deceased are exposed to potentially high health risks to organ fluid and secretions, even after taking the greatest precautions. Bhopal Municipal Corporation (BMC) has two dedicated ambulances for moving Covid-19 deceased for the final rites.


As per protocol, Mutki-Vahan gets the sealed body. BMC has selected places for cremation. Teams have been formed and they assist in the last rites, said BMC additional commissioner, Pawan Singh. “Being close to a known infected body during the pandemic is a brave task. Another task for the BMC staffer is not to permit the family members of the deceased to get too close to the dead body,” he added. 

These men perform their duty as per protocol. The PPE suits and other essentials are supplied by the BMC. However, cleaning and sanitisation of the ambulance itself takes place at a designated location in Bairagarh. On Sunday, four people were cremated by the BMC. Categorisation according to case risk assessment and dealing with cases accordingly is the key in minimizing the possibility of spread of infection. It is according to the Covid- 19 infective status. Dead bodies brought for medico-legal autopsy can be categorised as confirmed case, wherein Nucleic acid positive by RT-PCR technique for Covid-19 infection is proven. 

Secondly, there are suspected cases, or cases having at least one of the epidemiological history features and two clinical features of Covid-19. They are also cremated as per Covid-19 protocol. Covid-19 has also changed the dynamics for autopsy. Deaths in hospital and under medical care due to Covid-19 is a non-medico legal case and do not require postmortem examination and the required certification of death is being done by the treating doctors. 

As per ICMR protocol, autopsy of a Covid-19 diseased is to best avoided to lower the risk of infection spread. The investigating police officer must proactively take steps to waive off unnecessary autopsies during such pandemic situation, as per ICMR guidelines. The guidelines are based on the understanding about modes of transmission of Covid-19, international autopsy guidelines and knowledge about infrastructure and logistic strength of common mortuaries as per ICMR guidelines.

