Covid-19 fear haunts park guides, say tourism should not be opened
2020-04-22
Nagpur: Even as guides and Gypsy drivers have become unemployed due to closure of tourism in tiger reserves, national parks and wildlife sanctuaries and buffer zones amid lockdown, they are wary of reopening the parks fearing Covid-19 blast from urban tourists.

Deprived of daily income due to closure of tourism in parks from March 17, plight of guides is miserable and they are crying for some long-term help from the forest department, which has supplied them food kits enough only for a week. Most of them are indoors and many of them are hunting for alternative jobs in nearby towns.

“Guides earn minimum Rs10,000 per month but coronavirus shattered entire tourism economy. Most of the guides are landless and those having marginal land holdings are not interested in farming due to lack of sustained income. Crop damage due to wildlife is huge,” said Umred-Karhandla guide Vidhyadhan Uikey. 

“More than reopening of parks we are concerned about some long-term measures from department by engaging us in protection work. Now tourism should not be restarted for at least six months due to Covid-19. Tourists here come from cities like Mumbai, Pune and Nagpur, where cases are high. Spread of corona from outstation tourists will be dangerous for rural people who are safe till now,” Uikey said.

Similar views were echoed by Navegaon-Nagzira guide Sanjay Sahare, who feels, “With zero income our condition is very bad. Yet, I feel parks should not be reopened even after lockdown is withdrawn on May 3. Here most of the tourists come from urban areas and department has no mechanism to know the medical history of tourists. If coronavirus spreads in areas around parks it would be disastrous. Our employment can be retained by utilizing our services for fire watch, patrolling and monitoring. Here is where local communities can play a key role. There are 100 guides in NNTR.”

“During training we are told that guides are brand ambassadors and eyes of the department but except a small food kit no major help has come from the department. Our demand to pay ex gratia of Rs5,000 has also not been accepted,” said Sahare.

“The Tadoba tiger foundation has lakhs of rupees in accounts towards cancellation of tickets by tourists, which is not refunded. This money can be used to bail out guides and Gypsy drivers. However, the park management has not yet stepped out to help the guides. The only gesture that was done was by Dr Ramakant Panda from Asian Heart Institute, Mumbai, and resort owner Dhananjay Bapat and his friends,” said a section of guides.

Guides in Tadoba are still better placed as 60% of them own farm land and can do agriculture. But stakeholders like Ashish Choudhary from Pench have nowhere to go.

“I have a Gypsy vehicle 50% financed by Pench Foundation and 50% by private finance. I’ve to pay Rs14,000 per month as loan instalment. How will I pay when there is no tourism? We need extension to pay loan instalment till regular tourism is in place. We don’t expect the park to reopen this summer,” said Choudhary.

There are guides like Swapnil Bondre from Bor tiger reserve who are hunting for alternative employment as it is not advisable to reopen the park till October. 


