Covid-19 fight: Ministers try to make presence felt
2020-03-28
LUCKNOW: Feeling left out of the battle against Covid-19, some UP ministers have found way to make their presence felt. While several have donated from their development funds, many others are going beyond to do their bit.


Minister for law and justice, Brajesh Pathak, on Friday started a 24x7 control room at his official residence in Lucknow to help people of his assembly constituency. Anybody in Lucknow Central facing any kind of problem in the long-drawn lockdown can call up his helpline number and there are fair chances that Pathak would himself receive the call and direct the authorities concerned for their intervention.

“I have publicised the mobile, WhatsApp and landline numbers so that the constituents can directly call my control room,” Pathak told TOI.

MSME minister Siddharth Nath Singh is also the spokesperson of the state government. But nowadays, it’s additional chief secretary Awanish Awasthi and principal secretary, health, Amit Mohan Prasad, who are briefing the media about the government’s steps to tackle coronavirus challenge. Singh, who has also donated Rs 15 lakh to the state’s war kitty, is totally focussed on whatever he could do for the people of his constituency in Allahabad. 

He is also helping the needy from other states. Recently, when Telengana CM K Chandrashekar Rao called him up for rescuing a number of migrant labourers of his state in Varanasi, he intervened to ensure their safe and timely return to their native place.

Energy minister Srikant Sharma ensured a series of measures for officials and staff in his department, including timely payment of salary to 50,000 staff on contract, availability of sanitizers and masks to the linesman and interest rebate on online payment of electricity dues. “I have set up different teams in my Mathura assembly constituency to stay at Mathura-Haryana border, where hundreds of labourers are gathering everyday from adjoining states. We are taking them to their native places with the help of district administration,” Sharma told TOI.

Chief minister Yogi Adityanath has set up 11 relief committees to tackle the Covid-19 challenge. The committees have 20 IAS officers and 5 IPS officers, but no minister has been able to find a place.

Meanwhile, Pathak has also written to the additional chief secretary, home, about “insufficient and incomplete measures by LMC in sanitising the city”. 

Quoting the provisions of the Disaster Management Act, the law minister said when the state was fighting against the pandemic, the primary duty was of the fire department, which is missing from action. “In other states, the fire department and fire tenders have been used extensively and deployed, while in Lucknow there is no deployment of fire department. It is most needed for sanitisation," the minister said in his letter.


