Covid-19 count in central region touches 114
2020-04-12
Trichy: The number of Covid-19 cases in the central region reached 114 as 15 patients including three children testing positive in Trichy and Nagappattinam on Saturday. 

Trichy district has recorded three more cases taking the count to 39. The patients include two elderly women and a man who are close contacts of the family members of Covid-19 positive patients being treated at the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial (MGM) government hospital. One of the women was down with visual problems while another has issues with mobility, said hospital sources. 

The new patients were among the 165 family members and relatives of the 36 people who attended an event in Delhi. Their swab samples have been sent for testing on Thursday, 

Trichy district administration confirmed that 103 of them turned negative, but they will be kept in home quarantine for 28 days. The results of 59 were yet to be ready.

The containment plan in 20 places in the district continues with the localities being cordoned. The district administration has kept 69 Tabligi Jamaat delegates quarantined at the Jamal Mohammed College in Trichy. Collector S Sivarasu reiterated that all the quarantined people can be discharged only after the 28 days of quarantine either at home or at institutions. 

Out of 3,045 people under home quarantine, 2,729 people completed 28 days of quarantine in the district. 

In Nagappattinam, 12 more positive cases were reported including three children, six women and three men, taking the tally in the district to 24. All of them are from the same family and are being treated at the government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur. Seven places in Nagappattinam town and other areas including Nagore, Thittacheri, Sirkazhi, Poravacheri and Thirukalacheri have been brought under the containment plan as the patients hailed from the areas. A team of 33 doctors, 36 nurses, 700 anganwadi employees and 102 police personnel have been making door to door health check of residents in Nagappattinam. 

Karur, Pudukottai, Ariyalur, Perambalur, Thanjavur and Tiruvarur have not reported any new cases. 

(With inputs from D Vincent Arockiaraj)


