Coronavirus scare: 300-bed hospital for quarantining patients soon
2020-03-06
BAREILLY: A 300-bed hospital - which is almost ready - will be used for quarantining patients if any suspected case of novel coronavirus (Covid-2019) is found in Bareilly district.


According to the government’s guidelines, such containment zone for hosting mass patients should be built away from the population. Hence, the health department has identified an under-construction building for a 300-bed hospital. The hospital will be completed soon.

On Thursday, additional director (health) Dr Rakesh Dubey said, “We have directed the agency constructing the hospital to prepare five rooms for us with facilities like water supply, electricity and toilets. We are also making arrangements of beds and other necessities. Besides, isolation wards have been set up at district hospital.”

“No patient currently needs to be quarantined in Bareilly but arrangements are being made as a precautionary measure if any need arises in future,” Dubey added.

District epidemiologist Dr Meesam Abbas said, “As novel coronavirus has become a medical emergency, several steps are being taken to prevent spread of the virus. An inter-departmental committee will be set up for novel coronavirus which will work together. Besides, teams of call centres, human resources, surveillance, creating awareness on health education and mental health have been made.”

The health department is currently monitoring 15 new cases where people have recently returned to Bareilly division from their visits abroad. The health employees have been taking daily health updates of these 15 individuals as a precautionary measure. Officials said the sample of any person showing symptoms of novel coronavirus will be collected and immediately sent for laboratory testing.

Of the 15 persons who are under surveillance, 10 are from Bareilly district, three from Pilibhit and two from Shahjahanpur. A person is usually tracked for 28 days from the date of arrival to India. Health officials said considering the arrival date of people, three from Pilibhit will be tracked till March 24, 10 from Bareilly will be under surveillance till March 21 and two from Shahjahanpur will be monitored till March 6. No person from Budaun district is currently under observation.

Notably, 122 people from Bareilly division returned to India from foreign trips and of these, 104 are out of surveillance as the incubation period of 28 days lapsed.


