Tamil Nadu: Covid-19 patient beats loneliness with TikTok
2020-03-31
TRICHY: A 25-year-old Covid-19 positive woman under treatment in the isolation ward of the Ariyalur government hospital has kicked up a storm on social media by recording and sharing videos on the TikTok platform. Attempts by the hospital management to take away the mobile phone went in vain as the patient held on to it firmly, telling the authorities that recording videos was her only means to overcome loneliness. 


Ever since the woman, a native of Ariyalur who worked in a mall in Chennai, tested positive for Covid-19 on March 27, 2020, she has shared at least six videos from the isolation ward. On Monday evening, the woman was seen making videos with and without the facemask and an oxygen mask. The lip-sync videos in Tamil include funny takes on the Covid-19 outbreak. Some of the thousands of social media users who viewed it insisted that she ‘take rest’. 

On coming to know about the videos going online, the hospital management advised the patient against recording and sharing them. But she argued that she was engaging in such activities to overcome the loneliness she was experiencing for the past five days. “At the moment, we are concerned about her recovery from Covid-19,” a senior medical professional from the Ariyalur GH said.

Health department officials said they have no instructions to seize mobile phones of patients in the isolation ward. They said counselling will be provided to the patient by a psychologist to ensure her mental health. 

Trichy-based clinical psychologist Randeep Rajkumar said such behaviour is common in extroverts subjected to sudden isolation. “The mobile phone should remain with the patient as it will reduce her anxiety level. Snatching away the phone will only stress her further,” he said. Rajkumar also suggested relaying comedies or engaging videos in the isolation wards to prevent patients from feeling lonely. A few days ago, three sanitary workers in the Ariyalur GH were quarantined in the isolation ward for having close contact with the Covid-19 positive woman. One of the three workers reportedly took part in a TikTok video with the woman.


