Covid effect: Govt postpones house site distribution to April 14
2020-03-21
Amaravati: The state government has decided to postpone distribution of house sites to April 14. The administration is now engaged in containing the spread of Covid-19 in all districts. 

Earlier in the day, State Election Commission (SEC) gave the green signal for the distribution of house sites following a request by the state government.

The government had planned to distribute house sites (pattas) for 26.6 lakh poor people on Telugu New Year day, Ugadi (March 25). However, the SEC had halted the programme when it issued the notification to conduct elections to local bodies. The SEC’s decision had sparked a controversy as the government had criticized the move stating that it was a ongoing scheme not the one announced in the middle of the elections.

The issue had got complicated when the SEC announced continuation of the model code of conduct even after the postponement of the elections as part of the measures to contain the spread of Covid-19. 

The government received a breather when the Supreme Court directed the election commission to lift the model code of conduct in view of the uncertainty prevailed over the next schedule of the elections.

Curiously, the state government decided to defer the programme to Ambedkar Jayanthi (April 14) after getting the green signal from the SEC. The decision was taken at a review meeting chaired by chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Friday.

The CM asked the officials to ensure that there should be a social distance while taking beneficiaries to inspect their plots. The CM directed the officials to complete the draw of lots to allocate the plots to the beneficiaries. 

He said that all the beneficiaries should be taken to the site and their photo should be captured at the site for geo-tagging. The CM said that it would be a new record to give house sites to 26 lakh people in one go. He said that the government is also committed to complete the construction of houses in the allocated house sites by 2024. 


