Covid-19 scare: Greet with namaste, not handshake, says Maharashtra minister Rajesh Tope
2020-03-05
MUMBAI: While pointing out that Maharashtra has not reported a single confirmed Covid-19 case so far, state health minister Rajesh Tope said it may be a good idea to revert to the traditional way of greeting with a namaste with folded hands, instead of a handhsake.

“Since the virus is airborne and can spread through contact, maybe going back to traditional greetings like ‘Ram-Ram’ and ‘Namaste’ are a better idea,” Tope said on Wednesday, while responding to a discussion in the state council on the coronavirus threat.

The government also plans to use prime-time TV shows and cinema halls to spread awareness about Covid-19. “Jingles and video messages will also be put out soon,” Tope said.

Stressing that the state government has adequate supplies of preventive masks, he said that washing hands was a much better preventive measure. He advised people to use clean handkerchiefs, following reports of non-availability of masks and allegations of hoarding which has led to spiralling of the cost in some cities.

Tope said 551 international flights landing in Maharashtra had been checked with 65,000 people undergoing thermal scanning, and 676 passengers had been screened from ships entering the ports.

“The fatality rate of this ailment is 2.5%-3%, so there is no need to panic,” the minister said, adding that six people have been quarantined in Mumbai and Pune for possible infection.

He said quarantine facilities are available at Kasturba and Rajawadi hospitals, while Bhabha hospitals in Bandra and Kurla, and Balasaheb Thackeray trauma care facility have been identified for setting up isolation facilities. “We have also asked each district to make provisions for a trauma care facility,” he said.

The additional director general of cybercrime has also been instructed to book those found spreading fake news about coronavirus on social media, Tope added.

(With agency inputs)

