Covid-19 patient booked for spitting & violating isolation norm in Osmanabad
2020-04-10
AURANGABAD: A Covid-19 positive patient, admitted to a health sub-centre in Omrega, has been booked by Osmanabad police for spitting in the open and not following the isolation norm.


The action was taken after health authorities lodged a complaint against the man who is in his 20s. The patient, who came to Omerga from Mumbai, has been booked under sections 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 188 (Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Osmanabad superintendent of police Raj Tilak Roushan, on Thursday, said the suspect worked as a waiter in a five-star hotel in Mumbai and voluntarily came forward for screening after developing symptoms of Covid-19.

“Five days ago he was brought to the health sub-centre after his throat swab sample tested positive. However, his behaviour was found objectionable. The suspect allegedly kept spitting in the open and roaming outside the isolation facility. The patient also refused to pay heed to the repeated warnings given by the medical staff,” he said.

“As the behaviour of the patient remained unchanged, medical officer with Omerga health sub-center Basawraj Danai lodged a complaint against his at Lohara police station on April 7,” Roushan added.

According to police, the patient has been reprimanded and warned of severe action if he does not follow instructions given by the health authorities. “The suspect does not have any connection with Tablighi Jamaat,” a police officer said.

So far, Osmanabad district has three confirmed cases of COVID 19, while a total of 306 suspected patients have been tested. Test reports of 49 patients are still awaited.

Meanwhile, Osmanabad police on Thursday booked a total of eight people for not wearing masks and violating lockdown norms. A total of 214 vehicles plying on roads without valid reason during the current lockdown period were also seized.


