Covid distress finds voice in Kathakali
2020-05-04
Thrissur: Covid-19 pandemic has cast its shadow on life like never before with lockdowns and isolation. As people struggle to cope with the new normal, lyricist A V Vasudevan Poti has written a Kathakalippadam (song) about the dreaded virus, for which mudras have been composed by former principal and present dean of Kalamandalam, Kalamandalam Balasubramanian.

The Kathakalippadam describes how the Covid-19 pandemic has upended normal life and seeks divine intervention to help humans in their race to find a vaccine to fight the coronavirus. 

In his verses, Vasudevan Poti seeks the blessings of Dhanwanthara Moorthy (Hindu God of medicine) to help find a treatment for Covid-19. The Kathakalippadam has been sung by well-known Kathakali singer Nedumpally Ram Mohan.

When Kalamandalam Balasubramanian came across the song on a WhatsApp group, he decided to compose ‘mudras’ for the concepts mentioned in it.

“There were three words which were unrelated to Kathakali. They were: Covid-19, Vaidyan and Dhanwanthara Moorthy,” said Balasubramanian.

“There are 24 mudras codified in the treatise, Hasta Lakshana Deepika, an ancient text followed by Kathakali artists. I created three mudras for the three words mentioned in the Kathakalipadam based on the Shukathundam Mudra,” saidBalasubramanian.

“The song seeks God’s blessing in developing vaccines and treatments to fight the coronavirus. Dhanwanthara Moorthy is considered the father of medicine. He is the ultimate healer and the God who has the power to cure all diseases,” said Balasubramanian

They conducted a performance with limited facilities due to lockdown restrictions and it was recorded on a mobile phone. However, it has gone viral on social media.

Vasudevan Poti said it was the severity of the coronavirus pandemic that caused devastating human suffering across the world that prompted him to think about writing a Kathakalippadam about it. “The song reflects the times,” he said.

“After lockdown restrictions are lifted, we are planning to conduct a Kathakali performance based on the song,” said Balasubramanian.


