Covid-hit, GCPL Q4 sales down 18% to Rs 1,089 crore; volumes fall 15%
2020-05-14
MUMBAI: Godrej Consumer Products (GCPL) reported a 25% decline in net profit without exceptional items at Rs 222 crore in the fourth quarter ended March 31, 2020. India net sales were down 18% to Rs 1,089 crore, with domestic volumes falling 15% year on year.


Household insecticides declined by 16% due to loss of sales in the later part of March 2020, which marks the onset of high mosquito infestation in North India, while soaps declined by 23% due to loss of sales in the last fortnight of March 2020 owing to the impact of the Covid-19 outbreak. On the other hand, hair colours delivered a weak performance on the back of general slowdown in the hair colour category due its discretionary nature and consumers stretching their consumption. 

GCPL chairperson Nisaba Godrej, said the quarter was an unprecedented period due to the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic across the globe, impacting all the geographies of the company’s operations. "During this quarter, we had witnessed steady demand in our categories till mid-March 2020. However, the spread of the virus and the eventual lockdown in many geographies of our operations resulted in virtually no sales in the later part of March 2020, significantly impacting our sales performance in the quarter. This resulted in a weak performance in our India business, although we have continued to gain market shares across categories,” said Godrej.

In GCPL's international businesses, Indonesia continued its strong growth momentum with mid-single digit profitable constant currency sales growth in spite of the Covid-19 crisis. Godrej said this was driven by a consistent performance across categories and several go-to-market initiatives. In GAUM (Godrej Africa, USA, Middle East), on the other hand, GCPL witnessed a weak sales performance amidst disruptions caused by Covid-19 in many of its countries of operations.

"Going forward, we are ramping up our supply chain operations and distribution, in line with the prescribed safety measures and easing of lockdowns in various countries. Since the situation is very dynamic, our teams are continuing to manage our business prudently, while assessing various scenarios for business recovery. We will continue to focus on driving our market share and launch relevant innovations to enhance our competitiveness. The situation calls for an extraordinary level of adaptability, resilience and agility – and our teams are well-geared to embrace this challenge," said Godrej.

Analysts said this was the weakest performance in consumer staples following the Covid impact. While Hindustan Unilever saw volumes dip 7% in Q4, Marico’s volumes declined 3%. Nestle India, on the other hand, witnessed a high single digit growth.

