Covid Care Centres to treat people with mild symptoms in rural areas
2020-04-16
Nashik: District collector Suraj Mandhare on Wednesday informed that the entire machinery is focussed on bringing down the number of Covid-19 positive cases for which necessary steps are being taken.

“As part of the three-tier treatment facility for Covid-19 as mooted by the central government, we will have Covid Care Centres in rural areas where people even with mild symptoms will be tested and treated. This will not only ensure early intervention and correction but also lead to timely containment of the areas,” Mandhare said.

The district collector was speaking to the reporters after a video conference conducted by union cabinet secretary with the state chief secretaries across the country. 

“It is too early to decide on how the restrictions will ease and where. We have received some instructions today (Wednesday). We will study it and an action plan will be drawn accordingly in couple of days. However, the most important step is about ensuring the early intervention facility,” Mandhare said.

Civil surgeon Dr Suresh Jagdale said that hospitals under the jurisdiction of Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC), Malegaon Municipal Corporation (MMC) and in rural ares have been identified to treat patients only with mild symptoms. Such patients are around 70%.

"A set of other hospitals, Covid Health Centres, will tackle the patients with the moderate systems and Covid Hospitals — at the district headquarters only — will treat the patients who are serious," he said. 

Jagdale added that they were keeping a close watch on Server Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI) cases as well. 

"People who have fever and cough, and suddenly develops respiratory problems fall in the SARI category. At this point in time, there is no such patient in Nashik," he said.

Meanwhile, in Malegaon, the sub-divisional office of Vijayanand Sharma has issued orders for complete lockdown in the town till April 30 in the wake of Covid-19 patients being found there. 

"No person will come out of the house for any reason other than buying groceries and vegetables – which will be allowed only till 12pm. After noon only exclusive milk delivery centres will keep functioning," the office said in its orders issued on Wednesday.

All banks have also been closed till April 20 to avoid people coming out of the house for withdrawing money. 

Sharma has also announced that no citizens will be allowed to go out of Malegaon and nobody from outside will be allowed to enter the city under any circumstances .

"Sale of petrol and diesel will be allowed only for vehicles asscociated with essential services," he said.

Additional police force in Malegaon

The Nashik rural police has added one more unit of the State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) in Malegaon in order to stop people from moving out of their houses and contain the spread of Covid-19. 

The additional police force has also been sought from neighbouring districts to ensure that people stay indoors. Superintendent of police (Nashik rurla) Arti Singh said that currently they have a force of over 1,200 personnel deployed across Malegaon. 

"We have also started using two drone cameras to keep a check on residents who violate the lockdown orders in Malegaon," she said.

"Apart from capturing the footage of people moving on the streets, the public announcement system on the drones is being used to make appeals to the people for staying indoors," she added.


