Bengaluru: Covid-19 outbreak may hit KIA global traffic
2020-03-02
BENGALURU: The coronavirus outbreak is expected to have an impact on the growth of international passenger traffic at Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) this year. 


Three of the top four international destinations from KIA — Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and Bangkok — are in countries reporting a high number of confirmed cases. The fourth destination, that is unaffected till now, is Dubai.

Last week, International Air Transport Association stated airlines’ losses due to coronavirus will run into $30 billion.

Officials of Bangalore International Airport Limited (BIAL), the operator of KIA, pointed out that passengers have now become ‘cautious about non-essential travel’ and that the coronavirus situation will affect “international traffic, in general, and particularly on Asian markets”. “It is difficult to, however, quantify the impact at this point,” BIAL said.

“The spread of Covid-19 virus has had an impact on the growth of international travel. A few Indian carriers have temporarily suspended flights to China, Hong Kong and the Asian region. The virus has made passengers travelling to other southeast Asian countries, many of which have reported cases, cautious about non-essential travel, leading to lighter demand for travel to popular tourist destinations. The situation is evolving and BIAL is monitoring this on a month-by-month basis,” said a BIAL spokesperson.

Since January 20, 34,490 passengers have been screened at KIA. Of them, 369 came to Bengaluru from Covid-19-affected countries. Of them, 269 are under home isolation and surveillance. 

All 198 samples tested for the infection from Karnataka have been found to be negative. Ninty-six passengers have, meanwhile, completed 28 days of observation.

While airport authorities have predicted that KIA will record a growth of about 8.9% in international air traffic movements in FY 2019-20, based on the new routes announced and market conditions, it expects about 6-7% growth in international ATMs through FY 2020-21.

As of February 25, China continues to be the worst affected with more than 78,497 confirmed COVID-19 cases, followed by South Korea (1,767). The number of confirmed cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship has jumped to 705. Italy and Iran have also reported a rise in the number of confirmed cases.

