‘Covid Yoddhas’ to help cops enforce lockdown
2020-04-17
Nagpur: City police’s ‘Covid Yoddha’ scheme involving citizens rolled out on Thursday indicating chief BK Upadhyay’s move towards community-based technique instead of using force on citizens to enforce lockdown.The cops also started pulling up the bikers for riding with pillion and drivers for carrying more than one passenger in cars on Thursday but no specific data were maintained. The traffic police have fined 938 people that also includes such riders and motorists, said a senior official. In the ongoing lockdown, city police would be also stepping up their checking and verification drives manifold on roads with more barricades being put up. They may not use canes but made a fresh appeal on Thursday to either move with valid identity cards, police permissions or face legal action including FIRs and seizing of vehicles. Joint CP Ravindra Kadam has warned about more stringent checking on the roads from Friday. With the migrant labourers housed at various shelter homes demanding repatriation to home towns, city police had to engage their crime branch personnel full time to tackle this issue. Senior crime branch officials, including Addl CP Nilesh Bharne, DCP Gajanan Rajmane and ACP Sudhir Nandanwar have been visiting the shelter homes trying to counsel the inmates of 19 shelter homes. “It is becoming a challenge to handle the labourers who are becoming violent,” said an officer. After the cops acted tough in the initial days and invited criticism, they were asked to adopt milder measures. The latest strategy is to convince citizens about social distancing, remaining at home pr stepping out only with valid ID cards or police passes for genuine reasons. As per the latest plan of Upadhyay, the police stations would rope in citizen volunteers who would be labeled ‘Covid Yoddha’. They would accompany cops to different locations in autorickshaws fitted with public announcement systems for creating awareness. CP Upadhyay said police stations had started hiring the three-wheelers and selecting volunteers. “Covid Yoddha is an extension of the community policing and hopefully we would get better response and cooperation from the masses as it would be one of their fellow citizens requesting them to follow the norms of the lockdown,” he said. The top cop also has initiated use of social media platforms to spread awareness and make appeals.In another positive development, city police would be distributing PPE kits to personnel deployed at the quarantine facilities and also at the government hospitals and laboratories.