Jaipur: Covid-19 may take sheen off the silverscreen
2020-05-21
JAIPUR: A group of French tourists craving for something crunchy and sweet at Golcha auditorium, orders a few buckets of popcorn. The oldest of them is busy appreciating the elegant interior design, taking photos and sharing it online.

By the time, the main door opens after the matinee show, people come out hooting and whistling. The French tourists, clearly in awe, click those pictures and stand in the queue for their turn to enter the auditorium. Despite the multiplex culture, Golcha and Raj Mandir have held on to their old world charm and remain the torch-bearers of the past grandeur of cinema’s golden times in the Pink City.

Cut to May, 2020. It's lonely out there. The streets are deserted. The cinema halls have been shuttered down for the last couple of months. It all feels surreal, straight out of a film set!

The Covid-19 outbreak has dealt a severe blow to the struggling single screens and many owners feel it will be difficult for them to make a comeback after the lockdown is lifted. “No one knows when public health guidelines will allow halls to reopen. It’s also unclear whether people will feel safe going into a darkened auditorium initially with a crowd of strangers,” said Sudhir Puri, GM of Golcha cinema. In this context he said without the government assistance, it’s difficult for them to survive. “Suppose after lockdown, we are forced to run two shows daily maintaining social distancing. If that happens, it’s beyond our capacity to run the business. Where is the profit?” he asked. Battling against the ravages of time, these old movie theatres stand testimony to the past grandeur and Puri is determined to restore those.

Although he hasn't announced his decision officially, but he's dropped several hints of urging the state government to waive off electricity bills for at least one year. “On behalf of hall owners, we will also request the government to waive GST for a minimum period of six months.” 

The crisis, at the moment, trade experts say, is grave for the film exhibition business. The reason Puri explained is the fast progress of digital platform. “It may be true. But the concept was earlier announced by Reliance Industries chairman Mukesh Ambani in August last year,” he explained. Elaborating, Puri said Ambani’s ambitious plan is to enable premium JioFiber customers watch movies in their living rooms on the day of the release at theatres. On Friday, director Shoojit Sircar announced that Gulabo Sitabo, starring Amitabh Bachchan and Ayushmann Khurrana, will hit the digital platform on June 12 next month.

Amazon Prime Video has not only acquired the comedy-drama film, but seven other language films which will also be premiered next month. Protesting the move, INOX, in a statement said: “INOX would like to express extreme displeasure and disappointment on an announcement made by a production house to release their movie directly on an OTT platform by skipping the theatrical window run.” Acknowledging the greater challenge, the industry is facing now, Ashok Tanwar, Manager of Raj Mandir said ensuring public distancing will be the utmost priority which will go a long way in instilling confidence in public. 

“I am optimistic with a fair amount of economic activity opening up in India, public will get out of their house and watch movies on big screen. What I feel that public would love to come back provided we take extensive safety measures,” he added. Actor Suniel Shetty, who has decided to shoot all his upcoming projects in India, in order to give more business to domestic stakeholders, feels the industry after Covid-19 is going to be a lot different. It will be a different world post the pandemic. So will be the tinsel town. But will the audience ever return to the theatres, like they did in the past? Question remains!


