Covid-19 drama over delayed funeral leads to panic
2020-03-22
Nagpur: There was a panic-like situation in Lonara village on the outskirts of the city after residents started feeling tizzy after a 53-year-old woman’s body was kept in Nagpal Colony. 

The funeral, which finally took place on Friday, was delayed by 72 hours as the deceased’s son was held up at MLA hostel’s quarantine facility after landing at Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar international airport from Paris.

It’s learnt that the woman, after suffering for a prolonged period, had expired at a leading hospital in Pune on March 16. 

In the death certificate, the reason behind her cause of death was mentioned as pneumonia and related complications. 

The drama started after the woman’s body was shifted to her brother’s residence in Lonara’s Nagpal Colony, a day after her death. 

After learning about his mother’s death, the son rushed to the city to perform the last rites. He landed in the city from Paris on March 17 but was quarantined at MLA Hostel for the mandatory 48-hour screening.

Meanwhile, a resident raised objections regarding the body of the women being kept in the freezer. He was doubting her cause of death. He had also shared his concern about the woman’s possible cause of death due to corona-like symptoms. 

After the objections were raised verbally and via social media, local residents approached cops. They even questioned the delay of the funeral.

Senior PI Vazeer Shaikh of Koradi police station said he was flooded by calls from Nagpal Colony regarding the funeral. “We had to contact the doctor of the primary health centre of Gumthala who accompanied me to the house of the concerned person in Nagpal Colony on Thursday (March 19) to scrutinize the death certificate and other documents of the deceased. She did not die due to corona,” he said. 

Shaikh said the reports of the medical history of the deceased was revealed to the residents after summoning them at a prominent place in the village. “We convinced the local population that there was no reason to panic or fear as her death had not taken place due to corona. At the same time, we also summoned the person who was rumour mongering and warned him,” said the PI. 

He added the person, who was contacting everyone stating that there was a corona-related death in the village, was also served a warning notice. 

It’s also learnt that the police had sent a team to MLA Hostel to check the health status of the woman’s son after the rumour was spreading in Lonara and adjoining places. Police and government agencies had also conducted a check at the residence of the woman’s brother to ascertain whether there was a home quarantine facility, if required. 

As there were no symptoms, the woman’s son was discharged from MLA Hostel as the cops and other government personnel helped him reach home on March 20 to perform the last rites at a local crematorium. 


