Covid-19 takes the limelight from Chaitra festivals
2020-04-06
KERI: Chaitra, the first month of the Hindu calendar year, has its own significance from religious as well as cultural point of view. During this month, many festivals and celebrations take place in temples across Goa.


This year, most temple committees have decided to not celebrate festivals on a grand scale in keeping with social distancing norm.

Gudi Padva marks the beginning of the new year for Hindus. On this day, people erect a pole in front of their houses with a saffron flag and a pitcher atop it. People kept rituals to a minimum.

On April 2, Ramnavami was observed in the state. Every year, a huge crowd gathers at the Shree Ramchandra temple in Pilgao. Mostly, devotees from the Chari community besides others hailing from even Maharashtra and Karnataka make it to the festival. But there was no big celebration this year.

People also gather at Partgal math in Canacona. It is one of the biggest attractions for the devotees during Ramnavami. This year, celebrations were symbolic.

Between April 3 and 8, folk drama ‘Dashavtari’ is normally organised in Bicholim. A palanquin procession, Veerbhadra tradition and rathotsav are also held at the Shree Vitthal temple in Bicholim. The temple committee headed by Poriem MLA, Pratapsingh Rane took the decision not to hold festivities.

Raosaheb Rane from Sankhali associated with the Vitthal temple of Karapur said, “As devotees throng in large numbers during the Chaitra festivities, our committee decided to avoid grand celebrations.”

April 8, being Chaitra Pournima (full moon day), marks the birth anniversary of lord Hanuman. Most of the temple committees have decided to celebrate the festival symbolically.

On the day of Gudi Padva, devotees of goddess Lairai of Shirgao eat only vegetarian food and stay in thatched-roof structures.

This year most devotees have decided to follow the Covid-19 norms by offering prayer to the goddess seeking welfare of all.


