Covid-19 tally crosses 900-mark in Agra dist, 10 new cases in Meerut
2020-06-02
　Agra/Meerut/Bareilly: The Covid-19 tally in west UP's hotspot Agra district has surpassed the 900-mark on Monday, with at least eight new positive cases. The district tally is now 907. While at least 10 fresh cases were reported from Meerut, taking the tally to 444, which included one from Kanpur.

The district administration in Agra also confirmed the death of a 65-year-old Covid infected man. The man - a resident of Lohamandi - was suffering from respiratory ailment and was admitted at SN Medical College where he died while receiving treatment. So far, 43 Covid-19 deaths have been reported in Agra district.

Also, the new Covid-19 cases included three patients of SARI at SN Medical College, a patient suffering from chest pain at a private hospital, and two women under home quarantine. The people testing positive on Monday belonged to Nai Ki Mandi, Shahganj, Nagla Padi and Shastripuram. One more person of Viprawali under Pinahat block was found positive.

Seven patients were discharged on Monday. Out of 907 cases, 87.65% have recovered and discharged. There are 67 active cases in the district now. Chief medical officer (CMO) RC Pandey confirmed, "So far, 795 people have been cured of the infection and discharged. Health department teams are conducting door-to-door checks in hotspot areas."

Moreover, Meerut district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, "As many as 10 people tested positive on Monday. These include a man aged 63 from Kotwali, a 13-year-old child and a woman, 64, from Chahshor Jama Masjid, a woman, 55, from Gola Kuan, a 52-year-old woman and 27-year-old woman from Kesarganj, a man, 28, from Brahmpuri, and a man, 62, from Murgi Farm Colony."

Three people tested positive in Bijnor district as well. They were migrant labourers. According to Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav, the total tally is now 103. Out of these, 53 are active cases. These people were found in Pakhanpur. Their family members were quarantined and contact tracing is on. While three more cases were reported from Bulandshahr, taking its tally to 130.

In Bareilly, a private hospital nurse has been tested positive. District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, "The nurse was on duty at the hospital's ICU, but she had quarantined herself at the hostel since May 23. She is asymptomatic and we are tracing her contacts."

Meanwhile, a 70-year-old woman who was undergoing treatment at another private hospital's ICU in Bareilly has been found positive on Monday. The woman, who is a native of Budaun district, was tested by a private lab after she was admitted to the hospital.

Budaun's CMO Dr Yashpal Singh said, "Once we received the test report, we shifted the patient from Bareilly to Government Medical College in Budaun. With this, the total cases in Budaun reached 41, including seven active ones." Also, eight staff members of the private hospital where the woman was undergoing treatment in Bareilly have been home quarantined.


