Covid-19 +ve patient’s close contacts, 3 GMCH doctors show symptoms
2020-03-20
Aurangabad: Four close contacts of the 59-year-old woman who has tested positive for Covid-19 have been quarantined as they showed symptoms of Covid-19 while three resident doctors of the GMCH are under observation. 

According to district officials, a total of seven people with symptoms, including the four close contacts of the woman patient, have been admitted to the district civil hospital

Aurangabad district collector Uday Choudhari told TOI on Tuesday that the samples of all the four close contacts of the woman who tested positive for the contagion will be collected and sent to the National Institute for Virology in Pune. “They have been kept in isolation ward of the district civil hospital.

When contacted, GMCH medical superintendent Subhash Harbade confirmed that that three resident doctors were referred to the district civil hospital soon after they showed symptoms of coronavirus.

“A team of medical experts examined the doctors, who have not been quarantined because they do not have any history of being in direct contact with anyone who travelled abroad or with any COVID-19 positive patient. However, we have been asked to keep these doctors under observation,” added Harbade.

Sources at the GMCH said that appropriate arrangements were being made to keep the medicos under observation at the hospital.

District collector Choudhari said that those who have started showing symptoms are being quarantined and a close watch is being kept on the health related developments of all those who had been in touch with the woman between March 3 and March 15.

Medical sources said that taking serious cognizance of the latest development at the GMCH, preventive and precautionary measures have been scaled up to an all-time high. The issue has also been brought to the notice of district administration.

As per the statistics available with the revenue divisional commissionorate from the eight districts of Marathwada region since the outbreak of the disease, 35 swabs of patients have been collected, out of which 22 turned negative and reports of 12 are awaited. 

The authorities informed that 61 people, a majority of who are from Aurangabad, have been quarantined and 14 have been kept in isolation.

A 62-year-old person, who had been in the isolation ward of the district civil hospital, has tested negative for coronavirus. Another 36-year-old woman with symptoms was admitted to the isolation ward and her swab sample was sent to NIV in Pune on Monday. 

The medical administrator of the private hospital where the woman who has tested positive for Covid-19 said that her condition was stable and that she does not need ventilator support.


