Covid-19 puts huge BS4 vehicle stockin jeopardy
2020-03-24
Chennai: With a lockdown due to Covid-19 and its resultant impact on closed regional transport offices, the unsold stock of BS4 vehicles sitting in car, truck and two wheeler dealerships could be nearly Rs 6,350 crore. These vehicles must be registered by March 31. Federation of Automobile Dealers’ Associations (FADA) president Ashish Harsharaj Kale, “There are 7 lakh two wheelers worth Rs 3,850 crore in dealerships. Add to this 15,000 passenger vehicles worth Rs 1,050 crore and 12,000 trucks worth Rs 1,440 crore.” 

The entire stock will become junk on March 31, unless the court extends the BS4 registration timeline beyond April 1. “The Covid-19 impact is severe in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Odisha and Kerala, which have seen 40%-50% drop in footfalls, enquiries and deliveries; moderate in Gujarat, West Bengal, NCR and Punjab; and nominal in Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Bihar.” The passenger vehicle inventory is 2-5 days for passenger vehicles, 4-8 days for light commercial vehicles and 12-16 days for two wheelers,” wrote analysts at Crisil, in a note. It is learnt that Maruti has very limited stock (under 300 vehicles unsold last Friday), the situation is different for smaller niche players. Also two wheeler companies have substantial stock at dealerships. “Had this been a normal month, most of the stock would have got consumed but this is not a normal month. So companies that played the high-risk game of keeping inventory in the network will be stuck,” said Vinay Raghunath, head-auto sector, E&Y.As of now, companies are waiting for the Supreme Court to decide on a plea by FADA to extend the 31 March deadline for registering BS4 vehicles. 

“The Covid-19 outbreak is an unprecedented situation and we are facing this challenge in India as well. We do have unsold BS4 stock at dealerships but I cannot confirm the exact number. We are hopeful that FADA’s appeal will be given consideration and that the Supreme Court will understand that this is a force majeure situation,” said Rakesh Srivastava, MD, Nissan Motor India.

Apart from the FADA appeal, only Hero Motocorp has taken the decision to move court on its own for an extension of the BS4 cutoff in the context of the “unprecedented force majeure situation prevailing in the country,” said a company spokesman. 

“In the normal course, dealers could have easily sold the remaining BS 4 vehicles during the balance period of the month. In fact, our retail sales had been growing at double digits this month before the disruptions set in on account of Covid-19.” The company, he added, could not comment further as the matter is sub judice.


