Covid clinics help separate patients
2020-04-23
Nashik: About 60 Covid clinics across the city are helping in segregating patients with respiratory ailments from those suffering from other ailments like blood pressure and heart problems.

“Earlier, patients suffering from blood pressure or cardiac problems were expose to those with respiratory problems that may be corona symptoms, thus increasing their chances of contracting the infection. Hence, the move to identify and segregate patients,” Sameer Chandratre, the president of Indian Medical Association (IMA), Nashik chapter, said on Wednesday. 

Private medical practitioners in cooperation with Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) and district administration and help from the IMA have set up the Covid clinics in various parts of the city. 

The purpose of the clinics was to ensure people requiring medical treatment for ailments other than respiratory issues and also preventing government hospitals and facilities from being overburdened by people suffering from illnesses. 

“With the lockdown in place, the numbers of patients has come down. However we are getting patients in the clinics. After thorough check-ups, we have been successful in sending home those without Covid symptoms,” said Hemant Sononis, a doctor. 

Pediatricians, physicians and ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialists have been roped in to provide services in hospitals in the region on rotational basis. Hence, doctors in local areas can refer patients with respiratory issues directly to the Covid clinic. 

“With this arrangement, clinics and hospitals are safe and so are patients coming there. This is also further helping doctors to easily sanitise the area at regular intervals,” the doctor said.

The average numbers of patients these clinics receives daily is about eight and very few of them are required to be sent to any government facility, the practitioner said. 

“Efficient use of the facility will only be possible with the rise in the respiratory ailments, but none of us would want this to happen in Nashik city,” he added. 


