Covid-19 test of police, med staff not needed: NMC to HC
2020-05-23
Nagpur: Even as the collector and commissioner of police are ready to conduct RT-PCR tests on medical and police personnel on duty in Mominpura and Satranjipura containment zones, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has opposed the move citing burden on its finances and stretched manpower due to Covid-19 pandemic.

In an affidavit filed in Nagpur bench of Bombay high court by NMC’s additional health officer Dr Pravin Gantawar through counsel Sudhir Puranik on Friday, the civic body asserted there was no need for front-line warriors to be tested as enough protection was already provided to them.

A division bench comprising justices Ravi Deshpande and Amit Borkar then directed the state government to file an additional affidavit on compliance with earlier orders, where HC had asked to conduct RT-PCR tests on medical and police personnel on pilot basis.

On Thursday, the police commissioner and collector filed a joint affidavit stating they would be testing medical and police personnel from Mominpura and Satranjipura. 

NMC’s affidavit came in response to a PIL by Citizen Forum for Equality through counsel Tushar Mandlekar praying for conducting Covid-19 testing on all front-line workers, including police, pharmacists and para-medical staff.

Dr Gantawar said the civic body has changed the strategy of finding persons affected by Covid-19, by resorting to use of ‘pulse-oxy-meter’ technique. If there is less than 90% saturated oxygen in the person’s blood then s/he is immediately sent for RT-PCR test. The NMC has placed requisition for purchase of 440 such meters to the government, of which 165 have been received.

“If front-line workers are using PPE kits or other protective gear, such as hand gloves, masks or coats, then there is no requirement for testing them, as there are very less chances would be infected. NMC has already instructed all its health care workers, doctors and paramedics to discharge duties by wearing protective kits and even private doctors were informed in this regard,” the affidavit mentioned.

It added that NMC is strictly following guidelines of ICMR and it’s not necessary to conduct RT-PCR test on each front-line worker, as they’re following due precautions and don’t fall under the ambit of “high-risk contacts”. “If these workers are being tested, NMC will be required to deploy manpower, which is already stretched due in fighting the Covid-19 pandemic. NMC is conscious of the well being of all front-line warriors, including medical personnel,” the affidavit stated.


