Covid-19 man sent to hosp from dist border
2020-04-27
Kolhapur: The Kolhapur Municipal Corporation has decided not to mark the Nagala Park area as a containment zone though a resident of the locality has tested positive for coronavirus. This is because the man had not been home and had been sent directly to the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje (CPR) civil hospital from the district border upon his return from Rajasthan.

On Saturday, a 38-year-old resident of Nagala Park — who had gone to Iran and then taken to Rajasthan — tested positive for Covid-19. According to his relatives, he had gone to Iran and after the flights were cancelled, he, along with several others, were taken to Rajasthan on a defence plane. There he had tested positive and was put under treatment. After the treatment, his samples tested negative for the virus and he was allowed to return home, along with three others from the city. All four were issued special travel passes.

However, before they could enter the city, the 38-year-old man and his three companions were sent to the CPR hospital directly from the district border at Kini toll booth. Throat swabs samples of all four were sent for testing again. While his companions tested negative, this man tested positive for the virus.

Kolhapur municipal commissioner Mallinath Kalshetti said, “The person is now at the isolation centre. The three individuals who travelled with him have been put under institutional quarantine. Since all of them were taken directly to the hospital, and they had not gone to their homes, no containment zone has been marked at Nagala Park.”

Once a containment zone is marked, the locality is completely sealed and people are not allowed to come out of their homes. Disinfection is carried out and a health survey is done. The locals at Nagala Park are thus relieved that the administration decided to take these persons directly to the hospital.

“I have written to all the mandals and residential societies to let us know of the persons who have arrived from other places. Already, we have traced a large number of such people and they have been home-quarantined. We don’t want a single person with travel history to stay at home as Covid-19 can often be asymptomatic and people may continue to infect others unknowingly,” said Kalshetti.

The doctors at CPR hospital said the Covid-19 patient develop pneumonia when brought late for treatment. Dean Meenakshi Gajbhiye said pneumonia can be cured, however, it still exists in a small amount. As a result, a person can test positive for Covid-19. She said that the person will get recover soon and the test results for another swab sample sent to the Miraj laboratory are awaited.


