Covid-19 cases crosses 300-mark in Rajasthan
2020-04-07
JAIPUR: Thirty-five people tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Monday taking the total number of infected to 301. 


According to the health department report, 10 people from Kota, eight from Jaipur, five from Jhunjhunu, three from Dausa, two each from Dungarpur and Tonk have tested positive. Three Iran evacuees and one each from Jodhpur and Bikaner have also been found infected with the virus. 

In Kota, 10 people were found infected with the virus, including the 60-year-old man who died on Sunday night. The other nine are his family members.

Two persons tested positive in Dungarpur — an 11-year-old boy who came in contact with an infected person and another 22-year-old youth who returned from Godhra in Gujarat recently and is linked to the Tablighi Jamaat. 

Five persons were found infected in Jhunjhunu. All the five are linked to Tablighi Jamaat. They all are aged between 18 years and 65 years. 

Besides, eight persons have been found infected in Jaipur, three in Dausa and one each from Jodhpur and Bikaner. A 20-year-old woman from Bikaner has tested positive. She is the wife of a person related to a Tablighi Jamaat, who was recently diagnosed with Covid-19. Also, three evacuees from Iran kept at isolation facilities at Army wellness centres in Jodhpur and Jaisalmer. In Tonk, two persons including a 29-year-old man related to Tablighi Jamaat and a 42-year-old woman who is a relative of an infected person. 

Among eight who have tested positive in Jaipur, one belongs to Suraj Pole area who is undergoing treatment at SMS Hospital for difficulty in breathlessness. Seven others are all relatives of people in Ramganj who have tested positive. They are already staying at a quarantine facility at NIMS on Delhi Road. 

In Jaipur, the health authorities have quarantined 40 people from one building from densely congested Ramganj area of Walled City. “One person has been found infected with the virus, who lives in the building. There are 40 people in the building including tenants and owner’s family. We have sent 18 of them to quarantine facility in NIMS and we are in the process of sending the rest of them,” said a health department official. 

From Ramganj only, 89 people have tested positive for Covid-19 since the first case was reported on March 26. Covid-19 cases in Jaipur have touched the 100-mark.

