Covid-19 gives long-pending boost to health services in state
2020-06-05
Nagpur: The unprecedented challenge thrown up by Covid-19 pandemic has given a huge push to Maharashtra’s health services, which will benefit the state in the long run too. Notwithstanding problems in Mumbai, Pune and other cities due to increasing Covid-19 cases, it cannot be denied that the health infrastructure in state has seen a major facelift. Many works pending from years became a reality just because of the pandemic. 

One example are the Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL), the most laudable achievement.

In January, Maharashtra had two labs where Covid-19 tests could be conducted. At least seven GMCs in state already had approvals for the VRDL laboratories, but the equipment was present only on papers. As the pandemic situation intensified, all these seven GMCs get the VRDL labs. Many other GMCs, who were not in the scheme, also received the machinery and the lab facility was operationalized.

Today, the state has 75 laboratories where Covid-19 tests can be conducted. Out of these, 42 are in government institutions. AIIMS Nagpur has mentored setting up of 23 Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory for Covid-19 testing in a record span of 15 days. A lab that took months of waiting for approval, procurement, and certification at GMCH Nagpur, came up within six days at GMCH Gondia.

The concept of isolation wards or independent hospitals for viral diseases was totally new for the state. But, many hospitals were converted into Covid-19 hospitals in record time. Total 17 GMCHs in state are working as Covid-19 hospitals. On the same line, PPE kits and mask production has gone up. 

Dr Sanjay Mukherjee, secretary of Directorate of Medical Education and Research (DMER), said many changes happened at rapid space during the pandemic management. “PPE production capacity in the state is now over 1,00,000 per day, and N95 production over 1,20,000 a day. With this, prices will also remain under control,” he said. 

Doctors have also appreciated the state administration’s decision-making pace.

Indian Medical Association (IMA) state president Dr Avinash Bhondve said the government issued a GR in flat four hours after IMA members held a meeting with senior officials. 

“The issue was to form state and district-level coordination committees for private doctors. The demand was addressed within four hours, which is laudable,” he said. 

“It’s obvious that the state has been spending a lot on health infrastructure after Covid-19. But our way of life and way of health care is set to change after this pandemic. At least now our health expenditure should increase up to 3% of the total GDP,” said Dr Ravi Wankhedkar, treasurer of World Medical Association.

BLESSING IN DISGUISE

RT-PCR labs | In Jan, Mah had 2 VRDL labs, now has 76 — can conduct 30,000 tests a day

PPE kits | Mah producing 1 Lakh PPE kits/day, 1.2 lakh N95 masks

Covid hospitals | 32 District hospitals, 17 medical colleges converted into Covid hospitals

Covid Care Centers | Covid care centres came at 200-plus tehsil places 

Infrastructure | Covid wards were created in 17 GMCH across state

Oxygen | Centralized Oxygen supply systems pending from years came to many GMCs 

Ventilators | Pending from months together, but now procured immediately 


