Covid-19 death: Samples of 40 persons to be collected
2020-04-01
Thiruvananthapuram: The capital district is caught in a strange transmission scenario at Pothencode where source of infection remains a mystery even after three days of confirmation of Covid-19. 

The investigation team of health department prepared a list of around 40 persons who had arrived from Middle East and had attended the marriage ceremony at Pothencode in which Abdul Azeez , who died of Covid-19, also took part on March 2. Sample collection of these persons is expected to begin on Wednesday which will kick off a massive screening exercise. This is again based on assumption that one of them could be a source.

The police will also lend a helping hand in cases where there have been resistance to co-operate. It is learnt that police will directly pick persons suspected as sources of infection from their homes. However this again is a small part of the picture; as there are persons with travel history who attended the marriage and reside in other districts and it needs to be verified whether they have flown back or not. 

A call made from the control room to one person in the district went unanswered forcing health authorities to seek police help. The team had to source wedding videos and collect information on invitation list of families of bride and groom to make a list of probable persons with travel history. Besides a chain of contacts was established to probe further, however the results are still considered premature. 

Till now, the district has dealt with sporadic cases alone; one or more cases imported or locally acquired as per WHO guidelines. 

However the case at Pothencode can't be categorised as a sporadic case, because source of infection remains unknown. Th next possibility is clusters of cases which means most cases of local transmission linked by chains of transmission. If at least 10 out of 40 samples being collected on Wednesday turn positive, this would create a condition of community transmission which are outbreaks with the inability to relate confirmed cases through chains of transmission for a large number of cases. 

While minister Kadakampally Surendran keep repeating that all contacts have been traced and everybody has been quarantined, the need to go for a blindshot by shutting down an entire panchayat for 21 days is enough indication that clues are nil regarding probable sources that could be linked to the patient. More details keep emerging which add to the task. The route map mentioned about funeral, wedding, prayer, visit to sub-treasury office, however local bodies had to chip in with additional data that the person had attended PTA general body meeting at Government LPS, Thachappaly on March 5 and visited KSEB office on March 10. If everybody had been quarantined going by minister's words, the missing links in the route map would tell a different story.


