Covid-hit Gujarat braces for cyclonic storm tomorrow
2020-06-02
RAJKOT/SURAT/GANDHINAGAR: The cyclonic storm brewing in the Arabian Sea was barrelling towards Gujarat and is expected to hit the coast near Daman on the night of June 3, forcing the state government to brace up for any eventuality.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) said that the cyclonic storm is packing strong winds and expected to pound heavy rain in the region on June 3 and 4.

“The low-pressure system is around 900km away from Surat at present. We expect the cyclonic storm to hit the southern Gujarat coast near Daman on June 3 evening with a wind speed of 90 to 100 km per hour,” said Jayanta Sarkar, director, IMD, Ahmedabad.

High alert has been sounded in Surat, Navsari, Bharuch, Valsad and Dang while Bhavnagar and Amreli have been kept on alert. Over 100 vulnerable villages in these seven districts have been alerted and shelter homes are being prepared to bring in people in the event of evacuation.

After chairing a high-level meeting to assess the preparedness, chief minister Vijay Rupani said 10 teams of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) have already reached five districts of south Gujarat as well as Bhavnagar and Amreli districts. 

“District collectors have been asked to shift people from low-lying areas to safer places and a control room has been activated in Gandhinagar to monitor the situation,” said Rupani.

On Monday, heavy rain accompanied by strong winds lashed Bhavnagar and Tapi districts. The rainfall resulted in water logging in low-lying areas of Bhavnagar city while gale uprooted large number of trees and blew away hoardings and solar panels fitted on the rooftop of Bhavnagar University. Glass windows of a newly constructed building were also shattered due to winds and rain. Electricity supply to many areas was snapped for nearly three hours as a transformer near Barton Library got damaged

Vadod taluka of Tapi district received nearly 60mm rainfall while wet spell also prevailed in hill station Saputara on Monday.

Additional chief secretary, revenue, Pankaj Kumar said rescue teams will be equipped with masks, PPE kits and hand sanitisers and district administrations have been asked to prepare a list of Covid-19 patients in vulnerable areas to arrange for their shifting in shelter Homes and Covid hospitals in nearest schools and colleges.

In Surat, municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani said precarious structures and hoardings are being removed and residents have been told to remain indoors on June 3 and June 4.

Surat collector Dhaval Patel said, "Popular beaches like Dumas, Suvali and Dabhari have been closed for public.”

Valsad district development officer (DDO) Arpit Sagar said shelter homes have been set up for possible evacuation from 35 villages close to the coast and NDRF teams have reached the district.

The effect of the storm in Saurashtra is expected on June 4 and June 5.

