Covid-19: Cases top 11,000, Tamil Nadu may tweak testing policy; 4 deaths take toll to 78
2020-05-18
CHENNAI: As Tamil Nadu's Covid-19 count continues to rise, touching 11,224 with 639 fresh cases on Sunday, the health department has sent a comprehensive testing policy to the government for approval. Four people died taking the toll to 78. Chennai, the most affected district, reported 482 cases to take its tally to 6,750. 

The testing policy expected to be announced on Monday will advise district officials to continue testing all passengers from other states. 

While those positive for the infection will be send for isolation, others will be advised home quarantine instead of government facility quarantine. 

Over the weekend, 170 people who arrived from Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Telangana tested positive. 

On Sunday, nearly 12% of the patients who tested positive were from other states. They included 73 people from Maharashtra, three from Telangana, two each from Rajasthan and Karnataka and one from Andhra Pradesh.

Health minister C Vijayabaskar said the influx of people returning from other states is now a challenge for TN. For instance, Karur, which did not have any case for the last three days, had 16 passengers from Maharashtra testing positive. Salem, which did not report any local case, had three patients from Telangana, four from Maharashtra and two from Rajasthan. Similar was the case in Sivaganga and Virudhunagar. But the state is equipped with testing kits, quarantine facilities and isolation beds, the minister said.

The state has decided to test people coming from other states and countries through air, ships, rail or road. So far 1,961 air passenger (they came in 10 flights) and 1,696 train passengers have been tested using RT-PCR. "Thirteen people who came by three flights were sick. All other passengers on those flights tested negative but they have been told they are high risk contacts. They are all being monitored on a daily basis. So far, two people who came by train were positive. All others are in facility quarantine under our surveillance too," he said.

The state control room at the directorate of public health was still collecting numbers from districts on the number of people who came by road. 


No. of those tested rises by 4,000 on Sunday

A senior health department official, “People coming by private cars, trucks, and bikes are being stopped at the district check posts and tested. Those who test positive are sent to hospitals and those who test negative are sent either to facility quarantine or are advised home quarantine for two weeks,”

Meanwhile, epidemiologists said the number of people tested for the viral infection has gone up from 8,000 people on Saturday to 12,445on Sunday. Chennai’s neighbouring district continued to register more cases.

While Chengalpet reported 28 cases, Tiruvallur had 18 and Kancheepuram recorded five. At Chennai’s borders, one passenger coming from Andhra Pradesh and another from Karnataka tested positive.

On Sunday, there were 6,971 active cases in the state and 634 people were discharged from hospitals across the state, taking the total number to 4,172.

“We have managed to keep recovery rates high and mortality low. In some cases we don’t know why people deteriorate rapidly,” the minister said.

On Saturday, a 63-yearold man admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital died within a day of admission after he developed respiratory failure due to fluid in the lungs.

Hours later, at the Government Stanley Medical College Hospital a 44-yearold woman, who had rheumatoid Arthritis died within 40 minutes of admission due to septic shock.

A 45-year-old-woman died on Saturday and a 40-year-old man died on Sunday.


