Covid-19 scare: Hotel bookings at many hill stations cancelled
2020-03-12
NAINITAL/UTTARKASHI/HARIDWAR/MUSSOORIE/MUNSYARI: As the coronavirus scare grips the country, the tourism industry in Uttarakhand has started to suffer as well in terms of cancellations of bookings.


Hoteliers in Nainital said that almost half of the advance bookings in the lake town’s hotels have been cancelled and the situation is expected to get worse if the fear of the virus is not contained now. “There are several hotels in the town that have said that almost half of their advance bookings have been cancelled. Almost all the big and small hotels have seen cancellation of bookings,” said Dinesh Sah, president of Nainital Hotels’ Association.

Resort and hotel owners in and around Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR) said that while hotels in their area were almost full till last weekend, there has been a sudden spike in cancellations. “Till last weekend, hotels were running at almost 100% occupancy. However, as the fear of coronavirus spread across the world, people have been calling to cancel their bookings. As a result, almost 30% of advance bookings have been cancelled so far,” said Hari Mann, president of Ramnagar Hotels’ Association.

In a similar vein, Sanjay Aggarwal, secretary of Mussoorie Hotels’ Association, said that hotels in the Queen of Hills were fully booked for the Holi weekend but owing to the Covid -19 scare, over 30% bookings have been cancelled. He added that bookings for entire March have seen a sudden dip.

Jayendra Rana, president of Himalayan Mountaineering and Trekking Association, Uttarkashi, said that trekking operators, too, were seeing bulk cancellation of bookings. “Nearly a dozen foreign tourists’ groups from America, Japan, Italy, Korea and France have already cancelled their bookings. Besides, tourists from Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Pune and Bengaluru have also postponed their bookings to April-end,” he told TOI.

Hoteliers in many other places in the state also reported similar situations. “Travel agents have been constantly calling us to inform that group bookings are cancelled as people are afraid to travel in groups. As a result, almost half of the bookings in hotels in Haridwar have been cancelled,” said Ashutosh Sharma, president of Haridwar Hotels’ Association.

Puran Pandey of the hotel association in Munsyari said that the hill town has also witnessed a 30% dip in tourist footfall. “Over the past few days, the number of tourists visiting Munsyari has gone down by 30%. People are saying that they cannot take the risk of travelling, with the coronavirus threat looming large.”

Meanwhile, Deepak Gupta, secretary of Hotel and Restaurant Association of Uttarakhand, said that if tourists keep on cancelling their bookings, then Uttarakhand as a state will suffer badly. “Most of the state’s revenue comes from tourism and if the sector suffers, effects will be felt across the entire economy.”

— With inputs from Abhyudaya Kotnala in Uttarkashi and Anmol Jain in Mussoorie


