Delhi: Covid-19 patients misbehave with female doctors
2020-04-16
NEW DELHI: A group of Tablighi Jamaat members admitted to Lok Nayak Hospital with corona infection allegedly created a ruckus and misbehaved with the female doctors on duty at the quarantine ward on Tuesday night. They, along with other patients, ganged up on the doctors and allegedly heckled them after the medical team intervened to end an argument between the Tablighi Jamaat members and the other hospital staff over serving of food.


The security guards of the hospital later forced the patients into their wards and controlled the situation.

Delhi Police has beefed up the security of the hospital following a written request from the resident doctors’ association. The hospital will soon give a formal complaint to police in this regard.

DCP (Central) Sanjay Bhatia said that the suspects have been identified and special measures are being taken for safety of the doctors.

The incident happened around 10pm in the ward number 5A where Mohammad Arif, the main suspect, and a few other patients were admitted. An initial probe revealed that an argument had broken out between Arif and some hospital staff members over serving of food. When the female doctors tried to resolve the matter, Arif and some of the other patients got into a heated argument with them. “The group of patients misbehaved with the doctors and also heckled them. The doctors had to lock themselves up in their duty room,” said a hospital staff.

The patients then allegedly tried to break open the door of the quarantine ward to flee. The resident doctors, in their complaint, claimed that the security guards were informed about the ruckus, but they refused to enter the quarantine ward since they did not have PPE suits. The doctors had to lend them their own PPE suits after which the guards entered the ward and controlled the situation.

On Wednesday morning, the resident doctors’ association approached the hospital management, seeking registration of an institutional FIR against the patients and transport facility for the doctors. Later, the junior doctors demanded police protection through the day.


