Goa: Covid hospital receiving more patients with comorbidities
2020-06-02
PANAJI: The Covid-19 hospital has been receiving more high-risk patients with comorbidities over the past few days. 

On Sunday morning a woman diagnosed with heart failure was admitted. She had returned to Goa from Aurangabad by road with her family. 

Diagnosed with the condition around eight months ago, she was unstable when she was brought in, leaving the doctors at the Covid-19 hospital worried. Her condition is said to have improved by evening. With the woman uncertain about her age, doctors have estimated her to be in her late 50s.

Another patient admitted last week was a male from Vengurla with cancer of the oral cavity who also had diabetes and blood pressure. He was asymptomatic when brought in. He will be sent for radiation therapy only after he turns Covid-19 negative. 

A 13-year-old boy, who travelled by train from Maharashtra, is now the youngest patient in the adult ward. The relatives he travelled with are all negative. 

The youngest patient in the hospital continues to be a four-month-old infant whose mother is still negative. When the baby girl’s swab sample was taken again for her discharge last week, she tested positive. She continues to be in the paediatric ward of the hospital with her mother breastfeeding her. Doctors said the baby cannot be made to gargle with chlorhexidine — a very effective treatment — like other patients in the hospital, and as a result the virus continues to remain in her throat. 

The paediatric ward also has a mother who tested positive along with her five-year-old son. The boy’s father has also been admitted. 

The condition of the pregnant woman, who came in with a high fever and other symptoms, has improved, doctors said. An antenatal ultrasound conducted indicated the foetus was doing well. The woman’s husband, who also tested positive and was admitted along with her, has now tested negative. 

There are currently three families and one couple in the hospital, parents and their five-year-old son, parents and one daughter, and another set of parents with two daughters, besides one couple. Last week, a mother with her three sons aged 3, 6 and 11, who travelled to Goa by train and all tested positive, have recovered and were discharged. 


