Covid-19: PM urges Saarc nations to join forces; members welcome move, Pak mum
2020-03-14
NEW DELHI: As the world battles the coronavirus pandemic, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday launched a diplomatic initiative by inviting all SAARC nations to jointly combat the global health crisis.


In a tweet that created a huge buzz through South Asia, Modi said, “I would like to propose that the leadership of SAARC nations chalk out a strong strategy to fight Coronavirus. We could discuss, via video conferencing, ways to keep our citizens healthy. Together, we can set an example to the world, and contribute to a healthier planet.”

 
I would like to propose that the leadership of SAARC nations chalk out a strong strategy to fight Coronavirus.  We… https://t.co/PwPT5K7G8c— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1584085672000 

Sources said, the video conference, would be set up in the next few days.

Modi’s invoking of SAARC was itself significant as in the past three years, the government has consistently overlooked SAARC, even promoting other regional arrangements like BIMSTEC. No SAARC summit has been held since November, 2014 in Kathmandu. India refused to participate in the 2016 summit in Islamabad after the Uri terror attack. No summit happened in 2018 either.

The PM’s invitation was accepted by all SAARC nations, except Pakistan which had not responded till late Friday evening. Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa responded in a tweet: “Thank you for the great initiative Shri @narendramodi- #LKA is ready to join the discussion & share our learnings & best practices and to learn from other #SAARC members. Let’s unite in solidarity during these trying times and keep our citizens safe.”

 
Thank you for the great initiative Shri @narendramodi - #LKA is ready to join the discussion & share our learnings… https://t.co/XpVnPRvzbq— Gotabaya Rajapaksa (@GotabayaR) 1584091452000 

The reason for the Indian outreach is perhaps the extrenely porous borders which could undermine efforts of one country by flow of people and goods. Wagah and Attari borders with Pakistan are open as also border 
haats with Bangladesh in Meghalaya. So, it makes sense for all countries of the region to coordinate their actions and responses, as one official said, “contain and control” should be the mainstay during the crisis.

President of the Maldives Ibrahim Mohamed “Ibu” Solih said, “Thank you PM @narendramodi for taking the initiative on this important endeavor. Covid 19 requires collective effort to defeat it. Maldives welcomes this proposal and would fully support such a regional effort.”

 
Thank you PM @narendramodi for taking the initiative on this important endeavor. Covid 19 requires collective effor… https://t.co/zMNjzLESuf— Ibrahim Mohamed Solih (@ibusolih) 1584092466000 

Nepal’s Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli said,“I welcome the idea advanced by Prime Minister Modiji @narendramodi for chalking out a strong strategy by the leadership of the SAARC nations to fight Coronavirus. My government is ready to work closely with SAARC member-states to protect our citizens from this deadly disease.”

In his response, Bhutan PM Lotay Tshering said, “This is what we call leadership. As members of this region, we must come together in such times. Smaller economies are hit harder, so we must coordinate. With your leadership, I have no doubt we will see immediate and impactful outcome. Looking forward to the video conference.”

By evening, governments of Afghanistan and Bangladesh had also accepted the invitation. Bangladesh’s junior foreign minister Shahriar Alam tweeted, “HPM Sheikh Hasina welcomes the proposal and look forward to a constructive dialogue with @narendramodi @ibusolih @PM_Nepal @PMBhutan @GotabayaR n others HOSs/HOGs who already consented to discuss way forward at this testing times for the region and the world.”

Modi’s new outreach raised hopes for revival of SAARC. However, sources said the potential collaboration would be under the regional rubric and this would not be extended to other areas. India has refused to be part of SAARC as long as Pakistan engages in cross-border terrorism. 


More on Covid-19

 
  Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
  52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
  Helpline numbers for states and UTs
  Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
  How to stay safe
  How to quarantine yourself at home
 

