Covid-19 lockdown puts gaushalas in a fix as fodder stock depleting
2020-04-04
NAGPUR: When every activity to fight the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) is moving around humans, one of the areas that needs attention are the gaushalas (cow shelters) on whom acute fodder crisis threat looms large.


Stock of fodder is drying up at several protective shelters for cows in the city leading to appeals for donations to feed the cattle by procuring vegetables from markets. The prime reason for the crisis is restrictions on transportation.

Mahendra Kataria, president of Ujjwal Gorakshan Trust, Bahadura on Umred Road, said, “Due to the lockdown, there is drop in number of ‘gaurakshaks’ who were regular visitors to the shelter to feed these homeless cows. The daily donations have also dipped causing problems.”

“Secondly, supply of fodder extracted from gram and rice waste, corn silage etc is not coming because of the curfew. The feed, procured from neighbouring Madhya Pradesh, has stopped. We are relying on unsold vegetables from Kalamna Market now,” said Kataria.

For this, the trust, which is running the shelter for the last 26 years, has also appealed for donations. Due to prompt police action, there is spurt in inflow of seized cattle from butchers, who either steal cows from rural areas or procure smuggled cattle from Chhattisgarh and MP, he said.

“Our daily feeding expenses for 500 cows is Rs7,000. Even if a group of three persons — each donating Rs2,500 — comes forward it would be of great help. Each mini truck of unsold vegetables costs Rs2,500. We have list of brokers who have assured supply of vegetables,” said JP Sharma, trust secretary.

Similar is the plight of a ‘gaushala’ run by Shambu Patel near Pardi on Bhandara Road. “I have 500 stray cattle. With police help, I managed to arrange two truckloads of fodder from Bhandara. One truckload of silage is stranded in Narsinghpur in MP due to lockdown. I’m trying to see the transport is allowed with MP police help,” said Patel.

“We require 13 tonne fodder for 15 days. I have stock for three days and if rules are not relaxed for transport of cattle feed, it will be a matter of survival of the animals that have already got a new lease of life by escaping slaughter,” Patel said.

Gorakshan Sabha in Dhantoli too has fodder stock just for eight days. The sabha has one more cow shelter housing 250 bovines at Pendhri in Pachgaon on Umred Road, but due to waste produce available from its own farm, there is no fodder problem as such.

“At Dhantoli, we have 200 cattle. The animals are mostly fed crop silage, but due to transportation restrictions the material is not available. We procure fodder from Surat, Hyderabad and Indore. Due to the lockdown, we too are relying on vegetables now, though feeding only vegetables may cause dehydradation. The police should allow movement of trucks carrying fodder,” said Mohan Kolvatkar of Gorakshan Sabha.

The national secretary of Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) Ashok Dalmia admits main problem is regarding transportation of essential commodities. Police are restricting movement of loaded trucks and also stopping empty trucks going for loading of essential commodities.

“Unless empty trucks reach the factory or godown, how the movement of goods will start? This issue must be sorted out to ensure availability of essential commodities. Many trucks carrying commodities are stranded on inter-state borders. They must be allowed to move and no empty trucks should be restricted at borders,” said Dalmia.

