Covid-19 claims five lives in Meerut & Agra
2020-06-10
Agra/Meerut/Bareilly: At least three persons died in Meerut while two in Agra due to Covid-19 by Tuesday evening. The two deaths of Agra were reported from the city's SN Medical College, taking the number of dead in the city due to the contagious disease to 53. According to the health department, the two city residents died due to other health complications aggravated by the Covid-19.While at least 10 fresh Covid-19 positive cases surfaced in Agra by Tuesday evening, taking the district tally to 990. The new cases included a ward boy of SN Medical College and three patients of severe acute respiratory illness. Out of the 990 cases reported in the district, 83.80% have been declared cured and discharged. There are 112 active Covid-19 cases in the district.And, at least five persons tested positive in Meerut on Tuesday. The tally reached 537 (including one found in Kanpur).Dr Vishwas Chaudhary, Meerut’s district surveillance officer, said, “At least five cases tested positive in Meerut on Tuesday. Meanwhile, three people died here.” In Bijnor, five more persons tested positive for Covid-19 taking tally to 168. Out of them, 88 are active cases.Meanwhile, three fresh cases surfaced in Bareilly.Bareilly’s district surveillance officer (DSO) Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “Three persons, who are undergoing treatment at a private medical college, were tested positive for Covid-19. Of them, two women patients are residents of Bareilly’s Bas Mandi and Nawabganj while third, a man, lived in Kasganj.” With this, tally in Bareilly rose to 74, including 34 active cases.10 cases surfaced in Pilibhit. Among them, the youngest is 12-year-old while the oldest is 48 years.Additional chief medical officer Dr CM Chaturvedi said, “Of the 10 infected people, four belong to Barha village and two to Jiraunia village under Lalaurikhera block. Among others, one each is a resident of Dang village under Amaria block, Itoria and Raypur villages under Puranpur and Nand Puva village under Bilsanda block.”With this, the tally of novel corona infected persons has gone up to 66 here with 21 active cases.