Covid-19 scare: Anti-encroachment drive spike prices of vegetables in Nagpur
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: Even though supply of vegetables continued from smaller towns in the district and adjoining states, prices of most vegetables have shot up in retail markets due to the lockdown in the wake of coronavirus outbreak. 


Due to poor demand, wholesale fruit market in Kalamna will not operate till March 31.

“There is dearth of supply of vegetables in Nagpur city. Apart from Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Telangana, vegetables from Saoner, Ramtek, Hingna, Umred, Khapa, Patansawangi, Kalmeshwar, Katol etc are being transported to the city’s wholesale market in Kalamna,” agriculture produce market committee president Nandkishore Gour told TOI.

“Prices of perishables have increased as roadside vendors have been stopped from selling vegetables,” admitted a vendor from Gokulpeth Market, Shriram Wagle. 

Most vegetables including potatoes, onions, tomatoes etc are being sold at double the price in retail as compared to wholesale market. 

TOI visited a couple of markets and found potatoes, onions, tomatoes were being sold at Rs30, Rs40 and Rs20 a kg, respectively, at retail markets, while the wholesale rate is almost half.

Vegetable prices, in fact, have risen significantly during the last couple of days. Prices of bitter gourd, for example, rose from Rs30 a kg to Rs80 in the retail market. Cabbage and cauliflower prices have jumped by Rs15 and both vegetables are being sold at Rs30 a kg.

Gour blamed the skyrocketing of vegetables prices in the city markets to the municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe’s anti-encroachment drive. The NMC is not allowing weekly vegetable markets and roadside vendors across the city, so the prices of vegetables in dedicated markets like Itwari, Mangalwari and Gokulpeth have increased manifold. 

Even today, TOI spotted NMC’s Dharampeth zone staffers along with nuisance detection squad removing vegetable vendors from roads and footpaths in Gokulpeth area. Similar action was also initiated in Sitabuldi area. “A delegation of APMC members will meet guardian minister Nitin Raut urging him to allow some time during the day to roadside vegetable vendors to do business,” he said. 

To a query, he said the winter harvest, which came a month late due to delay in planting, is going in full swing currently. With good rainfall last year and few spells of rains in the recent past, harvesting of the winter crop has been extended by a month. So supply of vegetables from local markets is ample, said Gour. “Due to coronavirus scare, we have restricted functioning of the Kalamna Market. Now, it will remain open from 4am to 12 noon,” he said.

Meanwhile, demand of fruits has fallen drastically by over 50%, said wholesale dealer Rajesh Chhabrani from Kalamna Market. The wholesale market used to witness 400 to 450 truckloads of fruits from various destinations. “With poor demand, the number of vehicles supplying fruits had reduced to 250 last week. Today, only 20 vehicles with oranges arrived,” said Chhabrani. 

“In this situation, we have decided to keep the fruit section on the APMC premises shut from March 24 to March 31. Today, we have communicated to the fruit growers and suppliers not to visit the market from Tuesday,” he said. 



