Covid-19 like other respiratory diseases, don’t panic: Health director
2020-06-08
Panaji: As malls and restaurants get set to open up for business, health authorities urged citizens not to panic because of the rising number of Covid-19 cases, likening the novel coronavirus to “any other respiratory disease” prevalent in Goa.

Director of health services Dr Jose D’Sa said that if every person took adequate precautions, residents had “nothing to panic” about, and could go about their daily lives. However, he stressed that individuals in high-risk categories, like elderly persons, children, those with co-morbidities or pregnant women need to take extra precautions.

“Covid-19 is just like any other respiratory disease,” he said. “Just like Influenza or H1N1, Covid-19 is also a respiratory disease, a viral disease, and therefore there is nothing to panic about.” He was speaking at the daily press briefing by the health secretary and revenue secretary.

D’Sa said that a lot of fear is being generated in the state due to the rise in cases. “If you look at other communicable diseases, there are so many patients presenting themselves everyday,” he said. “Look at the statistics, and you will see that the number of cases of these other diseases is also high. That is why don’t panic, don’t get scared.” 

He also said that most Covid-19 patients in Goa did not exhibit any of the serious symptoms associated with the disease, and were thus treated with basic medicines. “Only symptomatic patients need special attention,” he said. “This is a self-limiting disease, and no special treatment was given to patients, they all got cured.” 

He also said that the department was putting in place adequate safeguards to prevent the spread of the virus to other parts of the state.

From Monday, restaurants and malls have been permitted to open after being shut for more than two months. Malls and restaurants will have to adhere to guidelines issued by the Food and Drugs Administration and health department.


