Covid-19 concerns eat into revenue of RTC’s Thiruvananthapuram depots
2020-03-19
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: City-based depots of KSRTC incur an average daily loss of more than Rs 10 lakh as more and more people stay indoors amid rising concerns over spread of Covid-19. 

The average daily collection of the City depot of KSRTC at East Fort this week (till Wednesday) was Rs 5.69 lakh. The figure was Rs 9.5 lakh two weeks ago. The City depot with 93 schedules now operates only 60 schedules daily.

“Our daily fare collection never went below Rs 9 lakh in recent past, but nowadays the collection is not crossing Rs 6 lakh. There are only a few people in bus stops and on roads. On Mondays, our average revenue was around Rs 11 lakh which was reduced to Rs 5.7 lakh this week,” said Jacob Sam Lopez, assistant transport officer, City depot.

 “As there was shortage of masks, I had to arrange handkerchiefs for the bus crew,” added Lopez. According to officials the decline in revenue was noted after March 10.

A daily loss of Rs 3 lakh was noted at Pappanamcode depot. The depot used to receive revenue of around Rs 9.5 lakh on a daily basis. The depot that used to operate 92 schedules now operates only 75 schedules.

“The bus services to secretariat and Medical College are operated as per schedule. The city fast services, which used to receive an average collection of Rs 10,000 to 15,000 do not get even Rs 5,000 now. The bus crew are directed to operate services as per demand. All the buses are cleaned with disinfectant every day to ensure safety of passengers as well as drivers and conductors,” said Saiju K G, assistant transport officer, Pappanamcode unit.

The situation is no different at Vikas Bhavan unit of KSRTC, where the collection fell to Rs 4 lakh. Out of the 74 schedules, the unit now operates only 50 schedules daily.

“The depot had a daily collection of around Rs 7 lakh. There are not many people on road. After the Attukal Pongala festival, there are only few passengers travelling in buses. The services to main routes such as Kazhakkoottam, Medical College and Pothencode are operated as per schedule,” said Ajikumar V S, district transport officer, Vikas Bhavan.

An officer at Peroorkada unit said that there has been 40% decrease in passengers after Covid-19 cases were reported in the district. 

The unit, which used to receive revenue of around Rs 7 lakh on a daily basis, now gets only around Rs 4.5lakh.


