Covid proves fatal to very elderly in state, mortality rate above 18%
2020-06-04
Jaipur: The highest mortality rate in the state has been reported among the very elderly above 76 years of age, which stood at 18.6%. Senior citizens in the age group of 61-75 years too have a high mortality rate of 11.7%. Age has emerged as a major factor in Covid-19 deaths in the state. The data of 203 deaths till Wednesday morning shows that the highest mortality rate has been reported among the most elderly and the lowest in the age group of 5-15 years.

Even among children, the mortality rate is slightly higher at 1.6% in comparison to the young population, which is below 1%.

The health department is monitoring deaths by dividing the population into seven different age groups of 0-5 years, 6-15 years, 16-30 years, 31-45 years, 46-60 years, 61-75 years and 76-plus. The data of deaths indicate that the elderly population is the most vulnerable group and needs to be protected against Covid.

“We have found that the 76-plus age group has the highest mortality rate,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary. Officials pointed out that co-morbidities such as diabetes, hypertension and other chronic diseases are linked with age. So, an elderly person is at higher risk of death due to co-morbidities. An SMS Hospital official said that a majority of the people who died in the hospital had co-morbidities. A health department report showed that 70% of the people who died had suffered from other diseases.

According to the report issued by the Centre on Tuesday, the mortality rate in the state is 2.2%. “Identifying potential high risk and vulnerable persons is key to saving lives in the Covid-19 pandemic. Mission Life Saving (LISA) is helping us in early and timely detection of cases and helping us to prevent mortality. This is how the state has managed to keep the case fatality rate low compared to the national average,” said Singh. Under LISA, the health department is monitoring health of elderly population and vulnerable group to detect Covid early for timely treatment.

People in the age group of 6-45 years are the safest lot with a mortality rate of below 1%.

“In elderly patients, immunity is compromised. It affects oxy-haemoglobin curve of body system. So, less oxygenated blood is delivered to cell of multiple organs of body. This indirectly impacts body metabolism, resulting in decreased or no activity of body cell. This will affect body functions to combat diseases, particularly viruses,” said Dr Narendra Khippal, senior professor, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, SMS Medical College.

Doctors suggest elderly population to take precautions. “The elderly population should keep monitoring their sugar level. They should not go out of their houses and isolate themselves in houses. Mild exercises should be done regularly. They should take protein-rich diet for developing antibodies. Also, they should increase Vitamin C intake. There are more chances of severe infection in elderly population in comparison to younger population. After a certain age, the immunity to fight against diseases starts reducing,” said Prakash Keswani, senior professor (medicine), SMS Hospital.


