Covid-19: IRDAI gives 30 more days to pay life insurance premium
2020-04-05
BENGALURU: IRDAI has given 30 extra days for life insurance policy holders to pay their premium - if it was due in March and April 2020.


On March 23, IRDAI had already given a 30-day grace period for policyholders whose premiums falls due in March. Now with this notice, the grace period extends to 60 days for those who had been liable to pay in March. 

In another far-fetching move, where holders of ULIPs would be worried about the value of their funds given the "Black Swan moment," tanking Indian stock markets, the regulator has now given relief. 

ULIP poliyholders, whose policies come to maturity in March, April or May, will now have the option to postpone closure/maturity of the policy for upto 5 years. "See, the markets have been performing badly. So its possible the net asset value (NAV) of the ULIP might have gone down considerably. And policyholders might be getting a raw deal - if their policies are maturing in this time period and they are given a lump sum settlement now. So IRDAI, to protect policyholders, has given them the option to keep their money with the insurer if they so choose to - till they feel it will be advantageous for them to withdraw the fund amount," said an IRDAI official.



More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 
IRDAI said “Where unit linked policies mature and fund value is to be paid in lumpsum, life insurers may offer settlement options in accordance with Regulation 25 of IRDA (Linked Insurance Products) Regulations, 2013. This one-time option is regardless of whether such option exists or not in the specific product."

The regulator has also instructed life insurers to explain clearly to policyholders - what happens if they withdraw immediately or withdraw later. "Life insurers have to explain clearly the possible downside risk of continued fluctuation of fund value based on daily NAV and clear consent has to be obtained from the policyholder. This is allowed for unit linked policies maturing up to 31st May 2020,” said the regulator.

