Cradle of Tablighi Jamaat, divided Kandhla in UP scrambles for answers
2020-04-06
Meerut: Some 80 km north of Delhi, Kandhla, a small town in UP which till now has escaped the novel coronavirus, is now in the sudden glare that the Islamic “reformist” movement born on its soil has brought. 

In Shamli district, with just over 50,000 residents, Kandhla is looking for answers ever since followers of the Tablighi Jamaat congregated in large numbers in Delhi sometime in mid-March amid the national lockdown. 

Many, in muted voices, blame Jamaat chief Muhammad Saad, who has had several run-ins with Darul Uloom Deoband, the country’s largest Islamic seminary and the parent organisation of the Tablighis, for bringing a "bad name" to Kandhla. In 2017, the face-off reached a point where the seminary disowned the organisation and asked all clerics to snap the ties with it.

“It happened because of Maulana Saad’s interpretation of the holy book,” a cleric told TOI on Saturday. Sources said the Jamaat's ties with Deoband gradually soured "irrevocably". 

Even those who supported the functioning of the Jamaat say the gathering in Delhi should not have been held. “Saad should have called off the events and evacuated all the people from Nizamuddin’s Markaz. A similar event which was to take place in Pakistan during the same period was cancelled by Jamaat. Then why didn’t they do it in Delhi?” asked Mohammad Saleem, assistant professor at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, and an expert in Islamic studies. He has ties in Kandhla.

There were some, though, who said the issue was being "communalised" and Jamaat vilified. “Several religious gatherings were going on in the country at the same time. Even Parliament session was on till March 23. Some people are trying to discredit an organisation that has been there for the last 90 years and never ever violated any law,” said a cleric associated with the Jamaat.

People in Kandhla described Saad as a man of few words. According to Kandhla-based cleric Maulana Rashid, “The first ever Tablighi Jamaat was held in Kandhla in 1927 by a local resident Muhammad Ilyas al-Kandhlawi. He was the great grandfather of the current head Maulana Saad and started a reformatory movement that focused on ensuring the return of Muslims to practise Islam identical in the way it was observed at the time of Prophet Muhammad. Kandhla is actually the cradle of Tablighi Jamaat. Later, the movement spread far and wide, to 200 countries.”

Rashid added, “Maulana Saad doesn't speak much. He comes to his ancestral home only once in two years. And his visit is not publicised as he avoids meeting people except during Jamaat events.” 


