Coronavirus: Create quarantine zone in JNU in case of emergencies, say students & teachers
2020-03-15
NEW DELHI: A day after JNU announced suspension of classes due to the novel coronavirus scare, the students’ and teachers’ associations have suggested that the administration should create a quarantine zone in a building on the campus in case of a medical emergency. JNU Students’ Union (JNUSU) has also asked for an improvement in the sanitation facilities on the campus.


On Saturday, JNUSU, in its statement said, while classes were shut till March 31 and it understood the importance of precautions, “more needs to be done to strengthen the preparedness rather than simply suspending academics. Since it is advisable that travel be restricted, it will be better if a mechanism is provided for residents to help follow precaution.”


Coronavirus outbreak live coverage

The students’ body objected to the state of cleanliness, hygiene and sanitation and said, “Since the mess facilities continue to be open for the students, it is better the issue of cleanliness drives in all areas be considered.”

JNUSU also called for the varsity’s health centre to be prepared to provide basic facilities of quarantine and medical care, “starting with ensuring medicals kits for detection of the virus. The administration must provide a proper quarantine zone by repurposing existing housing structures that are vacant and secluded as a quarantine zone. It must also ensure safety of all the residents, including the sanitation workers and the mess staff.”

The JNU Teachers’ Association (JNUTA) added that there needed to be specific plans in place to ensure the university does all that was feasible to minimise the chances of transmission of the virus. “The administration must put in place special measures to improve the sanitation levels in the hostels, particularly in areas where large congregations of students and staff are likely, ensure availability of running water, soap and sanitisers everywhere on the campus. It should also make use of the expertise available in the university, such as the Centre for Social Medicine and Community Health, to formulate a comprehensive plan,” JNUTA said in its statement.


