Create awareness on novel Coronavirus: Expert team
2020-01-29
HYDERABAD: The three-member expert team from New Delhi, which visited the state-run Fever Hospital on Tuesday to inspect the preparedness to deal with a possible outbreak of the Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV), made suggestions to improve awareness about the virus among hospital staff, particularly the ones likely to deal with nCoV patients in case of an outbreak. 


The team, including Dr Shubha Garg, Dr Anitha Varma and professor Ajay Chauhan, along with director of Airport Health Organisation Hyderabad, Dr Anuradha Meduju, inspected the 40-bed isolation facility set up for patients with symptoms of Novel Coronavirus, hospital plan and the virology laboratory. 

The team interacted with hospital staff and took notes on how samples were being taken, availability and use of safety gear and sample sending procedure among others. The team also spoke to patients from the city, who were at the isolation ward on Tuesday. 

“While the expert team consisting of a general medicine expert, a microbiologist and an epidemiologist was largely satisfied with the arrangements here, they also made some suggestions,” said Dr K Shankar, superintendent Fever Hospital. 

“The suggestions included improving awareness among the staff in the isolation ward and emergency departments (on handling outbreaks) as they found a few staff members to be unaware of the issue. We will educated them as per the suggestion. Proper maintenance of charts and special training for washing and disposing area have been suggested. After a meeting with the state authorities, we will rectify these problems as per the directions of the government.” 

 Dr Meduju said that two review meetings were held in Hyderabad, which discussed end-to-end preparedness for management of 2019-nCoV at the airport, thermal screening process, transportation of patients and the hospital facility. One meeting was with the state health authorities (including health secretary Shanti Kumari), and another at Fever Hospital to understand the state’s preparedness in dealing with an nCoV outbreak. 


