Cremation of second Covid-19 victim held amid opposition in Dakshina Kannada
2020-04-25
MANGALURU: The funeral of a 75-year-old woman, who died of Covid-19, was held amid opposition from local people in Dakshina Kannada district on Friday. The funeral was held as per the protocol for Covid-19 deaths, police said.

The woman, identified as the mother-in-law of the district’s first victim, was declared dead at Wenlock District Hospital on Thursday. 

With fear raging that Covid-19 could spread to those handling bodies, at least four crematoriums denied permission to conduct the last rites. The district administration had first decided to conduct the woman’s last rites at Pachanady crematorium, but after the news spread, locals from neighbouring Kudupu, Panchanady and Vamajoor raised objection over virus scare.

In a video that has gone viral, Mangaluru city north MLA Dr Bhsarath Shetty was seen expressing solidarity with the locals as the administration had failed to inform him or the local corporator about the decision to conduct the funeral at Pachanady crematorium. 

“Cremation with fire is an accepted method to dispose of the body of a patient with COVID19 +ve case. However, thousands of people including women gathered in Pachhanady who were in Panic with rumours & reluctant to move. In order to protect law & order, we had to change plans (Sic),” he tweeted later. 

Later, the body was taken to Bantwal where the locals again opposed the move and MLA Rajesh Naik U reportedly offered space at Oddoor Farms in Ganjimutt for the funeral. “The administration reached out to me around 11pm. I offered space at my farm for cremation. I also asked the administration to give me 30-minutes prior notice to make all arrangements. But, by then the administration had decided to conduct the cremation at Kaikunje. The entire process was completed by 3am. There is no harm in conducting the cremation as long as the guidelines are followed,” he said. 

Gayathri Nayak, deputy director, district urban development cell, said: “There is widespread misconception and fear regarding the protocol for Covid-19 deaths. The administration will take measures and spread awareness on it.” 

The district has so far reported two Covid-19 deaths. The funeral of the first victim, who died on April 19, was conducted at the Boloor crematorium amid opposition from the locals.

Meanwhile, referring to the controversy, minister S Suresh Kumar said the disease must not lead to stigma. “It’s inhuman to deny space for the cremation of a patient who has expired. Those who denied may have had lack of awareness. I request all not to forget humanity,” he said. 


Khader slams Shetty for supporting protesters

Mangaluru: Manglauru MLA U T Khader on Friday slammed Mangaluru city north MLA Dr Y Bharath Shetty for opposing the cremation of district’s second Covid-19 victim at Pachanady crematorium.

“It’s a blot on civilised society. I wonder as to how an MLA could lead the people to protest against the cremation. At times like this, humanity is very important. I condemn the stand taken by MLA Bharath Shetty. Meanwhile, I appreciate the humane gesture of Bantwal MLA Rajesh Naik U, who offered space for the funeral to be conducted at his Oddoor Farms in Ganjimutt,” Khader said.


