Cremation of Delhi's first coronavirus victim a challenge too
2020-03-15
NEW DELHI: The last rites of Delhi’s first novel coronavirus-related victim were carried out on Saturday, but not before a minor controversy over the lack of clarity on the procedures for such cases. The management of Nigambodh Ghat crematorium was reluctant to allow the cremation of the body until municipal health officials arrived. The family of the 68-year-old from Janakpuri, however, had to wait for several hours before the body could be consigned to the flames in the CNG facility there.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Sanjeev Arora, the nephew of the virus victim, told TOI that the family was informed about her death on Friday night. “Her son is also under treatment for Covid-19 at Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, so we asked the hospital authorities about how to handle the cremation but they were clueless. They only asked us to arrange an ambulance to take the body from the mortuary.”

The body was kept in the ambulance on the hospital premises under guard through the night. Around 8:30am on Saturday, the family finished the paperwork and were asked to take the body to Nigambodh. Four ward boys in protective gear were sent with the family.

“We reached Nigambodh Ghat around 10:30am and were waiting for the slip to cremate our aunt’s body in the CNG facility when Suman Gupta, the chief coordinator of the crematorium, arrived to tell us cremation was not possible there. He asked us to take the body to the Lodhi crematorium,” related Arora.

The family again contacted the Delhi health minister’s office, having done so on Friday too. “The deputy health officer of North Delhi Municipal Corporation and doctors from RML reached the cremation ground and we finally carried out the rites at 1pm,” added Arora.

Varsha Joshi, commissioner of north corporation, said that in cases like these, electric or CNG crematoria were advised for their contained and high-temperature incineration. “We advised the family to go to the electric facility at Lodhi crematorium, but they preferred Nigambodh Ghat, so the CNG unit was the only option,” remarked Joshi.

Avdhesh Sharma, supervisor at Nigambodh, said, “We immediately allowed the last rites once the municipal health officials came.” He added that the delay was caused by the effort to ensure the standard operating procedure for disposal of highly infectious diseases was followed properly.

Gupta pleaded that it was the first coronavirus death in the city and “we did not know what had to be done”. However, a corporation health official said the Union health ministry had already issued instructions on coronavirus-related deaths. “Cremations can take place anywhere, preferably an electric facility, but protocol needs to be followed. People handling the body must wear protective suits, gloves and polysheet shoes. After the cremation, they have to be sprayed with disinfectants and all personal protection equipment have to be autoclaved,” he elaborated.

Dr Sudhir Gupta, professor and head of forensic sciences at AIIMS, assured there was nothing worrisome about the cremation of an infected body by whatever means. However, in case of a burial, the upper portion of the grave had to be plastered over.

