Criminal cases against those who are obstructing to Covid victims’ last rites: Jagan
2020-05-01
Amaravati: Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Thursday said that criminal cases will be booked against those obstructing the performance of final rites of Covid-19 victims.

The CM said that it was inhuman to oppose the final rites of the deceased. He expressed serious displeasure at locals creating ruckus when the officials took the body of a Covid-19 victim to the burial ground in Kurnool district.

“We should not allow such things to happen. Firmly deal with such people by slapping criminal cases,” chief minister directed the officials on Thursday.

Jagan reviewed the Covid-19 containment measures with the officials at the CM’s camp office. Referring to the Kurnool district incident, the chief minister said people should not treat Covid-19 patients as untouchables. He said people should realise they may too face such a situation. “I have been telling this for the past few days that no one should discriminate against Covid-19 patients and keep them away as untouchables. The virus could infect anyone including me. Discriminating and disrespecting the dead is more inhumane,” said the chief minister.

He asked DGP Gautam Sawang to initiate criminal cases against the protestors as per the guidelines issued by the Centre under the Epidemic Act.

He appealed to people to allow the performance of final rites with dignity. The CM said that the people should keep in mind that Covid-19 is a treatable disease as thousands of people were getting discharged from hospitals after recovering completely.

“Many people are getting discharged from hospitals in our state. They are going home safely because they have recovered. Why should people discriminate against others?” asked the CM.

Chief secretary Nilam Sawhney and special CS (health) Jawahar Reddy told the chief minister that 80 clusters have been designated as very active and that there are 64 active and 66 dormant clusters in the state. They said that they were implementing micro-level action plan to contain the disease in Kurnool, Guntur and Vijayawada cities and identifying vulnerable cases in advance and screening them for other ailments to reduce fatalities. They said discharge rate would increase in the next few days as many of the positive patients were on their way to recovery.


