Crime rate dips amid coronavirus scare in Bhopal
2020-03-27
Bhopal: The number of serious offences reported in the state capital has come down drastically during the ongoing lockdown amid the coronavirus scare. Not a single case of loot, murder, attempt to murder, rape and other serious crimes were reported in the past four days. House break-ins and vehicle thefts have also been negligible. Senior city cops maintained that the fall in crime rate was a result of continuous monitoring and checking done by police personnel.

Earlier, around 8-10 cases of serious offences were reported at various police stations in the city on an average daily. Every day, on an average around half a dozen vehicle theft cases were also reported. On an average, two molestation and a rape case were also reported daily before the lockdown.

Ever since the lockdown was enforced from Sunday, only three vehicle theft cases and two house break-ins were reported. A considerable fall was also registered in crimes against women and only one molestation case has been reported during the last four days.

More than 30 cases were registered in the city against people violating the lockdown order including one against a Covid-19 suspect, who had returned from Dubai three days back and was found roaming on his scooter at Board Office Square police check point. Ten cases against lockdown violators were registered on Thursday. Although, a few assault cases were reported across the city.

ASP (crime branch) Nishchal Jharia said that enhanced police movement and curfew has led to a steep fall in the crime rate. “Even the miscreants are worried about their health and it seems and they are not venturing out”, he said.

ASP Zone-1 Rajat Saklecha said that cops have been maintaining constant vigil at every nook and corner of the city to enforce the lockdown. Security check points have been set up at all roads on the city outskirts to check movements. Also, 17 internal check points have been set up across the city to keep a check on people venturing out without any valid reason.

Apart from them, 27 fixed picket points have been set up under the jurisdiction of various city police station areas. As many as 19 check points have been set up by traffic police at major city crossings. Senior officers were regularly patrolling the areas and monitoring security.

SP (Police Headquarters) Dharamveer Singh Yadav said that apart from setting up check points, two police patrol vehicles at each police station level were directed to patrol in their respective areas and spread awareness on precautions to be taken to avoid the spread of coronavirus. Violators of prohibitory orders are being booked under relevant sections of the IPC and Motor Vehicles Act.


