Crimes rise as lockdown curbs eased
2020-06-13
Kolhapur: The crime rate in Kolhapur district has doubled after the lockdown norms have been eased as 203 major and minor crime cases were reported in April while May witnessed 414 crime cases.

According to the statistics available with the district police, crimes like causing injury and murder have increased. Cases of house break-in, which had become a big problem for the police, has come down as most of the people have returned home.

In April, stringent restrictions were in force due to the lockdown. Movements were restricted and heavy police security was there all over the district, officials said. 

Police officials attribute fall and rise of crime cases in April and May respectively to the nationwide lockdown. One murder was reported in April while May saw six murders. There were three attempted murder cases in April as against 15 in May.

 Three thefts and 23 house break-ins took place in April and 13 house break-in cases in May. Officials said that majority of occupants, where house break-ins took place, were locked as they had shifted to some other places. 

 April and May witnessed five and eight cases of kidnapping respectively. Three dacoity cases were reposted in April while six cases took place in May, according to the data collected by Kolhapur police. 

As many as 12 cases of outraging modesty was witnessed in April as against 26 cases in May. Eight cases of domestic violence were registered in April while 26 cases were reported in May. 

Police recorded 58 cases of causing injuries in April while 114 such cases were recorded in May. 18 cases of crowding and assault took place in April while 51 cases were reported in May. 

Kolhapur district saw six road accident in April but the number increased in May when restrictions were partially lifted. As many as 42 accidents took place in May, leading to 13 casualties, officials said. As per the police record, 29 people were injured in the accidents in May. 


