Crisis looms over College Street as lockdown puts lakhs of books at risk
2020-04-20
“It’ll take termites just a week to reduce our book stocks into a pile of mud,” says the owner of a small bookshop on College Street -- Kolkata’s famous boi para, which is a haven for millions of bibliophiles. Avik Bandyopadhyay of Dhyanbindu has stocks worth Rs 10 lakh lying unattended at his outlet and a nearby storeroom since Janata Curfew. “Not just books, we have a large stock of imported sheets of paper. We doubt if anything will be in usable condition once we are able to open the shop,” says Avik, who lives in Baranagar and doesn’t have a single staff living close to the store. 

Avik’s fear is shared by owners of thousands of small, medium and big bookstores operating on the 1.5 km-long stretch of College Street and surrounding areas that now wears a deserted look with piles of books unattended since the lockdown started. Asim Das of Suprakash Boighor had to leave stocks worth more than Rs 5 lakh at his small shack on the pavement adjacent to College Square before hurriedly packing up. “The area is rodent-infested. There are packs of rats in College Square. If they attack the books, we’ll be left with nothing,” says Asim, who last opened his shop on March 21 before leaving for Nadia. 

Large publishers are at their wits' end too. While some big houses like Patra Bharati and Dey’s have conducted partial pest treatments at their warehouses, most publishers could not get that done. “Our books are at great risk. All the staff members have returned home. Besides, books are stuck in warehouses around the country. Our future is so uncertain,” says Raju Barman of Rupa. 

Many stores regularly get pest controlling done to maintain the books. “Before the lockdown, we’d have someone do it every Saturday. But maintenance has stopped since March 21,” says Sribindu Bhattacharya of Best Books and Jijnasa Publishing House who currently has stocks worth more than `20 lakh. “Besides, we have books worth Rs 30-40 lakh with our binders too,” adds the 74-year-old who has been in this business since the ’60s and has ‘never seen anything like this before’. 

To add to the bookstore owners’ woes, the lockdown has led to a surge in grey market for e-books and not all of them abide by copyright policies. “Readers are downloading whatever they can get their hands on. We too have started our e-book and audio book sections with third parties and the traction has gone up. This lockdown has made us realise how obsessively dependent we have been on physical books,” says Esha Chatterjee of Patra Bharati. 


The perils of unattended books 

In a place like Kolkata, where humidity is high, books need special care. Otherwise, insects including booklice, termites, silverfish and others bore through books and ruin them. Books need fresh air to avoid damp apart from regular dusting and pest or termite control plan. 
 
Tridib Chatterjee, president, Publishers & Booksellers Guild, said, “This is a never-seen-before situation for us. Around 4.5 lakh people are directly or indirectly related to this business. Besides the losses incurred during the market closure, the fear of damage is eating the booksellers. Buildings are old in this area and hence the chances of damp and pest infestation are high. Some big publishers, especially those who live nearby, are treating their stock with pesticides. But many of them live far away. Besides the publishers, there are binders, printers, daily wage-earning transporters and other staff members. We don’t know what will happen to them. We have appealed to the government to look into the matter.” 



