CRPF roped in to help enforce lockdown in Ranchi
2020-04-28
RANCHI: With many people coming out on the streets needlessly amid the rising number of Covid-19 cases in the city, the state government has roped in Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel to enforce the lockdown strictly across the state capital.

Official sources said two companies of the paramilitary force will be deployed at various sensitive areas of the city in the initial phase. The administration will also respond in a calibrated manner and would deploy more CRPF personnel, if needed. 

DGP M V Rao said CRPF was deployed mainly due to shortage of manpower in the state police force and the need to put up checking points at more places in the city. He further said police will take strict action against people breaking laws, misusing social media and spreading rumours. Moreover, people loitering on roads will face strict legal action, the officer said.

Rao said, “I appeal to people to obey the lockdown norms as it is the only way to prevent the spread of coronavirus. If they violate laws, they should not complain of stern measures taken against them.”

In the recent past, several people have reportedly escaped from the Hindpiri locality, the epicentre of Covid-19 outbreak, where police said a strict security cordon has been set up. In the latest incident on April 18, three members of a family from Hindpiri were traced to Bero area in rural Ranchi. Police brought them back on the same day and sent them home after a medical examination. A case was also registered against them in connection with the incident.

Rao, however, said taking CRPF help was not related to people escaping from containment zones. He said, “Incidents of people escaping from containments zones happened earlier. The decision on CRPF was taken recently.”

CRPF inspector general Raj Kumar said even though the paramilitary force has been deployed for law and order duties in the past, it will be an entirely new assignment for them to work during the Covid-19 pandemic.

“We have taken all precautions by providing our personnel with masks and sanitizers. They have been asked to maintain social distancing while on duty. The commandant 133 Battalion has been made the nodal officer in this regard,” Kumar added.


