In view of coronavirus outbreak, Bihar government withdraws orders to attach tax defaulters’ bank accounts
2020-03-24
PATNA: Deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi on Monday said the earlier orders issued to attach the bank accounts of tax defaulters for not clearing dues worth Rs375 crore before GST’s enforcement have been withdrawn. The pending dues pertained to the period before the uniform goods and services tax (GST) regime had come into force in the country, Modi said.


He said this and a few other measures have been taken by the government specially in view of the impact of coronavirus.

In another such development, the government has also withdrawn its notices served to the tax payers regarding the recovery of tax dues amounting to Rs300 crore in relation to the scrutiny, non-filing of tax and failing to regularly comply with the input tax credit (ITC) rules under the GST Act, he added.

Modi told this newspaper that he had also discussed with central revenue secretary R S Pandey the possible steps the Centre could take or should take to give relief to the tax payers under the GST Act.

As it transpired from the discussion, the Centre, in fact, has been discussing the critical situation facing the economy with all the stakeholders, including the state governments. The situation has arisen from the impact of coronavirus on the national economy and, accordingly, the Centre would “soon announce an economic package” to arrest the negative impact on the economy that has suddenly come under accentuated slowdown.

That apart, as to the relief announced by the Bihar government for the tax payers with regard to the non-compliance with the clearance of the twin tax dues worth Rs675 crore overall, Modi said it should come as a major relief for them to let their trading and business activities going in the critical situation.

As to the non-compliance with the payment of tax dues worth Rs375 crore, Modi said it falls in the period before the GST came into force and is related to value added tax (VAT), central sales tax (CST) and entry tax.

The banks concerned had been asked to “attach” their bank account numbers to make them clear the dues. It would have impacted 8,033 tax payers. In pursuance of the same, as many as 4,248 notices were issued, which have now been deferred till further order.

As to the non-compliance with the clearance of dues under the GST rules regarding scrutiny, non-filing of tax returns, and irregular ITC clearances, the tax payers overall were served with 3,785 notices. However, their implementation has now been withdrawn till further order.

