Delhi: CSE charts out post-lockdown plan for clean air
2020-06-06
NEW DELHI: The World Environment Day webinar organised by Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) on Friday brought out that reducing pollution from heavy-duty vehicle, switching to clean vehicles, using clean power and providing green economic stimulus were a few post-lockdown strategies which could help retain clean air and blue skies.

The lockdown enforced due to the Covid-19 pandemic led to a large improvement in the air quality across the country.

Anumita Roy Chowdhury, executive director-research and advocacy, CSE, said, the PM2.5 levels in six mega cities — Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Kolkata — showed a 45-88% drop in the first phase of lockdown, but during Lockdown 4.0, there was a 2-6 time increase in the levels. Similarly, in Delhi-NCR, the PM2.5 levels dropped by 66-79% in the first phase, but saw 4-8 time increase in Lockdown 4.0. 

“One of the top lessons from the lockdown is that such massive scale of intervention is needed to get change in air quality,” she said.

Speaking of CSE’s ongoing analysis of the air quality during the lockdown period, Roy Chowdhury said, “The overall mean speed on roads of Delhi-NCR increased by 15 km/hour. Farm fires did not create the same kind of havoc that they do every year. Daily peak levels of nitrogen dioxide remained flat. We must move immediately to ensure pollution and congestion levels do not go back to ‘normal’.”

The webinar, An environmental agenda for the future, presented a charter of environmental demands to ensure a better, cleaner and more sustainable environment, life and air quality after the lockdown was lifted.

Sunita Narain, director-general, CSE, said the nation needed an intervention at such a massive scale where movement across the country was completely restricted. “All the industry stopped functioning to make our skies blue and our air and lungs clean. It tells us that we need to set down agenda for action that will help us retain the lockdown advantage,” she added 

The novel coronavirus pandemic and the lockdown that followed have disrupted our lives and lifestyles at an unbelievable scale and speed. “We need to implement our action agenda at a similar scale and pace, only then we will be able to breathe easy,” Narain said.


