CSIR soon to start phase three clinical trials for drug against Covid-19
2020-06-10
CHANDIGARH: In the course of the country’s first randomised control trial on an injectable drug for Covid-19, researchers found that the commercial drug used to treat gram negative sepsis, a severe blood infection, is safe. It also lowered the levels of inflammatory proteins responsible for severity in Covid-19. The study group is now moving from phase 2 to phase 3 of clinical trials. 


This is the first published preliminary observational study of the drug for Covid-19 in PGIMER, Chandigarh. Phase 2 of clinical trials for 50 patients is nearing completion at AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Bhopal and PGIMER. Phase 3 will include study of the drug as adjuvant for Covid vaccine (ingredient in a vaccine that makes it work better) for prevention. Tests will also be conducted on those who have recovered from the virus to ascertain if they can be re-infected. 

“This will include 10 to 15 centres across India. We have approval for phase 3 in two sets. We will study 500 patients to see if it works as a prophylactic and if it prevents the asymptomatic from progressing towards the severe form of Covid. We will study the 600 patients who have supposedly recovered from the virus to see if they will be reinfected or not,” said Dr Ram Vishwakarma, director, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, CSIR, Jammu. 

The injectable drug is a non-specific immuno-modulator (regulates immune response during attack of any pathogen) which contains Mycobacterium w—a non pathogenic bacteria which is killed by heat. 

The safety study was conducted on four severely ill patients in PGI to evaluate the drug’s safety in Covid-19. No adverse effect was reported and the breathlessness patients suffered from showed clinical improvement after a week. “The observational study is done before we start with randomised control trials. Now, our dosage study is also nearing completion and we are soon going to submit the report and move on to the next phase,” said Dr Ram. “In another four to six months, we shall complete phase 3 trials. Cuba is also working on Mycobacterium w. We plan to collaborate with them and do a two- country based trial,” he added.

Immuno-modulators are basically regulators of immune response and in a way can prevent excessive activation of immune response. They will help generate an appropriate immune response and help in faster clearance of virus and may even prevent the cytokine storm, which is associated with the progression to severe form of Covid-19. However, few scientists believe that having different mode of action, modulators of immune response may not prevent the infection as the vaccine would. “Besides, immuno-modulators would facilitate the generation of specific immune response by a vaccine. A vaccine is required to generate a specific information to the T cells. These T cells in the body help generate a specific immune response to kill the infected cells. Vaccines create a population of sensitised cells against a pathogen or virus, which is also called a memory generated against that virus, where the pre-sensitised cells can act fast to eliminate the virus on exposure," said Prof Sunil Arora, immunopathologist in PGI.


