Culinary newbies hit the kitchen to beat lockdown blues
2020-04-29
RANCHI: Youngsters in Ranchi are cooking up a storm at their homes as the country completes more than one month under lockdown. The kitchen has become the centre of activity at households as, apart from cooking three meals a day, people are experimenting with the stove and cobbling up snacks and coming up with new recipes.

A resident of Piska More, Stuty Tiwari surprised her mother with her favourite gulab jamuns and golgappas. She had been craving for these savouries for days, but could not get her hands on them as shops remained shut due to the lockdown.

Stuty, a post-graduate student of Central University of Jharkhand, said, “I have enough leisure time and my mother always used to tell me to learn cooking. I decided to experiment with new recipes as I was also craving for certain dishes.”

Sushma Singh, a resident of Ghatshila, said, “I love cooking but I never got the time for it because of my studies. These days, I have been helping my mother as she cooks new dishes.” Sushma has opened an Instagram account to connect with other chefs and friends and share her recipes with them.

Like Stuty and Sushma, many others are utilising the lockdown period to pick up culinary skills while other are honing their stove skills and taking them to the next level. Stuck at home, with little access to fresh ingredients, these young chefs are rustling up meals that are easy to put together with whatever is available.

Sushma said she finds beetroot juice quite handy while looking for colouring options and jaggery instead of sugar. “On many occasions, I do not find what I am looking for, so I have to go for alternatives. If I want to make some idlis and cannot find urad dal, I go for suji instead,” she added.

With grocery stocks running low in most households, using up every bit of food has become paramount for families during the lockdown. Now, with the lockdown in the sixth week, many are making creative use of leftovers from the previous evening to make a meal of it.

Some young chefs make fried rice and lemon from the remains of the previous day while others are giving a spin to the dal and potatoes that did not make their way to the tummy. Others are logging into the internet to scour for new recipes and churning out novelties like maggie pakoda.

Competing with the women of the house are men, who never entered the kitchen earlier, but have found their hidden culinary talents while in isolation. The lockdown imposed to help stop the spread of the virus has provided the opportunity for men to show off their kitchen abilities by cooking up some tasty family meals.

Bipin Kumar (35), a businessman from Pandra, surprised his family when he teamed up with his brother and cooked a meal for their 10-member family. Kumar said, “My brother and I stepped into the kitchen only after the women in our family sneered at us and asked us to cook a meal when our demands became too much for them. It was a major role-reversal, but we took it as a challenge. It ended up becoming an enjoyable and memorable moment for the entire family.”

Ujjwal Tirkey, a resident of Pandra here, tried his hand at litti chokha, the region’s favourite fast food. Tirkey said, “Whenever there is family reunion, we cook special dishes together. During the lockdown, we have tried to cobble up many dishes. We siblings have divided time to help our mother in the kitchen.”

Even as pictures and recipes of dishes flood the social media during the lockdown, mental health experts say cooking is a great way to destress and get away from the often-scary information on the new virus as it gives an individual some downtime to focus on one thing and get away from all reality, at least for a while.

Dr Nishant Goel, associate professor of psychiatry at the Central Institute of Psychiatry and nodal officer for providing psychoanalytical aid to those seeking help during the lockdown in the city, said, “Cooking is one of the best ways to bust stress, anger and anxiety during prolonged periods of isolation. When we cook, we get to enjoy time with our family and it comes with the joy of sharing. Hence, learning culinary skills help in beating anxiety.”

He added, “Those with an inclination towards cooking, must do more often during the lockdown. For novices and kitchen newbies, this is the perfect time to pick up a new hobby. And what could be a better passion than something that delights your palate and fills your stomach.”

