Curbs issued on mass gatherings in Kerala amid coronavirus outbreak
2020-03-11
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With eight more persons testing positive for Covid-19, the government has enforced strict restrictions on mass gatherings in the state. It has been decided to close all educational institutions, except medical colleges, in the state till March 31. However, there will be no change in the examination schedules. 

Announcing the decisions taken at the specially convened cabinet meeting here on Tuesday, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said the state is on alert mode and hence there is a need for taking adequate precautions.


 
At present, 14 positive cases are admitted in various hospitals in Pathanamthitta, Kottayam and Ernakulam. The parents of the three-year-old kid, who was declared positive on Monday, tested positive. The results from the National Institute of Virology were made available on Tuesday evening. All three are now isolated in Ernakulam Medical College Hospital.

Among the other new cases reported on Tuesday, four are in Kottayam and two in Pathanamthitta. All six persons contracted the virus from the three of a family from Ranni who had travelled from Italy. 

“The restrictions are to check the spread of the virus. It has become evident that the virus has spread from the three people who had come from Italy to Pathanamthitta. Hence it is the time to take adequate precautions,” the CM said. 

The people who had gone to receive the Pathanamthitta family from the airport have also tested positive. Two are the daughter and son-in-law of the 54-year-old father. In addition, the parents of the man also tested positive. These two elderly persons have been placed in the high-risk category as they suffer from several pre-existing health conditions. 

Efforts are on to save the lives of the two. All four are at Kottayam Medical College Hospital. 

In Pathanamthitta, the two new cases were reported from people who had come into close contact with the Ranni family. These two have been isolated at a hospital in Kozhencherry. A two-year-old kid who had come in close contact with the family has also been categorized as high-risk. 

Health minister K K Shailaja, in a press conference, said the daunting task of mapping the people who had come in contact with the primary positive cases is continuing. “Only once this is complete could we say that we have achieved the target of the first phase. Then the second phase to find out the people who had secondary and tertiary contacts with the primary cases has to be completed,” she said. 

All schools and colleges, including professional colleges, in the state will remain closed till March 31. This will be applicable also to CBSE and ICSE schools. Examinations from class l to class VII will not be held. All tuition classes, entrance coaching centres and other special classes have been asked to shut down till the month end. 

The CM has urged all religious heads and institutions to organize festivals and other rituals without mass gatherings. All government functions have been suspended till March 31. 

The Union health ministry sanctioned testing facilities at Kozhikode and Thiruvananthapuram MCHs. The state government has sought approval for such centres in Kochi and Kannur as well.

