Cured educator’s college marked safe from virus
2020-03-23
Aurangabad: The faculty member at a city-based educational institute, who had tested positive for the virus last week, was declared free of coronavirus on Saturday. The institute where she worked has also been marked free of virus following an extensive screening of all its students and staff and negative reports of suspected cases. The students and staff, however, continue to be in quarantine until March 26.

Alarms had gone off after the 59-year-old educator was detected with Covid-19 on March 15. Incidentally, the woman, who had travelled to Russia and Kazakhstan and had returned to Aurangabad on March 3, had conducted lectures at the institute between March 4 and 7. As soon as she tested positive for Covid-19, the civic and health authorities jumped into action and noted down details of the people she had come in contact with. Subsequently, 480 students of the institute and 32 of the woman’s close contacts were screened and put on home quarantine. 

Almost 90% of the institute’s students are from outside the city.

AMC commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey, municipal officer of health Nita Padalkar and city engineer Sakharam Panzade had gone to the hostel where the students were quarantined and helped boost their morale.

The district civil hospital had sent swabs of the people with Covid-19-like symptoms for testing. District civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said all swabs of the students and staff of the institute and close contacts of the patient had tested negative.

On Saturday, as soon as the woman was declared free of coronavirus after testing negative in two consecutive tests, the students at the institute, the women herself and her family heaved a sigh of relief. “We have won one war. The district is made free of coronavirus. The thorough testing and screening of the students at the institute have ensured that they are marked safe from the virus attack,” Kulkarni said.

In a letter issued on Saturday, the institute’s principal said that all the students have tested negative, but added that the institute would follow the instructions of the city administration on following the home quarantine protocol.

Kulkarni said the students continue to remain on precautionary quarantine. They will be able to step out of the home quarantine after March 26, he said.


