Coronavirus outbreak: Cured Aurangabad patient discharged from hospital
2020-03-24
AURANGABAD: Aurangabad’s first and only coronavirus patient, who was declared to be cured of Covid-19, was discharged from the private hospital where she was being treated at 3pm on Monday.


According to the medical administrator of the hospital, the decision was taken in consultation with the district authorities. The patient has been discharged with instructions of 10-day home quarantine.

The 59-year-woman, an educator in a city-based institute, was tested positive for coronavirus on March 15. The woman had travelled to Russia and Kazakhstan and had returned to Aurangabad on March 3. On March 4, she returned to work and started conducting vivas and lectures at the institute.

However, she got a fever and started feeling breathless on March 7 and visited a private hospital on March 12 with fever, shortness of breath and chills. On March 13, she was admitted to the hospital and her throat swab was sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune on the same day. The woman was diagnosed with Covid-19 two days later.

According to the hospital’s medical administrator, the patient was started on anti-retroviral therapy (ART) on March 15 and was administered two drugs as part of it, while symptomatic therapy continued simultaneously.

Following the first two days of non-invasive ventilator support, the hospital reported that the patient was showing signs of recovery. Therefore, she was scheduled for the second swab test. In the report that came on Saturday, March 21, the woman tested negative for two swabs collected in a gap of 24 hours. “According to the guidelines of Archana Patil, the director of health services, Maharashtra, if two consecutive samples have tested negative and the radiological picture (CT test) has improved, then the patient has to be discharged,” the doctors said.

Following her discharge, the patient will continue to be on ART until March 29 — that is, 14 days from the time the ART was started.

She has been recommended nutritious vegetarian food and consumption of adequate liquid apart from following all guidelines specific for home quarantine. After the discharge, the patient walked from her ward to the car by herself. The hospital said she was well-oriented and well-recovered at the time of discharge.


