West Bengal: Cured of Covid-19, they are keen to donate plasma to help patients
2020-04-12
KOLKATA: A day after the Bengal government gave its nod for clinical trials of ‘passive immunization’ of Covid-19 patients using antibodies in the blood plasma of cured patients, at least three survivors from Bengal, currently in home isolation, have lauded the initiative and said they would help in the research process if their health parameters permit.


 


“I read about the initiative and I am ready to donate blood plasma if it can save some lives. I will consider myself fortunate to be a part of such a noble programme,” said 23-year-old Monami Biswas from Habra, who was among the first Covid-19 patients in Bengal who walked into Beliaghata ID Hospital last month after getting off a flight from Scotland.

 
Times ViewThis is a great gesture. A few other Indian institutes are doing similar research and they need all the help they can get.


The University of Edindurgh student, who was released from hospital on March 31, said she would undergo a fresh check-up on April 14, after two weeks of home quarantine. 

Another survivor — the city’s first confirmed patient and a student of Oxford University who faced flak on social media for allegedly violating home isolation protocol after returning from UK last month —has also expressed his desire to be part of the research project. “I will extend all possible help to the researchers to fight this disease. I am following the instructions from doctors and staying at home. But once doctors allow, I will be glad to donate blood plasma for the cause,” said the 18-year-old youth. 

The treatment, which is under trial in some countries, would involve drawing blood plasma from people who have been cured of Covid-19 after a four-week gap and injecting this into Covid-19 positive patients. The blood plasma contains antibodies. According to doctors, convalescent plasma is advantageous because of its immediate availability since drugs and vaccines take a long time to develop. 

Another Covid-19 survivor, a 51-year-old diabetes and hypertension patient from Salt Lake’s AD Block who had returned home last Tuesday after a week’s treatment, said he wants to be part of the project but only if his health permits. “At present, I am very weak and not in the best shape — mentally or physically. Once I get a little better, I will take a call with my doctor’s guidance and see if I can be a part of the project,” said Gopi Krishna Agarwal, a businessman who had no recent travel history and still has no idea where he had contracted the disease from.


