Curfew success: Kanpur shuts doors on coronavirus
2020-03-23
KANPUR: City streets, on Sunday, remained deserted as denizens observed ‘janata curfew’ on the call given by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to fight against coronavirus.

People participated with full vigour to self-quarantine themselves. They did not move out for the entire day except when the clock struck 5 and they came on their balconies to clap and blow conch shells in an act of displaying appreciation for those who work round the clock to fight Covid-19.

People also rang bells, beat plates and some even beat dhols to cheer for the warriors including doctors, nurses, mediapersons and policemen. Even children participated in this exercise with full enthusiasm. For over half an hour, the city echoed with the sounds of bells and conchshells.

Except for police, no one could be seen on city streets, barring a few who were out due to some or other emergency. Cops were witnessed standing guard at prominent city crossings. 

The areas which usually witness heavy rush like Mall Road, Naveen Market, PPN Market, Parade crossing, Bada Chauraha, Kidwai Nagar, Govind Nagar, Lala Bangla, Kalyanpur, Baradevi, Naubasta, areas in South city and entire city were deserted as the city observed janata curfew. 

People spent their time by watching their favourite shows, movies, playing games with their family members or on their smartphones. While for many it was a good time to read books or complete several pending work at their home. 

District magistrate Dr Brahmadev Ram Tiwari, DIG Anant Dev, City magistrate Himanshu Gupta and other district officials inspected different places including isolation wards raised at LLR hospital and Infectious Disease Hospital.

Later at 5 pm, DM, DIG and other officials visited Kalpana Tower, Emerald Garden and other city localities and raised enthusiasm of denizens by waving at them while they clapped to pariase the work of corona warriors. 

The officials thanked the citizens for following the advisory and suggestions given by the PM.


