Current pattern of lockdown to continue in state till further orders: Oraon
2020-04-26
RANCHI: While the Union government on Friday night allowed the re-opening of standalone shops throughout the country, Jharkhand will continue with the current pattern of lockdown until a review is done, state finance minister Rameshwar Oraon said on Saturday. “As of now, the current pattern of lockdown, with certain relaxations in rural areas and in non-coronavirus zones, will continue. Any new relaxation at the state level will only be announced following a review,” he said.

He further said there will be strict enforcement of the lockdown and the social distancing norms in those districts with Covid-19 cases. “So far, the state has done well to restrict the spread of coronavirus and we will have to follow a strict discipline in the coming days as well,” he said. As the number of Covid-19 cases continue to surge daily in the state, nine out of the total 24 districts have been affected by the virus, so far.

When asked about bringing back the stranded students and workers from outside the state, Oraon said, “The state government has assigned a few officials to work out modalities for the staggered return of the stranded migrants and the students, but till the Centre gives us a clear-cut guideline in this regard, it isn’t feasible to bring them back at the moment.”

Meanwhile, soon after the Central notification on the re-opening of shops was issued, many districts, including Ranchi — which has been declared as a red zone owing to daily surge in the number of Covid-19 cases — have begun notifying the continuation of the current pattern of lockdown. An official communiqué from Ranchi district administration read, “Whatever arrangements made by the district administration in the containment and the non-containment zones in connection to the enforcement of lockdown will continue to remain so till further orders from the state government and the district administrations. Detailed guidelines will be issued soon.” Covid-19 hotspots like Dhanbad and Deoghar have issued similar guidelines,too.


