Coronavirus scare: Curtains, blankets removed from trains
2020-03-16
VADODARA: To prevent spread of COVID-19, railways have shorn off small comforts in air-conditioned (AC) coaches of trains including blankets and curtains. Commuters also won’t have the comfort of travelling in controlled cool temperature despite paying for AC as the railways has decided to set the temperature inside such coaches at around 25 to 26 degrees.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The changes are made keeping in mind the overall weather conditions and comfort of travellers. Normally, the temperature inside AC coaches during winter is kept around 24°C, while during summer it is kept around 22°C. 

Although it is not known if COVID-19 follows a seasonal pattern like other influenza and other coronaviruses that tend to peak in the colder months, the coaches will remain warmer going by the common knowledge that there is less trouble as the weather warms up.

“Curtains and blankets in AC coaches are not washed after every trip. Therefore, we have been instructed to immediately withdraw curtains and blankets from service till further orders,” said Khemraj Meena, public relations officer of Vadodara railway division.

“Passengers are being advised to bring their own blankets in their own interest. Supply of other linen items will, however, continue. Some quantity of additional bedsheets will be kept for any exigencies,” he said.

The Vadodara railway division services two express trains – Vadodara Express and Vadodara-Rewa Mahamana Express. Around 695 passengers who had booked their journey in AC coaches of Vadodara Express have been informed through bulk PRS text messages regarding withdrawal of blankets and curtains from the coaches. The railway division has also chalked out a detailed action plan including major cleanliness and sanitisation drive.

A nodal officer has been appointed and staff nominated for a special ward at the Vadodara railway hospital. Apart from masks, disposable gowns, hoods, gloves and sterillium, infrared thermometer guns have also been procured to tackle exigencies.

