Cusat to upgrade biosafety lab for testing viruses
2020-04-20
Kochi: Even as the government medical college has set up a biosafety lab level-II for testing swab samples for coronavirus, Cochin university of science and technology (Cusat) is exploring options to upgrade its already existing biosafety lab level-2 following a call by the department of science and technology.

The biosafety laboratory under the department of biotechnology has this facility which is used by research scholars for isolating proteins and biomolecules among others. As of now, they do not work on viruses. “Dealing with live viruses means biocontrol mechanisms should be put in place. Since this is a university campus and our entire biosafety equipment have been placed on different floors, we cannot think of using this facility for virology tests,” said V Mohanan, virologist and DBT faculty, Cusat.

He said the facility was incorporated for research but some infrastructural and logistic changes can be made to mould this into a biosafety laboratory level -3 or 4. “As of now, we do have a two-door entry with biosafety specifications to access the biosafety cabinet which can be used for testing viruses. However, our real-time PCR is in the upstairs and it access is through an open stairs,” he said stating the reason for Cusat not applying for a BSL testing facility licence.

“In case of diagnostic facility, all these should come on the same floor. As we will be dealing with viruses, we can’t have it in open area on the campus. The entire area should come under a restricted zone where only the researchers should be allowed to enter,” he added.

According to experts, BSL level-2 is sufficient for testing SARS viruses, BSL-3 for testing Nipah in bats and BSL-4 which is the highest level among testing labs can test for Nipah in humans.

Cochin university vice-chancellor K N Madhusoodanan said the authorities will look at all the options for upgradation so that at least it could be readied in the near future. “Since we are a research-oriented university, it will be good to have a facility that will be one of the best in Kerala.”

The biotechnology department of GoI had called for projects for developing diagnostics, vaccines, novel therapeutics, repurposing of drugs and any other intervention for control of Covid-19 outbreak. 


