Customers seek extension of motor cover duration due to lockdown
2020-05-07
Hyderabad: With the lockdown being extended, motor insurance holders are clamouring for Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) to direct insurers to offer some respite such as refund or extension of policy cover duration as they have not driven their vehicles for well over a month but have paid premium for it.

“The government has enforced lockdown since March 24 and ever since, people have not been using vehicles for which they would have bought motor insurance policies in advance. It is unfair that on one hand, we are charged for the lockdown period but on the other hand, there are hardly any claims …Therefore, we demand IRDAI instruct insurance companies to extend the policy period, by a duration equivalent to the lockdown period, in the larger interest of consumers,” said Sai Krishna, who has reached out to IRDAI and also floated an online petition in this regard.

Industry experts said insurers have reported savings of around Rs 2,200 crore in the last 40-odd days as the number of claims have been very low due to people being grounded at home.

However, despite savings, many insurance companies feel there are risks associated even when a vehicle is parked. Another industry expert added that the around 10% hike in the third-party motor insurance premium for the current financial year has been put on hold due to Covid-19. “It means that customers are being offered respite and they have saved that bit,” he said.

However, there are insurers who feel customers’ demand are legitimate and have either rolled out certain products as part of IRDAI’s Sandbox project or are working on offers.

In fact, in April, Acko General Insurance had offered one-month free extension to customers but sources said it had to be rolled back due to regulatory issues.

Shanai Ghosh, CEO & ED, Edelweiss General Insurance said, “The current pandemic has forced everyone to examine discretionary spends…we are aware of our customers’ concerns with regards to paying for only what they consume...we will soon be launching a motor product that holds significant relevance in the current context as well as for the future.” The company has received approval for a product under the Sandbox initiative, where customers can pay depending on the usage of their vehicles.

During April-end, Bharti AXA General Insurance also announced the launch of ‘usage-based motor insurance’ policies for private car owners, under the Sandbox project. Known as ‘Pay As You Drive’, it allows customers to pay premium depending on the number of kilometres they drive their car.

In the US, many insurers have already started extending grace period by allowing customers to skip premium payments for a limited duration without charging any penalty. For instance, as per information available on US-based insurer Allstate’s website: “Shelter-in-place orders mean fewer people on the roads and fewer accidents. Given this decline, personal auto insurance customers will receive 15% back, based on their monthly premiums in April and May”.

IRDAI had not responded to an email sent on the issue till the time of going to press.


