Cyber crooks play on corona pandemic panic
2020-04-27
LUCKNOW: Exploiting pandemic-triggered insecurities among citizens and cashing in on surge in online transactions in time of lockdown, cyber crooks in the city are making merry and laughing all the way to the bank.

It was double trouble for Alok Kumar, an event manager and Indiranagar resident, after he was duped of Rs 10,000 by a fly-by-night website. Kumar booked N95 masks and sanitisers for his troupe early this month from a snazzy website, offering covid-19 solutions. However, after two days of transaction, the website was withdrawn by conmen after making fast buck.




Similarly, a teacher residing in Gomtinagar, was defrauded of Rs 15,000 by a caller, who introduced himself as World Health Organisation (WHO) official and promised to deliver PPE kits and medical check-up at the doorstep. The teacher had suffered a panic attack after an area in close proximity was declared a hotspot. She fell to sweet-talking of the caller and placed an order for 10 PPE kits extra and later realised she had been scammed.

‘Corona-conning’ cases account for 65% cyber frauds reported in one month since the lockdown was clamped, with total cases at cyber cell of Lucknow Police pegged at 66. While other kinds of cybercrime, including phuishing and vishing has dipped, scamsters are now making the most of covid-19 scare by duping gullible.

A cyber cell senior officer said, people are being scammed not only on the pretext of selling protective gears like masks, PPE kits and sanitisers at cheap rates on fake websites, but also in the name of covid-19 medicine. In most cases, scamsters pose as WHO or hospital officials, besides floating fake websites, he said. Another category of fraud, he said, was circulation of fake messages seeking donations to battle coronavirus with a tax-saving rider.

“At least 13 people were duped in the name of selling masks and PPE kits, 13 others were scammed by claims of covid-19 medicines,” said Vivek Ranjan Rai, assistant commissioner of police, cyber cell.

Rai said, preliminary investigations suggest of 66 cases, 40 conmen had links with the infamous Jamtara district of Jharkhand, while 12 had links to NCR region and remaining 14 from other parts of India, including Surat, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad. “After the lockdown ends, a team will be dispatched to bust the Jamtara gang,” he said.

“We had issued fraud prevention advisory against coronavirus-related scams, but more awareness needs to be created,” said the ACP. He also said few days ago, the cyber cell took note of fake websites offering key positions with an aim to con those who lost jobs after the onset of lockdown.


