Cybercrime cases rise in Hyderabad amid lockdown
2020-04-15
HYDERABAD: Cybercrime sleuths of Hyderabad police commissionerate received seven complaints on Tuesday, taking the number of cases booked since lockdown to 160. On Tuesday, a fraudster posing as a wine shop representative siphoned off Rs 92,000 from a private firm employee’s bank account by promising to supply a bottle of brandy.

Most of the complaints are of victims who fall prey to fraudsters posing as PayTM, liquor shops, courier company representatives and armed forces or paramilitary personnel trying to sell vehicles. An accountant from Sultan Bazar approached cybercrime sleuths and lodged a complaint alleging that a fraudster had siphoned off Rs 92,000 from his account by posing as representative of a liquor store.

“The victim searched on the internet for home delivery of liquor and found a phone number of Bagga Wines promising to deliver liquor in Hyderabad. The victim dialled the number and the fraudster posing as liquor store representative, gathered the victim’s credit card details and also the OTPs to transfer Rs 92,000 to different e-wallets in six transactions,” cybercrime ACP KVM Prasad said.

A retired government employee from Habsiguda, who was waiting for a parcel, searched on the internet for the customer care number of the courier service and the fraudster posing as an employee made him fill details of his debit and credit cards in a Google form sent through SMS. “He lost Rs 90,000,” the ACP said.

A stock broker from the city who wanted to get a fancy cellphone number lost Rs 55,000 to fraudsters and a private employee was duped by fraudsters for Rs 32,000 in the guise of KYC update for his PayTm account. “The accused made him install Quickviewer remote desktop app and siphoned off the money from his account,” police said.

A constable lost Rs 36,000 to a fraudster posing as a CISF official on a e-classifieds website to sell a bike and a private employee from Kavadiguda lost Rs 32,000 to fraudster posing as Army man on the same portal offering to sell a bike. 


