Cyclone-Covid pincer attack: Schools in West Bengal to remain closed till June 30
2020-05-28
KOLKATA: The Bengal government has decided to extend the closure of schools up to June 30 after several school buildings suffered damage due to cyclone Amphan. Some others have had to be utilized as isolation centres for the returning migrant labourers. This is in addition to the ongoing threat due to the Covid-19, which is still a major concern for the administration. On Wednesday, education minister Partha Chatterjee said 462 among 1,058 schools spread across eight districts — which were earmarked as higher secondary exam centres — have been ravaged due to the cyclone. 


“I have held a meeting with the president of the West Bengal Higher Secondary Council, Mohua Das. We have decided to utilize colleges, if necessary, which shall be converted into HS examination centres,” said Chatterjee.

The minister added that at every step, health guidelines will have to be maintained and social-distancing norms will be adhered to. 

“Thus, the HS Council has taken up the task to expand the number of venues available for the remaining board examinations,” he said.

In several schools, rooms have collapsed and toilets have broken down. Chief minister Mamata Banerjee has been seeking reports of damage from the schools, colleges and universities. The majority of the affected schools are from Kolkata, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, North 24 Parganas, South 24 Parganas, East Midnapore and East Burdwan.

“As the CM has already appealed, we request the corporate organizations to repair the school buildings, as well as other education institutes, through the CSR projects as they had earlier proposed,” said Chatterjee.

The minister on Wednesday also said that the HS Council will accommodate most of the students in the examination centres near their homes while those who have to travel will be able to avail of transport facilities. As decided earlier, universities shall hold their terminal examinations according to schedule. “They have decided amongst themselves and will be allowed to continue according to their individual plans,” Chatterjee added.

The education department has made a preliminary estimate of the loss incurred by the department — around Rs 700 crore. “But it is likely to exceed Rs 1,000 crore,” the minister said.

Before the schools reopen, sanitization drives will be conducted and as students return to schools, social-distancing norms will have to be maintained. 

The government had earlier announced that schools will remain closed till June 10. The rescheduled dates for Class XI state board exams — June 29, July 2 and July 6 — will be unchanged, Chatterjee said. “To make up for the prolonged disruption in classes, we will ask teachers to ensure taking classes at home if they live in the same locality,” Chatterjee said.

The department is also conside-ring a proposal to provide free text books to the cyclone-affected students, particularly those in the higher secondary level.

