Cycling, the solution to commuting fears during pandemic?
2020-06-03
As cities around the country are gradually emerging from the long lockdown and trying to get life back on track, experts are rooting for the cycle as a safer way to commute. So much so, Mumbai will see 24 
bicycle councillors taking charge of a ward to make it cycle-friendly starting from today, on World Bicycle Day. Here’s looking at why this two-wheeler is seen as a safe alternative for a traffic-heavy and congested city as ours...


‘A cycle is the best way to have a personal vehicle and keep social distance’If you have always treated cycling as just a hobby in Mumbai, it may just turn out to be a lifesaver now. A report quotes Morton Kabell, who co-chairs the European Cyclists’ Federation, as saying that the transition to bike-friendly urban environments “is necessary if we want our cities to work”. Bicycle Mayor of Mumbai, Firoza Suresh, endorses it, saying, “The air quality has improved drastically in Mumbai during the 60-day lockdown. Do we want to go back to the old ways of taking motorised transportation for short commutes? Why not cycle, instead?”

Across the globe, there is an active post-lockdown focus on cycling. “With concerns arising about shared mobility (app-based cabs) and the need to keep social distance, a cycle is the best way to have your own personal vehicle and keep a distance from others on the road. Besides, it also reduces carbon emission and does not increase pollution levels,” she adds.


‘Bicycle councillors have the task of making each ward cycle-friendly’
To move towards a greater cycle usage, Mumbai will soon have ‘bicycle councillors’. “Each ward of MMR (Mumbai Metropolitan Region), which are 24 in number, will have a bicycle councillor. They’ll be designated with the task of making their ward cycle-friendly. We wanted to start the process on June 3 as it is celebrated as World Bicycle Day,” informs Firoza Suresh.
For some, the cycle has been a boon during lockdown. Take Mumbai’s frontline healthcare workers. Says Dr Viswanathan Iyer, brain and spine surgeon, “I’ve always been a cyclist, but in lockdown it became a necessity as I had to visit different hospitals in Thane and Ghatkopar from Mulund. It's also a safe mode of transport. People should think of adapting to it and use it to travel up to 10kms, which is something anyone can do.”


Salman Khan ko cycling pasand haiLockdown or no lockdown, Salman Khan just needs a reason to go pedalling on his cycle — be it to Mehboob Studio, the shooting set near his apartment, or to visit his starry neighbour, Shah Rukh Khan. In fact, the actor was spotted cycling around his Panvel farmhouse, where he’s been throughout the lockdown. His friends, including Jacqueline Fernandez, who are also at the farmhouse, were seen cycling with him. The cycling brigade in tinseltown also includes SRK, Sonakshi Sinha, Sidharth Malhotra and Kalki Koechlin among others.


This will help curb pollution: Iqbal khan“I have two cars, but now, I use them mainly for long-distance travel. My sole purpose to buy a bicycle was to help curb pollution and traffic congestion. So, If I want to go to the gym or my local grocery shop or buy veggies, I use the bicycle. I used to love riding it before the lockdown. After things open up now, I will begin using it again for short distances.”

 

 
  
 



