Bengal: Cyclone, lockdown shadow over Eid celebrations
2020-05-26
KOLKATA: Muslims across Kolkata marked a sombre Eid under lockdown restrictions and aftermath of Cyclone Amphan on Monday. 

Eid, the most important Muslim festival, marks the end of the holy month of Ramazan and is celebrated by offering prayers in the mosques followed by feasts with family and friends and shopping for gifts and sweets for guests.

 

A man offers prayers at his home in central Kolkata 
But this year prayers in mosques were held without public attendance and the biggest congregation on Red Road was cancelled to prevent the spread of the virus. Some people, however, reached their local mosques thinking the government has eased restrictions for Eid prayers, but they were turned away by the police. 

“This year Eid was very sombre and low-key,” said Mohammad Arshad, a schoolteacher in central Kolkata. “On one hand, there is happiness that comes after the month of fasting ends, but it is strange because we remember how the festivities were in previous years where we offered prayers together and then settled down for a feast with family and friends.” 

Most streets wore a deserted look throughout Eid though some people and children did step out. But in the absence of food stalls and shut shops most of them had to return home. 

Technology came to the rescue of people who made video calls to their relatives staying in the same city. Children posted selfies in their Eid paraphernalia though most families stayed away from buying new clothes for the festival. “It is not a happy time this year. First there is a looming threat of coronavirus which has also impacted so many people economically. Then there is the devastation in the aftermath of the cyclone,” said Mohamamd Arif, a businessman on Rabindra Sarani in central Kolkata. 

In absence of an imam to lead prayers many people turned to live streaming of namaz on social media in the morning. “Even though we are physically apart we want everybody to celebrate it together on virtual platforms,” said Sheikh Siraj, a Bow Street resident. 

“Given the situation we are unable to do much for the people, but we are ensuring to reach out to people in need of ration,” said Bilkis Begum, a social worker. 

