Dabur initiates clinical study of Chyawanprash as preventive remedy for coronavirus
2020-05-14
Even as the scientific and pharma industry is researching potential Covid drugs and vaccines, alternative medicines have joined the bandwagon. In one of the first such instances by a fast-moving consumer goods company, Dabur has initiated a clinical study of its flagship immunity booster, Chyawanprash, as a preventive remedy in Covid-19. This could perhaps be the first such trial using an Ayurvedic therapy targeted at a particular disease. 

Effectiveness of ancient herbs like ‘Ashwagandha, Mulethi and Giloy’ will be tested in separate studies by the Ministry of AYUSH, while Medanta Institute of Education and Research is also planning similar trials. 

Immunity and stamina building products like Chyawanprash and products made from ayurvedic herbs, across companies, have shown a surge of over 60% during April year-on-year, industry experts say. 

Clinical trials will be conducted on two groups of 750 people, who are healthy and not suffering from any ailments like diabetes or high blood pressure. The clinical study has been planned at Jaipur, Vadodara, Pune and Mumbai, and has both Ayurvedic as well as modern physicians as investigators. It will see the comparative assessment of incidence of Covid-19 in subjects taking Dabur Chyawanprash, and those not taking it, over a period of three months. 

“This purely scientific study would assess not just the preventive aspects of Chyawanprash, but also its effect on recovery from Covid, and reducing severity of infection on individuals who become positive during the study’s course. In addition, Dabur is also conducting clinical studies for prophylaxis and management of Covid-19, along with various state governments and AYUSH ministry. As part of this initiative, we have already supplied 7.5 lakh tablets of Guduchi Ghanvati (Giloy tablets) and around 3,000 kg of Chyawanprash, which are being used to evaluate the immunity-boosting properties of Ayurvedic interventions in preventing and managing Covid-19. We have further committed to supply six lakh tablets of Ashwagandha, and around 5,000 kg of Chyawanprash for similar studies,” Dabur India chief executive officer Mohit Malhotra told TOI. 

This comes as PM Modi has also reportedly pushed AYUSH ministry guidelines, which suggest a range of home remedies to boost immunity, with states like Telangana distributing these products to frontline workers. 

Several companies with Ayurvedic and herbal formulations and concoctions are reporting a huge spike. Sales of Baba Ramdev-promoted Patanjali Ayurved products, mainly preventive care like Giloy, Tulsi, Chyawanprash, Haldi and Swasari Ras, as well as hygiene (personal care) products have doubled to over Rs 400 crore, in April over March, a company official said. 

The Dabur study is open label, multi-centric, randomized, intervention community-based, and has been registered at Clinical Trials Registry India (CTRI), hosted at ICMR’s National Institute of Medical Statistics. Proper guidelines like informed consent process, ethics committee approvals at all sites and insurance to study subjects, will be followed. 


