Bhopal: Dad-daughter beat coronavirus with poems and Rig Veda
2020-04-07
BHOPAL: Father and daughter drew strength from each other – and goddess Durga – as they fought Covid-19 together at AIIMS-Bhopal. They walked out two days ago, cured of the virus, holding on to the special bond they acquired over a fortnight, and clutching a sheaf of poems she wrote in her hospital bed.


“Jwalamukhi sa tez mera, athak rahungi mein khadi… (I have the energy of a volcano, I will stand determined),” goes one of her poems.

“We never allowed negative thoughts to overwhelm us,” they told TOI over phone on Monday.

The daughter, an LLM student, was Bhopal’s first coronavirus patient, having tested positive on March 22. She had returned from London on March 17 and was screened at Delhi airport. She says that when she had left London, she took “utmost care” throughout her journey. “Once I reached India, I wanted to quarantine myself,” she said.

For the first three days at AIIMS-Bhopal, as the city’s first covid-19 patient, she stayed alone in a hospital room. And then, her father, a journalist, tested positive.

She was then shifted to a bigger room with her father. “I was a little disturbed when Papa’s report came corona-positive. I thought he suffered because of me,” she said.

Her father said: “When I joined my daughter, it was relaxing to see her. Spending time with each other gave us a lot of strength.”

In her lonely days in quarantine, she had begun reading the Rig Veda. It became a ritual for the father and daughter.

“I had always wanted to read the Rig Veda,” she told TOI. “Every day, throughout my quarantine period at AIIMS, which was also Navratra, I also worshipped the Goddess by reading Durga Saptashati.”

“And all the time, I was always sure that I will overcome. There were no negative thoughts,” she added..

Besides reading Saptashati in the morning and Rigveda for most of the day, she would attend online lectures of her university and write poems. “I like to paint but without a canvas, I wanted to express my emotions somehow, so I started writing poems,” she told TOI.

Her father also remained positive and “never allowed Corona scare to dominate”, she said. 


