Daily wage workers worst affected due to lockdown
2020-03-26
DEHRADUN/NAINITAL/PITHORAGARH/ROORKEE: The nationwide shut down for three weeks is already hurting daily wage workers who are now out of work and have no means to earn two square meals.


In Dehradun, the local administration has started the process of providing daily wage workers, who have Jan Dhan accounts, with an aid of Rs 1,000. For the purpose, a list of daily wagers has also been sought from the department of labour.

“So far, we have transferred Rs 1,000 in accounts of 13,600 daily wage workers. To ensure aid to more such people, we have directed the banks to work for two additional hours,” Dehradun DM Ashish Kumar Srivastava told TOI.

The move comes a day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his address to nation, announced that daily wagers who are Jan Dhan account holders can be assisted with Rs 1,000 so that they don’t suffer much during lockdown.

DM Srivastava added that those workers who are not registered with the department of labour are being provided with food packets.

In Nainital district, hundreds of daily wage workers coming from neighbouring Uttar Pradesh as well as states like Bihar and Jharkhand have become stranded due to the lockdown. “I want to go to my village in Darbhanga (Bihar) but all trains have been cancelled. I don’t have the means to survive for the next three weeks,” said Ram Charan Singh, a daily wage labourer.

The district administration has said that though no arrangement has yet been made to send these labourers back home, efforts are being made to provide them with essentials. "Due to the countrywide lockdown, it is not possible to ensure return of these labourers. However, efforts are being made to provide all the essentials to the people who need it. The poor and needy will be our focus and the administration is working towards helping them," said Nainital’s district magistrate (DM) Savin Bansal.

Similarly in Champawat, SP Lokeswar Singh has directed in charges of all police stations in the district to help people in need. Police have also released helpline numbers (059652- 30444, 30607 and 18001804178) for people to ask for help.

And in Pithoragarh, social organisations and police are coming forward to help those in need during lockdown. Sushil Khatri, chairman of a social organisation “Seemant Youth Morcha”, told TOI, “We find out about the people in need through a WhatsApp (8979221108) group. Before delivering us ration, we make sure that the person (or family) is actually needy. Subsequently, we provide the needy with essentials like flour, rice, edible oil, potato, onion, among others.” He added that his organisation provided three Nepalese families with supplies on Wednesday.

Meanwhile in Roorkee, the situation is grim for many labourers and rickshaw pullers who are left with no means to earn money due to the lockdown and have not been offered help as yet. “More than 300 rickshaw pullers in Roorkee are forced to go hungry due to the lockdown. We can provide their names to the administration. They all must be given help,” said Mumtaz Naqvi, president of Roorkee Rickshaw Pullers Union. 

