Dakshina Kannada records first Covid-19 fatality; 50-year-old woman dies of infection
2020-04-20
MANGALURU: Dakshina Kannada district has recorded its first Covid-19 death. A 50-year-old woman from Kasba in Bantwal taluk, admitted to district Wenlock Hospital with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) on Saturday, died at 9.15am on Sunday.


Deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh said she was undergoing treatment at the intensive care unit of the hospital. Given the woman’s SARI condition, the doctors sent her throat swab sample at the hospital’s lab. Even as the report was awaited, the woman breathed her last at the ICU. The report received in the afternoon confirmed her to be Covid-19 positive.

The final rites were conducted at the local crematorium as per the medical protocol prescribed for Covid-19 patients. District health and family welfare officer Dr Ramachandra Bairy said the family members saw her body for two minutes from a distance before it was cremated. “We have identified 19 primary contacts, including her husband and son and a doctor who treated her initially, and have quarantined them and more could be quarantined. We are also ascertaining news that her son had returned recently from Dubai,” Dr Bairy said.

The district also recorded a positive case in the day with P-389, who is wife of P-325 from Uppinangadi. The total number of positive cases in the district has now risen to 15. There are two active cases, 12 discharged people and one death (P-390).

The neighbouring Udupi district has had no fresh cases since March 29. It has no active cases as all the three patients have been discharged.

In a related development, the Dakshina Kannada district administration sealed seven villages as per the state government guidelines and appointed incident commanders there to implement the same. The villages are Thokkottu, Uppinangady, Thumbe, Ajjavar, Sampya, Belthangady and Sajipapadu. The DC said all essential items will be supplied to residents of these villages.

