Dakshina Kannada, Udupi schools' 'heal' in quarantine
2020-06-07
MANGALURU: Quarantine seems to have done some good to some schools as well. Confined for 14 days, occupants have channeled their energies to spruce up campuses, apply a fresh coat of paint and carry out other repairs. Some schools in Karkala in Udupi and one school in Belthangady in Dakshina Kannada now sport a fresh look, ready to welcome students when they return. 


 In some cases, it turned out, those quarantined were old students. "It is a kind of homecoming as well as nostalgia to me because this is where I completed my studies and left for Maharashtra to find greener pastures," said Ranjith from Karkala. "During my stay, along with others, I cleaned up the campus and refreshed school memories with them." Pruthvi, who quarantined in Attur school, said he stitched masks during his stay. 


Big-hearted citizen effort at work in quarantine

Karkala block education officer GS Shashidhar told STOI that many such activities had been carried out in quarantine centres, especially in schools. “Some have painted schools, repaired roofs, planted saplings and cleaned the campus. We are more than happy and thank them for their contribution towards government schools,” he said.

So far, Karkala district has welcomed 2,470 returnees from Maharashtra alone and around 400 from Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala. They were quarantined in 38 places. In the second phase, 400 people from Maharashtra are expected.

In Belthangady, as many as 25 out of 64 people who were quarantined at 60-year-old Kookrabettu school in a remote village of Belthangady have done their bit of work in isolation. Rathnakar Marody, a villager, said returnees from Mumbai had plucked out weeds, manured coconut trees, worked on the sports ground, cleaned the water tank and tended to the garden. They also carried out repairs.

Once quarantine was over, they were given a farewell by Belthangady MLA Harish Poonja. He gifted them a sapling as a memory of their days spent in the school.

