Dance away your lockdown blues
2020-04-08
KOCHI: After an exercise challenge online, now, students at Thrissur Medical College are in the process of starting 'Dance To Health Challenge'. The challenge is for students from all colleges, both professional and other streams, wherein the college dance team can come together virtually and choreograph a dance. 

This will then be collated together and posted on social media. The idea of starting the DHC challenge came when the college medical students collated and posted their dance video online. It was huge hit and won support of Indian Psychiatric Society, Kerala,

"Dancing is a good exercise that will reduce anxiety and stress. TMC's DHC challenge will enable students, especially dance teams in each college, to come together virtually and choreograph a dance. They would all do the steps at home. Then it will all be collated together and posted on YouTube as TMC DTH Challenge," said Dr Sebind Kumar, secretary, Indian Psychiatric Society, Kerala.

He said that TMC has an excellent dance team that had won several inter-medical college dance competitions. "Now, everyone is confined to their homes and therefore we suggested that the students start TMC DTH Challenge," said Dr Kumar.

TMC's Vikings Crew - consisting of 18 to 20 members - are all excited about the concept that has support from the college union as well as Indian Psychiatric Society Kerala.

"What started as a fun competition among us, will now be an online challenge that will keep the youth engaged. Each college team will have to choose a song and create their dance that will have to be uploaded on social media. We are planning to invite students from across the state. How long can you sit and just study?" said Naveen K Razak, a final year MBBS student, TMC and member of Vikings Crew.

The rationale behind this was that due to the lockdown, they got reports that many young students were restless at home and tried to go and meet their friends, risking Covid-19 community spread. So, they thought that it is important to engage youth at home and they should use their energy in a positive manner and dance is a good form of exercise as it makes you happier and healthier, both mentally and physically.

"We have all been locked down for two weeks now. What was initially fun, binging on movies and chilling with family, started getting grey after two weeks. While we are all eating homemade food, doing fitness routines keeping ourselves healthy, it is also very important to keep our spirits high," added Dr Kumar.


