Dang stays Covid-free, 179 in home quarantine
2020-04-20
SURAT: At a time when inter-state and even inter-district travel has been banned to stall the spread of the coronavirus, a 32-year-old woman who had gone to work in agriculture fields in Maharashtra a few months ago returned home on April 15, walking all the way through forests. Interestingly, she travelled during night hours only to escape police detection at the check posts. 


However, upon discovery, Ramila Pawar, a resident of Chinchod village in Vaghai taluka of Dang district, was booked by Vaghai Police on Sunday for her misadventure amid the lockdown. 

“Pawar told the police that after the lockdown, she was left jobless and therefore she had no option but to walk her way to her village via forests. Ramila was booked under the Disaster Management Act,” said cops.

Pawar has been put under home quarantine by the district health administration. According to sources, the district authority was forced to increase its vigil after they learnt that some tribals have sneaked into the Dang district. Dang district has remained Covid-19 free so far.

Like her, some other people too are trekking their way back home through the forests from Maharashtra.

"We have sealed the border and do not allow anyone to enter Gujarat from Maharashtra. Police are manning the inter-state check posts in the district. But some people entered into the district using agricultural fields and forest routes. FIRs have been filed against them,'' said Sweta Shrimali, superintendent of police, Dang, told TOI.

“Till now we have lodged 448 FIRs against the people for violation of public notification in Dang district which includes not wearing masks, and venturing out of homes without valid reasons,” said the police official.

“The district has remained Covid-19 free and we have put 179 people under home quarantine. This includes those people who have entered into the district after the lockdown was imposed,” said a senior officer from Dang collectorate. "We have prepared a list of 33,000 labourers of Dang who migrated in search of work. This data has been shared with authorities concerned,” said a senior official from Dang collectorate.


