Data helping Covid warriors nail the virus
2020-04-28
JAIPUR: Ramganj model may have failed to match the Bhilwara model in containing the spread of coronavirus, but it has set a new benchmark in drawing strategies using statistical tools, probability theory and technology. 

From crunching data in a line graph, scatter plot, funnel and gauge chart to geotagging of Covid-19 patients, home address and geo-mapping of hotspots, attempts have been made to scientifically approach the problem.

Since the beginning of the outbreak, the situation in the congested locality of Ramganj was never under control, forcing officials to implement internationally standard tools for better examination of the situation. 

Every day, the statistics team at the Covid-19 war room in Jaipur receives information on positive cases, their location and mobile numbers. 

“My team crunches data into all possible kinds of graphs, tabulate it using a repository of available information, analyses CDR data, geo-tagging the exact location of positive cases and marking possible technological tools for the administration,” said Rohitashva Meena, joint director at the transport department presently heading the statistics team at the war room. 

Confidential information they prepare on a daily basis is shared with the nodal office for planning its strategy. Information received has helped officials in the micro analysis of the pandemic spread in the Walled City.

“It has made possible for us to earmark the exact hotspot areas lane-wise. Even the scale of testing in areas is determined on the basis of data provided by them,” said Aqeel Khan, an area magistrate in Ramganj. The effective area is divided into 11 zones based on data rather on municipality figures. 

The statistical team claims data provided by them meet along with administrative decisions has flattened the curve. “Our data demonstrate that the rate of doubling of patients has also increased from 4 days to 10 days,” said Meena. The data model will now be implemented in the emerging hotspots like in Tonk, Jodhpur and Ajmer.

Despite all efforts, Ramganj continues to remain the top hotspot in the country with 600 Covid 19 cases, while Bhilwara model based on ruthless containment has restricted its numbers to 33.


