Dawn of the lockdown age
2020-04-18
Like the entire country, the lockdown has forced the panellists to stay indoors but at the same time opened up doors of new realizations for them. Celebrity chef Vishnu Manohar acknowledges the amount of work housewives do. “Now, more men are into cooking,” he said.

On a more personal level, Manohar says he has been able to give quality time to his 14-year-old son. “And there is so much time to read and listen to music,” he said.

There are many new things which Seema Saboo, a psychologist and child counsellor, has learnt from the man of the house. “It’s amazing how he pays attention to the smallest of details,” she said.

For the youths, it’s a unique situation as they are not used to staying at home for long periods. In case of Aishwarya Nandwani, a student, she discovered the hidden chef in her. 

During her online sessions, life coach Sapna Sharma has come across students and husbands who are complaining about the household chores. She didn’t enjoy cooking before “but now that’s a part of life”. 

The lockdown has led to exodus of labourers from cities, but those who stayed behind need to be cared for, feels industrialist Sharad Agrawal who has “adopted a wait and watch policy.” “Whenever normalcy returns, not sure how social distancing and sanitization of workplaces will happen,” he said. On the personal front, Agrawal said he was distributing food packets to the needy.

“It’s been a really tough time for an outdoor person like me,” said cycling enthusiast Aniruddha Raich. To maintain physical fitness, he has been climbing stairs and following gym-like routine.

Having worked from home for the last 20 years, the situation is not new for mental health counsellor Dr Tarique Sani. “Just missing outdoor running and a haircut. Surprisingly, most clients are coming to me with a sense of loss and grief, rather than anxiety,” he said.

Tarique is of the view that the lockdown should continue. Sharma doesn’t see the virus going away soon and so the “lockdown will definitely continue”. Sounding a note of caution, she said that whenever the lockdown is lifted, there could be disaster as everybody will rush to markets, malls etc. “There should be a graded opening,” she said.

For Raich, the lockdown has made people like him feel like a caged animal but he too supported graded opening of lockdown. 

Sharma commended the efforts of central and state governments for “timely and effective implementation of the lockdown”. Aishwarya felt, “the poor and labourers are not getting proper help.”

“Given the size of our population, the governments are doing a good job. Others are also doing their bit. CBSE has started online courses and it’s heartening to see schools too getting involved to keep students engaged,” Saboo said.

Manohar too praised the governments but felt the benefits were not reaching at the grassroots level. “NGOS are doing a better job. Facilities at quarantine centres need to improve. Local people’s representatives need to take responsibility,” he said.

Aishwarya pointed out the outbreak should be looked at as a problem for entire society and shouldn’t acquire a communal angle. 

Tarique wanted individuals to give their best in helping others. “Governments can be questioned later,” he said.

“The government has to make a choice between saving lives and saving economy. It may end up choosing economy as the disaster is inevitable,” Raich said.

Agrawal sought answers from government for not roping in private hospitals to test or treat patients. “If private sector is allowed, some 5% will go there and insurance will take care of the costs,” he said.

Talking about the lingering effects, Sharma cited example of China where many couples had filed for divorce after the lockdown. “This could be side-effect of staying together in closed quarters for prolonged period. On the brighter side, relations might improve and people might develop a broader outlook,” she said.

In case of Manohar’s family, he said that they now knew each other much better. He also expressed concern about the rebuilding process for businesses.

Raich felt it was going to be a tough time for small businesses and employment would be scarce. “Finding manpower will also become difficult,” he said. Tarique was concerned about health of frontline warriors, who he said might develop complex mental disorders in years to come.

According to Agrawal, migrant labourers will return but felt it would be difficult for industrialists to employ many. 

Heart attack cases are going down, leaving cardiologists wondering, pointed out Sharma. She attributed this to people eating better, exercising, low pollution and spending time with family.

On the environmental front, there have been quite a few positives. But will they last? In Saboo’s opinion, people will learn to appreciate nature. Sharma isn’t sure because “everything will be back to what it was earlier”.

Raich too was of the view that it will be like New Year’s resolutions that are forgotten quickly. “We won’t be back to agriculture-based society,” Tarique said.

On Aishwarya’s statement that people will not give up luxuries so soon, Saboo said new habits developed in 30 days and “we have 45 days to change our life for better”.

“As soon as industries start, pollution will be back,” said Agrawal. According to Manohar, vegetarian food will become more popular. “Maybe those who went to villages may not come back in as many numbers,” he said.

Sharma was sceptical whether the situation will make people more compassionate. “Some will change but not the whole society,” she said.

“What will happen when reals scarcity happens? Charity is a temporary phenomenon. It will go down when resources start depleting,” Tarique said. 

Raich defined charity as an everyday act, in how you behave and conduct yourself. “People will come out on the streets if scarcity strikes,” he said.


