Day 2 of Covid-19 lockdown: 52 booked for flouting rules
2020-03-27
PRAYAGRAJ: Day 2 of the nationwide lockdown enforced to check the spread of Covind-19 ended with 52 persons being booked for violating rules mandated for the period in Prayagraj on Thursday.


Police caught a number of citizens in Old City and trans-Yamuna areas sitting outside their homes and wandering on streets.

Ten FIRs were lodged with police stations at Ghurpur, Khiri, Dhoomanganj, Mutthiganj , Jhunsi, Baharia, Naini and Manda under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. The section deals with violations of section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code.

Like the day before, streets wore a deserted look as local residents stayed indoors following the announcement of the lockdown. Shops selling essential commodities like medicines and groceries were open from 7am to 6pm. 

Police appealed to citizens to practise social distancing and ensured that shops selling essential commodities and pharmacies remain open from 7am to 6 pm.

Police also urged citizens to use the Dial 112 helpline to complain any trader found blackmarketing essential commodities. 

Besides, a Covid-19 helpline (0532-2641577\78 and 7458825340) and a helpline for getting essential commodities (0532-2266098\99) have also been lunched. 

SSP (Prayagraj) Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj said, “Police have roped in more than 200 vehicles within the city limits to ferry essential commodities so that the citizens do not have any problems. Police have also demaracted areas for citizens queuing up outside shops selling essential commodities and pharmacies so that they stand at least a metre apart.” 

The SSP also said police took stern action against those found sitting outside their homes in Mutthiganj, Kareli, Karelabagh, Khuldabad and other parts of the city. 

Police put up barricades on 183 crossings and intersections of the city to restrict traffic movement and challaned over 1,100 vehicles for defying lockdown rules on Thursday. 

Police also rushed two critically ill patients to different hospitals and arranged for meals for orphans and homeless poor living on roadsides in the city.

Police only allowed those two-wheelers and cars to move around whose owners were on their way to buy essential items, that too after checking their ID cards. 

The police also waived traffic restrictions for heavy vehicles delivering essential commodities and medical professionals.

On Thursday, three more special police teams were dispatched in trans-Ganga and trans-Yamuna areas of the city to check blackmarketing of essential commodities by traders. Policemen in civvies posed as regular customers and visited many shops in Old City markets like Mutthiganj, Kydganj, Khuldabad , Chowk and Dhoomanganj on Thursday. However, no cases of blackmarketing were reported.


