Day after ward boy, 4 others test +ve, DMCH quarantines 100 healthcare workers
2020-05-12
Ludhiana: Dayanand Medical College and Hospital (DMCH) quarantined about 100 healthcare workers on Monday, a day after its 31-year-old ward-boy and four others tested Covid-19 positive.The four were walk-in patients and included a 13-year-old girl of Khanna’s Ahluwalia Mohalla, a 69-year-old woman of Gurdaspur, a 60-year-old man of Faridkot and a 53-year-old woman of Patiala’s Rajpura.DMCH medical superintendent Dr Ashwani Chaudhary said, “We have quarantined over 100 healthcare workers as a precautionary measure, for they came in contact with the five positive cases. Some, including doctors, nurses and Class IV employees, have been isolated in the hospital. As the ward-boy has tested positive, about 10 officials of the isolation ward have been recommended quarantine. Their samples will be taken after five days. If they test positive, they will be put up in the isolation ward. The ward-boy, a resident of Haqikat Nagar in Haibowal Kalan, has mild symptoms of fever and cough.”The ward-boy had attended to a Jammu man, who had succumbed to the virus on May 9.DMCH secretary Prem Gupta said, “All staff members are taking full precautions. The hospital has sufficient staff as footfall has reduced by 75%.”Patient screening tightenedDMCH has started screening walk-in patients twice. Besides, transparent curtains have been put up in OPDs to check infection spread. “Patients and attendants are first screened at the entrance of the hospital and then at OPDs. As some walk-in patients had tested positive recently, the authorities decided to tighten the checks,” said a doctor.Previous walk-in cases that tested +veA 58-year-old kanungo of the revenue department had walked in DMCH with complaints of breathlessness, fever and cough. He had tested positive on April 16 and died the next day A 62-year-old woman of Basti Jodhewal was admitted to DMCH on May 2 with complaints of cough, cold and breathlessness from the past one week. She tested positive on May 2 and died the next day A 65-year-old man of Phagwara had visited DMCH on May 1 with complaints of fever and breathlessness. After he was confirmed to have contracted the virus, he succumbed on May 3A 65-year-old man of Jammu was confirmed positive on May 5. He succumbed on May 9.