Day 1 of Unlock 1.0: Social distancing norms thrown to wind
2020-06-02
PATNA: After over two months into the lockdown, life started limping back to normal in Bihar on Monday as all shops opened in most districts, the attendance increased in government and private offices and about 200 government buses also hit the streets on the first day of Unlock1.0.

However, people defied the social distancing norms at many places, including markets, railway stations and bus stands. A large number of people were also seen without masks or covering their faces with clothes.

Bihar Industries Association (BIA) president Ram Lal Khaitan was glad about resumption of most economic activities, but expressed concerns over violation of social distancing and other measures to prevent the Covid-19 spread. “Not more than 10-15% of people were seen either maintaining social distancing or wearing masks. If strict action is not taken against offenders and people are not made aware about the norms, situation in Bihar may become alarming, considering the already higher number of positive cases,” Khaitan said.

Nevertheless, additional chief secretary (home) Amir Subhani said steps were being taken to ensure adherence of social distancing norms. “Situation is returning to normal in the government offices and most works have resumed. Society is also opening up and all necessary steps are being taken to ensure adherence to social distancing. Awareness is also being spread for the same,” Subhani told TOI.

Even before the Centre imposed nationwide lockdown from March 25, Bihar government had ordered closure of schools, colleges and other public places from March 14. Though some economic activities were allowed under lockdown 4.0, but large scale relaxations came under Unlock1.0 announced by the Centre on May 30. Bihar government is following the Unlock1.0 norms without any modifications.

People were seen moving freely on the streets in Patna and most other districts as vehicle passes were no longer required. Many private offices also resumed work from offices but fear was palpable among many. “I am glad that offices have been allowed to function with full capacity. It will save our jobs. But the nearly 4,000 Covid-19 positive cases in the state make us apprehensive about contracting the virus in common places like office,” said Amit Pandey, an employee in a private computer firm at Jamal Road.

In Gaya, thousands of residents swarmed the streets throwing physical distancing norms to the wind even as the notification by the Gaya administration detailing the conditions of Unlock 1.0 was still awaited on Monday afternoon. Traffic jam was witnessed on Rai Kashi Nath Mor and GB Road.

All shops, business establishments, government offices in Khagaria opened, except in containment zones. Similar was the scene in East Champaran as all government offices at Motihari opened on Monday and employees resumed their work. 

In Nalanda, commercial establishments within Biharsharif Municipal Corporation area will open on Tuesday as per an order issued by DM Yogendra Kumar Singh. He said one of the three containment zones in Biharsharif municipal area — Khasganj — was unlocked on Monday and the remaining two will be opened on Tuesday.

(With inputs from Abdul Qadir in Gaya, N P Thakur in Khagaria, C B Pandey in Motihari and Farrukh Nadim in Biharsharif) 


