Day of recovery for Vidarbha: 16 new coronavirus cases, 46 discharged
2020-05-13
NAGPUR: On Tuesday, 46 Covid-19 patients in Vidarbha recovered and were discharged from hospitals in Nagpur, Amravati, Akola, Yavatmal and Bhandara. This number is nearly three times the number of new patients (16) reported from Nagpur, Yavatmal and Akola. All other districts in the region did not record any new patient. 


With six new patients, including three pregnant women from Covid-19 hotspot Mominpura, Nagpur surpassed the 300 mark of Covid-19 cases on Tuesday. On the same day, six patients recovered and were discharged in the city and this completed a century of discharged patients.

Now, out of 304 patients in Nagpur, 102 have recovered. Many of the rest are on the road to recovery and if the district adopts new discharge policy of Union health ministry, more than 170 could go home in the next three days. 

Districts coming under Amravati division have already adopted the new discharge policy. Due to this, 25 patients were discharged in a day from Amravati, nine from Yavatmal and five from Akola. In Bhandara, the only patient, a 45-yr-old woman, admitted in the isolation ward recovered on Tuesday. As she is a TB Patient, she was not discharged from hospital. Her TB treatment will continue now.

In Amravati, 25 patients recovered and 24 of them were discharged from Covid hospital. Only one, a kidney patient, was shifted to a different ward for dialysis. With this, the number of recovered patients has gone up to 46, leaving another 26 active cases in Amravati. The district has to date recorded 12 deaths.

In Wardha, Covid-19 test report of 23 out of 28 people who came in close contact with a coronavirus infected deceased woman of Hiwara (Tanda) in Arvi Tehsil came negative on Tuesday. Throat swab samples were tested at Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (MGIMS), Sewagram. Civil Surgeon Dr Purushottam Madavi said, “This is a relief for the district that all 23 reports came negative. However, all these persons would be in quarantine for next 14 days.”

There is a positive indication to ensure Yavatmal becomes a Covid-19 free district soon. With nine patients discharged on Tuesday, total 53 have been discharged from the isolation wards till date. Some 45 patients are there in the active positive category while a total of 55 are in the isolation wards of GMC Yavatmal. On Tuesday, father of positive tested pregnant woman from Indira Nagar also tested positive. Both of them are now in isolation ward.

Violation of social distancing in Yavatmal

On Monday, the collector relaxed the lockdown in Yavatmal and permitted all shops, excluding those in malls and supermarkets, to operate with set norms. However, neither shopkeepers nor customers were seen observing Covid distancing, which was a mandatory requirement for running businesses.

Taking cognisance of the blatant violation of social distancing, collector MD Singh has rescheduled the operation of shops. 

A similar picture was seen in Chandrapur. No new patient was recorded on Tuesday, but people rushed to the markets thwarting all the regulations of social distancing as lockdown curbs were eased from Monday. The new regulations allow shops of essential commodities to open between 7am and 2pm, while other shops have been allowed between 10am and 2pm.

All kind of intra district travelling has been allowed in the day, with restriction of only riders on two-wheelers; driver and 2 passengers in four-wheelers, and only two passengers in autorickshaws. The district and state borders, however, remain sealed.

