Day after delivering twins, woman passes away due to Covid-19
2020-05-30
Nashik: The 30-year-old woman, who gave birth to twins at Ahmednagar civil hospital on Thursday, passed away due to Covid-19 on Friday.

The victim had undergone caesarean section delivery on Thursday morning and gave birth to a baby boy and a girl, each weighing two kilograms. The hospital authorities have collected the swab samples of the infants and the reports are expected by early Sunday. The twins will be handed over to their father after the test reports are received.

The woman was admitted to the hospital on May 25 after she complained of breathlessness and later tested positive for Covid-19. Hospital doctors said the woman had severe pre-eclampsia and swelling over the legs. Pre-eclampsia is a disorder of pregnancy characterized by the onset of high blood pressure and often a significant amount of protein in the urine.

“She had developed a pneumatic patch in her lung due to the Covid-19 infection and her oxygen saturation levels could not be maintained at times. She had to be provided oxygen support,” sources in the hospital said.

According to hospital authorities, her condition started deteriorating after 8am on Friday due to pulmonary embolism and she passed away within next 45 minutes. Pulmonary embolism is a condition where there is a blockage in one of the pulmonary arteries and it is mostly caused due to blood clots.

“At 8am, her condition was stable and oxygen saturation was also good. But she started sinking within a few minutes and despite our best efforts, we could not save her,” added the hospital sources.

Hospital authorities claimed that the woman, who hailed from Ghatkopar area of Mumbai, had conceived 10 years after her marriage. She had come to her parents’ house in Nimblak village on the outskirts of Ahmednagar city.

“Although she was in the ninth month of her pregnancy, we tried to prolong her delivery as we were keen that she gives birth to the babies after getting cured of Covid-19. She developed severe labour pains on Thursday morning and we had to operate for the delivery,” sources said.


