Star quarantine facilities charge guests over Rs 4,000 per day
2020-04-01
HYDERABAD: Quarantined in star hotels in New Delhi, international passengers, many of them from Hyderabad, who flew into the country hours before the lockdown, have been hit by a double whammy— steep tariffs and an approaching ‘exit’ date. Some of the families that TOI spoke to said that the daily rent at these hotels ranges between Rs 4,000 and Rs 4,600 per day, which comes to Rs 56,000 to Rs 64,400 for the entire isolation period.


But the hefty bill is only part of their problem. Guests say that some of the hotels have asked them to vacate the premises by April 5, leaving them worried about where to go next. With all domestic connections suspended and several borders sealed, they are not sure how to get home once they check out.

“We have no relatives or family in Delhi. There is also no communication from authorities about alternative arrangements. I don’t know what my parents will do if they have to leave the hotel by April 5,” Naveen Amaravadi told TOI from Toronto. His elderly parents arrived in India from the US on March 22 and were taken to a star hotel. “We had to take a tough call and send them back (from my sister’s place in New Jersey) because my father is diabetic and he was running out of medicines. Also, the situation in the US was deteriorating so we thought they’d be safer in Hyderabad,” said Amaravadi, who even tweeted his story to officials in India, seeking help for his parents. He said there were at least 30 families from Hyderabad staying at the same hotel. 

When TOI contacted the hotel, the staff confirmed that the exit date was fixed as April 5. “Maybe the government will make some arrangement after that,” said an executive at the front desk, adding that 100 families had been quarantined at the property.

Another resident from Nizampet shared a similar story. “My parents returned from Philadelphia on March 20. They were asked to wait for mandatory screening at the airport for 19 hours...Since my father is 60 years old, they were asked to stay in quarantine for 14 days. They are staying in a hotel by paying Rs 4,000 per day. These are such tough times...Do they have to keep paying and stay in Delhi...Can they not return home?” Navya tweeted, seeking IT minister KT Rama Rao’s help.

