DC orders action against fake messages on Covid-19
2020-03-19
MANGALURU: The district administration has decided to take action against those who spread fake messages regarding authorities carrying out a Covid-19 prevention drive.


Deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh has directed officials to take action against those who created confusion among people by spreading a fake message. The fake message, which is being spread through social media and web portals, reads: “Kind Attention Mangaloreans, All are requested to stay indoors after 10pm tonight till tomorrow 5am… As there will be a disinfectant spraying procedure in order to contain Covid-19. Share this information to all your friends, relatives and family.”

Khader Shah, senior assistant director, department of information and public relations, said,“As per the government order HFW/54/CGM2020 dated 11-03-2020 spreading rumours and wrong information about Covid-19 is a punishable offence. Hence, action will be taken against those who spread wrong information about Covid-19.” 


632 people screened

As many as 632 people were screened for Covid-19 in Dakshina Kannada on Wednesday. While 689 people are under home quarantine, eight have completed the quarantine period as on Wednesday.

While samples of three people have been sent for tests, reports of 14 suspected cases were received. None of them tested positive for Covid-19. Two more people have been admitted for observation on Wednesday.

In Udupi, five suspected cases of Covid-19 were reported, including three in the district hospital, and one each in KMC and Kundapur Taluk Hospital. Out of five suspects, two had travelled to Dubai, while others travelled to Qatar, Abu Dhabi and Bahrain. Samples of all the suspected cases have been sent for tests, and reports are yet to come, stated officials of the health department.

Meanwhile, a patient from Puttur was admitted to Wenlock Hospital on Wednesday. ASHA workers have visited 55,241 houses as on Tuesday. Awareness has been created among 2,12,639 people so far on Covid-19. 

The health department has trained 1,331 ASHA workers to tackle Covid-19.

