Dead migrant in Koderma tests +ve for Covid, state death toll at 3
2020-05-24
Ranchi/Jamshedpur/Gumla: A 39-year-old migrant infected with the novel coronavirus died at sadar hospital in Koderma district on Wednesday, becoming the first returning worker and third patient in the state to succumb to the disease. He had returned from New Delhi on May 15 on his own arrangements and was put under home quarantine on arrival. The samples taken from his body tested positive along with 19 others on Saturday, taking the total number of cases in the Jharkhand to 350.

Talking to TOI, principal secretary (health) Nitin Madan Kulkarni said: “The deceased was admitted to hospital after he complained of chest pain on May 16. He died during treatment on May 20. His samples were taken and they returned on Saturday.”

Among the 20 cases detected on Saturday, 11 are from Koderma, four from Simdega, three from East Singhbhum and two from Ranchi. Of these, 19 are migrants. The other is a 21-year-old pregnant woman from Ranchi. 

Meanwhile, four patients from Ranchi and one from Deoghar were discharged after making a full recovery on Saturday. The state’s Covid tally now stands at 350, of which 205 are active while 142 have recovered and three patients have died. This is the first time the number of active cases in Jharkhand have crossed the 200-mark. The last 100 cases the state have been reported in just four days.

Koderma DC Ramesh Gholap said: “We recorded 11 positive cases on Saturday and all are migrants who have returned from Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and New Delhi. We have also recorded one death which include the deceased man from resident of Markachho.”

In Ranchi, two women tested positive for the virus. “A 19-year-old resident of Angara block who returned from Rajasthan and a preganant woman from Harmu area with no travel history in Ranchi city tested positive. We are starting containment measures in Harmu area,” Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said.

Simdega, which had only three cases until Friday, detected four fresh cases of coronavirus cases on Saturday. “Four migrants between 22 and 32 years of age tested positive in the district. All are migrants and are resident of Jaldega, Kuldega and Kolebira blocks,” Simdega civil surgeon P K Sinha said.

In East Singhbhum, three more patients tested positive for Covid-19, taking the district total in the Steel City to 20. “They arrived from Bangalore, Odisha and Mumbai on May 13 and were under isolation at MGM hospital. Of the three, one is a resident of Mango locality and the other is a from the rural Patamda block. The location of the third is being ascertained,” DC Ravi Shankar Shukla said.


