Dead ASI tests Covid positive
2020-06-10
PATNA: Altogether 69 police personnel of Aurangabad police lines were quarantined on Tuesday after the test report of an assistant sub-inspector of police (ASI), who died there on Sunday morning, came positive for Covid-19 Monday night. This is the first case of a policeman’s death due to Covid-19 in Bihar.

The 58-year-old ASI was found dead under mysterious circumstances in the police barrack of the police lines. He had earlier complained of high blood pressure and blood sugar. The postmortem report, however, stated cardiac arrest as the cause of death.

“The ASI’s test report from Sasaram came on Monday night,” Aurangabad district public relations officer (DPRO) Dharmaveer Singh said on Tuesday. His samples were collected after death and sent to the government hospital at Sasaram in adjoining Rohtas district. 

Aurangabad SP Deepak Barnawal said the police personnel who had come in contact with the deceased were identified and sent in quarantine for 14 days. The police barrack in which the ASI was staying has been sealed and is being sanitized. 

Aurangabad DM Saurabh Jorewal said all precautionary measures were being taken. The samples of the deceased ASI were sent to Patna for further test. His last rites were performed in the presence of family members while following all Covid protocols on Tuesday, the DM said. 

The ASI, a native of neighbouring Buxar district, had been posted at Khudwa police station in Aurangabad since May 5, 2019. Bihar Police Association (BPA) president Mritunjay Kumar Singh, however, said the ASI was deployed at Haspura quarantine centre under Obra block in the district against the police headquarters directive to the SPs not to depute any aged policeman or those suffering from diseases. 

Singh demanded action against the SP for violating the police headquarters order and deputing a sick policeman at a quarantine centre. The ASI had come to the police lines on May 27 to hand over reports of evidences in cases under the NDPS Act. He fell sick and was under medical treatment. The BPA chief also demanded Rs50 lakh as compensation to the family of the deceased. 


