'Dealing with Covid-19 was easier than dealing with misinformation, social stigma'
2020-04-13
KOLHAPUR: A member of the Islampur family — recounting his experience in the isolation ward of the civil hospital in Miraj where he along with his 24 other family members were admitted — shared how misinformation was spread on the social media, blaming them for the spread of Covid-19.


Six of the family members have recovered and discharged after testing negative for coronavirus. Talking to TOI, one of the recovered members said, "We have been living in Islampur for generations. The town is like one small community and supports each other through good and bad times. However, after we tested positive for Covid-19, the attitude of the entire town changed towards us. The social media was flooded with hatred without knowing about truth.”

He added, “When I revealed the names of people I came in close contact with, allegations were raised that I am taking their names only to settle old scores. It was not like that we created this virus and brought it deliberately to the town.”

The man, who was tested positive for Covid-19 on March 25, said misinformation like hosting of event and feast by our family was also rife on social media. “The fact is some of the elderly members, who had returned from Saudi Arabia, were unwell and we had consulted with out family doctor. We willingly went to the Miraj civil hospital and complied with all the instructions. This took many days, but no one knows about it. Even those who came in close contact with us had to deal with taunts,” he said.

“When we were admitted to the isolation ward, we were hopeful that none of us would die from this virus. But more than the disease, it was the spell of misinformation and rumours that was difficult to deal with. We did not know how will we face our friends and relatives after being discharged,” he added.

Stressing on the need for people to be compassionate during such times, he said, “I salute and admire the work put in by our medical team. They always encouraged us and gave their best.”

He added, “I would urge people to take care of themselves. Stay indoors and stay safe. If we can overcome this, anybody can. Our medical staff and administration is there for us."-- 


