Dearth of workers likely to continue in Kerala post lockdown
2020-04-06
KOCHI: The construction sector in the city is not hopeful about picking up momentum even if the lockdown gets lifted by mid-April. Construction activities in the city are largely dependent on the guest labour force and since the lockdow,n most labourers are either confined to their camps or continue to remain blocked at the borders of various states.

Officials with Kochi Metro said it would take considerable time for the stalled works to resume. “Once the lockdown gets lifted their priority will be to head to their native lands rather than getting back to work sites. At some sites of Kochi Metro, it will able to complete works with a skeletal labour force. Resumption of such works will largely depend on the availability of local labour force,” said a Kochi Metro official. He also said mobilization of labour force will be the responsibility of the contractors entrusted with the works.

A study released by Anarock Property Consultants on the impact on Covid-19 on real estate sector across the county points out since most workers are immigrants, labour shortage could emerge as a major challenge for the sector post lockdown. Several workers who were forcefully trying to migrate to their hometown were stopped by the authorities and quarantined at the state borders.

While a few are likely to return to their villages, others may come back to the project sites sooner. As a result, construction activities are set to be delayed with many developers and contractors facing labour shortage and a more pronounced liquidity crisis. The study stated that while many developers were overleveraged, the outbreak has made the situation grim in sustaining employment levels. It is anticipated that in the short-to-medium term, employment levels are likely to be affected significantly.

Anuj Puri, chairman, Anarock Property Consultants, says the nationwide lockdown has completely halted construction activity and project delays could run into several months for well-funded projects, and a couple of years for others. “Nearly 4.66 lakh units across the top seven cities (in the country) earlier slated for completion in 2020 now face a high risk of delays,” he said.

Many agencies supplying labour force to the various construction sites in the city said guest workers who continue to live in the camps and at other places in the city were unable to leave for their native places in North and North-Eastern regions of India as transportation systems have been halted. “There will be an exodus when the lockdown is lifted,” said Armjith Khan, a supplier of labour force.


