Death of doctor raises questions,some suspect new strain of virus
2020-06-12
CHENNAI: A 70-year-old medical practitioner, Dr R Balasubramanian, could not celebrate reaching a personal milestone as he died of Covid-19 on his birthday on Thursday morning. Experts said they suspect a different strain of the novel coronavirus could be affecting patients in the state, where an individual initially responds well to the treatment but the health condition suddenly deteriorates leading to death, as was seen in the case of the doctor.

According to his batchmate Dr M Balasubramanian and members of IMA, the doctor was admitted to a private hospital in Vanagaram on May 28 with complaints of fever. He was then tested positive for the virus and was undergoing treatment. “He was initially recovering well. Two days back, he had breathlessness and was put on a ventilator. He died at 4.30am on Thursday,” said Dr M Balasubramanian.

Belonging to the 1969 batch of Madras Medical College, Dr R Balasubramanian, a resident of Kilpauk, was a general and family physician operating out a clinic in Tondiarpet. According to his batchmate, he reopened his clinic in mid-May. “He was also seeing patients near his residence before he started getting symptoms,” he said.

According to officials at the IMA, Tamil Nadu branch, at least three doctors have succumbed to the infection in the state including Dr Simon Hercules and Dr Vinod Raja.

Dr A K Ravikumar, secretary, IMA, Tamil Nadu State Branch said like Dr R Balasubramanian, many have died of the infection after initially responding well to the treatment and that they suspect a different strain of the virus, possibly earlier seen in Maharashtra, as a reason. “The strain could have come from Maharashtra,” he said. “Earlier what we saw was the virus was infecting elderly people with comorbid conditions. Now it is affecting the young. The status is worrisome. That’s why we requested the state government for designated Covid hospitals and allot 25% of the beds in private hospitals for Covid treatment so both facility and manpower can be pooled in to treat such serious cases,” he said.


