Deceased tests +ve after funeral, 30 kin quarantined
2020-04-24
Kolhapur: A total of 30 family members and relatives of a deceased man were shocked to learn that he was Covid-19 positive only after performing his last rites in Kheradi Wangi village, 70km from Sangli, on April 18.

According to the Sangli district administration, the man, aged 35, used to work as an autorickshaw driver in Mumbai and had died following a heart attack at the Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Medical College and General Hospital in Sion, Mumbai, early in the morning on April 18. On April 17, he was admitted to the hospital with complaints of cardiac issues.

The relatives of the deceased in Kheradi Wangi village, who had participated in the cremation, have been kept under institutional quarantine. 

The man’s swab samples had been sent for testing, and the report showing him Covid-positive arrived on April 22. Questions are now being raised about the Mumbai hospital hurriedly sending the body to his village.

Sangli district collector Abhijeet Chaudhary said that it cannot be denied that it was a lapse on the part of the Mumbai-based hospital and that the body should not have been handed over to the relatives. “However, there is a possibility that the hospital staff might have been overworked, which lead to the lapse,” he said.

Chaudhary said the man’s swab sample was taken as a precautionary measure at the said hospital. The family members, after contacting the hospital officials, got to know about the Covid-positive report on April 22, following which they alerted the administration.

“Ideally, the body should not have been handed over to the relatives until the swab results were received,” he said.

It is mandatory to perform the last rites of Covid-19 victims as per the central government’s guidelines. 

Chaudhary said that the swab samples of the 30 people have been sent for testing and the results are likely to come by Thursday midnight. “We are also tracing the low-risk contacts of the deceased. The village has been sealed and vehicular movement stopped.” 

According to Chaudhary, the deceased’s death certificate had no mention of Covid-19 or anything else that could have alerted the administration, when the body was being transported. Hence, the ambulance carrying the body was not halted anywhere during its journey from Mumbai to Kheradi Wangi village.

State health minister Rajendra Patil-Yadravkar told TOI that he would look into the matter. “Ideally, the body should not have been handed over to the relatives,” he added 


