Decide on starting rapid anti-body test as a screening tool for Covid-19: SC
2020-04-29
NAGPUR: The Supreme Court has directed the Central government to take a decision on the suggestions made by city-based pulmonologist Dr Rajesh Swarnakar in his petition for mandatorily starting the rapid anti-body test as a screening tool for the Covid-19 virus as advised by the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR).


“We direct the Union of India to treat this petition as a representation, consider the inputs and grievances raised by the petitioner and take an appropriate decision in this regard,” a bench comprising justices NY Ramana, Sanjay Kaul and Bhushan Gavai said before disposing of the case.

The petitioner, who is expert pulmonologist, also opposed the creation of the isolation and quarantine wards and requested the apex court to issue directives in this regard. According to him, the suspected persons should be quarantined in their respective homes and this would save unnecessary expenditure of the exchequer.

Dr Swarnakar, through counsels Tushar Mandlekar and Rishi Jain, further informed the court that the ICMR is the highest medical research body dealing with everything related to the deadly virus. It has chalked out a strategy for Covid-19 testing in India and approved eight testing kits to conduct a rapid anti-body test.

“After discussion in detail with technical experts from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and after considering several inputs, the final decision on the anti-body testing advisory was prepared. It was later decided to start those tests in clusters in containment zones and in large migration gatherings for screening and surveillance,” he said.

The petitioner added that if the test is positive then it is advised by the ICMR that home quarantine should be followed for 14 days. But currently, all suspects have been placed in quarantine homes.

“Presently, diagnosis is confirmed only through RT-PCR test, using throat swab/broncho samples. The procedure is cumbersome and can only be carried out by an expert with personal protection equipment (PPEs). In India, such tests are conducted across 320 laboratories,” he said.

The rapid anti-body blood test is simple. Only a blood sample is used. It doesn’t require expert hands, costly infrastructure, PPE kits and has less risks of aerosol spreads. These tests can easily be done on all asymptomatic patients coming with ILI (Influenza like Illness) for just Rs400, he said.

