Decision on lifting lockdown difficult to make, says Alamgir Alam
2020-04-27
Ranchi: While many state governments, including a few non-BJP ones, have voiced their support in favour of another extension of the nationwide lockdown, the Jharkhand government was yet to take a call on the matter. 

Asked whether the lockdown would be extended, chief minister Hemant Soren’s principal secretary Rajiv Arun Ekka said, “Nothing has been decided till now. Deliberations are underway to find out ways to cope with the emerging situation.”

Although, Alamgir Alam, one of the key ministers in the mahagathbandhan government, said that going by the surge in the number of Covid cases, especially in Ranchi, the decision to lift the lockdown won’t be easy for the state government to make. Alam hoped that some clarity would emerge after the meeting between the prime minister and the chief ministers on Monday. 

He said, “The government seems to be in a wait-and-watch mode at the moment. While we complied with the first advisory from the Centre asking us to relax certain lockdown norms from April 20 onwards, we prefer not to enforce the second advisory on opening of standalone shops. Although the government led by the chief minister will soon take a call, I personally believe that we have to strike a perfect balance — i.e. to continue with certain curbs in affected zones and relax lockdown rules in a staggered manner in non-affected areas.”

Alam added that the state government is also readying a blueprint to handle the influx of stranded migrants post the lifting of the nationwide lockdown. “Even if lockdown goes, a host of restrictions would be in place till the Covid situation returns to normal,” he added.

Amid the uncertainty, Alam’s party, the Congress, wrote a letter to the chief minister placing certain demands. Senior Congress leader Alok Dubey said, “The party has demanded waiver of water and electricity bills, among others, for micro and small businesses to help the latter tide over the crisis. Moreover, infrastructure projects — mainly in the public sector — should be pushed so as to give more labourers an avenue of employment.”

Another spokesperson, Lal Kishorenath Shahdeo, added, “Sweet shops should be allowed to open in areas that aren’t in the red zone. This move, if taken, will help dairy farmers. Regulated movement of traffic between districts should also be permitted.” 

Notably, in less than a month after the first Covid case was detected in the state, the total number of cases has jumped to 73 and the coronavirus has spread to 10 districts in Jharkhand.


