Gujarat: Decisions on lockdown 3.0 modalities on Saturday
2020-05-02
GANDHINAGAR: The state administration will meet on Saturday to decide on various aspects of the Union government notification and how they will be implemented in the state even as stage three of the lockdown begins from May 4.

 Although the new guidelines for lockdown 3.0 permit state governments to do micro-zoning within large areas under municipal corporations and even in red-zone districts, the state government is not inclined to provide any major relaxation in lockdown for three cities — Ahmedabad, Surat and Vadodara. Rajkot, where there are relatively fewer Covid-19 cases, may get some relaxation.

Nitin Patel, deputy chief minister and state government spokesperson said, “The state government will strictly follow the Union government guidelines for the extended lockdown period. Officials have been asked to prepare a report based on the guidelines that have been issued. We will meet on Saturday to discuss every issue in detail, after which the government will make necessary announcements.”

Sources said that the government will seek feedback from officers, political leaders, business and trading community and general public, before taking a call on which activities should be permitted in the green, orange and red zones. “Any relaxation can lead to further worsening of the situation. Therefore the government will examine all aspects closely before making announcements in this regard,” the sources said.

After the government of India declared 9 districts of Gujarat in the red zone, 19 in orange and 5 in green zone and indicated the possibility of relaxation in orange and green zones, there was a buzz in the state administration that the state government may consider micro-zoning in the four big cities of Gujarat and offer some relaxations. However, a decision in this regard will be taken on Saturday.

With 326 new Covid-19 patients testing positive in Gujarat on Friday alone, the state now has 4,721 positive cases. As the number of Covid-19 patients jumped from 766 cases on April 15 to 4,721 on May 1 – a 516% increase in just a fortnight – the number of red zones defined by the Union health ministry has also gone up. According to a letter issued by the ministry, nine districts namely Ahmedabad, Surat, Vadodara, Anand, Banaskantha, Panchmahal, Bhavnagar, Gandhinagar and Arvalli, are now classified under red zone.

The state has 19 districts in the orange zone while only five districts, namely Morbi, Amreli, Junagadh, Porbandar and Devbhumi Dwarka, are in the green zone. According to the previous classification, five districts — Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Surat, Bhavnagar and Rajkot were classified under red zone i.e. hotspots with large outbreaks.

According to the new list, districts are designated as hotspots /red-zones, orange zones and green zones based on incidence of cases, doubling rate, extent of testing and surveillance feedback. The list will be revised on a weekly basis or earlier.


