Declare Covid-19 natural calamity: Hoteliers to PM, CM
2020-03-27
Aurangabad: The Aurangabad Hotels & Restaurants Association on Thursday demanded that Prime Minister Narendra Modi and chief minister Uddhav Thackeray should declare the pandemic coronavirus as natural calamity owing to the problems it has brought to the hotels and hospitality sector.

In a communication sent to the Prime Minister and chief minister, association president Harpreet Singh Nirh said: "The Covid-19 outbreak has added to the revenue losses that we have been facing since quite a few years. We urge you to declare this pandemic as natural calamity."

The association also listed many issues the they have already been experiencing owing to different reasons. "Drought, shutting of bars after a Supreme Court ruling, 8 major riot incidents, garbage issue and shutting down of Jet Airways in the past 2-3 years have been proving to be a deterrent for travelers from across the world. All these things have directly affected the hotel business," the letter said.

"By the time we could come out of this setback, we have landed in a much bigger and major crisis with the spread of this virus. This has not only impacted the flow of foreign and Indian tourists alike," it added.

The association said that their members witnessed huge cancellations in rooms, events, marriages and banquet bookings. "The virus is even keeping the locals away from restaurants. Even after the scare is over hotel industry will still take a substantial time to be back in business," Nirh said.

"Fixed costs like staff salary, maintenance and electricity bills are highest in hotel industry compared to any other industry. Hotels require huge investments to set up and in the current scenario loan repayments will suffer. We won’t be able to survive with such high loan repayments along with other higher operating expenses and entire tourism infrastructure of the city will collapse," he added.

The hoteliers have demanded relief in provident fund and Employee State Insurance Scheme contribution for at least one year. They have also sought 50% support for payment of staff salaries under MNREGA, waiver of profession tax for one year, as well as relief in income tax, GST, electricity bills and exemption of income tax on salaried class having income up to Rs 10 lakh per year.

The association also urged the prime minister to "urgently look into the demand and sought immediate disbursement by departments concerned to assist in survival and keeping the infra of the tourism capital of Maharashtra alive".


