Delhi doesn’t mask its indifference in faceoff with coronavirus
2020-06-13
NEW DELHI: I was sweating and my mask slipped down; I just took it off to drink water; I can't breathe if I have it on for long periods. These were reasons given to TOI on Friday by people across the city who were wearing a face mask improperly or, in cases, not wearing one at all. The mask has been the subject of an unprecedented awareness campaign alongside hand hygiene, yet even in crowded environments, Delhiites appeared careless about a simple measure that could prevent possible infection by the novel coronavirus.


Many, of course, wore their masks properly. But for others, it seemed like a token gesture to the gravity of the crisis, slung around their necks like a shabby neck ornament, but not used even when interacting in close quarters with others. There was too a set attentive enough to cover their mouths, but not their noses. And in a dismal indication of economic disparity, there were daily-wage earners who could only afford to buy a mask once and re-use it for two-three months.

Most people were quick to pull up their masks when TOI pointed out the breach of norms. A man at M Block Market in Greater Kailash requested not to be named while explaining, “My handkerchief comes loose over time and starts slipping down. I am also sweating. That is why my face is uncovered.”

A couple, similarly unmasked, reasoned the market was ‘relatively empty’ and so it wasn’t a risk. “We pulled down the masks for relief,” one of them said. Rajiv Sharma claimed to have pulled down his mask to be able to smoke. “I first checked to see one was close by,” said Sharma. In Connaught Place too, several shoppers were nonchalantly about masks. 

Avinash Kumar, a cloth shop owner at the GK-1 market, said he had noticed a number of unmasked people coming to the stores. “This is a big problem and is now rampant across Delhi,” Kumar said. “People are taking the masks casually though infection is rising every day.” Not all shopkeepers appeared to be concerned like him. At the busy Jangpura Market, Ashok Kumar, a tyre shop owner, was instructing his workers, his mask covering his mouth, but not his nose so as to “breathe’ freely”. While one of his workers donned a mask, the other had it dangling around his neck. The fatalistic tyre seller explained, “Jo hona hai, bhagwaan ke haath mein. Jiski jab likhi hai, tab aayegi (Those whom God wills to die will die even after taking precautions).”

Guddan Lal, a rickshaw puller at Central Market in Lajpat Nagar, said the lockdown had left him without money to buy a new mask every week. “I wash this one daily and try to keep it on at all times, but it is discomfiting in this heat,” Lal said. A closer look revealed his mask to be a basic surgical one that should be discarded after use.

At an electric repair shop there, all three staffers were bare-faced. “We know the risk, but we have to take it off at times to breathe freely,” pleaded Vinod, one of the three. Tea seller Ashish Bansal at GK-1 M Block said he hated a mask in this heat, but tried to “maintain a distance from workers’’ and pulled one on when a customer came.

