Delhi hospital sealed after 18 staffers test positive for Covid-19
2020-04-07
NEW DELHI: The state government on Monday sealed the Delhi State Cancer Institute (DSCI), a 180-bedded hospital, after it was found that 18 of its healthcare workers — two doctors and 16 nurses — had Covid-19.


At least 50 other staff members, including the director of the hospital and senior doctors, have been advised self-quarantine.

The Delhi governmentrun hospital is situated in Shahdara, close to Dilshad Garden, one of the hotspots in the capital.

One of the hospital’s senior residents who worked in the preventive oncology department had tested positive on April 1. Three days later, three nurses also tested positive for the disease, leading to a scare and the hospital deciding to shut down its OPD services. It also initiated the process of shifting its patients — 48 people suffering from cancer — to a private hospital.


22 new cases take Delhi total to 525; 25 of them in ICU
We have collected swab samples of 19 patients. They have been sent for testing on Monday. The district surveillance officers are trying to contact all other patients who may have come in contact with the doctors and nurses who have tested positive for Covid-19,” said a senior official at the DSCI.

Cancer patients are at high risk of developing complications and the hospital was worried about the number of patients affected by the disease, he added.

A 38-year-old woman with travel history to Saudi Arabia, who lives in Dilshad Garden, tested positive for Covid-19 on March

17. Subsequently, many of her family members and two mohalla clinic doctors who came in contact with her, also tested positive.

The DSCI is in close proximity to Guru Tegh Bahadur (GTB) hospital where 103 suspected and 28 positive cases of Covid-19 are currently admitted. Many of them are evacuees from the Nizamuddin mosque. District surveillance officials are exploring whether the sudden explosion of cases in the hospital was linked to the Dilshad Garden cluster, or to the Nizamuddin mosque.

“We are hoping our cancer patients haven’t contracted the disease from one of the nurses or doctors. That can have devastating consequences,” said a senior DSCI doctor, who did not want to be quoted.

Delhi has reported 525 Covid-19 cases, including 22 confirmed positives on Monday. Of the total cases, 329 are connected to the Nizamuddin cluster, sources said. As many as 25 people suffering from the disease in Delhi need ICU support, while another 15 require oxygen support, suggesting their lung functions are compromised. To date, Delhi has confirmed seven deaths, but the number may increase sharply given the high number of seriously-ill patients.

Maharaja Agrasen hospital in West Delhi’s Punjabi Bagh has confirmed that five of their healthcare workers have tested positive for Covid-19. They are believed to have contracted the infection from a 52-year-old man from Sonipat, who died at the hospital recently during treatment.

At Sir Ganga Ram Hospital (SGRH) also, 108 staff members are under quarantine as two patients who visited the hospital last week were confirmed as Covid-19 positive cases.

A senior doctor at AIIMS and his wife were confirmed positive last week. The wife delivered a healthy baby on Friday. Recently, two doctors at Safdarjung hospital were also tested positive. While one of them had travel history, the cause of infection in the other is still not known.

Also, at least 40 healthcare workers have been confirmed positive for Covid-19 in Delhi.

