Delhi: Jitendra Nath Pande, famed ex-AIIMS doctor, dies of Covid-19
2020-05-24
NEW DELHI: Dr Jitendra Nath Pande (79), eminent pulmonologist and former head of the department of medicine at AIIMS Delhi, who had tested positive for Covid-19 earlier this week, died at his residence on Saturday. 

Dr Pande and his wife tested positive on Tuesday with mild symptoms and decided to remain in home isolation, said AIIMS director Dr Randeep Guleria. His wife was shifted to AIIMS on Saturday. "We were following up and he said he was improving. On Friday after going to bed, he passed away in sleep, possibly because of an acute cardiac event," Guleria said. Pande had co-morbid conditions. 


‘Pande’s death great loss to medical fraternity’
Knowledge and humility can co-exist and Dr Pande was an epitome of that. He was an excellent human being and it is a great loss to the medical fraternity. AIIMS family will miss him the most because he joined AIIMS as an MBBS student and retired as the head of the department of medicine,” Guleria said.

Pande, who had authored hundreds of papers on respiratory medicine, had treated various famous personalities, including the President of India. After retirement from AIIMS, he was practising at Sitaram Bharatia Research Institute.

Dr Anoop Misra, chairman, Fortis C-Doc, said Pande was a great teacher, pulmonologist, biostatistician, and great diagnostician.


Deeply saddened to hear that today @covid19 claimed it's most illustrious victim Dr. J.N Pande Director & Prof of P… https://t.co/8nUoTSYNoj— Dr. Sangita Reddy (@drsangitareddy) 1590224994000

“Deeply saddened to hear that today @covid19 claimed it’s most illustrious victim Dr J.N Pande Director & Prof of Pulmonology@aiims_newdelhi. A stalwart of the medical world his work in pulmonology will continue to ensure better health for many. My Condolences to his family,” tweeted Sangita Reddy, joint managing director, Apollo hospitals group.

 

"Heartfelt condolences to Dr Pande's family. He retired from AIIMS after a long career of service but continued to work in another hospital until his unfortunate demise this week due to Corona. Delhi salutes you sir. RIP," Kejriwal tweeted.

