Delhi hospital discharges patient with cancer after he tests Covid-19 positive
2020-05-03
DEHRADUN: A top Delhi-based private hospital allegedly discharged a 65-year-old man, a resident of Dehradun in advanced stages of pancreatic cancer, after he tested positive for Covid-19. As per norms, Apollo Hospital — where the man was admitted — was supposed to inform health authorities about his status and provide him treatment, according to Uttarakhand’s additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant, who added that action would be taken against the hospital for flouting Covid-19 protocol.


A spokesperson for Apollo Hospital said the patient was not treated due to unavailability of a bed in Covid-19 ward, but was given the option of shifting to another facility. The hospital also claims that it had informed the Delhi government of the patient’s health status. (TOI could not independently verify this claim). 

The man, who had been admitted to the hospital in Delhi on April 28, was found positive for Covid-19 on April 30 after a test and then discharged. On May 1, he travelled for about 8 hours to Dehradun in a private vehicle with his son and the next day he dialled the state health department’s helpline to inform them about his status, according to Dr Dinesh Chauhan, district surveillance officer. 

Chauhan said the patient and his son have been shifted to All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Rishikesh, while his wife and daughter are in isolation wards at the Government Doon Medical College (GDMC). The family’s house help, driver and a relative will also be tested for the virus. 

District magistrate Ashish Srivastava said the patient would be tested for Covid-19 again after which the next course of action would be decided. “We will take action against the private hospital if he indeed tests positive.”

A spokesperson for Apollo Hospital said, “The patient had symptoms indicative of Covid-19 following which a test was conducted. He tested positive and was informed that beds were not available in the Covid-19 ward. He was offered a transfer to another of our facilities by the hospital’s nodal officer, who has been appointed by the Delhi government, but the patient decided to return to his place of residence for further management.”

