Delhi: Food inspector’s father dies; 700 school staffers on home quarantine
2020-04-19
NEW DELHI: A massive containment drive has begun in West Delhi’s Hari Nagar after the death of the father of a food supply inspector's (FSI) due to Covid-19. Around 700 staff members of 13 schools in the area have been asked to go on home quarantine, senior officials from the South Delhi Municipal Corporation said on Saturday.


The food inspector had frequented these schools, used as food distribution centres for the needy.

Out of these 13 schools located in areas like Uttam Nagar, Nawada, Rajapur Khurd, Bindapur, six are in the west zone, officials said. “There were around 300 staff members engaged in food distribution in these six schools and they have been told to undergo home quarantine for 14 days. They will be monitored regularly to check for symptoms like fever, dry cough or breathlessness. New staff will be put on duty in these schools,” they said.

While the inspector was deputed in circle number 33, he had also come in contact with inspectors of two other circles — 31 and 37. The number of people in home quarantine may go up as contact tracing is on, the officials said.


Many civic staff ‘scared’ families may be infected

A senior officer in the food supplies and consumer affairs department has written to the district magistrate of the West zone that staff members who had come in contact with the person were “scared” and “worried” that they and their “families could have contacted the contagious disease through human chain”.

Besides the 13 schools, places that are being examined include two private stores in Palam Colony and Uttam Nagar, 41fair price shops and multiple food and supply offices.

“The food and supply department has asked all the first contacts to go for mandatory quarantine and the food safety officer and the food safety inspector for testing. All those who interacted directly with the inspector should go for quarantine. The inspector who interacted with teachers should draw up a list of schools so that further advice can be given,” a letter, signed by the special commissioner of department, stated. They have also been asked “update” their status on Aarogya Setu app.

In order to avoid mass gathering, only two sons of the deceased have been given permission to perform the last rites and asked to wear gloves and masks. “The body will be handled by hospital staff,” the letter stated.

