Delhi: Health workers thrown into coronavirus battle without enough cover
2020-04-12
NEW DELHI: More than 35 healthcare workers, mostly nurses and some doctors, have tested positive for Covid-19 in Delhi. At least 300 others who came in contact with them are under quarantine. In Mumbai, 90 healthcare workers have similarly been infected. The story is the same in other states such as Rajasthan, where 22 healthcare workers have confirmed positive for Covid-19. In Madhya Pradesh, two doctors have died and a few others remain in quarantine after testing positive for the novel coronavirus.


In addition to high infection risk, health workers deployed in Covid-19 facilities also suffer from physical and mental exhaustion, the torment of difficult triage decisions and the pain of losing patients and colleagues. It is possible to alleviate these pain, say experts, mainly by providing them protective gear, N95 masks at the least, and distancing them from their families.

According to Dr S K Sarin, head of the task force appointed by Delhi government to prepare a strategy for Covid-19 management in the capital, most Covid-positive cases involving health workers came from non-Covid-19 hospitals. “This is due to the initial ignorance about precautions on the part of possibly both the patient and the doctor,” he said. “They probably did not realise that asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients can transmit the infection.”

In his report, Sarin has advised, “Anyone entering the hospital, including doctors and nurses, should be screened for symptoms of Covid-19. If they have any symptoms, they should be immediately referred to a coronavirus facility within the hospital or outside.” Till about a week ago, most non-Covid-19 hospitals didn’t have such facility. He said medical staff should wear N95 mask at all times, while patients should be asked to wear surgical masks. “Workers running the flu clinic, collecting test samples and managing Covid-19 facilities must get fullbody protection and wear hazmat suits,” he recommended.

Delhi State Cancer Institute (DSCI), where 22 healthcare workers have tested positive for Covid-19, recorded its first case on March 3, when a senior resident in the preventive oncology division tested positive. He contracted the infection from a relative. It is still unclear whether the senior resident infected the other 21. Three patients undergoing treatment for cancer were also found positive three days ago and one of them died on Friday.

At Maharaja Agrasen Hospital in Punjabi Bagh and Sir Ganga Ram Hospital in Karol Bagh, health workers contracted the virus from asymptomatic patients admitted for other illnesses. “We have a screening system in place and anyone with fever is advised to report to a Covid-19 facility. But what can you do when the person has no Covid-19 symptoms at the time of admission but tests positive later?” sighed a doctor.

Like Sarin, Dr K Srinath Reddy, president, Public Health Foundation of India, too stressed on personal protection equipment (PPE) kits for medical staff in high-risk areas. He also suggested deployment of younger doctors. “They tend to recover faster and without serious complications even if they get the disease compared with senior doctors,” Reddy explained.

Leeladhar Ramchandani, secretary general of Delhi Nurses Federation, said that many hospitals had indeed provided PPE kits to the staff deployed in Covid-19 facilities, but hadn’t been trained on how to wear or remove them, thus predisposing them to infection. “We have written to the government to provide on-site accommodation and fooding to nurses in Covid-19 facilities so they can work without the risk of transmitting the virus to family members. There’ve been instances when a nurse’s child or elderly family members have been infected,” Ramchandani said.

At Max Hospital in Saket, at least 150 staff members, including doctors and nurses, are under self-quarantine after coming in contact with two patients whohad been admitted to the hospital for heart procedures but later tested positive for Covid-19. Similar incidents also happened at Mumbai’s Wockhardt Hospitals and Delhi’s Sir Ganga Ram Hospital.

A medicine specialist at a top private hospital expressed the anxieties of many health workers. “I haven’t been going to hospital for the past few days because there aren’t many patients. I am also scared of being infected because I have old parents at home,” he said.

An article in the respected medical journal The Lancet recently said, “It is vital that governments see workers not simply as pawns to be deployed, but as human individuals. In the global response, the safety of health-care workers must be ensured. Adequate provision of PPE is just the first step; other practical measures must be considered, including cancelling non-essential events to prioritise resources; provision of food, rest, and family support; and psychological support.”

Dr Namit Choksi, a Schwarzman Scholar from Tsinghua University, China, reported that patients with a history of travelling abroad or exposure contact with positive cases often hide their medical history for fear of being sent into quarantined or not being treated. “The government should take necessary steps and rack up supplies of PPE kits to make sure every frontline worker has access to them. In addition, lying about his or her medical history to a medical professional must be made a punishable offence,” demanded Choksi.


