Can’t have permanent lockdown, says Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal as new cases rise by 1,163
2020-05-31
NEW DELHI: Shopping malls in Delhi will be opening from June 8, going by the new phased reopening plan unveiled by the Union ministry of home affairs on Saturday. This is in line with what the Delhi government was seeking. It wants the shops in malls to open on an odd-even basis. So far, only the shops selling essential goods were functioning. Neighbourhood religious places are also set to open.


However, no relaxations will be allowed in the 123 containment zones in the capital.

 

A total of 1,163 fresh cases was recorded in Delhi on Saturday, a new single-day high for the city. Though the MHA has proposed reopening of hotels, restaurants and other hospitality services from June 8, it remains to be seen if the Delhi government goes along with this. However, the city government has been pushing for more relaxations to give economic activities a boost. “We can’t have a permanent lockdown, CM Arvind Kejriwal said.


Markets to stay open till 9pm from Monday

No one can predict that the coronavirus will go away if the lockdown is extended by one or two months. We have to learn to live with corona and we have to arrange for everything required to treat corona positive persons,” Kejriwal said at a press conference on Saturday.

With the current phase of lockdown to be over on Sunday, markets in the city will be allowed to remain open till 9 pm from Monday. Traders have been complaining that they have been losing out on business because of the 7am-7pm restriction. Customers prefer to go in the evening because of the heat during the day.

MHA’s new order has relaxed the night curfew timing and now movement of individuals for non-essential purposes will be prohibited from 9pm to 5am. This will also enable morning walkers to complete their routine before the sun starts beating down.

However, there won’t be any early resumption of Metro services which the Delhi government has been quite keen on. It was responding to demands from traders to restart the services for giving business activities a major thrust. But the MHA has decided to deal with this issue later.

Public transport has already been operating in Delhi, albeit with restrictions, and shops are now allowed to open based on the odd-even plan. Offices and business establishments, besides takeaways at eateries, are also allowed to run.

People will have to wait longer for schools and other educational institutions, gyms, cinema halls and swimming pools to open. A decision on educational institutions will be taken in July and the rest in the third phase of the reopening plan. Delhi government, too, has also not been in favour of opening them soon.

There is no word yet on reopening of salons, barber shops.

An official said the state government will study the standard operating procedure prepared for resuming various activities and take a final decision based on that for allowing more relaxations after June 8. “The number of cases has been rising but the number of people admitted in hospitals has not gone up in a similar way. More people prefer home isolation because over 80% people have mild symptoms. It does not, however, mean that there is any dearth of beds in hospitals,” said an official.

