Delhi lockdown: Migrant workers are out of job, food and luck
2020-04-02
NEW DELHI: Mohammad Shahnawaz, 25, a labourer in south Delhi’s Khirki Extension, chafed at the confinement in his one-room house. With little to feed his family, he wondered if he could survive the three-week lockdown. “I have been living in Delhi for a decade and never faced such a big problem,” he despaired. “We can’t go out to work so there is little that we can do to make ends meet. There are around 5,000 workless labourers here, but food is distributed for 300 people. Even when people share the dal, roti, rice and pickle, we remain hungry.”


Another labour, Iliyas, disclosed that on the day he realised how bad things were, he asked his contractor for help, only to be rebuffed. “There is nobody to help us through the lockdown. Our only hope is the state government, but we may not survive long enough for its intervention to save us,” the 31-year-old said. “The food we are getting here is clear evidence that nobody cares about us.”

Mohammed Zafar, 41, who came to Delhi from Katihar in Bihar, went to Anand Vihar bus terminal on two consecutive days but could not leave the city. He has a family of five and very little savings to sustain them. “Every time we hear of food being distributed, we rush to get our share. But in the past two days, I have only managed a single portion. My wife and I skipped the meal and let our children eat the half-cooked rice,” Zafar said.

Anjali Bhardwaj, founding member of Satark Nagrik Sangathan, and social activist Harsh Mander have filed a petition in the Supreme Court asking the state government to give the beleaguered migrant workers minimum wages. “The Union home ministry issued guidelines saying that the employers pay the workers in full whether they were working or not. But the ground situation is not showing this,” claimed Bhardwaj

Laskar Taboor, 41, originally from West Bengal, works at a factory in Shahpur Jat. His problems are not very different from those of the migrant workers in Khirki Extension. “There are least 1,000 people working in the factories in this area. Almost half are getting food, but it is not edible at all,” alleged Taboor. “When we ask our contractors for money, they turn us away.”

When apprised of the workers’ views, a senior Delhi Government official said that people would be deployed at these areas specifically to make sure everyone got adequate fooding. He also assured that the quality of the food would be taken care of. 


