Covid-19 cases: Delhi travel, Unlock 1.0 fuelled Haryana spike, says Anil Vij
2020-06-09
CHANDIGARH: As the number of Covid-19 cases in Haryana head north, the state’s home minister Anil Vij claimed on Monday that he had endeavoured from Day 1 to keep the state’s borders sealed to contain the coronavirus spread, but pressure had been mounted on him from various quarters to change his decision. He also hinted that the Centre’s opening of all sectors has escalated the rise in cases.

“I refused to budge despite pressure and enormous number of phone calls because I had the responsibility to protect the people of the state. The central government itself decided to open all sectors in Unlock 1.0, which ultimately led to a spike in the state,” claimed Vij.

The minister, said he is closely monitoring the situation and may seal the borders again.

Haryana has witnessed a massive surge in the Covid-19 cases in the state in the past two weeks, from around 1,305 on May 26 to more than 4,800 on Monday. Even the numbers of deaths have reached from 17 to 39 with a surge of 22 deaths during this period. 

Vij said Delhi, which shares boundaries with Haryana, is totally in the grip of the virus and there are chances that people of Delhi can be carriers of Covid-19 in the state. He said it was because of people frequently travelling to bordering states, especially Delhi, that the state has witnessed a sudden spike. 

Referring to the Covid-19 data of the state, Vij said it is evident from the figures that 47% of the total Covid-19 cases in Haryana have been recorded from Gurgaon. He pointed out that the other districts with a high number of corona cases are also those bordering Delhi. 

The minister also blamed the rise of Covid-19 cases in Haryana on movement of people in the state from other parts of the country and due to opening of domestic flight operations.

“Since all the sectors have been opened now, one can only prevent Covid through self-motivation by following the social distancing norms because the government cannot deploy its employees everywhere to enforce the rules,” he added. 


