Delhi: Corona warriors too in grip of virus
2020-04-05
DELHI: Hospitals have become the new Covid-19 clusters in the capital, with at least 14 healthcare workers testing positive for the virus.


 


A total of four Covid-19 cases among healthcare workers - one doctor and three nurses - has been confirmed by Delhi State Cancer Institute. The hospital's OPD has been shut down temporarily over fear of the spread of infection among other staff members and nearly 45 cancer patients, who were admitted under different departments, are being shifted to a private hospital, sources said.

Last week, a senior resident at the hospital with history of contact to a relative who had returned from UK was confirmed positive for Covid-19.

It is suspected that the nurses also got the infection from him. "We don't know how many more staff members have contracted Covid-19. But as a precautionary measure, OPD services have been shut and our admitted patients are being shifted out," Dr B L Sherwal, medical director of the cancer hospital told TOI .

At Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, another major private hospital, 108 staff members were advised quarantine on Saturday after two patients who visited the hospital last week were confirmed as Covid-19 positive cases. "About a week ago, the hospital received two patients, suffering from critical illness, but they did not show coronavirus symptoms. During the period of admission, these patients showed respiratory symptoms and were checked for Covid-19 as per the ICMR protocol. They were found positive," the hospital said in a statement, adding that these patients were shifted to designated facilities.

"In all, 108 staffers, including doctors, nurses and ward boys, who were incidentally exposed to these patients have been quarantined. A total of 23 staff members have been quarantined at hospital and other attached facility, while the rest 85 have been quarantined at home," SGRH, in a statement, said.

The hospital added that at present, none of the quarantined staff has shown any symptom suggestive of coronavirus.

Three days ago, one senior resident at All India Institute Of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) tested positive for Covid-19. His wife, who delivered a healthy baby on Friday, and brother have also tested positive for the disease. At least a dozen other staff at the hospital, including some of the doctors who had come in direct contact with the senior resident doctor, have been advised self-quarantine.

Recently, two doctors at Safdarjung Hospital were also confirmed positive for Covid-19. While one of them had travel history, the cause of infection for the other doctor is still unknown. At least 50 healthcare workers, who had come in their contact over the past few days, have been advised to self-quarantine, hospital sources said.

"A healthcare worker can spread the infection further among other co-morbid patients who are at risk of developing serious complications once they get infected. That's why we need more personal protective equipment for doctors and nurses," a senior doctor said.

Across India, more than 50 healthcare workers have tested positive for Covid-19 in the country - triggering demand for more PPEs and stricter screening of patients with Covid-19 symptoms.

"In Italy, more than 60 healthcare workers have died. Many of their family members are also struggling with the disease," one of the doctors posted in the Covid-19 ward at Lok Nayak Hospital said.

Recently, Delhi government came up with guidelines stating that doctors treating coronavirus patients at Lok Nayak and GB Pant hospitals will be accommodated at Hotel Lalit and the payment of the same shall be borne by the state. Similar, arrangements are being made by the health department for staff involved in Covid-19 management in other hospitals.

