Delhi lags in trying times: 18,700 Covid-19 samples tested
2020-04-18
NEW DELHI: Is testing being done adequately to track Covid-19 in Delhi? Till April 16, data shows, 18,784 people were tested in the capital, nearly half the number tested in Mumbai, another major city hit by the novel coronavirus. On April 16, Mumbai had tested 35,085 people for Covid-19. The growth in number of tests conducted in Delhi has been relatively lower in spite of as many as eight private labs being allowed to carry out Covid-19 testing in addition to the seven government-run labs.


The lowest per day number of samples tested in Delhi in the past fortnight was 153 on April 3, highest on April 5 with 2,903 samples. Officials explained the big difference in the tests between these two dates was probably because of a large number of suspects being evacuated from the Tablighi Jamaat mosque in Nizamuddin. “The testing of their samples led to a sharp rise in positive cases,” conceded an official. On April 6 also, 1,867 samples were tested, mainly of the mosque evacuees and the people they had come in contact with. After that testing statistics decreased significantly.

 

As per government data, Delhi tested 577, 291 and 636 samples, respectively on April 7, 8 and 9. This rose to 1,093 on April 10 and was between 648 then and 2,179 on April 16. On Friday, 2,625 people were tested for Covid-19 in Delhi.

Public health specialists say that Delhi’s testing numbers are lower than warranted, it being one of the worst affected by the outbreak after Maharashtra. On Friday, Delhi had 1,707 positive cases and 42 people deaths. As many as 68 areas in the city have been declared as containment zones.

Delhi government said on Friday that orders had been issued to test samples of the communities under surveillance, people inn quarantine and all contacts of Covid-19 patients and patients admitted in hospitals. Dr S K Sarin, director of Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, who is advising the state government on Covid-19 management, explained to TOI that a major hindrance was collecting the nasal swabs from patients and their contacts. “To collect the nasal swabs, a team of at least four people wearing PPEs observing all safety measures is required per person. Hence, 70-80 samples can be collected in a day,” Sarin said. Another problem he pointed out was of persons exposed to the infection not readily acknowledging it due to the stigma associated with Covid-19.

Private labs conducting Covid-19 tests concede that people aren’t coming forward for testing. “The response hasn’t been as expected, but we hope the numbers go up in the coming days,” said a virologist. “I think people are hesitant to get tested fearing a positive result, in which case their houses will be marked. Even if they test negative, the neighbours might suspect them of infection.” He added that RT-PCR testing for Covid-19, which has been approved by ICMR, takes longer than rapid kit tests and requires specialised manpower.

Another problem with the testing process is the pendency of results. On Friday, results of 2,674 samples — 2,143 in government labs and 531 in private labs — were awaited. Recently, Delhi government issued orders stating that in case the number of samples collected was higher than the combined testing capacity of government labs, the samples collected at Covid-19-designated Delhi government hospitals or quarantine centres should be sent to the designated private labs. The government said it would bear the cost of the tests conducted at private labs. Delhi government is also awaiting one lakh rapid test kits to enable large-scale screening in the hotspots.

“Our numbers are low because we aren’t testing enough people. This is true for Delhi as well as whole of India,” argued an epidemiologist. “We do not know the extent of disease spread due to this serious lapse in Covid-19 management. Hopefully, things will improve once the rapid test kits become available for use.”

One of the reasons for low Covid-19 testing n the initial days was because the state government was allowed to test samples of only those who had travelled overseas or had direct contact with a Covid-19-positive case. Later, the Indian Council for Medical Research relaxed the parameters to include persons with influenza-like symptoms and healthcare workers. Under the latest guidelines, anyone who a physician deems fit for testing based on his or her symptoms can be tested for the insidious coronavirus.


