Delhi lockdown: Spend quality time with kids, Arvind Kejriwal tells parents
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, deputy CM Manish Sisodia and director of education Vinay Bhushan faced a volley of questions during the live video interaction session—“Parenting in the time of corona” held on Saturday. They answered queries from both parents and children. Educator Seemant Dadwal also attended the session.


Kejriwal and Sisodia insisted that while the world was going through a crisis, this could be an opportunity for parents to spend quality time with their children.

The CM also spoke about concerns of parents over private schools taking fees during the lockdown. “Some families are facing a financial crisis and hence finding it difficult to pay the fees, while private schools depend on the fees to pay the salary to their teachers and staff. This is a tough situation, and I will request the experts to give us suggestions on how we can solve such issues,” the CM said.

The live ses- sion, conducted by the government, was to assist parents and students currently at home due to the lockdown.

Sisodia said that there are around 44 lakh students in Delhi’s schools. “As a result of the lockdown, children are at home. It is very important to understand how to sail through these tough times. The aim is to effectively utilise our time during the isolation, and that is why we are holding this discussion.”

When a student asked why they can’t go out and play, the CM asked parents to explain to their children that this virus is contagious and spreads through direct contact.

Throughout the live feed, both Sisodia and Kejriwal insisted that the lockdown was an opportunity for students and parents. “It’s a crisis that we should convert into an opportunity. We have such a fast-paced life and people never sit and talk to each other. This is the first time that parents and children are at home and can spend quality time together,” said Kejriwal.

On the students missing out on their happiness classes, Sisodia said that “it is a good time for parents to learn what the children learn at happiness classes and maybe it’ll help them too. Parents can do meditation with their children.”

Some students asked about ways to beat boredom. Bhushan replied that already parents have been advised to conduct activities at homes for their wards.

There were parents who posed the question of countering the negativity caused due to the news about coronavirus and deaths. To this, Dadwal who is also the CEO of Meraki Foundation said that people should be away from social media. “Start doing activities at home and create positivity. Let your children express themselves more. Do not suppress them or be angry at them.”

Sisodia said that parents should make sure that students don’t go into depression due to the situation.

Kejriwal later said that the government would extend this programme and conduct such sessions on a regular basis with various experts. “Our motive is to change this time of crisis into an opportunity.”

