Delhi: 36% of Jamaat members test positive for coronavirus, illegal colonies new worry
2020-04-19
NEW DELHI: Of the nearly 3,000 Tablighi Jamaat members, who have been put under quarantine, 1,080 (36%) have tested positive for the novel coronavirus and the rest negative. Well placed sources in Delhi government have confirmed this.


The sources have told TOI that the Jamaat members and their contacts are nearing completion of 14 days in isolation. “They will be tested again — positive as well as negative cases — and only then cleared,” said a senior official, who did not want to be identified.

 

As on April 17, the capital had recorded 1,707 novel coronavirus cases. Of this, 63% (1,080) was related to the Jamaat. The state health department said the testing of the Jamaat members ended on April 14 though, when nine of them tested positive.

“After April 14, Delhi’s Covid-19 tally has come down significantly which is a positive change,” an official claimed. On April 13, Delhi had recorded 356 Covid-19 cases — its highest single day tally — of which 325 cases were related to Jamaat members and their contacts, sources said.

“Between April 15 and April 17, no new cases have been recorded among the Jamaat members. And this has a clear reflection in the state’s daily tally,” the official said.

“The Jamaat members and their contacts also account for majority of hospital admissions in the state’s Covid-19 facilities. With those testing negative getting discharged, the occupancy rate in state-run hospitals and quarantine facilities is likely to reduce drastically,” said an official.

But the capital is not the only state reeling under the pressure due to the high burden of Tablighi Jamaat-related cases. Joint secretary in the health ministry, Lav Agarwal said on Saturday that of the 14,378 Covid-19 cases reported in the country so far, 4,291 cases were linked to the Markaz event held in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area in March.

“Most of the Markaz event-related cases have been found in states with high burden of the disease, such as Tamil Nadu (84%), Telangana (79%), Delhi (63%), Uttar Pradesh (59%) and Andhra Pradesh (61%),” he added.

In Delhi, the new worry is detection of cases in unauthorised colonies like Sangam Vihar. Four new cases of Covid-19 were confirmed from one household in Sangam Vihar--an unauthorised colony in South Delhi which is home to nearly a million people, mostly migrant workers from economically weaker section of the society — on Friday.

“The neighbourhood where positive cases have been detected has been declared as a containment zone,” authorities said.

