Delhi: 45-day-old infant becomes India’s youngest Covid-19 casualty
2020-04-19
NEW DELHI: A one-and-a-half-month-old child admitted at Delhi’s Kalawati Saran Children’s hospital became India’s youngest Covid-19 victim on Saturday.


Sources in the hospital, one of Asia’s biggest for children, told TOI another 10-month-old child who is Covid-19 positive is also admitted there. Three days ago, a senior resident doctor was found positive for Covid-19.

Later, when persons who had come in his contact were tested, one more doctor, three nurses and a few other staff members tested positive for the disease.

As these doctors and nurses were involved in the care of children admitted in the hospital, sources said, the children were tested too.


Other kid stable, says doc

Two children admitted in the hospital tested positive, of which one died on Saturday. The other one is stable,” said a senior doctor, who did not want to be identified.

He added that more than 30 staff members of the hospitals and patients were tested and many of them tested negative too. “Some of the other children admitted in the hospital are too small and on ventilator support. We are making arrangements to place them in safer areas, maybe another hospital with equivalent facilities, to reduce the risk of infection among them,” authorities added.

Earlier, a 14-month-old baby boy, who had tested positive for novel coronavirus in Gujarat’s Jamnagar district on April 5, died of multiple organ failure.

The toddler, son of a migrant labourer-couple having no recent travel history, died on April 8 at a government hospital in Jamnagar.

Local authorities said the child was in a critical condition ever since he was admitted to the hospital. The boy, who tested positive for novel coronavirus two days ago, was as on ventilator support and eventually died due to multiple organ failure, the hospital said. in a statement.

“Children are usually less likely to develop complications even if they get Covid-19. Those with existing illnesses may not be as fortunate though,” epidemiologists say. A 10-month-old child of a nurse working at AIIMS has also tested positive for Covid-19, sources said.

Kalawati Saran Children’s hospital is the second government-run hospital where a significant number of cases of Covid-19 have been confirmed among the staff members and patients. Earlier, more than 30 nurses, doctors and three patients admitted at Delhi State Cancer Institute had tested positive for the disease. Two cancer patients, who contracted the infection, died within a fortnight of the diagnosis.

