Delhi-return man tests positive for Covid-19 in Rampur, district tally goes up to six
2020-04-12
RAMPUR: A 23-year-old resident of Indra village under the jurisdiction of Bhot police station tested positive for novel coronavirus in Rampur, taking the district tally to six. 

Speaking with TOI, chief medical officer (CMO), Rampur district hospital, Subodh Sharma said, “The patient is a barber who used to work in Delhi. He returned to his village on March 17 and was quarantined on April 5. Police had sent five people, including the patient, to the hospital for a check-up. Their samples were sent to Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College in Aligarh. On Friday, the medical college confirmed the Indra resident to be Covid-19 positive. He has been shifted to the isolation ward.”

The CMO said, “Six relatives of the patient have been quarantined at the district hospital and their samples will also be sent to JNMC.” 

Meanwhile, an FIR was registered against village pradhan Zulfiqar, also a family member of the infected barber, for allegedly obstructing a police team that visited Indra village in search of the patients’ relatives. 

Bhot police station SHO Yogendra Singh said, “The pradhan obstructed the police personnel and helped the patient’s relatives in evading police. Police, however, brought the six family members, including the pradhan, to the hospital and quarantined them.” 

The SHO said the pradhan was booked under sections 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 336 (act endangering life or personal safety of other), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Police also slapped sections 3 of the Disaster Management Act on them.”

Rampur district magistrate Aunjaneya Kumar Singh said, “Local authorities have sealed the entire village and nobody is allowed to enter the village without prior permission.” 

