Delhiite’s frantic trip to Bhopal for coronavirus treatment is too late
2020-06-09
BHOPAL: Turned away by five hospitals, a Delhiite made a desperate 800km train trip to Bhopal on Saturday to save his life, but it was far too late. He got admission immediately, but died early Sunday morning, sending authorities scrambling to track down his co-passengers on the train and his contacts here.


Authorities in Bhopal wonder how a man with fullblown Covid infection and 103-degree fever got past screening in Delhi and Bhopal.

His 18-year-old son, who is in Bhopal, preparing for competitive exams, said his mother had a severe asthmatic attack and collapsed at their Mayur Vihar home in Delhi on Sunday on learning of the death. His 15-year-old sister had a nightmare getting her admitted while struggling to cope with the loss of their father. After being turned away by one hospital, she was taken in by a private hospital in Noida’s Sector 11.

The 42-year-old was cremated in Bhopal on Sunday. “I sent tweets and e-mails to the Delhi CM and health minister and even the PMO, but in the end we lost,” said the boy.

According to the son, his father began showing Covid infection symptoms on May

29. “He was quite aware of the disease and went to a local health centre where he was given paracetamol and sent home. Then, he went to GTB Hospital and requested for Corona test but the hospital refused,” said the boy, who lives in a hostel in Bhopal. The family has several close relatives here.


Father turned away from 5 hospitals
Over the next week, his father went to five hospitals, only to be turned away by each of them, the teenager told TOI. No one heeded his pleas to be tested.

By then, his family was getting desperate. “I made more than 50 calls and several emails to hospitals to have him at least tested. My father’s health started deteriorating. As a last resort, I asked him to come to Bhopal. He arrived at 6.30am on Saturday by Bhopal Express. I took him directly to JP Hospital from where he was referred to Hamidia Hospital,” he said.

Within two hours of admission, the patient was diagnosed with Covid-19. He died the next day.

The daughter tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday and has been advised home quarantine. Her mother is negative.

On Monday, the health department and railways initiated a massive contact tracing exercise. Around 50 possible close contacts have been identified, said an official, wondering how the patient passed Covid screening.

“He had visible symptoms of distress, yet it did not raise alarm bells at Delhi or Bhopal railway stations,” said an official. His family says he took Covid-19 precautions and followed social distancing during his journey. “Even here, instead of getting into his brother’s car, he went to hospital by auto. He didn’t even hug his son who he was meeting after a year,” said a family member.


