Delhi to start plasma trials for Covid-19: CM Arvind Kejriwal
2020-04-17
NEW DELHI: Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday said that Delhi will soon begin clinical trials of plasma enrichment techniques to help critically ill coronavirus patients.


Addressing a digital press conference, Kejriwal said that the Centre has given its nod to Delhi to conduct the trials. Kerala, Maharashtra and Rajasthan have already got the approval from the Centre for clinical trials of plasma enrichment techniques.

“The trials will begin in the next three or four days. If successful, Delhi government will be able to save the lives of serious Covid-19 patients,” the chief minister said.

Kejriwal said various countries across the world had used plasma technology and achieved successful results. “People suffering from heart or respiratory diseases continue to be at a higher risk of losing their lives due to Covid-19. If plasma technology is used in such cases, it can save lives,” he said.

Kejriwal said that doctors of Delhi government hospitals had been doing a detailed research on this. “We have been given the approval for the trial. If it turns out to be successful, we will be able to focus on trying to save the lives of serious patients. The results will be known in 4-5 days.”

The plasma transfusion technology involves taking the blood of the person cured of Covid-19, which has anti-bodies that helped the person recover, extracting plasma from it and then transfusing it into an infected person.

The chief minister also urged people to identify the poor and inform the government so that relief measures reach them. There was a need to create awareness among people who are devoid of information, Kejriwal said.

“Our teams on social media are monitoring such cases 24X7. We need your support in helping us with information on who is hungry and we will make sure that the support reaches there. Over nine lakh people had lunch and dinner at hunger relief centres on Wednesday. We have the capacity to feed 15 lakh people,” Kejriwal said.

He added that about 15 lakh non-ration card holders had already applied for ration through the government’s portal.

