Delhi govt orders five-fold hike in Covid-19 beds at private hospitals
2020-05-25
NEW DELHI: A day after TOI highlighted the shortage of beds for Covid-19 patients in the city's private hospitals, the Delhi government took note of the crisis and decided to increase the allocation in these hospitals. 


It directed all private hospitals and nursing homes with a capacity of 50 beds or more to reserve at least 20% of their total bed strength for coronavirus patients.

Till now a total of around 650 beds were available for coronavirus patients in around eight private hospitals, although 10 were designated as Covid-19 hospitals. After the government's directions, this number is expected to rise to nearly 3,000, roughly five times the current availability.

As on the date, the government said, there are 117 private hospitals or nursing homes having a bed strength of 50 or more. Now, all these hospitals will have to earmark beds for Covid-19 patients.

 TOI had reported on Saturday how nearly 80% of beds in private hospitals designated for Covid-19 in Delhi were occupied. Top hospitals such as Apollo in Sarita Vihar, Max Smart in Saket, Fortis in Shalimar Bagh and two Sir Ganga Ram hospitals in Pusa Road had confirmed that most of their beds were running full. 

117 private hospitals to reserve 20% beds for Covid

The government’s decision marks a major shift from its previous policy of designating only those hospitals or units for Covid-19 treatment that could be completely turned into Covid-19 facilities — thus avoiding the mixing of Covid-19 patients with others.

“Delhi government felt a need to increase the number of beds dedicated to Covid-19 patients. Hence, all 117 private hospitals/nursing homes with a capacity of 50 beds or more have been directed to reserve 20% of their total bed strength for Covid patients,” Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain tweeted on Sunday, along with a copy of the government order for expansion of Covid-19 beds in private sector.

The order states that government will append the Delhi Nursing Homes Registration (Amendment) Rules 2011to allow all hospitals treating Covid-19 patients to accommodate 25% extra beds depending on space availability for non-Covid patients, if they choose so.

“These 117 private hospitals shall bill the Covid-19 patients as per their respective schedule of charges. However, the billing for non-Covid patients admitted on extra beds shall not be more than 50% of the lowest economy category of the concerned hospital as per earlier practice during upsurge of cases of vectorborne diseases,” it adds.

Dr Vinay Aggarwal, executive member of the Delhi Medical Council (DMC), said an increase in bed availability in private hospitals was much needed.

“Since it’s a national calamity, we all have to participate. The non-Covid-19 hospitals will have to identify smaller units that are separate from the main block to accommodate Covid-19 patients. It goes without saying that infection control measures will have to be stepped up too to ensure that other patients don’t feel scared,” he said.

Dr Aggarwal, however, added that many small hospitals and nursing homes with more than 50 beds operate from residential areas and, given the stigma associated with Covid-19, there might be some resistance against the move.

Ashok Agarwal, lawyer and public health activist, suggested that the government should select private hospitals and declare them 100% Covid-19 designated instead of directing the earmarking of a few beds.

“It may lead to a scare among non-Covid-19 patients. Already, we are seeing many patients suffering from diseases such as cancer and heart disease who are scared to go to hospital for the fear of contracting Covid-19,” he said.

BJP targets Delhi govt

Delhi BJP on Sunday alleged that the corona patients were not getting proper treatment due to unavailability of beds in the health facilities. It alleged that while Delhi government claimed to have beds and other facilities to treat 30,000 patients, it told the court that 3,150 beds were earmarked in government and private health facilities. Delhi government, however, refuted the charges and said it had preparations for 10,000 patients, while the plan of action for 30,000 patients was ready.


