Covid-19 in Delhi: Restaurants down shutters for the month
2020-03-18
NEW DELHI: With social distancing being promoted as one way to slow the relentless march of the novel coronavirus, Delhi restaurants have decided to cease operations till March 31. Though Delhi government has ordered the closing only of gyms, spas, cinema halls and nightclubs, restaurateurs told TOI that they could not risk the health of their guests and staff and had, therefore, taken a call to shut their outlets.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Priyank Sukhija of multi-brand First Fiddle Restaurants was clear that at a time like this, restaurant owners needed to put their staff and clients over business. “In the wake of the havoc caused by the novel coronavirus, we can’t deny the fact that restaurants are places where social distancing can’t be implemented,” he said. “We are shutting down all our restaurants across India till March 31 and we will be back with a bang once the Covid-19 threat ebbs.”

Echoing similar sentiments, Inderjeet Singh Banga, Gurgaon chapter head of National Restaurants Association of India and promoter of Prankster and Pirates of Grill eateries, stated, “The World Health Organization has declared Covid-19 a pandemic and since the virus spreads easily, closure has to be effected for the safety of our staff members and our guests.”

Dinesh Arora, founder of Eastman Color Restaurants, also felt it was time to take some stern steps to prevent patrons and staff from being infected. “The hospitality industry usually sacrifices almost everything to serve everyone. But it is facing this challenging situation, and safety is uppermost in our concerns,” he asserted. Arora urged people to refrain from socialising during this period.

The central and state governments understand the gravity of the emergency and the least the restaurants could do to boost the fight against the coronavirus was to shut their outlets and, thus, prevent gatherings, said Akshay Anand of Ophelia and Toy Room. Along with Anand, Riyaaz Amlani of Impresario Handmade Restaurants too has decided to down shutters till the situation improved. He said he had more than 50 employees in his outlets and keeping the restaurants open would mean violating the Delhi government directive limiting any gathering to 50 people.

While these restaurant owners have taken a voluntary decision to close their popular eateries, Sukhija urged the state government to take steps to ask the open outlets to follow suit so that Delhi could collectively fight the coronavirus infection before the situation got of hand.

