Delhi cops wary of snooping on 25,000 under quarantine
2020-04-03
NEW DELHI: Delhi government’s move to hand over close to 25,000 mobileImage used for representational purposenumbers of people under quarantine to the city police for surveillance has raised privacy concerns.


The government on Tuesday handed over 11,084 phone numbers of people who have foreign travel history and those who had come in contact with Covid-19 positive cases. Another 14,345 numbers were given on Wednesday. The surveillance is meant to check whether these people are adhering to quarantine norms.

While warning against a possible misuse of such a massive list, police sources said a verification of the numbers should be conducted and the monitored data should be in the hands of a high-ranking official.

Across the globe, many commercial entities, particularly those in the telemarketing, healthcare and insurance sectors, have been accused of trying to get their hands on such data, which apparently hold a high value in the aftermath of the Covid-19 crisis.


Cops to obtain call history, location
Police sources said unless a particular case required deep surveillance, the numbers were not to be put on “interception” — under which the target’s phone conversations are taped. This also requires the approval of the police brass and home ministry.

What police are going to do is obtain things like call history and locations. Delhi Police, it has been learnt, will monitor these numbers through an electronic map which will record a person’s movements using geotagging and other features. This will ensure that quarantine norms are adhered to.

“To obtain someone’s mobile location, the police just have to feed the number into their system, which is synced with the telecom service provider, to get limited data such as the person’s last cell tower location. This gives only a broad area where the person is located. People whose movements are found to be outside their designated area will be intercepted physically,” said an officer.

The police are also likely to go for other advance electronic checks which will ensure that the target doesn’t try to hoodwink the cops by moving around while keeping the phone at home. “Such mischief can be caught and the person will face strict legal action,” said an official.

The sources also cautioned against the possibility of phone numbers of people outside the quarantine list being sneaked into such a massive list, something that has been a headache for the police brass for long.

