Lockdown in Kolkata: Delivery continues, but food options shrink
2020-03-24
KOLKATA: Even though app-based home delivery services continued to operate through a ‘truncated partner network’, Kolkatans looking to order food were left disappointed on Monday as more than 80% of the restaurants shut their kitchens down. With a state government notification seeking closure of all eateries till March 31, food options have shrunk despite availability of delivery services. 


The Hotel and Restaurants Association of Eastern India (HRAEI) — one of the parent bodies of restaurants in Kolkata — claimed it was not feasible for most to keep kitchens running just for delivery. The restaurant industry in the state is staring at a loss of Rs 100 crore a day, according to the HRAEI.

Restaurants on the city’s food hub — Park Street — have been hit hard. All have closed their kitchens completely. “It would have been unfeasible to keep the kitchen open. Ensuring hygiene would be a challenge now and we are not willing to take any chance,” said Nitin Kothari, owner of Mocambo and Peter Cat. 

HRAEI secretary Sudesh Poddar said food orders have plunged despite online delivery services remaining open. “Delivery orders alone can’t sustain eateries. They merely supplement the business. Other than those who depend primarily on delivery services, the rest will find it difficult to keep kitchens running,” said Poddar. He added that delivery orders, too, have plummeted since people are wary of ordering restaurant food. 

Most restaurants have gone into a complete shutdown and staffers have been asked to go on leave. “I have asked my staff and cooks to go on leave. As of now, they are on a paid leave for I want them to stay safe and financially secure. But if this continues for an inordinately long period, we don’t know what it will lead to,” said Kothari. Another restaurant owner said he is already contemplating layoffs and leave without pay since sales have stopped. 

There were some, though, who continued to run their kitchens much to the delight of foodies. Take the case of Sanjha Chulha, which has kept just one base kitchen operational on Puddapukur from where its own fleet of delivery boys and aggregators Zomato and Swiggy are rushing off to all parts of the city. “There is a 100% jump in home delivery orders overnight and it’s growing,” said Asif Ahmed, spokesperson. “We are flooded with delivery requests and we are trying our best. The option of contactless delivery, where the boy leaves the food at your doorstep and you pay online, has also come in,” explained Sagar Daryani, owner of Wow! Momo.

Bengali speciality restaurant, 6, Ballygunj Place was flooded with home delivery inquiries too and so it decided to give a 25% discount in all its three restaurants. Those who live in the vicinity and chose to hop across to carry food home got a 50% discount, said spokesperson Dibyajyoti Chaudhuri.

Online food delivery services said they would operate since they are exempt from the lockdown. “We will continue to operate with a truncated partner network (restaurants and delivery executives) for those in need of food,” said a Zomato spokesperson.

