Demand for Covid-free home nurses on the rise
2020-04-20
Kochi: A doctor couple residing at Najarakkal in Kochi are desperately reaching out to nursing care services providers in the city to help them find an experienced nursing person to take care of an expectant mother. The couple is particular that the nursing staff who comes to take up the job should have cleared all tests and be declared Covid-19 negative.

Thesny Varghese, who runs a professional nursing care service at Tripunithura, said, “This is one of the major demands of clients who are seeking post-delivery care services. In these pressing times, it is difficult to bring nurses who are registered with us to the city as they reside in far off places. Even if they are willing to provide services, not all them will agree to the idea of bringing test results stating they are Covid-19 negative.”

Nursing service providers, who provide services of experienced nurses to families residing outside Kerala, said though many of them have made advanced bookings, it is not possible to send the staff to other states because of lockdown. Nurses from across Kerala, who are registered members under various agencies based in Kochi, are sent to cities like Mysore, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bhubaneswar for providing care at home. “Many young couples are away from their families who are in Kerala are not in a position to take care of new-born baby and mother. They need nurses for post-delivery care. On the other hand, children and grandchildren of many elderly citizens who are in Kochi are away. They are also looking for experienced care-givers,” added Varghese.

Smrithi Menon (name changed), who works in Bengaluru, is looking for a care giver for her mother and grandmother who are in Kochi. Most nursing service providers in the city remain closed due to lockdow. Menon’s mother is nearing 70 years old and her grandmother is 87, and both of them are unwell. “We have a home nurse to take care of them. But, as my grandmother is seriously ill, it is not possible for one nurse to take care of two elderly women. Though arrangements have been made to deliver food at home, I am in search for another home nurse to support them,” she said.


