Demand up for institutional quarantine on NRK influx
2020-05-19
Kochi: With non-resident Keralites (NRKs) returning home in large numbers, the demand for institutional quarantine (IQ) has increased manifold. And now some district administrations have written to small and medium private hospitals to reserve 30% of their rooms with attached bathrooms for the purpose.

However, cash-starved private hospital managements have raised objections, saying this opens up the possibility of non-Covid patients in their facilities catching the infection from asymptomatic persons in IQ. 

There are around 1,000 small and medium hospitals in the state, and most of them are now struggling to keep their head above water, with a few already closing shop and another 30% on the verge of closure. Since the lockdown was first announced most procedures have been postponed and OP and IP numbers have declined nearly 60 to 70%. This has hurt earnings drastically and many are struggling to pay staff salaries. Some have reduced or stopped specialist consultant services. 

“Despite financial woes and as per state government directions, we are still maintaining our facilities to provide care to non-Covid patients and at the same time be the much-needed reserve to combat Covid-19 if the need arises. However, we can’t handle both as it would increase risk of spread of infection,” said Hussain Koya, president of Kerala Private Hospital Association.

Kollam, Kottayam and Malappuram are some of the districts where private hospitals have been asked to keep 30% of their rooms for Covid-19 patients even though they lack separate entrance facilities. These hospitals have less than 150 beds and unlike quaternary care hospitals that have set up a separate Covid facility, they have expressed apprehensions.

“As a district hospital is kept as a Covid hospital to admit confirmed cases, all those in IQ are being accommodated at different places, including hospitals. We have raised concern that many may be asymptomatic persons and it is not safe. But they insist that I must admit them,” said the owner of a private hospital in Kollam, where seven people who had travelled from other states are in IQ. 

“It is very difficult to implement the new government rules, especially when patient flow is very less. If I go forward, I will have to borrow money to run the hospital. Therefore, it was decided now’s the best time to close,” said Dr Mohan SR, owner, Cochin Hospital, who has filed for closure with the government.


