Dementia care doubly difficult amid pandemic in Vizag
2020-04-29
VISAKHAPATNAM: 72-year-old Jayant Rao lives with his wife at Balaji Bay Mount in Rushikonda. Most of his days are spent on caring for his wife who was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease in 2013, at the age of 59. The Covid-19 pandemic and the consequent lockdown has made life doubly difficult for the elderly couple. Intent on reducing his wife’s risk of getting infected, Jayant Rao has let her evening caregiver go and has taken up the job of caring for his wife full time. Rao says that he is confused about how he can reduce risk when caring for Alzheimer patients primarily requires touch.


The lockdown is taking a toll on people caring for their loved ones who suffer from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) — the most common type of dementia where the mental ability of the patient declines gradually to a point where it becomes difficult for them to perform regular, day-to-day jobs essential to lead a normal life. As the disease progresses, patients find themselves more and more dependent on their caregivers.

While dementia in itself does not exacerbate the risk of contracting Covid-19, but behaviours associated with the disease make caring for patients especially challenging, said Dr NS Raju, managing trustee of Age Care Foundation. Dr Raju said that dementia patients are typically very sensitive to changes in routine and often require a great deal of hands-on care, both factors are hard to manage now.

Families of patients with dementia usually rely on day-care programmes or visiting caregivers. But now, they are finding it difficult to handle complete responsibility. On the other hand, families of patients who live in facilities are finding it difficult to visit.

According to Dr Raju, caregivers need to take measures to avoid exposure by having provisions delivered, disinfecting surfaces and employing proper hand-washing technique. The priority for caregivers, Dr Raju said, is to keep themselves healthy and act like emergency medical workers. He advises caregivers to go out and take walks by themselves and preferably set up a pool of people who can come in and give them breaks. 

Dr K Venkateswarlu, emeritus professor of neurology at Andhra Medical College said, “Elderly people with dementia and other chronic conditions are particularly more vulnerable to complications from coronavirus infection, which is a matter of great concern.”

“With limited access to information, they may not register safeguards such as using masks, sanitizers or maintaining social distancing, which makes them vulnerable to infection. In view of their special needs, there needs to be a collaborative effort from mental health professionals, social workers, nursing home administrators and volunteers,” Dr Venkateswarlu, who is also the Visakhapatnam chapter president of Alzheimer’s and Related Disorders Society of India (ADRSI), said.


