Dengue may add to Covid-19 misery: KMC
2020-04-30
KOLKATA: Samiran Bose, a resident of Azadgarh (Tollygunge) and a government employee, is worried about his 10-year-old son who has been running a mild fever. Though friends and relatives have tried to assure him that it was not Covid-19, the possibility of his son having contracted dengue has him worried. 


Azadgarh, while not listed as a Covid-19 hotspot, is a dengue-prone area in KMC’s health department records. Two minors died of dengue in the locality last year. 

 

A section of KMC doctors shared Bose’s apprehension. Though dengue usually strikes Kolkata and its neighbouring areas later in the year, the manner in which the virus has been mutating and spurt of recent nor’wester showers have left them worried about an early strike this season.

“In the past, we have seen dengue striking in as early as April in some parts of the city,” a doctor pointed out. A KMC official echoed his concern. “Though monsoon is still some time away, the recent showers could lead to emergence of breeding grounds for dengue mosquitoes,” he pointed out. 

Chief minister Mamata Banerjee had earlier sounded an alert on dengue, asking all municipal corporations and municipalities to keep a close watch in dengue-prone areas.

With KMC having to spend most of its resources to deal with the novel coronavirus outbreak, dengue has not been a priority this year. KMC physicians and health workers are ill-prepared to face the dengue threat, conceded a civic health department official. 

Civic doctors are particularly worried about areas in boroughs IX, X, XI and XII. Of these, borough X has been a ‘trouble spots’ for them. 

Tollygunge, Garia, Ramgargh, Golf Green, Lake Gardens, Anwar Shah Road, New Alipore, Chetla, Kalighat, Bhowanipore, Kidderpore, Behala are among other areas where dengue has been a recurring problem. Some areas off EM Bypass also need special anti-dengue drives. 

In north and central Kolkata, problem areas include Grish Park, Burrabazar, Rajballavpara, Chitpore, Amherst Street, Belgachia, Ripon Street, Elliot Road, SN Banerjee Road, among others. 


