Deputy CM accuses Tablighi of Covid-19, licking plates, then withdraws statement
2020-04-12
Tirupati: Deputy chief minister K Narayanaswamy on Saturday accused the Tablighi Jamaat of spreading coronavirus but later retracted his statement as his video blaming the principal minority community went viral on social media. Narayanaswamy’s statement comes a week after chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy appealed to people not to communalise the coronavirus issue.

“I am withdrawing my comments made earlier in the day. My intention was not to hurt the sentiments of people of any particular faith,” he told TOI.

Narayanaswamy, who chaired a review meeting with excise department officials at the sub-collector’s office in Tirupati on Saturday, accused the Tablighi Jamaat of spreading the novel coronavirus by “licking spoons and plates”.

The deputy chief minister may have fallen to a fake video, which was widely circulated on social media, showing a group of Muslims eating leftover food from spoons and plates. The video was debunked as fake and referred to the practice of some people in Bohra community against wastage of food.

Stating that he was not averse to Muslims, Narayanaswamy said AP would have only a few coronavirus positive cases had the virus not spread to the state by people attending the Tablighi meeting in Delhi.

“But everything happened after they went to Delhi, attended the function and came back to the state. They spit around, did not wash their plates and spoons. They licked the spoons to clean them. Did all kinds of things and came back to the state and left it here (sic),” he said.

He also alleged that “Muslims, who are testing positive for Covid-19, are not cooperating with doctors at hospitals. They are also not adhering to social distancing norms either at hospitals or outside”.

“I’m not against Muslim minorities. They are also Indians, who were born on this very land but not in Dubai or Pakistan. My only concern is that they should at least mend their ways now and save their own lives which are at stake,” he said.

Earlier, Jagan had urged people not to communalise the virus. “It is unfortunate that the disease has spread from the congregation in which several spiritual delegates from some foreign countries too participated. Some of those foreigners had coronavirus and it got transmitted to our people. But we should not attribute it (the disease spread) to any religion or caste and treat those people as deliberate wrongdoers,” the CM had appealed.

When contacted, Narayanaswamy told STOI his concern is that Muslims should stay safe by adopting social distancing guidelines. “They should cooperate with the state government and adhere to doctors’ advice,” he said.


