Deputation of staff to Covid-19 hosp, lab stretches MMCRI thin
2020-05-24
MYSURU: The easing of the restrictions in the Heritage City has certainly not eased the lives of the personnel at the Mysuru Medical College and Research Institute (MMCRI). During the lockdown, the state-run Krishna Rajendra (KR) Hospital and Cheluvamba Hospital were flooded with patients, many of whom rushed to Mysuru from quarantined and containment zones. Now, a large section of the crowd is also making its way to MMCRI, already stretched thin in terms of resources owing to the staff currently working at the Covid-19 laboratory at the institution. 

The Covid-19 laboratory at MMCRI is testing throat swabs for the fatal novel coronavirus from five districts in South Karnataka. In addition to deployment of staff for operations at the laboratory, doctors, nurses and other personnel are working at the Mysuru’s designated Covid-19 hospital. Consequently, this has left the hospital with a skeletal staff to serve other patients. 

The lack of a district hospital compelled the Karnataka health and family welfare department to rope in healthcare personnel from MMCRI at the Covid-19 hospital. The district hospital that has been built is yet to start operations after recruitment of doctors and other medical staff. 

MMCRI dean and director Dr CP Nanjaraj pointed out that, since Mysuru district had one active cases, the focus of the hospital administration had now shifted to the running of the outpatient department. “Despite the challenges, our staff has managed ensure that operations are not affected. But it will become difficult to run the show if the situation gets out of hand. We urge the health department to recruit more personnel,” Dr Nanjaraj said. 

Through the duration of the lockdown, the OPD at KR and Cheluvamba hospitals had been shut, with only emergency cases being attended to at the two institutions. Nearly 1900 patients seek treatment at KR Hospital’s OPD while about 500 plus at Cheluvamba hospital on a daily basis. 

KR Hospital medical superintendent Dr BL Nanjundaswamy said that, since the OPD resumed operations a week ago, around 900 patients had been seeking treatment, on average, every day at the facility. 


