Despite Covid risk, dentists handling all emergencies
2020-04-28
Nagpur: Routine dental care has taken a hit as dentists are at the highest risk of Covid-19 virus infection because of heavy aerosol creation in all dental procedures. Yet, government and private dental hospitals and clinics continue to alleviate pain of patients reporting traumatic dental injuries and swelling due to pulpal infection (decaying tooth).

Being a material driven therapy, private practitioners are feeling the heat of financial overheads which they are yet to pass on to the patients. 

Dentists are taking down complete patient history and details, including address and phone numbers, before attending to them. Planned surgeries and routine check-ups have been completely suspended while on-call and WhatsApp services are used before allowing patients to visit OPDs. 

Government Dental College and Hospital (GDCH) dean Dr Mangesh Phadnaik said that social distancing is being maintained for the first time. “Disinfectant are being sprayed in entire college and hospitals. Sanitizers have been provided everywhere. Barriers such as caps, masks, gloves are used. Patients will be screened before examination when we get thermal guns in a day or two,” he said.

GDCH and other big dental hospitals have departments of surgery, paediatric dentistry, endodontics, periodontics, oral medicine, oral pathology, public health dentistry, orthodontics and oral pathology.

Emergency cases of broken tooth, abscess, ulcer, swelling, white patch, mouth not opening, damaged appliance and sinus are attended at a designated area to control movement of patients. 

Dr Phadnaik said the area and objects touched by emergency patients are immediately sanitized. “Minor operation theatre procedures too are being done,” he said.

The dean said around 80 patients are daily treated while other times the GDCH alone sees over 300 cases. 

He said routine dental care such as teeth profile axis, fitting new tooth, spots on tooth, alignment, planned procedures and non-emergency, denture fitting are not advisable at the moment. “Emergency X-ray is done, if needed,” he said.

Besides GDCH, dental OPD is running at IGGMCH while a couple of private hospitals are functioning with limited staff for emergencies.

“Private clinics reference too are being taken on case-to-case but medicine is prescribed as far as possible,” Dr Phadnaik said and added that people too are avoiding visits on their own.

Dr Ritesh Kalaskar, professor and HoD, Paediatric and Preventive Dentistry, said that traumatic dental injuries and swelling due to pulpal infection have been commonly reported problems in children during this lockdown period. Cases of trauma in children are mainly due to closure of schools and outdoor activities. 

Indian Dental Association (IDA) Nagpur president Dr Girish Bhutada said dentists are taking utmost care in emergencies. “We all are taking history and treating our patients as per ICMR guidelines. We are avoiding a few treatments to reduce the virus load in the operatory,” he said.

IDA Nagpur secretary Dr Poonam Hudiya said, “We are pained at not being able to fully help our patients. Dealing with emergencies, we are keeping record of complete history of patients.” 

Dr Hudiya said the lockdown has dented a financial cost on dentists too. “Safety kits too have added to our operational costs. Already, dentists are struggling to pay EMIs for loans taken to set up their clinics,” she said. 

“We appeal to the government to provide us PPE kits and other necessary equipment,” Dr Bhutada said.


