Despite lockdown, over 80% Covid-19 cases from Vidarbha reported in May
2020-06-01
NAGPUR: Despite lockdown, Vidarbha recorded nearly 1,400 new Covid-19 cases and 54 deaths in May, accounting for more than 80% of the total cases (1,711) and total deaths (67) since March 11 when the first patient was reported in the region on March 11.

On May 31, the region recorded 54 new cases and two deaths. While both the deaths were of patients from Akola, the worst-hit in Vidarbha, the highest 26 cases came from Nagpur. Now, Vidarbha’s total Covid-19 cases have surpassed the 1,700-mark. 

The day began with death a woman Covid-19 patient from Akola, who was referred to Nagpur two days ago in a critical condition. A cancer patient, the elderly woman was tested positive in Akola and brought to Nagpur for dialysis and treatment on May 29. She died on Sunday morning.

Another death was reported from Akola GMCH. The deceased was a 38-year-old community health officer from Tarubanda under Semadoh Primary Health Centre in Chikhaldara tehsil of Melghat. 

Dr Dilip Ranmale, district health officer, Amravati, told TOI that the deceased was not on duty since May 2 and contracted the virus in Akola itself. He was taking treatment at GMCH Covid Hospital and breathed his last on Sunday.

Now, out of the total 67 deaths in Vidarbha, Akola alone accounts for 32.

Among the 26 new cases recorded in Nagpur, two are ZP doctors who were taking care of quarantined people at MLA Hostel. 

Amravati recoded six new cases, while nine came from Akola. Mumbai and Pune returnees tested positive in Buldhana, Gadchiroli, Gondia and Bhandara. 

On the other hand, no new case was recorded from Wardha, Washim and Chandrapur. 

In some relief, more number of patients are recovering. With 30 on Sunday, total 1,154 patients have been discharged from various hospitals in Vidarbha. Recovery rate of Vidarbha is 67.44% which is more than state’s 43.35% and India’s 47.76%.

In Yavatmal, driver of the ambulance in which a Covid-19 patient died while being shifted from Mumbai to Yavatmal tested positive. The total active positive patients in GMC Yavatmal isolation ward now stands at 19. 

There were five persons including the deceased, Rajesh Rathod, in the ambulance that reached Yavatmal on May 30. 

The district administration has sought case papers of the deceased from the Ghatkopar-based Rajawadi hospital run by the Bombay Municipal Corporation.

The administration is not ready to accept it as a death from Yavatmal though the deceased was a resident of Aarambhi village in Digras tehsil, which is a part of the assembly segment represented by guardian minister Sanjay Rathod.

Swab samples of the remaining three who were in the ambulance, including two drivers and brother of the deceased, tested negative. They are now in the GMC institutional quarantine. 

Show cause to Umarkhed SDO, others

Yavatmal’s guardian minister Sanjay Rathod has ordered the district administration to serve show cause notice on the Umarkhed SDO, BDO, talathi, taluka medical officer and others to explain as to why action should not be taken against them. 

The order was given following written complaint to the SDO Swapnil Kapadanis alleging total failure in keeping vigil over people patients housed in institutional quarantine and Covid-19 care centres.

Sarpanch Gajanan Kadam, APMC director Atmaram Jadhav and a social worker Indel Ade alleged that the 43-year-old Mumbai returnee woman died in the GMC isolation ward on Saturday due to neglect of the officers concerned and lack of prompt medical treatment.

The woman’s husband is a positive patient who is admitted in the GMC isolation ward and could not attend her last rites.


