Despite KCR rap and lockdown appeal, most public representatives MIA
2020-03-26
HYDERABAD: Despite chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao’s call to elected representatives to spread awareness among people and assess the situation, only few have ventured out in their respective areas. Ministers KT Rama Rao, V Srinivas Goud, T Harish Rao, Vemula Prashanth Reddy, deputy speaker T Padma Rao and MLA Maganti Gopanath were among the few to have reviewed the situation in their constituencies.


KTR toured the city and held a review meeting with disaster management officials over response teams and GHMC’s control room. He later inspected night shelters and interacted with inmates about facilities being provided at shelters. While on his way to GHMC office, KTR came across a few labourers walking on the road and asked officials to arrange transport for them to reach their homes.

Meanwhile, tourism and excise minister V Srinivas Goud donned the role of traffic police and regulated the movement of vehicles in Mahabubnagar town for almost three hours. He urged locals not to venture out and abide by the lockdown orders. The minister also asked vendors to ensure that customers maintain social distance. The minister claimed that as many as 300 people from outside were in the area for various reasons. He held a review meet with local officials and instructed them to open three new markets to avoid crowding.

Finance minister T Harish Rao reviewed preventive measures taken by Sangareddy collectorate and health officials. With Sangareddy sharing borders with both Maharashtra and Karnataka, Harish asked officials to maintain strict vigil on borders. He also visited district government hospital and inspected their isolation facilities.

Roads and buildings minister Vemula Prashanth Reddy held review meeting with officials in Kamareddy and Nizamabad. He interacted with some people under home quarantine and asked them to remain at home during the lockdown. As many as 1,075 people have come to Kamareddy district from other places in the past one month. 

Jubilee Hills MLA Maganti Gopinath visited Erragadda Rythu Bazar and enquired about rates of vegetable. He urged locals to maintain social distance and warned that action would be taken against vendors if they sell vegetables and fruits at higher prices. 

Labour minister Ch Malla Reddy also interacted with local leaders at Ghatkesar and asked the leaders to bring awareness among the people. Minister Mahmood Ali visited some police stations in the city. In Karimnagar, minister Gangula Kamalakar toured in the city for strict enforcement of lockdown and also reviewed with officials.

Similarly Serlingampally MLA Arikepudi Gandhi visited areas in Chandanagar, Kondapur and supervised spraying of sodium hypochlorite. Deputy speaker and Secunderabad MLA T Padma Rao along with mayor Bonthu Rammohan visited various sites including night shelters in Sitaphalmandi. Among GHMC representatives, deputy mayor Baba Fasiuddin interacted with locals in Borabanda and also visited Masjid-e-Mohammedia near Swarajnagar. He urged people to perform Namaz and Haza at home.


