Despite lockdown, UP sugar mills crush more cane than any year, begin producing sanitiser
2020-06-01
PILIBHIT: The principal secretary of sugarcane and sugar industry in the UP government, Sanjay R Bhoosreddy, has claimed despite the lockdown, UP sugar mills have so far crushed 771.83 lakh quintals of sugarcane in excess this year, in comparison to the corresponding period of 2019. He added that a large number of sugarcane growers have also benefitted from the sugar allotment policy, introduced by the government this year for a period of three months.

“It’s a remarkable achievement. Of the 119 functional mills in the state, 25 are still operating whereas the crushing season normally concludes by end-May. Projecting an outstanding performance for the year, mills have so far crushed 11,015.07 lakh quintals of sugarcane, compared to 10,243.243 lakh quintals over the same period last year,” Bhoosreddy said.

As per senior cane department officials, higher rate of crushing this year has been reported by almost every sugarcane growing district. It is being estimated that this reflects bumper productivity of sugarcane crop across the state during 2019-20.

Officials further said although jaggery units had been fully authorised to procure sugarcane and carry out production of jiggery, farmers probably diverted a major part of their crop to sugar mills this year, possibly due to several subsidies in the package offered by the state and better price offered by the government.

Bhoosreddy further said 70,793 willing farmers were allotted one quintal sugar per month at minimum sale price of the day for a total of 74,865 quintals, under a scheme aimed at reducing dues a sugar mill had with the farmer. This also allowed mills to liquidate their cane price arrears, he added.

He said mills paid Rs 5,543.07 crore to farmers for cane during the lockdown period. This was aimed at safeguarding their economic and social interests.

“Along with this, as part of our social responsibility towards facing the Covid-19 outbreak, the cane department, in association with the mill owner’s association — Cooperation of Sugar Mills — has so far sanitised 5,398 places, including 3,066 villages, 180 towns and 2,152 public offices,” Bhoosreddy explained.

For the first time, the cane department also encouraged sugar mills to start sanitiser production. As a result, 27 UP mills have been producing over two lakh litres of sanitiser per day, which is being supplied to almost every state in the country, after meeting the state’s own requirement, he said.


