Despite warning from Karnataka CM and RSS, BJP legislators target Tablighi Jamaat attendees
2020-04-08
BENGALURU: Despite warnings from chief minister BS Yediyurappa, some BJP functionaries continue to whip up a partisan agenda amidst the Covid-19 crisis.


In Davangere on Tuesday, Yediyurappa’s political secretary MP Renukacharya said the government should “gun down Tablighi Jamaat delegates”, who refuse to undergo tests or quarantine themselves.

“Despite repeated appeals made by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Yediyurappa, they are refusing to be medically checked. We all will suffer because of such anti-national elements. The government should not sit quiet. It should gun down a few to ensure they follow lockdown norms,” Renukacharya told reporters.

His comments came barely 24 hours after Yediyurappa appealed to partymen to avoid making divisive statements and not to target the minority community. The CM also called their comments “irresponsible”.

“The entire community cannot be held responsible because of the actions of a few,” Yediyurappa said. The RSS too issued a statement endorsing his views.

But that didn’t stop Mahadevapura (Bengaluru) MLA Arvind Limbavali, also state BJP general secretary, saying Tablighi Jamaat attendees who don’t turn up for tests on their own should be jailed. “Questions do arise about their intent. Why are they not cooperating? Is it to increase the number of Covid-19 cases or do they want to bring a bad name to the government?”

Limbavali also recalled the assault on Asha workers and instances where some Tablighi Jamaat attendees created a ruckus because they weren’t given food of their choice in quarantine. “It is indicative of their resistance and their ill-intent,” Limbavali said. “It’s time to initiate stringent measures and allow police do their job.”

Udupi-Chikkamagaluru MP Shobha Karandlaje was the first to pass inflammatory comments against minorities saying two days ago, “Tablighi Jamaat attendees are here to spread corona jihad in the country.” 

