Despite virus, no let up in illegal animal trade
2020-04-09
HYDERABAD: From star tortoises to slow lorises and even pangolins, Telangana has seen quite a few cases of illegal wildlife trade in the last few years.


In 2019, the state forest department listed 351 habitual smugglers and 80 poachers who were involved in illegal wildlife trade of various protected species and also handed over their details to the police department for surveillance. However, activists claim the official figures of cases that are booked every year are much lower.

A prime example of ignored numbers comes from the smuggling of pangolin scales across Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Despite being an endangered species and now considered a source of Covid-19 pandemic, pangolin poaching is rampant in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.

 


“Pangolin trade is very rampant in Telangana. The average price of pangolin these scales is reportedly over Rs 2 lakh per kg in the international market, triggering many local hunters and trappers to take up the trade. Pangolin meat is also considered a delicacy and its body parts are believed to have medicinal value. 

Although there is no market for pangolins in Telangana and AP, we are definitely a source,” said an official source under the condition of anonimity.

Also, in 2019, the police along with forest department officials seized four slow lorises, one Indian star tortoise and a softshell turtle in Hyderabad. This apart, in a few raids conducted at Murgi chowk, a pet market in old city last year, officials recovered a 10-month-old black buck and a golden jackal among many other protected wild animals and birds. Wildlife conservationists and biologists say that they see a persistent threat of epidemics if the forest department does not tighten the noose of wildlife crime in the state.

“There are 31 disease or in other words 70% of diseases have emerged from ildlife in past few decades. Destruction of nature displaces wildlife and it could come in close proximity to humans and transmit the Zoonotic diseases.,” said Iqbal Siddique, wildlife biologist and founder of Hyderabad Tiger Conservation Society.


