Industries feel their wings clipped by Covid restrictions
2020-05-31
MEERUT: With around 30% skilled labourers returned to villages, supply chain snapped, movable capital stuck in the market and avenues to move final products not in sight due to the on-going lockdown, as many as 1,000 industries, mostly Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), which get the permission to operate in non-containment zones find their wings clipped by the Covid-19 restrictions. 

“The procurement of raw material is an issue and then the movement of the finished product is also an issue. Almost 30% of labourers have gone and are not going to return any time soon, and above all, there are issues with the district administration regarding terms of permits to start industrial units. Problems like these are sliding us into a state of recession,” says Anurag Agarwal, president, the Meerut Chapter of the Indian Industries Association (IIA).

Nearly 4,000 manufacturing units in Meerut had around 2.5 lakh skilled labourers working for them before the lockdown, but now a sizable 30% of labourers — mostly from Bihar and Jharkhand — have returned to their villages.

Besides, industry and trade bodies had umpteen meetings with the district administration, bargaining hard for the reopening of production units on “reasonable” terms.

“It’s been weeks since we are trying to explain to the administration to let us work otherwise the entire system will collapse. Though they have given some relaxations, those are not enough. An industrial unit doesn’t work in isolation and there have to be regular interactions with the outside world,” said Agarwal.

Chief development officer Isha Duhan, however, said, “We (Meerut) are still a red zone, yet we have permitted all those units, except those in containment zones, to reopen after they applied for it. We also want normalcy to return sooner than later, but checking the spread of Covid infection remains our primary objective. We are holding meetings with the industry captains to resolve their issues regularly. These are unprecedented times.”

“This virus is not going anywhere in the near future. We have to learn to live with it and the two months’ training (the lockdown phase) is enough. Government and administration must understand the seriousness of the situation. Lakhs of people are exhausting their meagre savings by sitting at home. Replenishment is the need of the hour,” said a trader who wished not to be quoted.


