Despite coronavirus, the show must go on – digitally
2020-03-13
With hundreds of events, concerts and conferences being cancelled or postponed worldwide due to coronavirus outbreak, the online space has emerged as the safest option to keep the show going. In the last few weeks, many events were turned into ‘digital only’to avoid any health risks.


Livestreaming concerts and music showsApart from business launches and conferences that went online to stay on schedule, the art and music world also went digital to reach out to fans despite the threat of coronavirus. Leading the way here was K-pop band BTS which decided to live stream a press conference promoting their new album. Keeping in mind the coronavirus outbreak, the band livestreamed the conference from an empty hall last month and urged fans to take care of themselves, the members waving and bowing to an empty hall and answering previously selected questions from journalists. "Health is always on our mind these days and our messages of facing your inner self and loving yourself is ultimately possible when you’re healthy. Especially since it is very risky outside these days, I hope you take care of your health," singer Jimin was quoted as saying. The K-pop megastars also cancelled four Seoul concerts due in April.
As per reports, many K-pop celebrities are resorting to online fan meets and streaming concerts to communicate with their fans. Baek Ye-rin met fans through YouTube livestreaming after her performance in Head In The Clouds festival was cancelled in Jakarta recently and Taeyeon, a member of Girls Generation, decided to have an online fan meet for the release of her new songs. 
Determined to keep going after the coronavirus forced Venice's ornate opera house, La Fenice, to cancel its performances, recently, a string quartet gathered in the empty, eerily silent theater and played Beethoven, streaming the concert online and winning an ovation of handclap emojis.
The outbreak also forced the Shanghai Symphony Orchestra to cancel all of its concerts in February and March, leaving its musicians working from home. They began posting master classes online, along with informal videos showing the players practicing at home and playlists designed to help people under quarantine "fight boredom at home."
Closer home, Raja Kumari cancelled her "secret gigs" in Delhi and Mumbai and released her new single online. "For my first ever collaboration with NERVO and Krewella, I had planned a secret gig in Mumbai and Delhi but I opted to cancel it due to the coronavirus outbreak. Precaution is more important than promotion right now for all artists. Unfortunately the event business is getting affected, but I feel artists can opt for more innovative ways to promote their new releases and launches and test newer waters," she says.
 
 
Raja Kumari who cancelled her gigs in Delhi and Mumbai 

Social campaigns go digitalThis year, the Canadian High Commission’s annual Women’s Day event, Run For Her, was turned into a virtual run. A statement released a day before the event read, "In light of public health advice cautioning against mass gatherings, this year's Run For Her planned for Sunday, March 8 on the occasion of International Women’s Day will go ahead as a virtual Run for Her. Between now and Sunday, 15 March, we challenge all participants to put on your race kit, get out and do whatever kind of exercise you would like, when you finish, take a selfie or a short video of yourself in your Run for Her gear and post on social media with hashtags, like #RunForHer. To keep the momentum going on this exciting campaign, we will be following up with ongoing social media content." This event was one of the first in Delhi to be transformed into a digital one.
 
 
 Canadian High Commission’s annual Women’s Day event, Run For Her was turned into a virtual run, in which participants posted pictures of themselves with the event’s hashtag


With events getting postponed, Online platforms are helping create a buzz 
India Fashion Week, which was scheduled from March 11-15 in Delhi, was postponed last week. Nida Mahmood was one of the designers showcasing at the fashion week, but when the event was postponed, she decided to give a glimpse of her new collection online. "We did plan an event to showcase our new collection and I was also planning to put it on the ramp at the fashion week. But keeping in mind the health concerns, we decided to cancel the event and showcase our collection online. This will help us create a buzz till the time we actually get to showcase our collection. In the current scenario, online platforms seems like an ideal solution for promotions and to spread the word,” says Nida. DJ Sumit Sethi, who had planned an event to introduce his ‘video travel and music diary’, at a club in Delhi is now planning to introduce it on YouTube. “I don’t think delaying the launch is a good idea, so I have decided to first do an online launch and then host a party later," he says.

— With inputs from NYT, AFP

