Despite lockdown losses, industry feels shutting down was right: PAU
2020-05-28
Ludhiana: In a research conducted by a Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) professor, it was revealed that the ongoing lockdown has put a lot of strain on the industrial sector. 

A survey was conducted by Dr Surabhi Mahajan, assistant professor, department of apparel and textile science, PAU, under the guidance of the dean, College of Community Science, PAU, Dr Sandeep Bains. The respondents of the survey were CEOs, directors, merchandisers, production heads, senior designers, marketing managers and human resource managers from 50 industrial units of Ludhiana. 

Also, 74% of the industries that provided the data belonged to Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector, while 26% were large industries. In Ludhiana, 46% of the industries were making different kinds of knitted garments followed by those manufacturing woven garments, fabrics and yarns. Though the lockdown severely affected the industries still 84% of the respondents were of the view that lockdown from April 25 to May 17, was the right decision taken by the government. 

Dr Surabhi Mahajan said “Nearly 64% of the industries were completely shut down due to lockdown, while rest were able to work online on their designing and IT related aspects. There was a mixed response on government’s idea to open up the large industries in between the lockdown by providing stay facilities to the labour within the industry premises with regular medical check-ups, as 38% respondents agreed, 44% disagreed and 18% were not sure about this." 

She further added that 86 % of the respondents felt raw material availability is going to be a major difficulty due to global lockdown as they were dependent on Chinese import for the same. 

“Labour movement to their native states has resulted in extreme labour shortage, leading to production issues and it was the concern of 94% respondents. Further, maintaining social distancing among the uneducated workforce was a big problem, as shared by 62 % respondents, while the rest thought that it can be done through regular training of the workforce. Further, 82% of the industry experts agreed that it is the responsibility of the employers to educate their workforce about sanitation and hygiene at this sensitive hour. The non-integration and management issues of the supply chain of the products were a major threat for 94% respondents. All respondents said capital shortage due to liquidity issues will add to the woes of the Ludhiana industry. 88% respondents were facing difficulties due to panic created by the lack of authentic and reliable information among their workforce. Cancellation of orders and accumulation of dead stock due to global recession and no business deals was a challenge according to 94% respondents. An overwhelming proportion of the respondents, i.e. 96%, were concerned due to no summer business this year. This was due to the fact that the lockdown period of 54 days was the suitable time for mass production of summer merchandise, which has been completely thrashed due to shutdown of the industries. Moreover, 54% of the respondents were also concerned with the decreased demand of clothing after the lockdown period as the discretionary income of majority of people has diminished. 48% of the industry people were of the view that the normal working in their premises can be resumed only after 5-6 months as of now and till that time the industry will have to suffer huge losses. About 50-75% loss in business has already taken place due to the lockdown as stated by 80% respondents. Additional expenditure on ensuring medical safety of their employees clubbed with reduced business opportunities is creating trouble according to 76% respondents. However, a ray of hope that existed in the industry came from the fact that lockdown resulted in opportunities for creating new products like face masks and PPE kits as stated by 72% respondents,” stated Mahajan in her study.

As far as the future strategies for fighting against this crisis was concerned, the study explained that 76% of the respondents were thinking of buying raw material from local markets or selecting alternative raw material easily available to cope up with shortage of Chinese raw material. 78% of the industry is planning to provide pick and drop and hostel facilities to their labour to overcome absenteeism and ensuring their health and hygiene. To boost up the future sales, product line diversification and exploration of new markets are the most appropriate options. This is reflected in responses of 76% respondents. As far as clearance of dead stock is concerned, the industries are planning for their alternate uses to make new products and to give promotional offers to their customers for increased selling as stated by 76% respondents, while few were supportive of keeping the stock for next season as well.

Dr Mahajan concluded that the industry is looking for government support in the present situation. 


