Despite Telangana HC order, dead not being tested for Covid-19
2020-06-07
HYDERABAD: About 10 days after the Telangana High Court asked the state government to conduct Covid-19 tests on the dead too, the process is yet to start at any of the state-run hospitals. Authorities say that they are yet to receive formal orders in this regard.


“We have so far received no orders from our superiors to take samples from deceased patients. Unless there are formal orders from the state health department, samples cannot be collected. There is no clarity on why there is a delay in issuing the order,” said a senior doctor from the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences admitting to the possibility of transmission through such patients. 

On May 26, theHC had ordered the state government to conduct Covid-19 tests on all dead bodies before releasing them from hospitals. A bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice B Vijaysen Reddy had stressed that the state government must ascertain whether the virus affected dead patients or not and not doing so would be like inviting the trojan horse. The order was issued while hearing public interest litigations saying that the government was not conducting adequate tests for Covid-19.

However, suspected cases continue to slip testing due to the current protocol. “Since we do not have orders to test dead patients, even some patients who would fall in the suspicious category and have succumbed, are not being tested. This week alone there were three such highly suspicious cases and the patients succumbed within hours of coming to the hospital. Since their samples were not collected when they came in, after they succumbed too the samples could not be collected as we do not have orders to do so. Some of them could be Covid-19 positive but without testing them, we would not know,” said a senior resident at Osmania General Hospital (OGH). 

When contacted, director medical education Dr K Ramesh Reddy and director public health Dr G Srinivas Rao did not comment on the issue.


