Coronavirus scare: Despite opposition, Kerala budget session cut short
2020-03-14
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Kerala legislative assembly has cut short its budget session in view of the rising concerns over Covid-19 outbreak and the health emergency the state is facing, despite an opposition from the UDF against applying guillotine to pass the remaining demands for grants without discussion or voting.

As per the decision taken at the business advisory committee (BAC) meeting held before the start of the assembly session on Friday, all the outstanding demands for grants, besides the Kerala Appropriation Bill and Kerala finance bills were passed without discussion and the house was adjourned sine die.

However, terming the decision as undemocratic and a bad precedent, the opposition UDF staged a walkout and alleged that the state government wanted to escape criticisms against its failures and was trying to cover up corruption with the Covid-19 scare. “This is a challenge on the House’s right to take part in the discussions and voting on demands for grants,” said opposition leader Ramesh Chennithala before staging the walkout.

The budget session was scheduled to be held till April 8 and discussion and voting on demands for grants for various departments were to be held on March 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 24 and 25, while presentation of Kerala Appropriation Bill was to be held on March 30.

Presenting the BAC report, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan told the assembly that a demand for cutting short the budget session was raised from various quarters, including from opposition member and IUML leader KNA Khader. “This is not to create any precedence, or to escape any criticisms. Kerala has an assembly which is in session for the most number of days in the country,” he said.

Earlier, opposition legislators, including M Ummer, K C Joseph, P T Thomas and Thiruvanchoor Radhakrishnan, opposed the BAC decision and asserted that it was an onslaught on democracy. “This will send a wrong message and create panic among people,” said Joseph.

At the BAC meeting, opposition members had suggested that the house could be adjourned sine die after passing the vote on account and that discussions on demands for grants could be resumed after two months.


