Despite thousands returning from abroad, Dakshina Kannada, Udupi districts have least Covid-19 cases
2020-04-27
Mangaluru: Despite a large number of people from Dakshina Kannada and Udupi, working across the globe, many of whom have returned to the districts, so far, the districts have the lowest number of Covid-19 cases in the state. In Karnataka, Dakshina Kannada has recorded 3.6% of the total Covid-19 cases, while Udupi has just 0.8% of the total cases in the state.

“The credit goes to the people of undivided Dakshina Kannada, who have again proved that they are educated and understand the situation, and secondly to the efforts of the district administration. We have noticed that people have been conscious about the gravity of the situation, and all those who have returned from abroad, have strictly been in home quarantine,” appreciated Munish Moudgil, nodal officer and in-charge of the state Covid-19 war room. He said that a good administrator can be the head of any district, but it is the people who are responsible to make a difference.

If one looks at the data in Udupi, it had 1,990 people who returned from abroad till Tuesday, and as many as 904 samples were tested. However, the district had only three positive cases, who have now recovered, and been discharged. Udupi deputy commissioner G Jagadeesha pointed out that Covid-19 was kept in check in the district, despite a large number of people coming back from abroad, due to the strict quarantine measures imposed by the district administration. “All the houses of those who returned from abroad, and anyone associated with the Tablighi Jamaat congregatin in Delhi, were strictly put under home quarantine. Officials from the health, revenue and police departments visited them every day. Stickers were put on houses, wherever people were in quarantine, and their neighbours were given the responsibility to alert the district administration, if anyone moved out of the house,” said Jagadeesha.

Udupi district has also sealed its border, and allows in only people who are seeking medical help at Udupi and Manipal. “So far, 904 samples were tested for Covid-19, and the results of 51 samples are yet to arrive. Out of three positive cases in Udupi, only two had travelled abroad to Dubai. One of the patients was working at a private hospital, who was aware about the pandemic, and kept himself quarantined. Another Covid-19 patient returned from Dubai and came in contact with hundreds of people, but luckily, none of them got infected,” Jagadeesh added.

Another senior official monitoring the response to Covid-19, pointed out that Dakshina Kannada and Udupi districts were successful in keeping the Covid-19 numbers low, because of extensive contact tracing and cooperation of people. “The people of Dakshina Kannada have been cooperative, and joined hands to fight the pandemic,” added another source.

Till April 20, Dakshina Kannada screened about 39,182 people for Covid-19 and 1,286 samples were tested. 


