Despite Covid-19 threat, pangolin hunted for meat
2020-05-21
Nagpur: At a time when various international studies have pointed out that Covid-19 outbreak may have originated from pangolins, those living on the forest fringes have failed to understand seriousness of the issue and are still hunting these scaly-anteaters for bushmeat.

Pench Tiger Reserve (PTR), Maharashtra, officials on Tuesday arrested two poachers from Kirangisarra who had killed a pangolin and were in the process of cooking its meat for consumption. 

The accused have been identified as Radheshyam Odgu Aahake and Kawdu Udaram Dhurve. Both were cooking the pangolin in an utensil in the farm of Raju Ramji Dhurve. The rare mammal was hunted from compartment number 554 in Chorbahuli range.

Dhurve is said to be president of eco-development committee (EDC), which is set up in wildlife areas as part of people’s participatory management practice. Both the accused will be produced before Ramtek judicial magistrate first class (JMFC) on Wednesday. 

Owing to the lockdown, patrolling has been intensified and during this period the foresters got a tip-off that some persons had hunted a pangolin. The officials zeroed in on the two accused and arrested them.

Pangolins are listed under Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and same sections, which are applicable for poaching tigers and leopards, apply for pangolins. 

Kirangisarra is an obscure village on Pench fringe. Technically speaking, the village is outside the reserve but has no way out rather than use the tiger reserve area to move in or out. This village needs to be included in Pench and relocated later for long-term conservation of tigers and wildlife.

Pangolins are targeted for their scales used in traditional Chinese medicines and meat consumed as a delicacy in many Asian countries. A study by global NGO TRAFFIC for a period 2009-2017 had found that nearly 6,000 pangolins are killed in illegal wildlife trade in India. However, this was a conservative estimate as only a fraction of illegal wildlife trade is detected and the actual numbers are likely to be higher.


