Needle in haystack: States go really slow on Covid-19 testing
2020-04-04
CHANDIGARH: The rate of coronavirus (Covid-19) tests conducted in Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh continues to be poor, leaving a high possibility of several cases of the killer virus being untraced.


Punjab, till Friday, had conducted as many as 1,585 Covid-19 tests. When taking into account its population of more than three crore, the rate of testing in Punjab comes to just 52.7 tests per 10 lakh people. Chandigarh, which has a population of about 11.93lakh, has a testing rate of 110.6 tests per 10 lakh. It has tested 132 suspects so far. 




Haryana and Himachal Pradesh have done the worst. While Haryana, which has a population of 2.9 crore, has conducted 1,325 tests so far and testing rate is 45.6, Himachal Pradesh, which has a population of 70 lakh and had conducted only 296 tests till Friday, has a testing rate of 42.2 per 10 lakh.

In the line with the protocol issued by the central government, state health authorities initially focused on screening people coming from virus-hit countries and tested only those who showed symptoms. Family members of positive cases and people who came in their contact were also tested.

Now, health authorities have started testing all patients with respiratory illnesses and pneumonia for coronavirus. Till March 23, the Punjab government had tested only 251 cases, or 8.3 tests per 10 lakh. It has now set a target of conducting 800 tests in a day.

Health experts said mass testing was not feasible, but the state would have to increase “focus” testing. This is important because, according to data complied by authorities, 55,669 NRIs/foreign travellers arrived in Punjab through Mohali and Amritsar international airports between January and March.

The figure of thsoe who came via Delhi-based Indira Gandhi International Airport is unavailable. The government has not been able to trace all these travellers, forcing it to direct all NRIs, who have not been contacted by health officials and local administration, to submit a self-declaration to the deputy commissioner of their respective areas.

Dr D Behera, department of pulmonary medicine, PGIMER, Chandigarh said it was important to contact each person with a travel history to foreign countries.

Acknowledging practical difficulties in tracking each case, Indian Medical Association (IMA) Punjab chapter president Dr Navjot Dahyia urged people to support the government by voluntarily coming forward and reporting to health authorities so that screening could be done. “The government cannot run after each individual. People will have to support the government, like in developed countries,” said Dr Dahyia. Dr Deepak Parasher, member of IMA, Punjab, said the government needed to ramp up testing and people should also support the government at the same time. “The virus has still not spread in the community. To keep it that way, there is a need to increase testing,” said Dr Parasher.

Health economist Aswini Kumar Nanda of the Chandigarh-based Centre for Research in Rural and Industrial Development (CRRID) termed high testing rate “unfeasible” in India, considering vast geographical area, huge population and resource constrain. “By and large, central and stategovernments are on the right track. All we need is focused testing, instead if testing everyone,” said Prof Nanda.

Punjab health minister Balbir Singh Sidhu said the state had been following the guidelines issued by the Centre. “We have increased the rate of testing and the numbers are there for everyone to see. The health department aims to test as many people as possible for controlling the virus,” said Sidhu.

Punjab to launch community testing

Aware of the gravity of the situation, Punjab chief minister Capt Amarinder Singh on Wednesday issued directions to the health department to start community testing for severe acute respiratory illness in hotspots which have witnessed outbreak of Covid-19 cases



