Develop quarantine facilities for Rajasthan labourers returning to state: CM Ashok Gehlot
2020-05-01
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Thursday directed district collectors to make arrangements for the safe return of migrant workers from Rajasthan. He said out of the 10 lakh registered migrant workers, at least 70% will return to the state. He directed officials to make arrangements for their quarantine in each district. 

The chief minister said the state government was in touch with the Centre for arranging rail facility for their travel. 

The chief minister said health facilities had to be strengthened at district level to meet the challenges like corona pandemic in future. He said it was the state government’s endeavour to develop facilities for testing and treatment at the district level. He asked officials to devise short-term and long-term plans to meet the threat posed by Covid-19. He said nobody knows how long the fight against the virus would last. 

The chief minister said the long lockdown had taken a toll on the economy. He said it was necessary to restart economic activities along with lockdown. Gehlot said the administration has to take effective measures to stop the spread of the disease while at the same time economic activities need to be resumed. 

The chief minister directed officials to devise simple procedure to issue passes. He said people were already suffering due to the lockdown and they should not be hassled in getting passes for urgent work. 

Health minister Raghu Sharma informed that coronavirus testing per day in the state had crossed 9,100. He said testing will touch 10,000 once ICMR gives nod for testing at Barmer, Pali and Sikar. 

He said apart from all government medical colleges, testing is being carried out at Jhalawar, Bhilwara, Bharatpur, Dungarpur, Churu, Mahatma Gandhi Medical college in Jaipur, AIIMS Jodhpur and Marushaliya Ayurveda Research Centre, Jodhpur. 

Chief secretary D B Gupta said the response of the Centre had been quite positive to the suggestions of the state for running destination train for migrant labourers. He directed that all migrant labourers had to be screened and those who had any symptoms of cold and cough had to be quarantined.


