Developers tread cautiously before resuming construction activity in non-Covid zones
2020-04-19
Pune: A slew of steps like daily medical check-up for workers and permissions from Pune divisional commissioner as well as collector are on developers’ radar before resuming construction activities at non-coronavirus locations in the district.

With the Centre’s guidelines clearly mentioning that no worker would be allowed at construction sites from outside, Pune Credai Metro president Suhas Merchant said the developers would have to take extra efforts to ensure that the workers are convinced to stay back at the construction site till the lockdown, which nay require certain incentives.

The developers are hoping that the local authorities would also issue occupancy and plinth certificates without any hassle to help complete the ongoing constructions. As per the Maharashtra Real Estate Regulatory Authority (MahaRERA), of the 25,489 projects registered with it, only 21% (5,346) projects are complete, while 78% (19,931) projects are incomplete.

Credai national president Satish Magar said the body was working on a detailed note to be sent to the collectors in other parts of the country to get clarity on dos and dont’s. “We are working on the modalities and the note for the Pune collector should be ready within two days,” he told TOI. 

Property consultant Anuj Puri said the move to start at least some of the construction activity at project sites, though with limited workforce, was a welcome step. “With many migrant workers moving back to their villages since the lockdown, we will have to see how many are ready to resume work,” he said, adding that migrant workers comprised at least 80% share of the total 44 million workforce in the construction sector.

He said no construction activity being allowed at Covid-19 hotspots from April 20 was a huge dampener for markets like Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR), which had been reeling under rising cases. A recently released data stated that MMR had the highest under-construction residential stock of nearly 4.65 lakh units, which accounted for 30% of the overall 15.62 lakh under-construction stock across the top seven cities. Pune, according to the consultancy firm, has close to2.62 lakh units in various stages of construction, which is nearly 17% of the overall 15.62 lakh under construction units across the top 7 cities.

Rohit Gera, managing director of Gera Developments said while resumption of construction activity in green zones was a welcome move, workers were extremely anxious and keen to head back to their villages as soon as the travel restrictions were lifted. “As the supply chain stabilizes, work should slowly start to limp back to normalcy.”

Credai national vice-president Shantilal Kataria said it would take over a year for the sector to recuperate from the lockdown. “From June onwards, the monsoon season will begin, during which construction activities will be halted for about four months. The prevailing situation is rare and banks need to help us. MahaRERA has already given three-month extension to complete the projects,” he said.


