Development of coronavirus vaccine initiated under 3 programmes
2020-01-25
Mumbai: Three programmes, involving two US biotech companies, have initiated development and fast-track of vaccines against the dreaded coronavirus (nCoV-2019), the first such step taken by a global entity to tackle the outbreak, which has reportedly infected hundreds and raised fears of a pandemic. Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (Cepi), a global alliance financing and coordinating the development of vaccines against infectious diseases, will fund these “pioneering technologies” to speed up the development of vaccines against emerging threats like nCoV-2019, Gagandeep Kang, vice-chairperson of Cepi, told TOI here on Friday. 

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has declared the new coronavirus an emergency for China with several deaths reported in the country, but stopped short of declaring it a global epidemic.

Coronaviruses a family of viruses that can lead to respiratory illness including severe acute respiratory syndrome, are transmitted between animals and people, and can evolve into strains not previously identified in humans. On January 7, a new coronavirus was identified as the cause of pneumonia in Wuhan (China), and additional cases have been detected in a growing number of countries, including Thailand, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, and US.

US-based companies Inovio and Moderna, and Brisbane-based University of Queensland will leverage rapid response platforms (in separate programmes) already supported by Cepi as well as a new partnership, to advance vaccine candidates for coronavirus, into clinical testing as quickly as possible. “Our aspiration with these technologies is to bring a new pathogen from gene sequence to clinical testing in 16 weeks – which is significantly shorter than where we are now,” Richard Hatchett, CEO of Cepi, said. 

Cepi, launched at Davos in 2017 to develop vaccines to prevent epidemics, is also working on vaccines against Chikungunya, Ebola, MERS and Lassa viruses. 

Speaking on the sidelines of the Indian Society for Clinical Research conference here, Kang, who is also executive director, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (Department of Biotechnology), said the idea at Cepi is to be prepared for what may be the next outbreak, instead of being reactive. 

The organisation awarded Inovio a $9 million grant to develop a vaccine against the recently emerged strain of coronavirus. The initial funding will support Inovio’s preclinical and clinical development through Phase 1 human testing, according to a company statement. Further, Cepi will invest up to $10.6 million in University of Queensland to develop a “molecular clamp” vaccine platform, a transformative technology that enables targeted and rapid vaccine production against multiple viral pathogens, the release adds. 

Under the agreement, Cepi announced a new partnership with Moderna and US-based National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to manufacture an mRNA (messenger RNA) vaccine against 2019-nCoV. 

Also, Cepi invests in platform technologies that can be used for rapid vaccine and immunoprophylactic development against unknown pathogens (ie, Disease X). Till now, it has committed to investing over $456 million in vaccine and platform development, according to its website.


