Dhantoli residents move HC against bringing Covid patients to their area
2020-05-01
Nagpur: A residents’ association has approached Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court praying for cancelling municipal commissioner’s orders of April 23 to take over private hospitals for accommodating Covid-19 patients.

While issuing notices to respondents including Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC), Justice Manish Pitale on Thursday directed its counsel Sudhir Puranik to file an affidavit on total number of beds available in Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) and Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) for coronavirus patients. All of them were asked to file replies before May 5, the next hearing date.

The judge also made it clear that until the beds in both government hospitals are full, they can’t shift patients to private hospitals.

The directives came while hearing a civil application filed by Dhantoli Nagarik Mandal in its PIL (No65/2012) opposing blind permissions granted to private hospitals in their area that had led to severe congestion and traffic snarls.

According to the NMC officials, both hospitals have the combined capacity to accommodate 1,400 patients which could be stretched to 2,200 in case of a jump in the number of Covid-19 patients.

Quoting case of Avanti Institute of Cardiology run by Dr UK Mahorkar, the petitioners through counsels Ashutosh Dharmadhikari and Ashwin Deshpande informed it also received a communication from the civic body for getting ready to accommodate the Covid-19 patients.

According to them, it’s a heart institute and keeping Covid patients there would be dangerous for others taking treatment for cardiovascular diseases there. “Dhantoli is already a very congested area full of hospitals, business and residential complexes. If such patients are kept in hospitals there, there’s threat the disease may spread in the area. If all positive patients are from Satranjipura and Mominpura areas, there’s no point in shifting them all the way to Dhantoli,” they contended.

While suggesting that Hotel Chidambara’s building, vacant since many years, be used for such purposes, the lawyers pointed out that communication issued by NMC commissioner Tukaram Munde under Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, was contrary to the Act’s provisions.

Terming the NMC’s communication arbitrary and illegal, the petitioner prayed for staying it.


