Kolkata: Dhapa crematorium furnaces reserved for Covid-19 victims
2020-03-27
KOLKATA: The Kolkata Municipal Corporation on Thursday decided to reserve the crematorium at Dhapa for Covid-19 victims. This facility with two furnaces was set up in 1995 to cremate unclaimed bodies. The decision was taken to avoid a repeat of the 10-hour delay that authorities faced after stiff resistance from locals and Nimtala burning ghat staff in cremating the 57-year-old who had died of the disease.


The KMC health department indicated that the crematorium situated on the municipal solid waste dump ground complex was ideal for cremating Covid-19 victims as the neighbourhood is sparsely populated and there would be no objections. A source said the operator of the electric furnaces was on Thursday asked to ensure both the units were serviced and ready for operation. Usually, one furnace is operational and the other is on standby.

An official said the civic body’s electrical wing had agreed to hand over the crematorium to the health department for the next couple of months. “The health department will take a final call in case a Covid-19 patient has to be cremated,” he said. The civic body’s health department has also decided not to allow entry of more than three family members of a Covid-19 victim at the time of cremation, a KMC source said.

The state health department must prepare the KMC staffers at Dhapa to handle bodies. “They have to be trained on the standard precautions for hygiene, use of masks and gloves. The rules allow relatives to see the body for one last time by unzipping only the face end of the body bag. Only those religious rituals are allowed that do not require touching the body.

“No one is allowed to bath, kiss or hug the body. The cremation staff and family members should follow hand hygiene measures after the cremation. The ash does not pose any risk. Large gatherings at the crematorium should be avoided as a social distancing measure,” a health department official.


