Dharavi cases could spike, BMC to ramp up quarantine capacity
2020-04-23
MUMBAI: On the day a central inter-ministerial team visited Dharavi along with state health minister Rajesh Tope to examine the civic body’s Covid-19 preparedness, the vast slum pocket reported nine more cases. The visiting team advised civic officials on Wednesday to triple quarantine facilities in the area and conduct more tests as cases could increase “drastically” in the coming days.

Dharavi is part of the G-North Ward, which includes Dadar, Matunga and Mahim. Till Wednesday, the ward recorded a total of 262 cases, of which 72%, or 189, including 12 deaths, are from Dharavi alone. The slum is spread over an area of 2.1 square km.

The visiting team said since the first case in Dharavi was reported as recently as on April 1, there is a possibility that numbers could rise drastically by the month-end or the first week of May. The team cited the example of G-South (Worli) Ward where the first case was reported on March 21 and the number rose to to 487 by Tuesday.

Following the suggestions, Tope said he has instructed the civic commissioner to increase the quarantine capacity from 1,200 beds to 2,000 in Dharavi and, if needed, tents could be erected in open spaces. He directed the BMC to conduct more tests too. 

Tope said the situation, whether in Mumbai or Pune, is serious as it is an epidemic. “We have to strictly follow the cluster containment zone policy. Considering an expected increase in cases in the next 10 days, we are checking our preparedness plan, including availability of PPE kits, ventilators and oxygen masks so that all hospitals are ready to face the situation,” said Tope.

Kiran Dighavkar, assistant municipal commissioner of the G-North Ward, said, “We have been asked to increase the quarantine capacity. We may use tents in the Rajiv Gandhi sports complex to add more beds. We are examining all available spaces in the area for quarantine purpose.” 

The team expressed its satisfaction with the civic effort to arrange for groceries and vegetables in containment zones. It also discussed the success of the fever clinics.

