Dharavi past 100 mark with 15 Covid-19 cases; death ups toll to 10
2020-04-18
MUMBAI: Dharavi reported 15 new Covid-19 cases, including a death, on Friday. The total positive cases rose to 101 and the death toll to 10.


The latest cases were from Muslim Nagar, Matunga labour camp, Indira Nagar, Laxmi chawl, Janata Society and Social Nagar.

The deceased was a 62-year-old from Matunga labour camp admitted to the BMCrun Sion hospital.

“We directly received information from the hospital authorities that the patient was Covid-19 positive and had passed away,” a BMC official said.

The official said the the death and three more positive tests were the first cases from the labour camp and the BMC would conduct fever camps in the area soon.

The other three cases from the labour camp were male patients aged 24 years, 37 years and 65 years.

The first positive test in Dharavi was on April 1, a 56-year-old man who died later in the day. A garment unit businessman, he had hosted Tablighi Jamaat members in a second flat he owned in his residential complex.

Later, others in his complex and people who were regulars at a place of worship were also found infected.

The Tablighi Jamaat members had attended a religious congregation in Nizamuddin, Delhi, a gathering that is behind the spread of the novel coronavirus among hundreds across the country.

Positive cases also began popping up from different parts of the massive slum spread, the congested spaces aiding the spread.

Three pockets in Dharavi today have a high number of patients: Muslim Nagar with 21 cases, including a death; Mukund Nagar with 18 cases; and Social Nagar with 10 cases, including a death.

BMC officials said the process of hiring private doctors, ward boys and nurses to handle Covid-19 patients from the area had started.

“Those hired will be kept at the institutional quarantine centres within Dharavi so that the suspected Covid-19 cases can be closely monitored,” a BMC official said.

The doctors will be paid a monthly remuneration of Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 2 lakh for an eight-hour duty cycle, while nurses and lab technicians will get Rs 30,000 per month. Ward boys and labourers will be paid Rs 20,000 monthly remuneration for an eight-hour duty cycle.


