Covid-19 outbreak: Dharavi man may face arrest for defying home quarantine
2020-03-21
MUMBAI: The Mumbai police is likely to initiate legal action against a Dharavi resident who stepped out of home quarantine and moved around in public on Friday. 



Coronavirus in India latest updates 

The 43-year-old man had travelled to Dubai in search of a job, and on his return four days ago was stamped at the city airport and asked to remain home quarantined for 14 days. He has now been sent to SevenHills Hospital in Andheri where he will be quarantined. 

A BMC official said: “He had erased the ‘Home Quarantine’ stamp with some chemical. We conduct random checking and found out that one of them was not at home. We have taken serious cognizance of it and immediately took him to the police station.”

Police commissioner Parambir Singh told TOI, “We caught the person and sent him to SevenHills Hospital as he did not follow the home quarantine directives. Legal action will follow later, but this should be a lesson for those who are running away from quarantine centres. This is the first case in our jurisdiction and we are enhancing security on all home quarantine arrangements in the city.” 

Assistant municipal commissioner of G-North ward Kiran Dighavkar, which covers areas like Dharavi, said every day the ward has been receiving a list from Mumbai airport about the number of travellers entering the city and placed on home quarantine. “The police, along with BMC teams, are keeping a vigil as to whether the persons are adhering to the direction given to them. In many cases, we personally visit the homes,” he said.

This is the fourth instance in the past two days where people who were to remain quarantined were found in public places. Seventeen people were deboarded from trains in three separate instances on Thursday. On Wednesday, four passengers en route to Surat were deboarded at Palghar station.

On Thursday, state home minister Anil Deshmukh had said that stern action would be taken against those escaping quarantine centres by booking them under the Epidemic Diseases Act. The offence carries a punishment of six months in jail or Rs 1,000 fine or both.

