Gujarat: Dhrangadhra cops use selfies to enforce quarantine
2020-04-10
AHMEDABAD: Dhrangadhra police have made it mandatory for those quarantined to mark their presence every one hour. Their physical presence at the police station is not required, but the 47 quarantined persons in their jurisdiction have to upload selfies of themselves inside their homes every one hour and have to fill up a form on their health every four hours.


According to assistant superintendent of police, Dhrangadhra, Shaifali Barwal, not only does this ensure their personnel are not put to risk, but also that the person quarantined does not leave home. “If the person reports a fever, a health team is informed immediately and medical assistance reaches them,” she said.

Barwal said that their app is for the 72 village in Dhrangadhra taluka. Barwal said that on Wednesday another app was launched using which people can inform the department if they have come into contact with suspected or confirmed Covid-19 cases. She said that superintendent of police Mahendra Bagria gave all requisite permisssions and help for the launches of these apps. A local IT expert Vimalrajsinh Parmar helped the department in develop them.

“As these are village folk they tend to think police will catch them and put them in isolation, but we are launching a drive to raise awareness so they can quarantine themselves,” she said.

A senior police office said that the department has even quarantined those who have travelled to districts such as Ahmedabad, Rajkot, Bhavnagar or Surat besides those who travelled outside the state or country. The officer said that this has helped ensure the taluka did not report any Covid-19 cases so far.

The officer said a small control room has been set up in Dhrangadhra and the patients are regularly monitored. “If someone fails to upload a photo, we call to ask why and inquire about their health first.”

With Parmar’s help, the department also also prepared an electronic form that can be filled in by those with symptoms and uploaded to their website or app. The form asks them if they have fever, cough or any other symptoms and if they have noticed similar symptoms in their neighbours.

