‘Diabetics need to be extra alert of coronavirus’
2020-03-13
NEW DELHI: In the midst of the novel coronavirus scare, persons with diabetes should be extra careful about their health. They should maintain good glycaemic control (blood sugar level), which helps in reducing the risk of infection and also the severity of complications. “Good glycaemic control may also lessen the chances of secondary bacterial pneumonia, a key complication of Covid-19,” says Dr Anoop Misra, chairman of Fortis C-Doc Hospital. He, along with a group of experts, has authored a research on clinical consideration for patients with diabetes in times of Covid-19 epidemic.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The research paper states that attention to nutrition and adequate protein intake is important. “Exercise has been shown to improve immunity, though it might be prudent to be careful and avoid crowded places like gyms or swimming pools,” the research, published in Diabetes and Metabolic Syndrome – Clinical Research and Review, adds.

It stresses on the need to follow general preventive measures, for example handwashing with soap and water, practising respiratory hygiene and minimising contact with an affected person.

In case a person with diabetes gets Covid-19, the advisory suggests authorities should be notified immediately. “Majority of patients have a mild disease and can be managed at home. Hydration should be maintained and symptomatic treatment can be given,” it adds.

According to the experts, hospitalised patients with severe disease need frequent blood glucose monitoring.

The guidelines on preventing and treating Covid-19 among diabetics is important. According to a study published in The Lancet recently, the lifestyle disease is the second most common co-morbidity affecting 19% of Covid-19 patients who require admission. The same point has been stressed upon in the report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19.

Dr Aparna Jaswal, additional director, cardiology and electrophysiology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, said those suffering from co-morbidities such as diabetes and heart disease may benefit from supplement of Vitamin C.

