Mumbai: Dialysis patient waits for 7 hours as hospital seeks Covid-19 test with 10-day validity
2020-04-29
MUMBAI: A 50-year-old dialysis patient waited for seven hours—four of them lying down in her car—at Masina Hospital before she was given the treatment on Tuesday. 

On Monday, the Byculla-based hospital had told Khushnuma Ansari to get a Covid-19 test done with a 10-day validity. Her last test was done 12 days ago. But Dr Daksha Shah, deputy executive health officer with the BMC, clarified: “There is no advisory asking patients to get Covid-19 tests done before going to hospital.” 





Khushnuma, an Agripada resident, has a lung disease besides renal failure. “We used to take her to Wockhardt Hospital at Mumbai Central for dialysis since a year. But after staff tested Covid-19 positive, the dialysis service was shut. We then had four dialysis sessions at Masina,” said Shabaz, Khushnuma’s son. Masina Hospital too was shut briefly, and she was taken to JJ Hospital where she had three sessions. “After JJ’s unit was shut next, we went to a private hospital at Pydhonie. In one month, we have changed four hospitals,” he said.

When the Pydhonie hospital too shut its , Khushnuma returned to Masina. “We had an appointment for Monday, but were turned away as her Covid-19 test was 12 days old. Her condition deteriorated as she hadn’t been on dialysis since five days. On Tuesday, we went to two other hospitals before reaching Masina at 10am,” said Mushtaq, her husband. The family waited for four hours in the parking lot with Khushnuma lying down in the car. “She couldn’t eat or even move. Eventually, we called the police. By 2pm, we were allowed inside the dialysis unit, but treatment didn’t start till 5pm,” said Shabaz. 

A statement from Masina Hospital said: “Different hospitals are adhering to different limitations of days for Covid-19 tests before treating or admitting patients. Masina Hospital has decided that the patients are required to take the Covid test once in 10 days. The patient (with lung disease making her more susceptible to Covid) arrived at the hospital without an appointment and due to the patient load at the hospital, she couldn’t be taken in immediately for dialysis, especially without a negative Covid result. The patient was refused dialysis at multiple other hospitals. However, post consultation, we offered to provide dialysis during the last shift at night to ensure that the facility does not treat other patients right after to ensure no risk of virus transmission.”


