Diamond Princess quarantine ends, but not for Indian crew
2020-02-19
NEW DELHI: As the mandatory 14-day quarantine period for passengers on the cruise liner Diamond Princess comes to an end on Wednesday, the nightmare for the majority of over 3,700 on board may be coming to an end. But not for the 132 Indian crew members who have been doggedly at their stations through this period.


They will not only be the last people to step off the boat, because they will continue to serve the other passengers but their quarantine will start after the last passenger has left the ship. This basically means they will have to be quarantined for an extra 14 days before they can be cleared for travel back to India. Of the 132, six have already tested positive for the virus and have been moved to hospitals.

As of Tuesday, 542 cases of the virus had been diagnosed on the ship. Japan’s move of quarantining all the passengers on the cruise liner basically meant that the ship became like a petri dish for the deadly coronavirus. In fact, if the Diamond Princess had been a country, it would have had the highest number of infected people after China. Japan is coming in for criticism for its quarantine moves for the cruise ship, because its not clear how the virus has infected so many despite the quarantine.

The six Indian passengers along with all the others, will be tested in batches starting Wednesday, before being allowed out. There is a fear that if the virus has been raging on the ship regardless of the quarantine, there are chances that many passengers could have contracted the virus in the past few days.

Official sources said, the company that owns the cruise liner, has offered to pay the medical bills and arrange for the transport of the crew back to India. The US conducted one evacuation over the weekend: two planes carried 328 people to military bases in California and Texas, including 14 who tested positive for coronavirus.

Meanwhile, almost 1,400 passengers of another cruise ship Westerdam, which docked in Sihanoukville, Cambodia after five nations refused to allow it to dock, left for their respective countries, but a huge question arose, when one American passenger among them tested positive for the virus.

