Diamond City reports second death due to COVID-19
2020-04-06
SURAT: A 61-year-old woman from Pal, who had tested positive for COVID-19, passed away at Seventh Day Adventist Mission Hospital on Sunday, taking the toll due to the deadly virus to two in the city. 

Rajani Lilani, suffering from hypertension, breathlessness and diabetes, was immediately put on ventilator at the hospital on Friday. Her tests came positive for COVID-19 on Saturday. 

A 67-year-old man from Nanpura had died at Mahavir Hospital due to COVID-19 on March 22.

Health officials of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) stated that the health of the woman deteriorated on Saturday night and that she breathed her last at about 1.15am.

Sources said the woman's son owns a shop at Radha Krishna Textile Market at Sahara Darwaja where a 62-year-old textile trader from Parvat Patiya tested positive for COVID-19 on March 25. While the woman had no travel history, her son had been to Mumbai in the last 10 days. 

Dr Ashish Naik, deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), said, "The woman breathed her last at Seventh Day Adventist Mission Hospital. Her last rites were performed at Jehangirpura crematorium as per government protocol at about 4am. Hers was second death due to COVID-19 in the city." Later, the entire crematorium was disinfected

Dr Naik informed that about eight close contacts of the woman were shifted to government quarantine facility at Samras hostel on VNSGU campus. Their samples have been sent for testing at a laboratory. 

Three test positive for COVID-19 in city

Surat: Three persons tested positive for COVID-19, taking total number of positive cases to 14 in the city. 

Rameshchandra Rana, 65, from Begumpura, and Abdul Wahid Qureshi, 50, from Adajan Patia, who were admitted to Seventh Day Adventist Mission Hospital, and Satyabhama Vanare, 40, from Pandesara, admitted to New Civil Hospital, tested positive for COVID-19 on Sunday. Health condition of all the three patients, who do not have any travel history, is said to be stable. 

Sources said Vanare is mother of the sales executive of a supermarket, who had tested positive for COVID-19 on April 1. 

Meanwhile, a COVID-19 positive patient identified as Tohled Arif Pathan, 32, residing in Rander, was discharged from New Civil Hospital after his samples tested negative for the virus on Saturday night. About one square kilometre area of Rander town was placed under mass quarantine after detection of two positive COVID-19 cases there recently. 

Health officials said about eight people with suspected symptoms of the virus were admitted to SMIMER hospital and Seventh Day Adventist Mission Hospital on Sunday. 

COVID-19 Metre

Total suspected cases: 195

Total positive cases: 14

Total negative cases: 177

Reports pending: 5 


