Didn’t know when I was put on ventilator: Man who beat virus
2020-04-22
AHMEDABAD: On entering his housing society premises in Ambawadi, Neelam Apartments, he was greeted with clanging thalis and clapping. Nitin Shah did not realize when he was put on the ventilator and was on it for 10 days. On Tuesday, he walked out of the hospital, victorious over Covid-19.

Shah who works in the administration department of Diwan Ballubhai School, was admitted to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel hospital on April 2. “And on April 15, when I opened my eyes, I realised that I was on the ventilator,” says Shah. Diabetic for the last four years, Shah said that he had never before been admitted to hospital in his 55 years.

“This was the first time I was admitted to hospital, for Covid-19. I don’t remember when I was put on the ventilator, all I know is I was made unconscious after three days.”

Shah said that he suspects he got the infection while on government duty at the school during the Class X and XII examinations. At least 15 government officials would visit the school every day and they used to tgive me files and other material, which I think could have been contaminated with Covid-19.”

“When I found I was infected, I was surprised as I had not even gone outside Ahmedabad city in March. On April 4, my 19-year-old son Jainam also tested positive. He was discharged on April 13,” said Shah.

Shah’s case was referred to by municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra, who said, “Even a patient Nitin Shah, who was on the ventilator for 10 days was discharged in the last 24 hours, after he tested negative. Such is the care and treatment at SVP Hospital.”

Shah was all praises for SVP staff and said that the doctors and paramedical staff took good care of him. He said he would recommend the facility to the people of Ahmedabad if the need arose. He said that after he was shifted to the ICU there was an issue between the management and ward boys, about their safety, but the management was quick to solve the problem he was getting treatment similar to a corporate hospital ever since.


