‘Different vaccines being tried out, will take at least 6 months’
2020-05-10
Shekhar Mande, director general of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), speaks to TOI on how the country is combating Covid-19, progress made towards vaccine and other initiatives. Has CSIR been assigned a specific role by government in combating Covid-19? What is the contribution of different CSIR labs?Being a premier research and development organization of the country, it is natural that CSIR would take a lead. We are working on five different pillars. The first one is surveillance which includes digital and molecular. The work has started and large-scale mapping of population is being done. The second pillar is diagnostics and the country’s first paper-strip test for rapid diagnosis of Covid-19 is set to get commercial soon. Pharmaceuticals is the third pillar under which we have already started trials of Mw (Mycobacterium w) vaccines and few others. The fourth pillar is hospital equipment and we have been making around 30,000 personal protective equipment (PPE) per day. And the last pillar is supply chain logistics which we are handling across India.Are CSIR laboratories also contributing in testing?Yes, around 15 laboratories are carrying out testing for coronavirus. But, more than that, they have taken a lead in training. The CSIR’s Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology in Hyderabad has trained around 100 personnel so that they could start rapid testing in their respective talukas in Telangana. The National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (Neeri) in Nagpur has been appointed as a model for other testing laboratories.How is India progressing in finding a vaccine for coronavirus?A number of vaccines are being tried out in India. The lead has been taken by major manufacturing companies. Apart from developing monoclonal antibody-based vaccine with Hyderabad’s Bharat Biotech, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) in Indore and other institutes, CSIR has also begun clinical trials for Mw. It is based on an immune boosting molecular formation which will boost the immunity of an infected person, thereby enabling him to fight the virus effectively.By when can we expect a vaccine to be ready?Even in the best possible scenario, I don’t think any of the vaccines are going to be ready in another six months.There are speculations regarding a rise in Covid-19 cases in the country. How can we prepare for it?Speculation is the right word as all these talks are based on different models. But we should always be prepared for the worst to implement needed actions effectively. As of now, the testing rate in the country is sufficient. Apart from this, multiple testing strategies are coming up which will hopefully be implemented in the future.There has been an obvious improvement in environmental parameters during lockdown. How can this be maintained while ensuring economic growth?It is for everyone to see that the impact of lockdown on the environment has been positive due to a reduction in anthropogenic activities. It is obvious that when all of us get back to work, the environmental conditions will go back to being the same old. It is in our hands to be careful and have the necessary restrictions to maintain a healthy environment.Do you think science and technology will get higher priority and better funding in post-Covid scenario?This is wishful thinking. However, I do hope that the larger section of the society recognizes that science and technology alone can ensure well-being of human beings. It can do wonders for humanity.