Direct sellers take biz online amid lockdown
2020-04-22
Namrata.Singh@timesgroup.com

Mumbai: Direct selling — a model which works on personal relationships, including sizeable gatherings and one-on-one interactions — has not escaped the Covid-19 pandemic’s impact. However, direct sellers are finding ways to ensure business continuity. 

Amway India has witnessed a significant shift towards online orders, which have increased from about 34% in February 2020 to 100% now. The company is scaling up infrastructure to handle the load shift to its website. These orders are from Amway direct sellers and their customers with an approximate split of 50% each. It is working to re-instate last-mile connectivity. 

Amway India Enterprises CEO Anshu Budhraja said, “Our team is monitoring the evolving situation 24x7, and we connect daily with our partners and key stakeholders to review the developments and response strategy. We are leveraging digital technology by conducting all the important meetings and training programmes with direct sellers online. A total of 350 online training sessions have been conducted in the last seven days across regions. And since the platform is digital, we can cover a much larger number of direct sellers. So far, we have engaged with 50,000 direct sellers through online training programmes.”

Direct selling engages micro-entrepreneurs and homemakers and is about skill-building. Companies expect that these will resonate even more in the future. Tupperware India is innovating with digital formats and platforms and encouraging its direct sellers to embrace technology and host virtual meet-ups and gatherings to drive sales.

Tupperware, which entered the retail and e-tail market in August 2019, and has its products listed on leading market places, is empowering its salesforce to use social selling to generate demand. It is also extending rental support to franchise outlet owners during the lockdown. Tupperware India MD Deepak Chhabra said that the company underwent a strategic transformation from a direct-selling model to opening multiple channels of sales to serve latent demand. 

“Communication has been intensified with our direct sellers/customers via virtual media — both formal and informal. We continue to support our Tupperware Independent Reps as they turn to WhatsApp and Facebook for online businesses under the lockdown and staying home to avoid social gatherings. We are supporting them by highlighting products that provide solutions to numerous families, like how to make fresh food last longer, how to preserve bulk buying, create quick and easy meals and great ideas for family time while everyone is home together,” said Chhabra.

Indian Direct Selling Association head Chetan Bhardwaj said the direct selling industry has been clocking a CAGR of 16% over the last four years. The size of the industry is over Rs 13,000 crore, with about 5.7 million direct sellers. “Direct selling is one sector which grows even during an economic downturn. Since a person does not require funds to join direct selling, more people come to this industry during a downturn. We are telling our members that once we are out of the current restrictions, we have the potential to outgrow our past numbers,” said Bhardwaj.


