Disability fails to deter him from working at Jodhpur Covid-19 hotspot
2020-05-04
JODHPUR: Thirty-year-old Kaluram Bhati is an inspiration to all corona workers in the place of his work, which has been identified as a hotspot.


An accountant and data entry operator at a primary health centre (PHC) in Kalal Colony, Kaluram, who who despite being differently abled, continues to serve reflecting his indomitable spirit. 

Living away from his parents, the eldest of three siblings, Kaluram, begins work at 9am knowing well that there is no saying when the day will wrap up. He prepares the teams comprising a nurse and a BLO for survey, readies the line list of all samples taken in his area and shares it with the administration.

“Based on the report of the survey teams, I set up the sampling centre as per the convenience of the residents so that they can come and give their samples,” said Kaluram. 

It is not merely a desk job that he does sitting comfortably on his chair in a safe room. “The most difficult aspect of the entire exercise is to convince people to come to the centre and give their samples,” he said. 

Kaluram said he personally visits the narrow streets of the areas and talks to people to convince them to cooperate with the survey and medical teams by clarifying their confusions and describing to them the consequences of ignoring the infection. “Earlier, it was a herculean task. But gradually people have started understanding,” he said. “I have been working here since 2018, so people know me. That helps a lot,” he added. 

Kaluram admits that in the beginning, he was not so forthcoming in continuing with the duty amid the outbreak with the area being declared a hotspot. Going on leave did seem a safer and easier option. 

“Then I realized that if everybody would begin to think like me, who would be there to work? So I decided to proceed with whatever duty was given to me,” he said. 

Kaluram had also been advised by his parents back in Bhopalgarh, his native place, to take leave and come home. “We had asked him to take leave considering the fear of coronavirus and his physical condition. But he insisted that he would continue the work as a service to the nation,” said his father Rameshwar Lal. 

