Disabled youth, 21, dies in Delhi hospital due to Covid-19, family gets to know it 4 days later
2020-05-15
MEERUT: For the last four days, a quarantined family in Meerut was making desperate calls to find out about the well-being of their disabled son, 21. He was referred to a Delhi hospital after being found Covid-19 positive. None of them knew that all this while he was lying dead in the hospital’s mortuary, unclaimed and unattended.


Hopes shattered and the calls ceased on Thursday when the news was broken to them. His elder brother, who came out of quarantine on Thursday and rushed to Delhi, found that the youth took his last breath on Sunday, with no one around.

Meanwhile, Meerut district magistrate Anil Dhingra has ordered a probe into it. “An inquiry has been ordered under additional chief medical officer Dr Pooja Sharma and the sub-divisional magistrate (Sadar) to see if there was any negligence on our part,” the DM said. 

A senior Delhi government functionary said that the issue had just come into their knowledge. “The medical superintendent of the hospital is setting up a fact-finding committee to probe it,” she said.

The youth who was suffering from a brain ailment was referred to the Delhi hospital on May 1, a day after his Covid-19 report came positive. He could not walk due to disability in both his legs. The family members, who were put under quarantine, were in contact with him through the phones of other patients in his ward.

But they lost contact on Sunday. The next four days were traumatic for them. They also approached their local MLA, Rafiq Ansari, who also tried to contact authorities, but could not get any news.

Ansari said, “On April 30, he was admitted to LLRM Medical College and tested positive for coronavirus. He was referred to a Delhi hospital on May 1 at 2pm. However, he was unable to get admission until 12 midnight. I contacted the chief medical officer, district magistrate and LLRM principal. They assured help, and he was later admitted to Lok Nayak Hospital around 2am on May 2.”

His elder brother, on his way from Delhi with the body, told TOI, “The entire family was in quarantine. So we were in touch over phone, that too of the patients who were admitted in the same ward. On May 10, a patient started giving us negative vibes. That is when we contacted the DM and CMO. But they said if he were dead, Delhi authorities would have informed them.”

He added, “We even tried to get in touch with Delhi officials, but all in vain. I was in quarantine, and got discharged on Wednesday. On Thursday morning, I left for Delhi and found at a police post inside the hospital that my brother died on May 10. My brother is no more and nobody bothered to inform us about it for four days. Is this how people are supposed to be treated?”

Meerut CMO Dr Raj Kumar confirmed that the Delhi hospital did not inform them about the death. “According to norms, the Delhi hospital should have informed us about his death. However, nobody got in touch with us. We got to know about it on Thursday, that too after we sent them an email.”


