Chennai: Disabled son left to fend for self as both parents test positive for coronavirus
2020-05-30
CHENNAI: “The past ten days felt like hell,” said Jayanthi*, a domestic worker who tested positive for Covid-19 . A day after she was moved to Stanley Medical College and Hospital, her husband too tested positive and was kept in isolation in their Thiruvottiyur home. But it was the plight of her disabled son that worried her the most. 


R Mahendran, her 23-year-old son who has severe intellectual disability and Down Syndrome, was left to fend for himself as both his parents were cut off. “He tested negative, which came as a relief. But my son is totally dependent on me, he needs round-the-clock support. He was left all alone,” she said.

Jayanthi tried reaching out to friends, distant relatives, and neighbours to go and check on Mahendran, but in vain. “They all feared to contract the virus,” she said. Mahendran was receiving vocational training before the lockdown. He used to have a hard time dealing staying indoors, and would get restless and angry, said his mother. “My going away made it worse.” Mahendran refused to eat, sleep, bathe, cried and threw temper tantrums. Mahendran also attempted to run away to find his mother.

S Namburajan, general secretary of the Tamil Nadu Association for the Rights of All Types of Differently-Abled and Caregivers, contacted the official concerned from the Greater Chennai Corporation and requested them to either move the boy to the hospital so he can be near his mother or quarantine her at home. “They refused and suggested that they could move him to a community hall,” he said.

Three days ago, Jayanthi tested negative and was reunited with Mahendran on Thursday. Mahendran has only been smiling since. “He had his first meal in four days. He’s just not letting me go. I am very happy,” she said. 

The incident has raised concerns about the lack of support system for people who need round-the-clock support like Mahendran. Experts said the existing system only focuses on treating the infected, but not providing care to those who are totally dependent on patients and left helpless and abandoned. “The disabled and senior citizens suffer the most,’ said Namburajan. “We need a proper plan to protect them too,” he said.


