Dishwasher, vacuum cleaner sales looking up due to lockdown
2020-05-12
NEW DELHI: They are the new domestic helps, and you don’t run the risk of contracting Covid-19 from them. Dishwashers, vacuum cleaners, air purifiers and washing machines have suddenly captured the imagination of Indian households, emerging as the new helping hand as wary families restrict the entry of 
kaamwalis.


Increasing enquiries are being made about these gadgets and orders rapidly placed even during the lockdown as families struggle with household chores, officials at sellers such as LG, Voltas, Dyson, and Samsung tell TOI.

The officials say with social distancing remaining the norm even as the country gradually opens up, there would be fear in the minds of people to allowing household helpers inside.


Coronavirus outbreak: Live updates

Though the concept of dishwashers and air purifiers is relatively new in the country and these gadgets are in the premium category, buyers are interested, officials say. Dyson, a premium maker of vacuum cleaners and air purifiers, is understood to have now witnessed 5-6 times more enquiries at its sales partners compared with the pre-corona days. The company’s cord-free vacuum cleaners cost between Rs 30,000 and Rs 60,000.

Vijay Babu VP (Home Appliances) at LG Electronics India, said their dishwashers have the capability to even clean utensils stained with oily food, something that was always considered a problem in India.

“There were valid doubts about the viability of the dish-washer in India, considering we use a lot of oil in cooking and have steel utensils. However, we have tried to address these concerns with our products.”


Gadgets new concept, but buyers still interested
The high cost, as well as limited space in most Indian kitchens, however, is an area of concern. For example, LG’s dishwasher in India costs upwards of Rs 50,000, a steep cost for most of the middle-class households.

However, officials say that with social distancing remaining the norm even as the country opens up, there would be fear in the minds of people in allowing household helps inside.


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Lockdown 3.0: What's allowed and what's not in the three zones
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news

“Thus, the need for such products goes up manifold, especially as people need to focus more on safety and protection of their family members while they attend to their official work,” Babu says.

Raju Pullan, Senior VP (Consumer Electronics Business) at Samsung India, says even products such as smart televisions are receiving a very strong response as people are home and consuming entertainment, news and content from platforms such as Netflix, and Amazon Prime.

“In the past one month, we have received thousands of queries from consumers across the country as to how they can buy TVs or digital appliances as they stay home and work from home,” Pullan says, adding that even refrigerators and washing machines are in good demand.

Pradeep Bakshi, managing director of Voltas, said households will be looking to increase the number of durables and appliances as the market opens up.

“Products like refrigerators, washing machines, and dishwashers will witness demand, since more and more consumers are taking care of household chores, without the support of domestic help… Apart from household durables, many general trade, kirana stores, hypermarkets and modern trade department stores require chest freezers, chest coolers and other commercial refrigeration products for storing food, beverage and dairy products.”

