Disquiet in quarantine: Covid suspects comparing room size, food, & campus
2020-05-06
Nagpur: The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence, goes the proverb. This seems to be the case with several of the over 2,000 Covid-19 suspects quarantined in plush buildings on the picturesque campuses of various institutions in the city.

Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) officials have discovered that the suspects have been “comparing their room size, food items and type of campus with fellow relatives and friends”, and nit-picking in the facilities provided in institutional quarantine.

This was revealed when a top NMC officer personally visited the densely-forested campus of Visvesvarya National Institute of Technology (VNIT) following unabated murmurs from Satranjipura residents. 

Besides the sprawling VNIT campus, the state-of-the-art Symbiosis campus, newly-built Pachpaoli police quarters, and upscale Prozone Palms at Chinchbhuvan are other quarantine centres. The state-owned MLA Hostels, Ravi Bhavan and Vanamati were already full and not many picked up in the mass drives from Satranjipura and Mominpura found a place there.

Additional municipal commissioner Ram Joshi told TOI most of the inmates are happy as all quarantine centres were started in recently constructed buildings. “The quarantined persons come from low income groups as well as well-to-do families. They were randomly assigned the centres. Where the facility is excellent, the inmates are enjoying there,” he said.

Officials said those who got the old hostel blocks of VNIT are the ones sulking.

Joshi said the citizens were fortunate to have such accommodation as compared to other cities, where finding decent space is a problem. “In big cities, suspects are being kept in big halls because of lack of such structures,” he said.

Regarding complaints of food, Joshi said economic background is the reason some people were content with whatever has been served while others wanted specific items. “Some told us they loved non-veg food and can’t have dal and rice. We can’t provide that though we are trying our best to keep them happy. Many among them are observing roza (fast). We have tied up with many NGOs who are taking care of their sehri and iftaar,” he said.

NMC officials observed that some inmates belonged to same families or were friends. After being admitted to the quarantine centre they had started exchanging photographs of the places they were staying in.

Officials said the accommodation capacity is different at all campuses. “Some are three-sharing, some have four-sharing bedrooms, and some have just two persons in a room with attached bathroom. When others come to know they become unhappy and demand to be shifted,” they said.


