Disregard for lockdown norms triggers clusters in Chennai
2020-04-30
CHENNAI: On April 19, a fireman from Perambalur had a duty call. Accompanied by three colleagues, they left for Karur where a fire in a garbage yard in the city’s suburbs had to be put out. By the time the team reached the spot, scores of onlookers, including staff of the corporation and municipality and members of the public, had gathered, in violation of the lockdown.

"It was a big crowd, maybe 200 people. In the afternoon, someone gave us food packets. Later in the day we returned home," said the fireman from his hospital bed in Trichy. The fire had been put out but on April 25, the 33-year-old man tested positive in a random test. Health officials are still cracking the puzzle as to how he could have contracted the infection.

 


As a worried government consulted experts, held video meetings with district collectors and worked hard to devise a lockdown exit strategy, flagrant disregard for norms by the public has seen the mushrooming of Covid community clusters. While China exercised military discipline to contain the spread in Wuhan, authorities in Chennai, Chengalpet, Coimbatore or Kanyakumari have not been so lucky.

In Chennai, a man, who decided to defy the lockdown and keep his saloon open, tested positive. In Chengalpet, a pregnant woman attended a birthday party held furtively under the lockdown shroud, tested positive. Teams of health and corporation staff have been working hard to trace their contacts. In Coimbatore, six police personnel deployed at a containment zone in Podanur were infected. One of them told TOI: "Few people adhere to the rules. Though they are not allowed to come near the barricade at exit points of the containment zone, no one listens."

In Tenkasi, a post funeral ritual and a puberty event held in a containment zone in Puliyangudi town saw at least 30 people being dragged into the Covid net. In Kanyakumari, a young man asked to quarantine himself on his return from abroad via Chennai in the third week of March, went visiting friends in Nagercoil the whole day, got into a brawl with a friend, and infected him and five others.

"People are yet to get responsible. In a containment zones, people behave like they are in a social camp. They are supposed to remain indoors. But, we see them moving around freely," said Additional Commissioner of Police (North Zone) R Dhinakaran in frustration.


