‘Disregard to lockdown rules a stress trigger’
2020-04-29
PUNE: People’s disregard to lockdown rules and social distancing norms is a major source of stress for Pune police personnel, a study by the BJ Medical College and Sassoon General Hospital’s department of paediatrics has revealed.

The study, commissioned by Pune police commissioner K Venkatesham, is titled ‘Knowledge, attitude and practice of police force of Pune urban area towards Covid-19’. A team of doctors headed by Dr Aarti Kinikar of the hospital conducted it, findings of which were submitted to the police on Monday.

As a part of this exercise, online forms were issued to the city’s total force of 8,651 police personnel. Of these, 5,692 (66%) of the personnel responded by submitting observations and difficulties faced by them. Apart from disregard to the lockdown rules, factors like being abused by people, limited opportunity to meet family members, difficulties in accessing food, water and snacks, groceries and even repairs of their vehicles are causing stress among the force (see box), the study revealed.

The study encompassed about 28 different questions to ascertain the reasons for the stress level of the police personnel during the lockdown, Venkatesham said, adding that a majority of the issues raised by the police personnel had been addressed. 

“We have installed sanitization chambers at the police stations and other police units and also created couple of roaming sanitization vans. The policemen can approach their immediate superior authorities with their complaints and the seniors have been asked to look at these complaints at priority,” the Pune police commissioner said.

Besides, the city police have also started supplying groceries and other essential products at police colonies or stations for the benefit of their personnel.

A special team headed by deputy commissioner of police (Headquarters) Virendra Mishra has been formed to look after the issues faced by the policemen engaged in bandobast or check-point duties on the field, especially in the red zones of the city.

Since the outbreak of Covid-19 in the city on March 9, the police have been deployed for various tasks, including providing security to hospitals and healthcare services, aiding contact tracing and even bringing escapees back to the quarantine facilities, among others.


