Dist to shut down borders tomorrow to keep virus out
2020-03-24
Nashik: The district administration has decided to seal the borders of Nashik district from Wednesday morning 6am, which will prohibit the entry of any person without valid reason inside the district. Moreover, movement of all vehicles, including bicycles, have been banned in Nashik city from 7pm on March 23 till March 31. Nashik police commissioner Vishwas Nangare-Patil has banned the movement of any kind of vehicle in the city to ensure people do not travel for any reason. The orders have been issued under section 144 (1) (3). “In order to contain the spread of coronavirus, it is important that people are socially distanced. However, it has been seen that there has been a unwarranted movement of vehicles in the city. Hence, movement of all vehicles, including bicycles, have been banned from 7pm March 23 till March 31,” Nangare-Patil said. District guardian minister Chhagan Bhujbal said that it has now been decided to restrict entry of people from neighbouring districts from Wednesday.Bhujbal, however, pointed out that all essential services will be allowed. “All vehicles carrying essential goods will be allowed to go to the destinations. The services will be allowed at the nearest place provided you maintain proper social distance between each other,” he told citizens.Bhujbal has ordered reserving Zakir Hussain Hospital exclusively for isolation ward. The hospital has 100 beds. The administration has also been asked to increase the similar facility at the extension building at civil hospital. Bhujbal also pointed out that there was no coronavirus positive case in Nashik district so far and at the same time, added about 500 people were quarantined at different levels – including home quarantine. Bhujbal assured citizens that the government was doing all that it could . “We have 146 ventilators at this point in time to treat patients in public and private establishments. We are trying to get more,” the minister said. Warning that the citizens violating the norms of section 144 (1) (3) would face criminal action, the guardian minister reminded the authorities that many of them would be out for their important work and hence should be treated humanely. Nashik collector Suraj Mandhare said since the e-vegetables and food delivery services will be running, there is no problem for the people to order food. “The only aim is to stop moving out of the house. Services will come to you,” he added.