Pune district divided into 65 zones for Covid-19 micro-monitoring
2020-03-17
PUNE: The district has been divided into 65 zones to micro-monitor and contain the spread of Covid-19. 


Through a notice, the district administration stated that one controlling officer — a revenue department official — has been appointed to take all action with regard to general surveillance over anyone in a particular zone.

Under the Epidemic Diseases Act, the controlling officer has been vested with powers to carry out contact-tracing, send people for tests and also enforce forced quarantine if necessary.

“S/he can do contact tracing and send people for tests and may place people under quarantine as per need,” district collector Naval Kishore Ram said. 

Those under home quarantine are under orders from the district magistrate to take necessary care. The controlling officer can appoint a person to take care of home-quarantined people and also a surveillance officer to track them daily, Pune zilla parishad CEO Ayush Prasad said. “If someone doesn't follow the rules laid down by the collector, the officer may send them to home quarantine. Officials and anganwadi workers can be directed to check on the individual,” he said. 

Through the ZP website, online self-reporting and real-time tracking can be carried out. Gram panchayats have been authorized to create containment and buffer zones, while a door-to-door survey is being carried out with a focus on senior citizens.

The suspected cases are mainly the first and second contacts of travellers being checked, and micro-monitoring will help officials take adequate care to ready containment zones, added district officials. At the moment, four containment zones are in place for those who tested positive. More can be created depending on the reports by the micro-monitoring authorities.

Micro-monitoring officers have been asked to keep a strict watch on any instance of social boycott of those who tested positive for Covid-19. The collector said stringent action would be taken against the boycotting society members under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, under the powers vested in the Disaster Management Act.

180 quarantined in PCMC limits

The Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) on Monday said that it has been able trace over 150 contacts and home-quarantined who had come in contact with the nine Covid-19 positive patients from its limits. 

PCMC also said it has formed a rapid response team comprising 100 civic officials to monitor all patients with symptoms. No new case was detected on Monday. 

PCMC further placed 20 people under quarantine for suspected foreign travel. Including those already in isolation, the total number of patients under quarantine in PCMC limits has increased to 180. Twenty-three people have completed the quarantine period of 14 days so far. 

Of the nine positive cases, five had a history of foreign travel, while four were the immediate relatives of one patient. PCMC throat swab samples of 72 suspected cases have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) for testing till Monday.


