District admin to take legal action against those defying home quarantine advisory
2020-03-23
Agra: Legal action would be taken against those who are not following the health department’s advisory of 14-day home quarantine for all foreign returnees, contacts of those people who tested positive earlier and other individuals with Covid-19-like symptoms, according to Agra district administration on Sunday.District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said that action would be taken under section 107/116 of CrPC (breach of peace and disturbing public tranquility) and the person may be even sent to jail for 14 days.“From Monday onwards, anyone who had been advised home quarantine by the health department or travelled abroad in the past 14 days and found outside the house will have to face action under 107/116 CrPC. The individual will be sent behind the bars for 14 days. At present, 1,816 individuals have been advised to maintain home quarantine in Agra,” the DM said.Meanwhile, six residents, including a woman, who had recently travelled overseas, were admitted to the isolation ward at district hospital on Sunday to check Covid-19-like symptoms. They were referred to the isolation facility by the health department’s surveillance team.Superintendent in-charge of district hospital, Satish Verma, said, “The six people who have been admitted are asymptomatic. They have been kept in isolation ward on the basis of their travel history. Blood, nasal and throat swab samples of these people, along with 12 other suspected cases, have been sent to Lucknow’s King George Medical University (KGMU). The reports are likely to be received by Monday afternoon.”Also, samples of 14 suspected cases sent to KGMU on Saturday were found to be negative.Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the 21 samples sent to KGMU has been tested negative for Covid-19. So far, eight positive cases have surfaced in Agra. Out of them, seven people have recovered and the rest home quarantined. A woman who tested positive is being treated at SN Medical College. People are advised against leaving their houses unnecessarily.”