Dist admin all geared up to prevent new Covid-19 hotspots
2020-04-15
Nashik: With an aim to get some relaxation from the lockdown, senior officials from across the district are working overtime to contain the spread of Covid-19 and ensure there are no new hotspots.

On Tuesday, while addressing the nation, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that areas that show good record and there is no increase in the number of Covid 19 patients would be given relaxation from the lockdown to resume activities after April 20.

A senior district administration official said that thousands of health workers and medical officers are working to trace Covid-19 patients and bring them immediately under treatment. 

Leena Bansod, CEO of Nashik zilla parishad, said the Nashik Municipal Corporation, Malegaon Municipal Corporation and rural parts of the districts are treated separately in the assessment for Covid-19.

"Thus, some areas could get relaxation from the lockdown. We are working hard to trace people with travel history and those who may have come in contact with positive Covid-19 patients. Other measures taken are to get the suspect patients quarantined and tested at the earliest so that chances of spreading the disease are prevented," she said.

The Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) has already started taking various measures to prevent new hotspots of Covid-19 in the city.

"We are keeping a close eye on those coming into the city from Malegaon, which is the most Covid-19 affected areas in the district. Such people are immediately sent to institutional quarantine," a civic official said.

Moreover, the civic body has also made a group of home-quarantined people and is taking regular update from them.

"We are taking measures to ensure that there are no new hotspot in the city. We are taking all preventive measures to curb spread of Covid-19," the official said.

The NMC has also formed teams of health officials, doctors, nurses and Asha workers to conduct door-to-door survey across the city. A door-to-door survey is also being carried out in three hotspot areas of the city.

A total of three people from Nashik city, belonging to different areas, have tested positive for Covid-19. The civic body has sealed all the the three areas — Govind Nagar, Anandvalli on Gangapur Road and Rajlaxmi lawns on Nashik Road — for 14 days as a precautionary measure.

Until Tuesday morning (April 14), the district had reported 36 patients suffering from Covid-19 with the maximum (30 cases) from Malegaon. So far, the death toll of the district stands at 2.

District collector Suraj Mandhare said, "There is no community spread of the disease in the district. Earlier, positive patients were either from family or close contacts of the positive patients. If social distancing is observed, we can prevent the spread of Covid-19."


