District administration ramps up quarantine and isolation facilities in more hospitals
2020-03-24
Coimbatore: With one Covid-19 positive case reported in the district so far, the Coimbatore administration has begun ramping up quarantine and isolation facilities at more government hospitals in the district. It has also tightened the security on the border. 


The medical services department on Monday increased the capacity of isolation and quarantine facilities at the Mettupalayam and Pollachi government hospitals. “At Pollachi GH, we have 47 beds, of which 12 in the isolation ward and 35 in the quarantine wards. In Mettupalayam, we have 23 beds — 11 in the isolation ward and 12 in the quarantine ward. Both hospitals have enough ventilators.” joint director of medical services Dr Krishna said.

Following the government direction, the health department has kept one-third of staff at the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital and the ESIC Hospital on reserve, to brace for a situation in which one of staff getting infected and exposing others to the virus. 

District collector K Rajamani, meanwhile, asked the ESIC Hospital to dedicate the entire hospital infrastructure for treating Covid-19 cases. “As of now, the Covid block has 100 beds, but it can easily be ramped up to 300 beds, if required,” deputy director of public health Dr G Ramesh Kumar said. Officials said there are enough facilities and even isolation and quarantine wards in CMCH and ESIC are yet to get full.

The collector also visited the Walayar check-post on Monday. He ordered to move the check-post close to the Kerala check-post on the border to close the gap of 2km. “Between the check-posts, people were taking sub-routes to cross the border. Several people were found walking and finding unfrequented paths to cross the border,” Dr Ramesh Kumar said, adding that, “Now we have moved the check-post to the border itself, where our officials can turn people and vehicles back.”

The health department ordered a batch of quarantine stickers that must be stuck in front of houses where people were asked to be home quarantined. So far, 387 households have been identified. Hand stamps have also been ordered for people arriving at airports. Meanwhile, the corona observation centre at Karumathampatti has stopped functioning for now as all international flight take-offs and landings were banned in the country till March 31, health department officials confirmed.

