Dist reports 2 quarantine violations on a daily basis
2020-05-28
Kochi: Every day in Ernakulam district, one-two people violate home-quarantine protocols, according to mental health programme’s wing extending psycho-social support. They noticed it during random sample collections that have been carried out daily on 50 people undergoing quarantine at their houses in the district.

“We take only 50 samples per day. Earlier, we used to find around four to five people violating protocols while undergoing home quarantine every day. Now it has come down to one or two,” said district mental health programme coordinator Soumya Raj.

Though the violations have come down drastically, people admit to counsellors of the wing that they use common toilets, which is not allowed according to home-quarantine norms. Some people even told the counsellors that since they are taking immunity-boosting medicines, they are not going to get infected with Covid-19. “Some people due to ignorance say they take preventive medicines (actually immunity boosters being offered by other branches of medicine) and are not going to get infected with Covid-19. This misunderstanding prompts some to violate the quarantine protocols,” said the district mental health programme coordinator. 

Noticing that people have been violating home quarantine, district health authorities have informed rapid response teams, constituted in each ward under ward members, to be more vigilant and report violations immediately to police stations in respective areas. “An app was launched by city police for keeping a watch on people under home quarantine. Besides the information gathered from the app, we also get tip-off on people violating norms. We have asked rapid response teams to be more vigilant in this regard,” said Dr Mathew Numpeli, NHM district coordinator.

Counsellors also noticed that some people who have been undergoing institutional quarantine at Covid-care centres due to lack of facilities or other issues at their homes face a lot of mental stress.

Number of people undergoing home quarantine has increased to 6,750 in Ernakulam on May 24 from 341 on April 26.

Meanwhile, health authorities have included female sex workers, headload workers, warehouse workers, vehicle transit workers and street vendors, who come in contact with more people, in the sentinel surveillance list in Ernakulam. Their swab samples will be collected for pool testing to identify community spread of Covid-19. The list is revised every fortnight in the district depending on the rise in positive cases. Samples of those being brought to jails will also be collected for pool testing despite them being asymptomatic. 

Authorities are also planning to start collecting samples of tribespeople at Kuttambuzha panchayat with the support of the leaders in their settlements.

The health teams have already started collecting samples of autorickshaw and taxi drivers in the district.


