Covid-19 lockdown: ‘Distribution of pulses begins in four districts of Bihar’
2020-04-28
PATNA: The free distribution of pulses started in four districts of the state four days back. The Centre had announced it for the ration card holders from April to June due to coronavirus pandemic and consequent lockdown.

The first four districts where 1kg pulse distribution has been started are Kaimur, Rohtas, Buxar and Katihar, food and consumer protection department secretary Pankaj Kumar Pal said on Monday.

“The distribution will also start in two other districts on Wednesday. Gradually, all the remaining districts will also be covered, as per the supply of pulses from NAFED. The process has already been put in motion,” Pal said, adding that there was no problem as to the distribution of rice from the PDS shops.

“We place our demand to Food Corporation of India (FCI) through the required process. The state’s requirement is being fulfilled. There is no problem,” Pal said.

It has been learnt that the process has also been started to provide ration cards to the other deserving persons. For this, a survey work has already been started. “Those without rations card will get it after proper verification and processing of data, which would take some time,” a source said.

Earlier last month, Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman had said the Centre would provide free 5kg of rice or wheat and 1kg of pulses to the ration card holders from public distribution system (PDS) shops for three months to tide over the lockdown crisis on the food front.

CM Nitish Kumar had also announced Rs1,000 to each ration card holding family as assistance. The state has 13.36 lakh ration card holders.

Earlier, deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi had clarified that NAFED could not start supply of pulses, because trucks and rail rakes were not available. Further, NAFED also faced the problem in the milling of pulses. He also assured the ration card holders that they would get 3kg of pulses due for April, May and June. 

