Pune district admin to track 170 people visiting coronavirus-hit countries in past month
2020-03-14
PUNE: As many as 170 people from Pune travelled to several Covid-19-affected destinations in the past one month, revealed the data the district collector shared with TOI on Friday.


Pune district collector Naval Kishore Ram told TOI that the district authorities had prepared a containment plan and teams of officials had been formed to approach and track these 170 travellers, mostly from the city. “These 170 people have been identified, along with where they live and their contact details. In a nutshell, all these people had recently gone abroad and visited destinations where the chances of infection were high,” he said.

These people would now be tracked to find out if they have been experiencing any flu-like symptoms. It is a general observation that those who have come from Abu Dhabi seem to show a higher incidence of infection.

“If they are experiencing any flu-like symptoms, they would be quarantined, while those who were exposed to these people will also be tracked. We have noticed after the spread of Covid-19 in Pune that a high number of travellers had gone to international destinations recently,” said Ram.

The travellers’ data only pertained to figures furnished by the city-based tour operators to the district authorities. The numbers will add up to a higher count when hoteliers in the city furnish the figures on the number of international guests checking into the hotels in the past 30 days.

The maximum number of travellers had gone to Dubai, followed by Thailand, the data showed. Close to 57 people had gone to and returned from Dubai alone in the past one month, while another 44 had gone to and returned from Thailand. The data also showed that around 19 people had visited Phuket and returned recently, while eight had been to Bangkok and Pataya.

The district collector said, “This (Friday’s) figure of 170 people is excluding the 40-member group that visited Dubai between February 23 and 29 (which included the first positive cases of Covid-19 in Pune). All these 170 people had gone abroad with various tour companies in Pune. The list does not include travellers who may have travelled on their own.” 


