Covid-19: Kochi authorities look to boost health infrastructure
2020-03-19
KOCHI: As the number of people arriving in Kochi from foreign countries increases, district authorities are looking at enhancing health infrastructure. As of now, there are isolation facilities at Government Medical College, Ernakulam and district hospital, Muvattupuzha. The combined bed strength at isolation wards at these hospitals is 80.


Union health ministry has given instructions to arrange facilities near Cochin International Airport Ltd (Cial) for quarantining 3,000 persons. “Anticipating the need for quarantining or isolating more people, we have already identified 900 beds at various hospitals in the district. We are in search of more facilities,” said district collector S Suhas.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Now, the authorities are planning to set up isolation facilities at Tripunithura taluk hospital, Karuvelippady taluk hospital, Government Ayurveda Medical College, Tripunithura and State Institute of Medical Education and Technology, Tripunithura. The authorities are also planning to start isolation facilities at all the taluk hospitals in the district. “We are searching for centres which can be used as isolation wards or quarantine facilities at Aluva and Kochi,” an official with health department said. Navy have arranged isolation facilities on their own. 

Number of ambulances required for transporting suspected cases or persons diagnosed with Covid-19 also will have to be increased. “As of now, we have provided 75 ambulances for shifting persons to the medical college and their homes. We will be arranging more ambulances if need arises,” Suhas said. “More volunteers will be required for taking up various tasks, including awareness campaigns. We have already identified some,” he said. More police personnel also will be required to support the medical team. 

The district administration has given instructions to private hospitals to arrange facilities for isolation in case any patient being treated there are tested positive for Covid-19.

If a person who is under treatment in a private hospital is diagnosed with the disease and the private hospital doesn’t have the facilities to set up isolation wards, health department will take over the treatment of that person. In case any foreign national or persons returning after foreign trip seeks consultation at private hospitals with symptoms of fever, such cases should be informed to corona control room at Kakkanad. Such persons should be shifted to a government hospital suggested by the health department. The department will provide vehicles for transporting such patients to government hospitals. 

Representatives of 92 private hospitals in the district attended the videoconference conducted by assistant collector M S Madhavikkutty on Wednesday. WHO consultant Dr P S Ragesh, deputy DMO Dr K Savitha, NHM district manager Dr Mathews Nambeli and Dr Nikhilesh answered the queries by employees of different hospitals.


