Dist admin to acquire 173 private establishments to fight Covid-19
2020-04-25
Nashik: The district administration is set to acquire 173 private establishments across the district to treat people suffering from the Covid-19 disease. These include private hospitals, hostels, wedding halls, schools, hostels, and even colleges.

The administration has decided to acquire these facilities with whatever equipment they have in place.

Zilla Parishda chief executive officer (CEO) Leena Bansod has been appointed as the incident commander under whose leadership the acquisition programme for the entire district will begin. 

“It is a long battle against Covid-19.When a person is found positive, there is a compulsory 14-day treatment and that too in isolation only to prevent others from getting infected. Since every bed will be occupied for the said period and considering the rate of new persons getting the infection, the current facilities are likely to fall short,” sources from the district administration said, adding that the officer has been assigned the responsibility of preparing the infrastructure to fight the disease. 

As per the central government’s advisory, three-tier hospitals should be identified to treat the patients by segregating them based on the symptoms — mild, moderate and severe. The administration has decided to prepare the facilities at the taluka and village levels where people with mild symptoms can be treated, leaving the specialist hospitals to handle critical patients.

Considering the same, the list of establishments that are to be acquired in first, second and third phase has been prepared by the administration. 

Since a large numbers of cases fall in mild symptoms category and that they can be treated at the Covid Care Centres (CCC), the government has also allowed the health teams to seek help of AYUSH facilities for treatment at the centres. Around 8,470 beds will be made available in the rural areas of the district for the purpose.

“In rural areas, there are a large number of hostels, primary and secondary schools, ashramshalas in tribal areas, facilities of the government establishments, junior and senior colleges of government and private establishments as well. All these facilities will be utilized for treatment of Covid-19,” an officer said. 

In case of Dedicated Covid Health Centres (DCHC), all hospitals, eye hospitals, colleges and hospitals of trusts, trauma centres, rural hospitals, will be prepared for treating people with moderate symptoms.

The Dedicated Covid Hospitals (DCH) will look after the treatment of critical patients. 


