District civil hospital transformed into exclusive Covid-19 facility
2020-03-31
Aurangabad: The Chikalthana district civil hospital has now been transformed to exclusively deal with Covid-19 cases after getting directive from district collector Uday Choudhari to shut down all other health services at the facility.

The entire building of the state-run hospital situated on Jalna Road will now work as Covid-19 management centre. Though no positive case has been reported in Aurangabad district as of Monday, the hospital is being equipped to be ready for any unforeseen situation.

Santosh Naikwade, pediatrician at the hospital on behalf of district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni, said the ground floor of the hospital is reserved for screening and swab collection of the patients.

“The first floor of the building has the isolation ward with 100 beds. The symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with travel history or those who have come in contact with a confirmed coronavirus patient will be placed in isolation ward. Currently, 6 persons are under observation in the hospital,” he said.

“On the second floor, the hospital has 43 beds reserved for the confirmed cases of Covid-19. The work on installing compartments between every bed is underway. We have 8 ventilators available, 5 more are being procured from Government Medical College and Hospital and 5 are being repaired. The district collector will provide another 11 or 12 ventilators,” Naikwade said.

Divisional commissioner Sunil Kendrekar and Choudhari visited the hospital and reviewed the availability of equipment and supplies.

“The hospital has currently 300 sets of personal protective equipment (PPE) which is used by the doctors for swab collection. More sets will be procured if the positive cases are found,” the hospital said.

Meanwhile, 5 physicians, 5 anaesthetists and 5 specialists at the hospital will be undergoing Covid-19 management training

Doctor’s swab sample sent for testing

A doctor at the district civil hospital, who had been to Pune, has developed fever. Subsequently, the hospital has collected his swab sample and has sent it to the Government Medical College and Hospital for Covid-19 testing.


