DIY activities help Bengalureans beat lockdown boredom
2020-04-08
BENGALURU: With plenty of time on hand, the creative side of Bengalureans is emerging in the form of DIY (do it yourself) arts and crafts activities. 


With a shortage of face masks, people are sharing DIY videos that show how scarves can be turned into masks, some that even resemble the N95 variety. People are getting highly inspired by such trending DIY videos on social media platforms.

Alex P, a chef, says though he doesn’t need to go out except to get some groceries, he has made at least a dozen face masks for his neighbours. “I made some simple masks after I saw this DIY post on Twitter by Constance Jones, a journalist. Her DIY method doesn’t need any stitching, just a square scarf and two rubber bands. I have many square scarves and plenty of rubber bands. This mask is easily washable,” he says. 

But it’s not just masks that people are attempting to make, they are also learning origami, glass painting, cloth painting, knitting, macramé (a form of textile produced using knotting techniques) and more. 

Aishwarya Anand, an independent consultant in the field of social media marketing told TOI she stumbled upon macramé while looking at hashtags like Craft and DIY on Instagram. “I saw people making these tapestries and it looked simple but so beautiful at the end. Instagram got me to do macramé,” she said, explaining the French knotting technique, which only needs thread, a pair of scissors, scale for measurements and a brush to make tassels. 

Aishwarya says she finds DIY activities calming. “Being stuck at home for more than two weeks is frustrating. The DIY videos help you stay focused and provide instant gratification. Little things that give you joy instantly can get you to pull off another day locked in your house,” she adds. 

It is that kind of joy that is attracting youngsters like Shibya to find a distraction in painting pillowcases, among other DIY activities. “The pretty end product gives me a sense of satisfaction and joy,” she gleams. 

Just like dentist Dr Virajitha Dasari, who is sketching and painting small pebbles during this phase. “I spend two to three hours doing this and I find it extremely relaxing. It is also helping me polish my skills,” says Dr Dasari, who’d earlier never find enough time to invest in such activities. She also tried her hand at glass painting and painting photo frames. 

However, on a lighter note, some say their lockdown DIY activities are different from these crafts. Zakiya Mubeen, a homemaker said: “The vessels, the sweeping, it is all DIY for all of us since the last two weeks. It is also an art — the art of cleaning,” she says. 

