‘Do it yourself’ is now a lockdown mantra
2020-03-31
KOCHI: Praveen Nair had never tried fixing a leaking faucet before. As the plumber who used to visit his neighbourhood is forced to stay indoors due to the lockdown, he is left with no option but to try doing it himself. 


“This is something completely new to me. Water was dripping, and something had to be done urgently. Hardware shops are closed. It is not possible to buy a piece to replace the damaged one. Moreover, there is no one available to do the job. I spoke to the plumber over the phone, and he gave me some quick fix solutions,” said Nair, who works as HR manager in a private firm. Queries were posted on the WhatsApp group of the apartment complex, and he managed to get the tools required for the task from his neighbour. “Another person helped me with O-rings. It took considerable time, and constant contact with the plumber over the phone to get it done,” he added.

As families and individuals remain confined within the walls of their homes, DIY (Do IT Yourself) has become the catch phrase. Many homes that were earlier dependent on domestic helps are now left to do everyday chores themselves. Even children are encouraged to do their bit. Housemaids have become a luxury of the past. “Cooking, cleaning, dusting and scrubbing have become shared activities. Everyone has to do their own laundry. We make our kids clean their room and bathrooms,” said Shalini Mohan, a software programmer. 

While some people are dependent on families and friends for advice and tips, others manage to get information online. People check websites for easy recipes, and those who want to experiment with their culinary skills search for elaborate recipes. “It’s all about survival during crisis,” said Aswathy A, a student who returned home from a neighbouring state. 

Apartment owners associations say that at least some residents have started taking interest in knowing how waste generated in their buildings are being processed. There could be times when sanitation workers would not be able to reach the apartment complex. “Some of the residents also watched the process of treating bio-waste when training was given to temporary labourers. Future is so uncertain, and it might help us,” said a representative of an apartment complex. 

However, in the midst all these there is a small section trying to find their feet in the changed situations. “I am in home quarantine since my return from the UK. I do not know how to wash clothes by hand. The washing machine is placed near the kitchen, and I cannot go there. It’s also not possible to handover my clothes to other members in the family. I soak my clothes in soap and antiseptic liquids in a bucket and leave it on the staircase. Someone collects it from there. It never occurred to me that I would have to do all cleaning and moping on a regular basis. I feel sad and guilty about it,” said a student.

