DM asks hotels to allow paid quarantine of returnees
2020-05-08
GAYA: The Gaya district administration has asked hoteliers and representatives of foreign monasteries to accommodate stranded persons returning from foreign countries for three weeks quarantine period on payment basis.

Deliberations in this regard were held in a meeting convened by Gaya DM Abhishek Singh with hoteliers and representatives of foreign monasteries on Wednesday evening. Earlier in the day, Union home secretary Ajay Bhalla wrote a letter regarding return of stranded Indian nationals from foreign countries to the chief secretaries of all states, including chief secretary Deepak Kumar.

The Union home secretary’s letter state that the state government will have to arrange facilities for the mandatory institutional quarantine of stranded Indian nationals being brought back to the country. The letter also said that standard operating procedure (SoP) for the movement of stranded Indian nationals has already been notified on May 5 and it has to be strictly followed.

According to Gaya DM Abhishek Singh, an estimated 8000 people from Bihar are stranded in Middle East countries, including UAE. “Besides those from Gaya district, residents of smaller districts will be also quarantined in Bodh Gaya,” he said.

“Transit facility for all incoming international travellers has to be provided by the Gaya district administration. The modalities are being worked out,” the DM said.

According to a press statement issued by NK Gupta, deputy director, public relations department, Gaya, the list made available by hotels and monasteries states that 1,860 rooms are available in different hotels to accommodate the quarantined people. Besides the hotel rooms, about 1000 rooms are also available in different monasteries. There are about 50 foreign monasteries in Bodh Gaya.

“Quarantined people will have to pay for the hospitality offered to them. They will remain under institutional quarantine for 21 days,” the DM added.

The press statement also stated that the DM asked the hotel owners and monastery managers to charge only a reasonable amount from the quarantined people as many of them, being migrant workers are not very well off.

Though the flight schedule is yet to be officially announced, the first flight is likely to arrive on May 11. 

Meanwhile, another group of more than 100 stranded Thai nationals is expected to be flown out by a special flight from Gaya. The Thai authorities have sought permission of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) to operate the special flight. Earlier, on April 25, altogether 342 Thai nationals were flown out in two special flights.


