DM forms 12 teams to enforce lockdown
2020-03-28
PATNA: Patna DM Kumar Ravi has formed 12 separate teams headed by additional district magistrate and deputy collector-rank officers for effective enforcement of lockdown.

These teams will also handle home quarantine, medication, transportation, information technology and supply chain aspects apart from supervising isolation centres.

The lockdown enforcement cell quarantined nine people, including five women, in the Buddha Smriti Park on Friday. These people had reached Patna from different places to teach meditation and yoga. Cell’s nodal officer Krishna Kanahiya Singh said the nine had reached the city on March 17.

“They were requesting us to make arrangements for their return. However, keeping in mind the current situation, they were quarantined,” Singh said.

Patna DDC Richie Pandey, the nodal officer of home quarantine enforcement cell, said all those who had been stamped with ‘home quarantine’ mark were being contacted. “We will ask them to stay indoors at least for 14 days. We have a database of all such people,” Pandey added.

Patna divisional commissioner Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said the newly constituted cell comprises police officers, doctors, administrative officers and others. “Similar teams have been formed in other districts too,” Agarwal added.

Special passes for vehicles carrying essential items: The state government has started issuing special passes for inter-district movement of vehicles carrying essential commodities after proper scrutiny of applications. The officials concerned are also quizzing the applicants on various aspects before issuing the passes.

State transport secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said passes are being issued only for inter-district movement of vehicles carrying essential commodities, including cattle feed. “There is no need of special passes for vehicles moving on highways carrying essential items,” he added.

Meanwhile, the administration also issued a special pass to a couple on Thursday to bring their daughter back from Kolkata. “The couple was issued the pass in a special case as their daughter was stuck in Kolkata,” an official said.


