Coronavirus outbreak: DMRC drive focuses on touch points and high-footfall stations
2020-03-14
NEW DELHI: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has intensified cleaning of its trains and 264 stations in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. Delhi government, which is supervising the disinfection of metro trains and buses, has also started sanitising buses arriving from other states to the three inter-state bus terminals of the city.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

A DMRC spokesperson said that while all the metro trains are cleaned thoroughly every day before the start of services and at terminal stations after every trip, the practice has been intensified with more rigorous cleaning of stations. Special emphasis is on locations like hand railings, train doors, token vending machines, passenger emergency alarms, elevators and escalators among other places where hands come in direct contact.

“Mechanised cleaning of metro stations is being carried out 24X7, which includes scrubbing and wet cleaning of floor, concourse, platform, passages, stairs, station control rooms, ancillary building areas, doors, window frames, shutters, etc.,” the spokesperson said.

Weekly, fortnightly and monthly activities are also being planned for mechanised cleaning, he added.

“To provide better service to metro commuters, the floors and seats of metro trains are cleaned during revenue hours. For this, specially trained additional housekeeping staff are deployed in two shifts at terminal metro stations of all the lines,” he said.

He stressed that special cleaning drives are carried out at the busy stations. DMRC is also focusing on cleaning of surrounding areas, removal of unauthorised posters, cleaning of parking areas, proper disposal of garbage and plastic wastes and cleaning of security frisking area and toilets. “Parking areas are cleaned regularly. Weekly intensive cleaning is carried out every Saturday night,” the spokesperson said.

DMRC said that eco-friendly chemicals and high standard equipment are being used for cleaning of stations and trains. “Cold water high pressure jet, battery operated walk-behind automatic scrubber dryer, automated vacuum cleaner, steam cleaner and automatic escalator cleaners are being used.” 

“Delhi Metro staff have also been sensitised and guidelines have been circulated regarding dos and dont’s to prevent the spread of coronavirus. Dos and dont’s in both English and Hindi are also being displayed on digital screens at major stations like Rajiv Chowk, Kashmere Gate, Central Secretariat, Chandni Chowk, New Delhi, etc.,” the spokesperson said.

“The civic bodies have also been requested to help in keeping the areas outside the metro stations clean,” he added.


