Do not let Hyderabad’s green quotient dip post lockdown, urge experts
2020-05-03
HYDERABAD: Environmentalists warned that the significant improvement in air and water quality, which the city has witnessed since the lockdown, may cease to continue if we are not mindful. They warn that after days of staying indoors, a spurt in travel and industrial activities could set us back again.


“The drop in pollution levels has happened as a result of the lockdown and not because we have made any lifestyle or systemic changes,” said environmental scientist Babu Rao, who lamented that staying indoors is being seen an inconvenience by many.


Speaking to TOI, Rao said once people start heading out, vehicular traffic will increase, worsening air pollution levels. “A reduction in travel time on the road and reduced energy consumption must be encouraged through policy decisions. The biggest takeaway from the lockdown is that people need to live simpler lives, especially the rich.”

 


Activist Pranay Upadhyay, who has also been advocating for a reduction in vehicles, suggested dedicated cycle lanes across the city and car-pooling to reduce vehicular pollution. 

Speaking about the resumption of industrial activity, Kajal Maheshwari, representing city-based environmental group, Citizens for Hyderabad, said, “The cost of the end product does not factor in environmental damage. Sold for dirt cheap these products are then lapped up by consumers.” 

Putting the onus on people to be more aware of the environmental cost of what they buy, Maheshwari also said: “People need to be aware of the environment policies that are constantly being rolled out at the Centre. The environment ministry has become on that favours industries by giving clearances rather than one that protects our nature.”

With respect to keeping our waterbodies pollution free, Kalpana Ramesh, founder of the Rainwater Project which has started the Blue Hyderabad Campaign, said, “We need to focus not just on water security, but healthier water basins. This means once the lockdown is lifted, we need to ensure better segregation of waste and stopping dumping waste and pollutants in lakes.”

