Do you send soldiers on war front without guns, say doctors fighting Covid-19
2020-03-30
DEHRADUN: Doctors, nurses and medical personnel from across the country have taken to social media to raise the issue of sub-standard personal protection equipment (PPE) kits being supplied to them in their fight against coronavirus. On Saturday, an irate doctor, Dr Debopam Chatterjee from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Rishikesh exemplified the concerns of scores of medical professionals who are at the forefront of the fight against Covid-19. Posting pictures on Facebook about the kind of equipment provided to doctors and medical personnel at the Kolkata Medical College and Hospital — a dedicated hospital to treat Covid-19 patients — and comparing it to ‘raincoats,’ he wrote, “Healthcare providers should be rather asked to sign their death certificates prior to going on this suicide mission...we are ready to serve but not without protection!!” 


Not just Dr Chatterjee, medicos from across the country are protesting on the kind of protective gear that they are getting. What is fuelling these protests are rapidly emerging cases of doctors getting infected with the virus. 

Of the over100 patients in Mumbai, four are doctors who treated Covid-19 cases. In Delhi, a doctor of a mohalla clinic was found corona-positive. His wife and daughter have subsequently been infected as well. Doctors from Kerala as well as Lucknow have caught the virus infection too.

The protests against lack of equipment have been simmering across the country. After Meerut reported its first Covid-19 case on March 27, nurses and paramedical staff of Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College refused to treat patients in the absence of PPE kits. They were provided the kits a day later on March 28 when the city reported four Covid-19 cases in a single day.

In UP’s Baghpat, there were similar protests by nurses and paramedics who alleged that instead of PPE kits, they had been given gear used in HIV protection which would not be as effective against Covid-19.

That even premier hospitals still don’t have the protective equipment needed to fight the disease came to light recently when a letter from the chief medical superintendent (CMS) of King George Medical University, Lucknow, written to its V-C, went viral in which the CMS had proposed to deduct a day's salary of teachers, resident doctors and non-teaching staff to buy masks for health workers deputed for the treatment of suspected and confirmed Covid-19 cases. The proposal was later withdrawn.

Terming the issue of safety of medical staff which is engaged in the fight against Covid-19 as one of paramount importance, the members of Progressive Medicos and Scientists Forum of India had a few days ago written to the Prime Minister to provide doctors with adequate protective gear like masks, gowns, head covers etc. A similar request was made by United Resident and Doctor’s Association of India which sought “urgent intervention” of the PM on the issue.

The concern of doctors as they work every day in hospitals putting their own safety at risk is best exemplified by a doctor from Patna. Speaking to TOI, Dr Ravi Ranjan Kumar Raman, president of junior doctors’ association at Nalanda Medical College and Hospital in Patna, said, “My family, parents and sister cry every day I leave for work. They ask me not to go to the hospital but I can’t skip my responsibilities. Somewhere in my heart, I know that even if I die, it won’t affect the system. But my question is, do you send soldiers on the warfront without guns? Then why are you sending doctors to fight this war without proper kits?” 


