Kerala: Doctor couple returns to ‘retire’ Covid-19
2020-05-19
KOZHIKODE: A senior doctor couple who served in top posts in the state health department has come out of retirement to be part of the Covid-19 battle in Wayanad.

Dr A Sukumaran, a former state epidemiologist, has offered his services to help the district surveillance officer in contact tracing at the Covid-19 control room while his wife Dr Nita Vijayan, an ex-state programme manager of NHM, is coordinating disease prevention and surveillance in the tribal belts at Thirunelly.

The couple had been working in Wayanad from 1985, and Dr Nita was the district medical officer for several years. She also served as an additional director (vigilance) in the health department after they moved to Thiruvananthapuram. 

“We had returned last year to Wayanad and decided to spend our retirement life here,” Dr Sukumaran said. 

“But now when the district is under the threat of Covid-19, we felt we should give a helping hand to our colleagues in the health department who are putting up a brave fight. As we have long years of service here we know every nook and corner of the district and the intimacy and bonds with tribespeople can be a crucial factor to make them comply with the directives to be followed to prevent Covid-19 spread,” he added. 

Though the authorities have reportedly offered them a ‘small remuneration’, they have said it ‘is not an issue’. 

Dr Nita, who has been visiting the tribal colonies near Panavally where many are under observation after featuring in the contact list of a shop owner who tested positive last week, said that knowing the likes and dislikes of the tribal community can help make the right interventions.

“There is a good team of the health department in Wayanad and we have just volunteered to join them. The situation in Wayanad needs high vigil as there are lots of people coming to the district from other states and also from foreign countries. 

“Also, the vulnerable tribal community needs special attention and efforts are to protect them at the best possible way,” she added. 


