Doctor expects surge in cases post lockdown
2020-05-16
The district hasn’t reported any new Covid-19 cases in the past 12 days. In an interaction with Dr Sudha Ramalingam, director, research and innovation, PSG Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, TOI’s Pratiksha Ramkumar, discusses the chances of another novel coronavirus wave in the state in the next few weeks and the pattern of spread post lockdown. Excerpts:


There are no active cases right now and there is a lull in new cases. What does it mean for the district?
All the diagnosed cases have been cured and discharged with no major fatalities. The severity of cases was mild and fortunately no new cases have been reported. However, we have to wait and watch if there will be fresh cases as more than 80% case is asymptomatic. But with good public health measures and personal hygiene, I am optimistic that the case load will be low.


Is Covid-19 present in the district’s air?
In laboratory studies, when the virus was artificially induced in the air, it was found to stay for three hours before disappearing. But it is hard to say if the same will happen in real world situation. Unless we sample the air and test it for the virus, we will not know. As of now, there is no evidence to suggest the virus would spread by airborne route.


What are the chances of an asymptomatic patient infecting his family members?
According to the World Health Organization, symptomatic individuals have cough and sneezing, etc. But an asymptomatic person does not have droplet spread, so the chances of spread are less. The chances of virus spread via other body fluids are not yet known. But we must be cautious and take all precautionary measures. If any family member develops symptoms, they should report it to health authorities.


After lockdown, what all precautions should people take to protect themselves while working in air-conditioned offices?
Centralised air-conditioned offices are not advisable. We will never know who is Covid-19 positive, and there would be high chances of spreading. However, in offices with split or window air-conditioners, it’s advisable to keep the temperature between 24 degrees Celsius and 30 degrees Celsius. Facilitate better air circulation by switching on exhaust fan or keeping windows open. People should continue to follow standard precautions like practising hand hygiene, wearing masks and social distancing.


Why are the public not being tested? Is it not required?
In a country like India, testing its entire population is not feasible due to lack of adequate testing kits and manpower, and time and cost involved. No matter whether we test 10% or 100% positive, the control mechanism is the same. So, checking everyone is not required.


Has community spread started in Tamil Nadu?
We don’t know the stage of pandemic we are in. We must wait and watch the case trajectory. In Chennai, more testing is done because of Koyambedu cluster which spreads to Villupuram and Cuddalore. In Coimbatore, we are not seeing such clusters, which is why we are probably not doing mass testing. In fact, we get very less patients with flu symptoms in our fever clinic itself, which could be an indicator of the situation.


Why there are cases being reported despite lockdown? Does it mean lockdown is not working?
The basic idea of lockdown is to slow down the spread of virus and prepare the health system for the huge influx of cases. Lockdown has slowed down the numbers. Once the lockdown is relaxed, there will be a surge in cases, unless people take precautionary measures that are suggested by the government and avoid large public gatherings.


