Doctor visited once, food is bad, but med is working, say coronavirus patients in Pune
2020-03-12
Pune: When quarantined, it is normal to feel stressed, confused, scared or angry. The Sinhagad Road couple and their daughter who have been in the Naidu Hospital’s isolation ward after testing positive for coronavirus since Monday, spend their time chatting, taking naps inside the room and attend to calls from friends.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

There is no television and they have to depend on friends for food. But what they would like utmost is an update about their health from the doctors.

 Wednesday, 7.30AM 

The Sinhagad Road couple is up and take turns in using the wash room. They are in one room, while their daughter is in another. “We have to tell the staff to fetch some tea which they get with biscuits. The food arrangement at the hospital is pathetic. We ordered breakfast once, and it was of very poor quality. None of us could eat it," the 51-year-old man infected with Covid-19 said. They have requested their friends for food. “They drop a tiffin at the main desk of the hospital and it is brought to our room by a hospital staff member," the husband said, adding that they did not want to trouble their friends.


Waiting For Health News 

After breakfast, the 51-year-old man said, they all wait for a doctor. "More than two days have passed since we were admitted here. The doctor on Tuesday morning checked our blood pressure. Since then, nobody has come, even for a routine check. All three of us are now irritated by the system here and are waiting to be discharged," one of them said. “We are given medicines and are better since our arrival and now feel fine,” he added. For any help or enquiries about the check-ups, the staff tells them that the doctor would decide. “The doctor has not visited as yet," they added.


Connected Via Calls 

The patients said they did not have much to do the entire day as there was no source of entertainment. They receive calls from friends who check on their health. They call their son who is in another building of the same hospital. "The connectivity is poor here so talking on the cellphone is difficult," the husband said.


Co-Traveller Goes Online 

The 27-year-old co-traveller is quarantined at Naidu Hospital since Tuesday. “No doctor has come to see me or check my health. I have been ordering from food delivery aggregators who deliver at the gate and a staff member sends the package to me. I am not being updated about my health,” he said.


