Covid-19 is Telangana’s overriding concern
2020-03-18
HYDERABAD: Amid growing concerns over spread of coronavirus, doctors at several government hospitals are demanding a cap on the number of outpatients (OP). In this regard, hospitals are considering sending text messages to patients, whose contacts are available on the database, to not visit the hospital unless it is absolutely urgent. Hospitals are also arranging for tele-consultations. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“Crowded elective OPD (out patient departments) in all hospitals should be shut down and only emergencies should be attended. I request the director of medical education to ensure that only emergencies come to hospitals,” said resident medical officer at the government ENT Hospital in Koti, Dr Manish Gupta. The ENT Hospital, in recent days, has seen a spike in number of outpatients with the numbers increasing each day, according to hospital sources.

 
 

While the ENT Hospital has seen a spike, the patient flow at Gandhi Hospital — the nodal centre for treating positive coronavirus cases — has seen a sharp decline in OP since the first positive case was reported in the state. On Tuesday, only 450 patients had visited the hospital as compared to the daily average of over 2,000 patients. 

“Hospitals should SMS patients to not visit the hospital with fever and cough, unless it is absolutely urgent. Arrangements should be made by hospital for tele-consultation to determine whether such patients should visit the hospital. All patients with cough and fever should be provided a surgical mask at the reception and should get priority,” said president of Association of Surgeons of India, Dr P Raghu Ram.

Speaking about the challenge that lies ahead for hospitals and doctors, Indian Medical Association (IMA), Telangana general secretary Dr Sanjeev Singh Yadav said that a move to restrict the number of patients is an ideal one. 

“From the hospitals point of view, it is good to restrict patients (from) coming and getting affected...While routine things need to be deferred, a patient has to be seen by a doctor to ascertain whether or not it is an emergency. For instance, an unwanted ultrasound should be deferred but a pregnant woman needs to be checked. Patients should first go to a local clinic or doctor to get an assessment and if suggested, go to a bigger hospital,” Dr Yadav said.

