Docs treating Covid-10 patients at risk, provide safety gear to them: HC
2020-03-25
Nagpur: Lauding the role of doctors, nurses and other staff engaged in treating coronavirus patients, the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court advised the government to explore the possibility whether they could stay at the same facilities where the patients are being treated — GMCH and IGGMCH.

Also appreciating the contribution of employees working at airport, railways and bus stations along with various public sector undertakings (PSUs) of the Centre and state, the judges directed the collector and Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) to provide them with safety gears to protect themselves from getting infected.

“At both the hospitals, doctors and staff members are rendering their services tirelessly and with full dedication. They’re treating with all necessary care and concern. We appreciate their sincerity, valiance and commitment,” a division bench of Justice Sunil Shukre and Justice Avinash Gharote said.

Expressing concern over safety and security of the doctors and staff along with their families, the bench warned that they’ve a chance of getting infected. “If adequate safety gears aren’t provided to them, it’s quite likely that they may get adversely affected and even health of their family members would be jeopardized. There could be a situation where they may unwittingly put the health of family members at stake due to presence of the virus on their clothes or hair or some other body parts.”

While hearing petitions filed by CH Sharma and others (No. 3427/2000) and Subhash Zanwar (PIL No.10/2020), the bench asked concerned authorities to give their thoughtful consideration to such a contingency on doctors and staff members attending the Covid-19 patients and come out with some solution which is acceptable to all concerned.

“One of the solutions could be to advise them to stay at the respective hospitals for certain period instead of returning home. But, if any directive is to be given, it would be for the concerned medical authority to do so. In that case also, residential facility would have to be created at the hospitals,” the judges said.

After being pointed out that IIT Delhi has developed a new Covid-19 testing kit, which is much cheaper than the existing one and it was sent to Pune-based National Institute of Virology (NIV) for testing feasibility, the judges told the Centre to verify this information for its correctness. “If it’s found to be correct, we would request the Union of India to seek feasibility report from NIV, preferably within two weeks,” they said.


