West Bengal: Doctors cancel work trips as world combats coronavirus
2020-03-15
KOLKATA: Spine surgeon Susmit Naskar was scheduled to travel to Melbourne to be a part of an international conference on spine surgery that will begin on April 27. But the current coronavirus crisis has forced him to cancel his trip. Naskar was part of the team from the Association of Spine Surgeons of India (ASSI) that was to attend the conference. But ASSI pulled out a few days ago. The week-long event is held once in four years and Naskar had already paid his registration fee and bought his tickets.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“This was supposed to be my debut in this prestigious international meet where experts from the across the globe share knowledge,” said the doctor attached with Narayana Superspecialty Hospital, Howrah. “Forget the monetary part, my opportunity of interacting with the best minds in spine surgery under one roof is gone,” he rued. 


 
Critical care expert Arindam Kar had to forgo three academic conferences in Bangkok, Vietnam and Singapore as all these places have been affected by Covid-19. While the meet at Vietnam was to be held in mid-February, the other two were to take place in April. 

“For the Singapore meet, I was invited as a faculty. As I was gearing up for my travel, they called off the event due to the Covid-19 crisis. But then it is better to adhere to precautionary measures as much as possible as the world combats the virus,” said the critical care specialist at CMRI.

Italy, which has the highest number of Covid-19 cases outside China, is grappling to fight the spread of the virus. Paediatric rheumatologist Priyankar Pal was in a dilemma whether to travel to Genoa for a conference held by Paediatric Rheumatology International Organisation on March 21. “When I was mulling cancelling my travel plans, the organizers cancelled the meet,” said the doctor attached with Institute of Child Health.

Dermatologist Koushik Lahiri of WIZDERM also had to cancel his work trips to Korea and the US. The American Academy of Dermatology’s (AAD) annual meet at Denver that was to take place from March 17 to 20 is the largest gathering of dermatologists attended by about 16,000 specialists from across the globe. Another dermatologist, Sandipan Dhar, was also to be part of the Denver meet. 

