Despite a pandemic, doctors keep up organ transplants in Pune
2020-05-25
PUNE: Three people in Pune have benefitted from the organs of a security guard who was declared brain dead by doctors recently. 




Family members of the 40-year-old man, a resident of Dehu road, made the decision to donate the liver and kidneys. The transplants were carried out on Saturday, May 23. 

It was the third organ donation in Pune that led to successful transplants during the Covid-19 lockdown. A total of three livers and four kidneys have been donated and transplanted in recepients since restrictions began on March 24. 

The guard was rushed to the DY Patil hospital in Pimpri a day after he started complaining of severe headaches. He was soon diagnosed with intracranial bleeding. Doctors at the hospital said he could not be revived despite their best efforts and on May 22, he was declared brain dead. 

“He was the sole earner in the family. His wife agreed to donate his vital organs, including liver and kidneys,” said a doctor at the DY Patil hospital.

According to norms set by the Zonal Transplant Coordination Committee (ZTCC), the apex body that allocates donated organs as per the waiting list, the man’s liver was given to a patient enrolled with the Ruby Hall Clinic and his two kidneys were allocated to two patients: one enrolled with the DY Patil Medical College and hospital and the other with the Aditya Birla Memorial Hospital. 

“The liver recipient is a 60-year-old resident of Pune who hails from Rajkot in Gujarat. He is liver cancer patient who urgently needed a transplant,” said Aarti Gokhale, the transplant coordinator of the ZTCC.

The donor’s two kidneys have also been successfully transplanted into two patients. “They are also doing well,” Gokhale said.

The first organ donation during the lockdown took place at Ruby Hall Clinic on May 14. The donated liver was transplanted into a patient at Sahyadri hospital the very same day. 

The second organ donation took place at Inamdar hospital in Fatimanagar, when members of a 36-year-old bank employee (declared brain dead), donated his liver and kidneys that benefited three patients in Pune and Mumbai on Thursday, May 21. The bank employee was a resident of Wanowrie.


