Kerala: Doctors chart new course to beat coronavirus
2020-04-23
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM:The effect of a drug meant for parasitic infestations to kill corona virus may still be unknown, but the health team at Pathanamthitta associated with Covid management is pinning hopes on it to cure patients with prolonged periods of hospitalization despite being clinically stable. 

Six patients including the 62-year old woman who has been hospitalized for 43 days are being administered with ivermectin which is generally used for deworming and scabies.

Spurred by research studies, the team began administering 12 mg ivermectin on alternate days in all the patients. The use of Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is not advised beyond a period of 10 days and with patients showing signs of full recovery and being clinically stable, the team switched the drug even while continuing vitamin supplements. 

The samples given on Monday for all these patients came out negative on Wednesday and four of these patients were admitted in March and two of them were admitted in April. With double negative being the protocol, the samples were sent again on Wednesday and results are expected on Friday. We don't know whether it is the effect of this drug or not, because it needs further studies. This is a common drug and a harmless one .We were cautious regarding dosage and used it only on alternate days, hopefully the results are negative on Friday and all of them can be discharged,'' said a health official associated with the treatment. 

The use of ivermectine has precedence somewhere else in the world too. `Medical news today`, a web journal carried an article on a study paper published in the journal `Antiviral research` which says that ivermectin could combat severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-COV-2) which causes Covid19. The research was done by investigators from the Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory (VIDRL) and Monash University, both in Melbourne, Australia. The study paper shows that in the first 24 hours there was a 93% reduction in viral RNA present in samples which were treated with ivermectin and by 48 hours, there was further reduction of viral RNA indicating that ivermectin treatment resulted in the effective loss of essentially all viral material by 48 hours.

A medical board meeting is also scheduled on Friday to discuss further course of action regarding extended period of hospitalization for patients who are clinically stable. `` Their temperature is normal, vitals are stable, however tests don't come negative,'' the official said. In the case of 62-year old woman who was admitted on March 10, the result had come negative in the first week of April, however the consecutive test showed positive results forcing continued hospitalization.


