Coronavirus in Kolkata: Crowded hospitals beat concept of social distancing, say doctors
2020-03-20
KOLKATA: Leaves have been declared at educational institutes, movie halls have downed shutters temporarily and family functions are being postponed to ensure social distancing in the wake of the coronavirus crisis. However, thanks to the steady flow of patients, hospitals, specially the state-run ones, continue to remain crowded. This, doctors said, could pose a threat to the whole concept of social distancing to prevent transmission of the virus.


“The Karnataka government has already come up with a circular, asking only patients who need emergency care to visit government hospitals over the next two weeks. We hope the Bengal government comes up with similar restrictions to decongest hospitals,” said a senior doctor at SSKM Hospital. The hospital sees a footfall of nearly 14,000 OPD patients daily on an average. The rest of the four medical colleges in the city get 6,000 to 7,000 OPD patients each daily. Relatives accompanying them add to the crowd.

“We are trying to limit the number of visitors and OPD patients. For example, for patients with common illness, we are giving them medicine for one month and asking them not to come back during this period unless there is an emergency,” said Raghunath Misra, medical superintendent and vice-principal (MSVP) at SSKM Hospital.

NRS Medical College and Hospital has already started restricting the number of visitors to the hospital by allowing a patient to be accompanied by only one relative. Other measures are expected to follow. “Meanwhile, we have started our fever clinic from Thursday where all patients with flu symptoms are isolated and checked so that they do not mix with other patients. We have five ventilators in the RCU reserved in case they are needed to treat Covid-19 patients,” said Saurabh Chattopadhyay, MSVP at NRS Medical College and Hospital.

The Calcutta National Medical College (CNMC) administrators will meet on Friday to find out ways to reduce crowding on the hospital premises and also chalk out a roadmap to tackle suspected Covid-19 patients. “About 80% of patients who throng the OPD in government hospitals complain of common condition like abdomen pain. If we can attend to only 20%, who really need immediate medical attention, during this crisis, the crowd will thin down significantly,” said a CNMC doctor.

RG Kar has already held rounds of meeting on decongesting the hospital premises. The hospital will start segregation of patients with influenza symptoms. The authorities are also mulling planned intervention including scheduled surgeries. “The kind of crowd in government hospitals is a serious threat as far as transmission of coronavirus is concerned. Even our doctors are at risk. We have a few plans lined up to tackle the patient rush but we cannot implement them unless the directive comes from the health department,” said an administrator at RG Kar Medical College. 

While most of these hospitals have kept their isolation wards ready, they need uninterrupted supply of PPE (personal protective equipment) for healthcare workers who will deal with such patients. Apart from ID Hospital, only NRS so far has corona-suspected patients in its isolation ward.


