Coronavirus in Kochi: Doctors can see you online, thanks to police initiative
2020-03-20
KOCHI: In order to provide online medical consultation to those under home quarantine and to those who suspect that they have been infected, the city police commissionerate on Thursday launched an telemedicine platform, Swaraksha. 

The platform, with the motto ‘protect and be protected’, facilitates virtual consultations between patient and doctor. According to police, this would help overcome the dilemma of patients visiting hospital on their own, and coming into close contact with others.

Swaraksha was created in collaboration with Indian Medical Association, Rotary District 3201 and a private communication service provider, police said.

As many as 25 doctors have volunteered to associate with the project. These doctors have been given dedicated mobile phones and sim cards for the purpose,” said district police chief (Kochi City) Vijay Sakhare at a press briefing here.

Police said the link to the platform, , would be put out through social media platforms of city police commissionerate. The home page of the online service comes with a link to send a WhatsApp message, which could be text, audio or video. This message reaches the control room set up by the commissionerate exclusively for dealing with Covid-19 related matters. This control room is manned by a team of police officers and paramedics. 

The control room will call to the number to verify the caller’s genuineness and later sent it to a database accessible by doctors. The control room then arranges a conference call with the doctor and the one seeking medical assistance before disengaging itself from the platform, police said.

Police officers in the city have been active on duty to fight the Covid-19 outbreak. Their main tasks include screening of passengers at help desks set up railway stations and bus stands, and ensuring home quarantine of suspected cases. They also ensure that foreign nationals are staying in quarantine. 

Foreigners Outreach Cell has been set up by the city police to provide assistance to foreign nationals in transport, ticket and visa, accommodation and medical help. 

Cyberdome Kochi and cyber cell are keeping a close watch on internet and social media to fight the spread of fake news. Police have also moved all meetings to videoconferencing platforms.


