Docs urge Hemant to extend lockdown, use time to prepare for battle
2020-04-09
Ranchi: Prominent doctors in Ranchi on Wednesday asked chief minister Hemant Soren to extend the ongoing lockdown in Jharkhand to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Soren met the doctors at Project Building in the afternoon to discuss a way forward in dealing with the pandemic. So far, four persons have tested positive for Covid-19 in Jharkhand since March 31. 

At the meeting, Soren instructed chief secretary Sukhdev Singh to constitute expert medical teams at the state and district levels to monitor the coronavirus situation and guide the government about the best possible course of action.

Talking to TOI, Dr Pradeep Kumar, secretary of Indian Medical Association (IMA)’s Jharkhand chapter, said, “All the doctors present at the meeting unanimously agreed that the continuation of the lockdown is the only way to contain the spread of Covid-19 as there is no cure for the disease yet.” 

At the two-hour meeting, doctors also called for using the lockdown period to conduct a mass sanitization at government offices, shopping malls and other public places through fire engines. 

Pointing out the shortage of RT-PCR machines for testing blood and swab samples and the absence of testing infrastructure in rural areas, the doctors urged the CM to use ICMR-approved rapid antibody tests to identify patients. “The testing kits can be taken to areas that have suspected cases. This will reduce chances of transmission that comes with transporting a suspect to hospital for tests,” Dr Sanjay Kumar, vice-president of Ranchi Medica Hospital, told TOI. 

The doctors also said that there is a need to hire manpower on contract basis on war footing. “The frontline healthcare workers are supposed to be sent to quarantine after they come in contact with a patient. If a doctor or any other health worker gets infected, it will create a host problems,” another doctor present at the meeting said. 

City-based eye surgeon Dr. Bharti Kashyap, who heads the state IMA’s women’s wing, said women doctors involved in screening drives needed to be given security owing to the resistance of locals. “The rapid antibody tests must also be done on frontline health workers,” she said. 

Rims director Dr D K Singh pointed out the lack of technicians at the hospital. Emphasizing that the hospital’s dialysis unit has just two technicians on duty, Singh said there is a need to hire manpower to tide over the ongoing crisis. 

Speaking at the meeting, Soren assured the doctors of implementing their suggestions. “We have strengthened social security schemes, bBut on the health front, a few things are yet to be done,” he told the doctors. 


