Docs ditch cops as ‘suspected’ Covid-19 case triggers panic
2020-03-22
Ludhiana: Raising a big question mark on the response system of the health department, no medical team turned up in Field Ganj following panic over a “suspected” coronavirus case (England-returned woman) late on Friday night. 

All this while, cops were left in a tizzy. They even went to the civil hospital to fetch some doctors, but got no help.

Finally, the officials had to return while asking the elderly woman to get herself checked in the morning and quarantine self for 14 days. 

Earlier, suspecting that the woman had symptoms of coronavirus, the residents had tried to contact ‘112’ police helpline. As they did not get through, someone called up police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal. 

Soon, Agarwal sent a team comprising assistant commissioner of police (detective) Surinder Mohan; inspector Satpal Singh, SHO, division number 2 police station; sub-inspector Arshdeep Kaur Grewal, SHO, Jodhewal police station to the area. 

Inspector Satpal Singh said, “Around 12 mid night, they got to know about the panic situation in Field Gunj. The police found that a 66-year-old woman had come from England to visit her relative in the city. Thereafter, police approached the family who revealed that the woman had diarrhea. They also informed that the woman had gone through screening at Delhi airport.” 

The inspector said since cops are not experts in checking health, they called up doctors at the civil hospital. “We waited there for over half an hour, but nobody turned up for her medical examination,” he added. 

Sub-inspector Arshdeep Kaur Grewal said, “When no medical team reached the spot, I visited the Ludhiana civil hospital. I asked three doctors on duty to accompany me to the area to screen the woman, but they refused to come, saying they can’t leave the hospital.” 

“I asked them if there is some medical team which can come along, there answer was in negative. Finally, we had to ask the woman to get her tests done in the morning and keeping herself in quarantine for 14 days,” Grewal added.

Chief medical official and civil surgeon Rajesh Bagga said, “We have trained cops that medical examination is needed only if persons have symptoms of coronavirus like fever, cough, cold and breathlessness. If the person has no such symptoms, they are simply advised for home quarantine.” 

“Diarrhea is not a symptom of coronavirus. However, for details examination in this case, the cops could have called up ‘108’ ambulance to take her to the hospital where doctors were available,” he added. 

Medical helpdesk | 161-2444193

Ludhiana residents can contact the health department on the number if they have symptoms of flu. Consultant on the helpdesk will inquire and guide them accordingly, informed Dr Bagga. 

“Those who have flu-like symptoms, but no travel history can approach their family doctor. Else they can approach the urban community health care centres, dispensaries in slum areas, sub-divisional hospitals in rural areas and district hospitals,” he added. 

Those with symptoms and travel history can approach the community health centres, sub-divisional hospitals, district hospital, for isolation wards if needed. 

Residents can also call 108 ambulance to reach the civil hospital for test if needed.

Inform about others | 0161-4622276

Residents can approach the health department if anyone from their locality has recent returned from coronavirus-affected countries.

Doc-turned-ADCP counsels family

Additional deputy commissioner of police (PBI) Sachin Gupta said, "As no medical team visited the area, I as a qualified doctor talked to the woman and her relatives. I asked for their symptoms and suggested to get the test done in the morning. Besides, I have asked the entire family, including a 12-year-old child, to home quarantine for 14 days.” Gupta said he has also asked senior officials to get fever guns and biohazard suits for cops. “Thus the cops can check fever of people, while ensuring their safety. A company under CSR activity has agreed to give us biohazard suits,” he added.

UK-returned woman taken for check-up

A 70-year-old woman from Model Town, who had returned from the United Kingdom on March 4, was taken for medical examination on Saturday evening after locality residents called up the police to give information about her. Inspector Pawan KUmar, SHO, Model Town police station, visited the area and called a medical team at the spot. 

Inspector Pawan Kumar said the elderly woman does not have any flu-like symptoms and moreover, she had remained in home quarantine. But to be on the safe side, cops and the medical team asked her to go for the medical examination.


