Bihar: Doctors, Gaya airport alerted against coronavirus
2020-01-25
PATNA: The state health department has sounded an alert against the new coronavirus (CoV) which has infected large number of people in China and killed 26 till Friday afternoon. The civil surgeons have been instructed to orient their health workers, stock up sufficient number of masks and form a sample collecting team to tackle any emergency situation.


State surveillance officer Dr Ragani Mishra said though the virus had not been detected in India and people should not panic. She further said Union ministry of health and family welfare, in coordination with civil aviation authority, has issued advisory to all the international airports.

“This virus is so new that even its incubation period is not known. Hence, it is better to take precaution and create awareness. Also, no one has come to Bihar from China recently, but students or any individual of our state staying in China can return. So, we have to be on alert,” she said.

In the instructions given to the districts, civil surgeons have been told to form a district surveillance unit, a sample collecting team in each government medical college and hospital and ensure sufficient stock of masks. Mishra said the sample collected will be sent to National Institute of Virology in Pune for test.

 Union ministry of health and family welfare regional director (Bihar and Jharkhand) Dr Kailash Kumar said Gaya airport authorities have been instructed in this regard.

There are daily flights from Gaya to Bangkok and Yangon till March-April, three flights in a week to Paro from December to February or extended up to March and one weekly flight to Hanoi from October to March. 

“Airport authorities have been told to distribute pamphlets with symptoms of the new virus. People infected with this virus suffer from Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), fever and cough. They face problem in breathing because of lack of oxygen,” said Dr Kailash, recalling the 2003 SARS outbreak which had infected thousands of people and killed many.

Gaya airport director Dillip Kumar said though they do not have any flight from China, still the precautions were being taken because people do come from other countries, including Singapore where one confirmed case has been reported. “One terminal manager here has been made the nodal officer. If he gets any such case, then he will report the matter to the civil surgeon. Even the cabin crew have been oriented and have been told not to take anyone on board with CoV symptoms. However, if anyone develops the symptom on a flight, the crew will inform the pilot, who will alert the air traffic controller and then to terminal manager. That passenger will be isolated and taken to the medical emergency room,” said Dillip.

He also said no passenger was found with the symptoms of coronavirus till Friday.


