Pune: Doctors help bust Covid-19 last rites myth
2020-05-03
PUNE: The Poona Citizen Doctors Forum has cautioned against myths and misinformations surrounding last rites of Covid-19 victims. 


Members of the forum said panic, coupled with false information, was preventing relatives from carrying out rituals. 



Arun Gadre, a member, said there have been several reports from Pune of family members refusing to come forward to conduct last rites of loved ones.

“In many instances, municipal staff had to finally cremate the deceased. People need to understand that there is no danger as long as the necessary precautions are in place,” Gadre said. 

The doctors' forum has drawn similarities with Covid-19 and the stigma that once surrounded those with HIV/AIDS. "There was a similar response to cremations of those who had died of HIV/AIDS 40 years ago. No one was ready to perform the rites. But the fear faded as awareness grew. One of our members, Vinay Kulkarni, who is also a member of the Prayas Health Group, worked on a similar situation for HIV/AIDS. After seeing the recent cases, we decided to create awareness again,” Gadre said.

Another member of the forum, Anant Phadke, said, “Covid-19 is a respiratory disease and the virus spreads through respiratory droplets. This spread stops when a patient dies. The only safety concern is viruses present on the body surface and secretions. These viruses are not airborne and cannot spread on their own. One can wear gloves to avoid touching the body and secretions from the mouth and nose.”

Sharda Bapat from the forum stated said the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has already issued guidelines on measures to be taken while handing over bodies to relatives. 

“Hospitals have been advised to use 1% sodium hypochlorite or bleaching powder to sanitize the body, clothes, plastic bag and surroundings. After this, there is no risk for anyone with gloves who is travelling with the body or lifting the body. Other precautions include masks, vigorous hand washing and social distancing. People should also take a bath as soon as they return home,” Bapat said.

Forum member Shriram Geet said, “Also remember that the virus cannot survive in the ashes after cremation or in the soil after burial. So there is no need to spray disinfectant on the ashes or site of burial.”

