Pune: Doctor gets bail to serve Covid-19 patients
2020-06-02
PUNE: A city sessions court has granted temporary bail for 60 days to a medical practitioner, Indrakumar Deorao Bhise, who is in the Yerawada jail for a year in a case under the MCOC Act, on condition that “he shall offer his services as a doctor at Sassoon Hospital for treatment of Covid-19 patients at least five days a week”.

Additional sessions judge A N Sirsikar observed, “ ... in the larger interest of society it is necessary to grant him temporary bail subject to certain conditions.” 

The Baramati police had arrested Bhise (52), among other accused, in an alleged Rs30 crore extortion bid on the then state cabinet minister, Mahadev Jankar, and the latter’s associate, Balasaheb Dodtale. 

The police invoked provisions of the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime (MCOC) Act in the case, making it difficult for the accused to get bail. 

Recently, Bhise moved a temporary bail plea on medical grounds. 

Through a hearing on videoconferencing, he pleaded that he was diabetic, suffering from various ailments, his old mother, wife and two minor children were dependent on him and he was willing to utilize 20 years of his experience as a medical practitioner for the service of Covid-19 patients if granted bail.

Public prosecutor Vilas Patare opposed the plea, citing the Supreme Court-mandated High Powered Committee’s (HPC) decision against grant of temporary bail relief to all accused facing prosecution for serious offences, including those under special enactments such as the MCOC Act. 

Bhise’s lawyer, P D Durge, argued that his client be granted bail for rendering services to nCoV patients. 

Judge Sirsikar acknowledged the HPC’s decision, but observed, “The question is, as to whether request of temporary bail on the ground of rendering services to Covid-19 patients can be considered favourably?” 

“It is a fact that our country is facing an unprecedented public health emergency with Covid-19 pandemic affecting several parts of the nation. Maharashtra is one of the worst affected state which has more than 56,000 patients of Covid-19 positive. In Pune there are more than 5,000 Covid positive patients. The cases are increasing day by day,” the judge observed. 

“The central and state governments are making exceptional efforts to combat the crisis. Our public health facilities are facing tremendous load to take care of large number of patients. The Government of India has made appeal to the doctors who are willing to provide their services in the public health facilities,” the judge said. 

“According to accused, he is gynecologist having practice for more than 20 years, running hospitals at Shirur in Pune district, Karjat in Ahmednagar and in Sangli. I think the accused being experienced medical practitioner his services can be utilized in public health system,” the judge added.


