Tamil Nadu: Doctor, 10-month-old son, mother, maid test positive for coronavirus
2020-03-30
COIMBATORE: A 29-year-old doctor, who had treated two Covid-19 patients from Thailand at the Perundurai Government Hospital in Erode, tested positive for the disease here on Sunday.


The doctor has infected her 10-month-old son, 58-year-old mother and a 51-year-old maid, a district administration official said. “Perhaps, she is the first doctor to have contracted the disease from patients in the state. With this, the number of Covid-19 patients here has gone up to six. The four patients are being treated in the isolation wards of the ESIC hospital. Their vitals are stable,” he said.

The doctor had joined duty on March 23 at the Podanur Railway Hospital after she was transferred from the Erode Railway Hospital. As she felt feverish, she took leave on the same day. She was admitted to the ESIC hospital on March 25 after she started showing the symptoms of the infection. Her throat and nasal swabs as well as those of her family members were sent to the King Institute of Preventive Medicine and Research in Chennai. Shortly, the railway closed both the railways hospital she had worked as a precautionary measure.

“Her husband and the other child have tested negative. But their swabs have been sent for reconfirmation,” the official told TOI.

Meanwhile, four people who had travelled from New Delhi to Erode tested positive for the virus on Sunday and are undergoing treatment in the IRT Perundurai Medical College. With this, the number of Covid-19 patients in Erode has gone up to nine.

Health department officials are trying to track down 51 people - 28 from Mettupalayam and the rest from Anaimalai, Pollachi and Coimbatore city – who had attended a religious function along with the Thailand nationals in New Delhi for two days from March 22, said the official. “We tracked down 43 people and collected swabs for testing. They were admitted to the isolation wards of the government hospitals in Mettupalayam, Pollachi and Coimbatore.”

Two people who had returned from the Maldives had to struggle after doctors at the ESIC hospital in Coimbatore prescribed home quarantine on Saturday. “The duo had visited a private hospital in the city as one of them had cough. The hospital sent them to the ESIC hospital in an ambulance. Doctors there ruled out symptoms of Covid-19 and asked them to leave on their own,” a source said.

The duo managed to convince the driver of a goods carrier to give them a ride back home with the help of cops.

