Doctors perplexed as patients in quarantine throw tantrums
2020-03-23
Visakhapatnam: While both state and Union governments are intent on checking the spread of Covid-19 by sending all foreign returnees and suspected cases into quarantine and isolation wards, doctors are perplexed with people seeking facilities of a high-end hotel at a hospital or quarantine camp.

As per data provided by the district administration, 22 people have been kept in quarantine wards of Visakha Institute of Medical Sciences (VIMS), while 12 people who are being treated as suspected cases in isolation wards of Government Hospital for Chest and Communicable Diseases (GHCCF). Many of these people in isolation wards are foreigners or non-resident Indians (NRIs). 

Narrating the situation with patients in quarantine and isolation wards, a senior doctor of a government hospital said, “The initial tendency of patients, especially those with foreign connections, is to somehow escape quarantine and leave the hospital. Recently, a US-based woman doctor threw a tantrum because of a four-minute delay in receiving lunch.”

“They are somehow in a stage of anxiety and stress, but the moment her report came out negative, her demeanour changed and she felt sorry for her behaviour,” related the doctor.

The doctor also spoke of another incident where the authorities had to warn a Belgian national of police action because he was trying to leave the hospital before his test results arrived.

In order to help them bide their time while waiting for test results, people in quarantine and in isolation wards have been provided with free Wi-Fi, books and have also been provided with smartphones.

Moreover, those with family in the city have been allowed to let their family members bring food in sealed disposable containers. The relatives have to submit the food with staff guarding the entrance to the wards. 

Doctors pointed out that they are facing a scarcity of grade-IV staff as many are refusing to clean the wards apprehending risk to their lives.


