Lucknow: Doctor tests negative twice at government labs, private pathology confirms Covid-19 infection
2020-05-27
LUCKNOW: A female doctor (54) and a colon cancer patient (45) were among four persons tested positive for coronavirus infection on Tuesday, taking the city’s tally to 336.

The doctor, a resident of Vinamra Khand (Gomtinagar) was tested at a private pathology. She had tested negative twice earlier in two government labs – once in Delhi and again at RML Institute of Medical Sciences in the city. The infection was confirmed in the third test at a private pathology in Lucknow.

A senior health official said, “The doctor was at Gangaram Hospital in Delhi since November for treatment of her younger son. On May 15, her son was diagnosed with Covid-19. She got herself tested at the same hospital on May 16 but was found negative. She came back to Lucknow the same day with her elder son and they quarantined themselves at home.” 

“After 2-3 days, she developed influenza-like symptoms and got another test done at RMLIMS on May 20 but that too was negative. As symptoms continued, she got herself tested again at a pathology on Sunday which confirmed the infection,” he added.

The colon cancer patient from Nishatganj area was admitted to a private hospital on Sunday where he was tested positive by a private lab.

The patient is the neighbour of a railway hospital attendant who tested positive on Saturday. “The hospital will be closed for sanitization and the staff will be tested,” an official said.

A 36-year-old migrant worker, a resident of Kaiserbagh, who was quarantined at SR Institute of Engineering and Management in Bakshi-ka-Talab, and a 55-year-old man who came from Aligarh to his home in Vinamra Khand in Gomtinagar were also diagnosed with Covid-19.

The migrant had come from Shramik Special train from Ahmedabad, Gujarat, on Sunday and was quarantined at Alambagh bus station.

The patient from Gomtinagar is a government engineer posted in Aligarh. He had come to Lucknow on May 22. CMO Dr Narendra Agarwal said, “The migrant worker has been admitted to Lokbandhu hospital and the other patient is undergoing treatment at KGMU. Their family members are also being tested.” Meanwhile, 10 patients have been discharged from Lokbandhu hospital. On Monday, a 38-year-old resident of Mumbai was also tested positive at a private pathology lab. 


