Doctor at health centre has Covid-19, triggers fresh cluster worry in Ghaziabad
2020-04-12
GHAZIABAD: A doctor in charge of a community health centre in Dasna is the latest among healthcare professionals across the country to be infected by the novel coronavirus. He was among two persons to test positive in Ghaziabad on Saturday, raising concerns about a fresh cluster emerging in the NCR city because he had not only treated patients at the health centre but also gone on calls to some areas.


Police have sought details of the doctor’s call records so that they can identify all the areas he had visited and the people he met. “It will help the health department and police identify people he may have come in contact with. These people will be screened and placed in quarantine,” said GK Mishra, the district malaria officer and member of Ghaziabad’s Covid-19 response team.

 

What has come as a relief is that 41 workers of the Dasna health centre who worked with the doctor till Friday have tested negative for Covid-19. The health centre has been sealed.

With Saturday’s cases, Ghaziabad’s Covid count has reached 27. Apart from the doctor, the other person who tested positive is a Masuri resident who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin last month.

Till Saturday evening, the district administration was yet to seal the housing society off NH-9 at Golf Links where the doctor lives with his family. However, all its residents have been asked not to step out of their homes.

“All residents have been asked to place themselves in home isolation. The entire area has been sanitised. We have also collected swab samples of the doctor’s family members. The process of sealing the housing society will start on Sunday and it will be included in the list of hotspot areas,” said Ajay Shankar Pandey, the district magistrate. “The health centre in Dasna, where the doctor was posted, has been sealed completely,” he added.

Health officials said the doctor had recently visited a 100-bed quarantine centre set up at Sunder Deep college in Muradnagar. “There is a strong possibility he may have contracted the infection there,” Mishra said.

According to him, the doctor had offered to get his swab samples tested four days ago as he felt he had started showing virus-like symptoms. “We not only collected his samples, but also those of 41 others, who included workers of the community centre. Only the doctor’s results were positive. All the others have tested negative,” Mishra said. “He was admitted to one of the quarantine centres and samples of his family members have been taken for testing,” he added.

The second positive case is a 38-year-old man from Masuri, who had attended the religious congregation in Delhi last month. “This man had attended the Tablighi Jamaat meet in Delhi and was placed under quarantine. He had not tested positive initially. But a random test carried out a few days ago found his samples positive,” Mishra said.

Of the total 27 positive cases that Ghaziabad has reported so far, three have recovered and were discharged from the hospital. “This apart, there are seven persons under quarantine who have tested negative in their first test report. If their second test reports also mention negative, they, too, will be sent back home,” Mishra said.


