Maharashtra: Doctors place some Covid-19 patients on stomach to beat ARDS
2020-04-17
PUNE: Doctors dealing with Covid-19 patients are placing some severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) cases on their stomachs to improve oxygen supply to their lungs. 

This technique, called ‘prone positioning’, allows oxygen to reach more parts of the lungs and reduces the conflict between blood and oxygen supply in the organ. 




The first critical Covid-19 patient in Pune was placed in a prone position, her doctors at Bharati Hospital, intensivists Shivkumar Iyer and Jignesh Shah, said. She recovered well and is back home. 

Other doctors told TOI that they have used the technique while treating H1N1 patients and it could bring results in Covid-19 patients too.

Ashok Mahashur, a leading pulmonologist from Mumbai, said patients with very advanced ARDS are placed in prone position. 

“When the patient is supine (on his back), the alveoli (air sacs which allow for rapid gaseous exchange) at the base of the lungs, get compressed. Due to gravity, the blood circulation to these air units continues and there is a mismatch in the blood supply and ventilation. In the prone position, the alveoli open up and ventilation gets better, thereby improving oxygenation,” he said.

C Vijay Kumar, a leading pulmonologist with the Apollo Hospital group in Hyderabad, said India has used prone positioning since 2005, and it gained acceptance after the H1N1 pandemic in 2009-10. 

The method found more takers after a study by a team of doctors led by Claude Guerin was published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2013. It concluded that in patients with severe ARDS, early application of prolonged prone-positioning sessions significantly decreased 28-day and 90-day mortality.

Kumar said the technique helps doctors treat what’s called ‘Baby Lungs’ where the lungs have a limited breathing capacity due to infection or injury.

Kumar, who is treating Covid-19 patients, cited the example of a patient of viral pneumonia from the outskirts of Hyderabad last year, who took a nine-hour ambulance ride in the prone position, and was cured after treatment.

The Union health ministry in its guidelines for clinical management of Covid-19 on March 17 said, “ In patients with severe ARDS, prone ventilation for more than 12 hours per day is recommended. Application of prone ventilation is strongly recommended for adult and paediatric patients with severe ARDS but requires sufficient human resources and expertise to be performed safely.”

The medical experts had a word of caution. Mahashur said the technique is not effective for all patients.

Prone positioning that helped H1N1 patients could help Covid-19 patients too on a case to case basis, Jalil Parkar, a pulmonologist from Lilavati Hospital in Mumbai, said. 

Chest specialist from Pune, Nitin Abhyankar, said proning should not be seen as the primary method to save a Covid-19 patient with respiratory distress. “Proning is in the experimental stage. Only strong data will prove its effectiveness,” he said. 

There are set guidelines for its use. “Prone ventilation is used as rescue therapy when oxygenation doesn't improve beyond a specific level,” intensivists Iyer and Shah said. 

When there is only a single organ like the lungs affected and the patient's other vital parameters are within normal range, then prone ventilation can rescue a patient, they added.

If a patient has very low blood pressure and cardiac rhythm abnormalities, the techniques is risky, the doctors said. 

The Pune woman was young, had no co-morbidity, and got medical help on time. “She also had no secondary infections. Only her lungs were affected,” they added.


