Doctors in dilemma over quarantine norms in city, outskirts
2020-06-08
Nagpur: Despite an assurance of exemption from quarantine, several doctors running private clinics are in a dilemma after a general practitioner from Godhani was placed in institutional quarantine around 1am on Sunday. The measure was taken after his patient tested positive on Saturday.

As Covid-19 cases continue to be reported from across the city and its outskirts, doctors are worried whether to follow Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) guidelines, or be wary of the district health office (DHO).

Last week, NMC assured private practitioners to run their clinics without apprehension of getting quarantined in case any of their patient tests positive for coronavirus. The exemption was applicable so far for doctors using protective gear. 

NMC additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar reiterated that doctors and paramedical staff won’t be quarantined. “If they are using protective gear while examining patients, they need not worry. If all health care workers are quarantined, it may cause problems to ailing citizens,” he said.

Yet, the quarantining of the Godhani doctor baffled many other doctors. Dr Gantawar said the Godhani doctor’s case wasn’t handled by the NMC team as his residence fall outside municipal limits.

District health officer Dr Deepak Selokar, who supervises action in rural parts, didn’t answer TOI’s calls.

A medical officer from PHC said the DHO too followed the same guidelines for health care workers but with certain riders. “As per our survey, the Godhani doctor wasn’t using protective gear. His patient, who tested positive, concealed his travel history from him. The patient is symptomatic and co-morbid. We have traced and quarantined 10 more patients of the doctor,” the PHC officer said.

He added that the Godhani doctor was convinced to get quarantined. “When the situation is like this, health care workers can’t be exempted,” the officer said, adding the doctor was directly exposed to high viral load. 

However, the Godhani doctor said he used protective gear and had suspected the patient to be Covid positive while examining him. “I had advised the patient’s relative to immediately get him tested and maintain distance,” he said. 

He also claimed to have gone into self-isolation on Saturday evening, soon after learning about his patient’s positive Covid report. 

The doctor said he had informed the DHO team about the civic body’s latest decision to exempt health care professional found to be close contacts of positive patients.

Dr Shahid Akhtar, who is National Integrated Medical Association secretary, said on one side the civic body tells us to keep our clinics open or they will seal it, and on the other hand the DHO has other norms.

“Looking at this dual policy, we are not sure whether to stay open or closed. If all doctors are quarantined like this, patients will suffer and many suspect cases may go unreported,” he said.


