Doctors diagnosing virus symptoms on WhatsApp
2020-04-01
Nagpur: The incessantly rising number of people infected by Covid-19 is a daunting challenge for those working day and night to save lives. The unprecedented situation is taking a toll on the mental and physical health of these saviours of humanity.

With an aim to ease the pressure off doctors, city-based NGO Parindey Foundation has started a digital doctor consultancy helpline for coronavirus on WhatsApp. The helpline offers patients the opportunity to get free consultancy from specialist doctors.

The initiative, christened ‘Niraamayaa Bhava’ was started by Siddhartha Roy, a 21-year-old author and community developer, and chartered accountant Niranjan Jadhav, supported by Dr Aarzoo Meghrajani — who manages the operational aspect of the advisory.

When patients reach out on the WhatsApp number 7020844301, the doctor in-charge sends a symptom sheet to them to know their profile and travel history. After analysing the report, the doctor provides a solution and if needed, sets an appointment for a video/telephonic call. 

If the symptoms are severe, the patient is advised to meet the doctor in person. After the physical check-up, the patient is prescribed medicines or necessary tests.

“I have been working on various government projects for innovation and social change, but this is the time when we all should come together and do our bit,” says co-founder Siddhartha Roy.

“I had this idea in my mind from a long time, but felt that executing it alone would be challenging, which is why I collaborated with Parindey Youth Foundation and several doctors. It feels good to do our bit for the society,” he adds. 

“We had seen the sufferings of China and knew that if Covid-19 hits India, it'll hit us really hard. So we decided to make our citizens aware about it and reduce the stress on government hospitals. It has worked well and people have given a really good response,” says co-founder Niranjan Jadhav.

The initiative was launched by district collector Ravindra Thakare on March 20, and around 110 people have been helped through this platform by now.

Dr Geeta Pedgaonkar, a senior doctor who is associated with the initiative, says, “More than the disease itself, it is the fear which needs to be fought. The situation is such that even if people have regular cough, they start worrying of contracting the virus. The symptoms, travel history and other sources of exposure need to be carefully analysed for us to give measured advice. We are working on removing this fear from their minds.”

“I was very scared when I developed coronavirus-like symptoms. After a detailed online consultation through the platform, I was advised some tests. However, my reports were negative and I was discharged from the hospital,” says a beneficiary on the condition of anonymity. 

The panel of doctors associated with the initiative comprises Dr Shailendra Mundhada, Dr Aarzoo Meghrajani, Dr Satish Deopujari, Dr Geeta Pedgaonkar, Dr Devika Jadhav, Dr Madhavi Deshmukh, Dr Shreya Kate and Dr Nishi Roy. Dhruv pathology and molecular diagnostic lab is helping with the research and testing.


