Domestic fish supply, exports severely hit by lockdown
2020-04-10
Rajkot: The lockdown across the country to curb the spread of coronavirus has severely impacted various sectors and fishing industry in Gujarat, one of the major export oriented market, is not an exception. 

While the exports are staring at 30% loss in the annual business of over Rs 5,000 crore because of the corona pandemic in European countries, repercussion of fight against COVID-19 will also be felt in the domestic markets. 

Industry experts expect huge shortage of fish supply in local markets as the fishing season this year has been marred due to back to back cyclonic storm in the Arabian Sea in December-January. And when the best season for fishing began in March it got hit by the lockdown. March to June accounts for over 70% of the fish catch for a season.

This has rendered at least 36,000 fishermen of the Gujarat coast jobless. These fishermen come to work with boat owners in Gujarat from South Gujarat region and Southern India states every year. But now most of them are stuck. “These fishermen want to return to their native as soon as possible. They don’t want to wait till the end of fishing season in June first week,” said Jagdish Fofandi president of All India Sea Food Exporters’ Association. 

The fish production is also likely to be down by 30% this year as most of the fishermen will leave for home as soon as lockdown is over, he added.

Fofandi said that Veraval, one of the largest exporters of sea food in India which is bustling at this time of the year, looks like a desert town because all the fishing activities and processing units are shut since March 22. 

“We have requested the state government to allow us process and package fish worth Rs 1,000 crore laying in the cold storage of various factories and help us fulfil our pending orders. Nearly 50% of the stock is booked for export, but for the rest we need to find new buyers,” Fofandi told TOI.

The fish exporters’ body made represented to the Gir Somnath district collector on Thursday. There are nearly 100 processing units in Veraval.

Kenny Thomas, a fish exporter from Veraval said that not only fishermen, but those connected with the export industry like the ice factories, transporters and others have also been affected by the lockdown.

Thomas added that besides no business, exporters are also facing financial crunch as foreign buyers who have got the shipment in last three months are seeking more time for payment. According to exporters payment of about Rs 1,200 crore is outstanding even after the expiry of the credit period. 

Nearly 40% of the fish from Veraval is exported to European countries like Spain, Italy and France besides big Asian buyer like China. 

The fish exporters have also raised concern that after summer they will not have money to pay the fishermen stuck due to lockdown. 


