Covid-19 scare: Domestic flights to operate at IGI Airport, doubts over connectivity
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: Domestic flights will continue to operate to and from the Delhi airport and Indira Gandhi International Airport will not be part of the national capital lockdown announced by the state government. The aviation ministry spokesperson categorically said, “IGIA shall remain functional” on Sunday evening, after the state’s lockdown order said “all domestic/international flights arriving to Delhi during this time shall be suspended”. Schedule international flights in and out of any Indian airport are not allowed till next March 29.


However, how passengers, crew and other staffers of airlines, airports and other agencies commute between the airport and their homes/hotels across NCR remains to be seen. As part of lockdown, no public transport services including Delhi Metro, private buses, taxis and auto-rickshaws are allowed to ply. DTC buses will operate at 25% capacity for employees of essential service agencies like DJB, BSES and health department. Delhi’s borders with Haryana and UP are also sealed during the lockdown.

The Directorate General of Civil Aviation is going to seek exemption from these restrictions on commute of aviation personnel and passengers between IGIA and their homes/hotels in private cabs. Delhi Police and its traffic wing come under Centre (home ministry) and will play an essential role in making this possible.

A standoff is likely as the Delhi government stood by its order issued with the approval of lieutenant governor and reiterated that neither international nor domestic flights would operate in the wake of complete lockdown. Domestic flights operating despite lockdown in Delhi may leave flyers stranded at the airport due to absence of public transport.

Airlines have cabs to transport pilots and cabin crew. Other staffers mostly use personal or public transport. “Let us see how many of our required staffers we are able to ferry between the airport and their homes across NCR,” said an official.

“We are seeking exemption on Sunday-Monday night itself before the lockdown kicks in to avoid inconvenience to passengers,” said an aviation official. 

Immediately after the Delhi government order, top levels of aviation ministry went in a huddle. “It was felt that air connectivity, anyway in very limited now and that too to only schedule domestic, is an essential service that needs to continue,” said a senior official. IndiGo, India’s largest domestic airline, is cutting flights within India by 25% due to reduced demand.

The Delhi Airport tweeted: “As per the recent directives by DGCA, domestic flights to/from Delhi shall continue to operate as usual.”


