Domestic flights deep-cleaned following coronavirus protocol, but fumigation not on list
2020-03-14
KOLKATA: As the entire aviation sector attempts to navigate the turbulence caused by the evolving Covid-19 situation, domestic carriers have revised their housekeeping protocols and launched a host of measures to minimize the threat of infection and exterminate any possible trace of the virus on board. But fumigation of aircraft is not part of the protocol even when a confirmed Covid-19 case is reported on the flight.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Airlines are known to be cagey about disclosing their response to infectious diseases and threats they may pose to employees and passengers. But the situation has turned such that they seem to have shed the inhibition and are now reaching out to travel agents and flyers with preventive, containment and de-contamination measures they have adopted. 


 
National carrier Air India, which airlifted Indians stranded in China and Iran, has laid down protocols to deal with suspect cases. But fumigation is not one of the measures, even when a confirmed case is reported and the aircraft is on the ground for a few hours. Instead, it has advised cleaning of the aircraft interiors including seats, overhead bins and toilets with alcohol-based cleanser. 

Vistara, the Tata-SIA airline, has set up a specialized task force to deal with the challenges posed by the global outbreak of novel coronavirus. The airline said it was monitoring flights across the network for risks. If a suspected case is reported or detected, the affected row as well as three rows in front and behind are being sanitized, along with lavatories, sidewalls, tray tables, overhead compartments and carpets on the aircraft. “If any confirmed case is reported, we will carry out complete sanitization of the aircraft,” the Vistara spokesperson said, adding the situation was being reviewed daily and the airline was nimble in its approach to contain the virus. 

GoAir has enhanced overnight cleaning of its fleet and is spending six-seven hours to deep-clean each aircraft daily. “We have expanded the use of hospital-grade disinfectant to clean the cabin, elements in the flight deck, and lavatory,” a GoAir official said, adding all employees have been equipped with disinfectants, sanitizers, gloves and other protective equipment, particularly those who interact with customers. 

SpiceJet, too, has provided masks and gloves as personal protective measures against Covid-19. Cabin crew have been asked to wear masks in case they come across a suspect case. The airline said it had ensured sufficient availability of masks on each flight for passenger use in case of a suspect case on board. “We have been treating all international flights with disinfectants post disembarkation of passengers. During night halt of aircraft, extensive deep cleaning is being carried out,” a SpiceJet official said. 

All airlines have conducted training sessions for employees on WHO guidelines. IndiGo, which operates the largest number of flights in the country, said it was taking all precautionary measures to contain the spread of novel coronavirus as advised by the authorities, including screening at the airport and wearing of masks. “We are following all the prescribed Airport Health Organization (APHO) guidelines and are taking preventive measures for our crew operating flights to regions affected by coronavirus,” an IndiGo spokesperson said.


