Domestic violence calls to 181 helpline dip during lockdown
2020-04-16
Hubballi: The Mahila Sahayavani (181 helpline) in Karnataka has reported a decrease in calls related to domestic violence during the Covid-19 lockdown. The trend, however, does not necessarily mean a fall in such cases. Many instances might have gone unreported since victims are ever in the close proximity of abusers due to the lockdown.

According to officials of the women and child development department, the 181 toll-free helpline received 86 calls pertaining to domestic violence between March 23 and April 13 (22 days). There were 200 calls received in the 22 days prior to March 23.

Some experts said self-isolating partners at home due to the lockdown led to decrease in abusive behaviour and violence against women. The male member generally abuses his wife in a drunken state, but such cases dropped due to the non-availability of liquor.

However, Suvarna A T, supervisor of Mahila Sahayavani, said women might not get a free hand to call the helpline when the abuser is present at home. “Even during normal days, we receive complaint calls on behalf of the women in trouble. But due to the lockdown, women may have to restrict themselves at home. She may not get a chance to share her problems with family members and neighbours,” she added.

D Roopa, IGP, railways, said that during the lockdown, it is quite difficult for women in distress to call the helpline and seek help. “So, many women may be not coming forward to file complaints of harassment, leading to decline in calls of abuse cases,” she informed.

With 42 calls, Bengaluru reported the most number of domestic violence calls. There were seven such calls from Mandya district, six from Chikkaballapur, five from Tumakuru and four from Belagavi. Vijayapura, Dakshina Kannada, Dharwad and Ballari districts recorded two cases each.

K A Dayanand, director, department of women and child development, said the staff at Mahila Sahayavani 181 have been working round-the-clock to address the problem of women after the lockdown was announced. Sources said the 181 helpline provided police assistance in 45 cases between March 23 and April 13.

Workplace harassment

The 181 helpline received two calls related to sexual harassment at workplace (one each from Bengaluru and Ballari) and three sexual violence (general) calls (two from Davanagere and one from Bengaluru) from March 23 to 31. Sexual violence (general) is meant for lovers, who complain about break up, or not getting calls from the lover, or lover not responding to calls and other issues. So far this month, there has been one sexual violence call received from Davanagere.


