Domestic violence calls up from 10 to 25 a day during lockdown in Bengaluru
2020-04-10
BENGALURU: It’s 11.25am on Wednesday and one of the two telephones at Parihar Vanitha Sahayavani (women’s helpline) at the police commissionerate is ringing off the hook. Counsellor Bindya Yohannan picks it up only to lend an ear to a woman from Marathahalli who’s being repeatedly assaulted by her husband and his mother. 


The 21-day lockdown to check the Covid-19 spread has confined people to their homes but led to exponential rise in domestic violence cases in Bengaluru. Distress calls to the police control room by abused girls/women have multiplied since March 24, the day the shutdown was enforced.

Flooded with calls, police decided to press into service staff from Parihar (the family counselling centre that runs the helpline along with police), who were working from home due to the lockdown. Earlier, Parihar was mostly referred women’s abuse cases by police stations. The Parihar staff were provided a temporary phone counselling facility and assistance from Hoysala vehicles, if necessary. 

“Our eight-member team began working in two shifts from 8am to 8pm April 4 onwards. We started addressing calls made to the control room (100) pertaining to women’s issues and providing detailed counselling on the phone,” said Rani Shetty, head of Parihar.

On an average, the police control room is now receiving at least 25 distress calls related to domestic violence every day, while some women directly call the helpline. Prior to the lockdown, the control room would get not more than 10 such calls. Though Parihar had a functional helpline, it barely got direct calls as it’s not well known. There’s also a significant jump in the number of complaints referred to Parihar by various police stations.

“The Marathahalli woman, 29, was being subjected to physical torture by her husband and mother-in-law. Taking into consideration the gravity of the situation, we dispatched a Hoysala team who took the woman to her acquaintance as per her request,” Yohannan said.

Beat police personnel are exercising caution while addressing these cases by using thermal guns to ascertain if the people they engage with are healthy. Otherwise, they can call an ambulance. 

Calls to the helpline are often made by women who are being tormented by their spouses or other family members or are experiencing trouble in relationships. Sometimes, they are to do with missing girls. On Wednesday afternoon, senior counsellor Preethi Baliga attended a call from a Koramangala woman perturbed over her missing 17-year-old daughter.

“The mother claims she was last seen with a boy. We are trying to contact him. It can be extremely taxing for parents, especially during the lockdown. Even for police, it can be quite a task to locate the victim,” said Baliga. 

