Donate medical equipment for Covid-19 hospitals: Dist collector
2020-04-18
Kolhapur: District collector Daulat Desai has appealed to people to donate medical equipment to the Covid-19 hospitals to be set up at Shivaji University and Sanjay Ghodawat University hostels located at Atigre along Kolhapur-Sangli highway in the district.

These hostels-turned-hospitals will be equipped with isolation and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) wards. A number of private universities and hospitals have expressed interest for setting up of such facilities in view of Covid-19 outbreak. 

A team comprising officials of various departments of the district administration visited both the hostels. During their visit, they observed that each of these hostels can have at least 500 beds. However, owing to the dearth of funds, the district collector has appealed to the people to render whatever help they can.

“We have decided to set up 500-bed Covid-19 care and Covid-19 health hospitals at these two university campuses. But, we are facing shortage of medical equipment. Therefore, we are requesting all generous people to come forward and contribute for equipement such as beds and ventilators so that we can make these facilities operational.”

“We have also appealed to the doctors, paramedical staff, ward boys, nurses, health workers to come forward and register themselves at Kolhapur Warriors portal. We can get their service whenever needed. Also, we need lot of technical staff to put all the equipment’s at the building infrastructure made available at these two campuses," said Desai.

Apart from four major government and civic hospitals in the district, the administration has authorised six private hospitals from the city and district to admit and treat Covid-19 patients. “We are using private hospitals for institutional quarantining of suspects and Covid-19 confirmed cases. Currently, we have controlled the spread of the infection, however, we have to ensure all the facilities and arrangements are in place,” added Desai.

Meanwhile, the district administration has planned to set up a Covid-19 testing laboratory at Shendapark for speeding up the testing of suspects. 


