Don’t communalise Tablighi Jamaat issue: Muslim scholars
2020-04-02
HYDERABAD: Cutting across the ideological divide, some Muslim religious scholars have extended support to Tablighi Jamaat. Though initially many non-Tablighi groups blamed it for the spread of the virus, Muslim leaders from all schools of thought came forward and said that the issue should not be communalised.


Perhaps for the first time, religious scholars from Barelvi, Deobandi and other schools of thought, who otherwise do not see eye-to-eye with Tablighi Jamaat, supported it.

Sufi leader and Seerat-un-Nabi Academy chairman Moulana Syed Ghulam Samdani Ali Quadri said though he was ideologically opposed to Tablighi Jamaat, he would support it on principles. “The congregation in Delhi began on March 15. There was no lockdown or ban on congregations. People in Markaz could not move out due to sudden lockdown. There was no transport facility. It is wrong to blame the Jamaat,” he said.

Moulana Arshad Madani of Jamiat Ulema Hind said people were stranded at the Markaz due to sudden lockdown. He also found fault with the authorities for not granting transport permission to shift people.

Moulana Khalid Saifullah Rahmani of Islamic Fiqh Academy, said the government should have given sufficient time for lockdown.

Zaid Patel, president of the Islamic Information Centre, in his message said the spike in number of Markaz visitors testing positive is due to a high percentage of testing in a targeted group. He said similar results could come out if people, who attended different political and religious congregations, were also tested.

Muslim leaders argue that though 30,955 suspects are in quarantine in AP, the government conducted tests on only 748 people. And all those, who attended the Jamaat meeting are subjected to corona tests and this explains the high number of positive percentage. All over the country only about 35,000 people were tested, the lowest in the world. In other countries it is 100 to 500 times more than those tested in India.

They also cited several instances when large gatherings were held during the period of Markaz meeting, and later during the lockdown.


