Don’t conduct SSC exams amid pandemic and promote all students, urge parents and experts
2020-06-08
HYDERABAD: With the state governmnet postponing the SSC exams for the second time, educationalists and parents are of the view that it would be wise to promote all students rather than forcing them to appear for exams at a later stage in the year.

They suggested that students be promoted either by considering internal assessment marks of class 10, by taking class 9 marks into consideration.


“It is likely the state has already come up with a mechanism to promote all students which it will reveal in time,” said T Tirupati Rao, retired Osmania University professor, who was heading the school fee regulation committee.

Teachers, however, said that it is important to immediately declare all students as having ‘passed’, so that they are not left wondering when they will be asked to appear for the exam again. “They can come up with a grading mechanism later. First, cancel SSC examination and declare all students as passed,” said M Ravinder, president, Telangana Progressive Teachers Federation. He said that internal assessment (formative assessment) marks are already available with the government and can be used as one of the aspects to grade students.

However, there are differences of opinions on the usage of internal marks to grade SSC students as there is no uniformity in awarding these marks. “Awarding of internal marks will differ from school to school. So, it cannot be used,” said Rao and added that if needed, the state can conduct an entrance examination with only multiple-choice questions for admission into intermediate colleges.

Parents too said that promoting students is the right way to go forward as many are scared to send their children to appear for exams.“For many, the SSC certificate is used as the date of birth proof. These marks are not used for any entrance exam. There is no harm if students are promoted in class 10. They will be tested again in intermediate,” said K Shanti, a parent. 

The education department officials, meanwhile, are said to be considering promoting students without examinations. Instead of grading, all students who have been issued a hall ticket might be declared as pass by the state government. Earlier, in erstwhile Andhra Pradesh, all SSC students were declared passed without exams in 1969 during Telangana agitation. 

Meanwhile,the director of government examinations A Satyanarayana Reddy on Sunday directed district education officers (DEOs) to issue instructions to preserve thermal screening kits, masks, sanitisers, hand gloves, OMRs and blank stationery papers at the examination centres.

On Monday, chief minister K Chandrashekhar Rao will be convening a review meeting with the education department officials on SSC examinations and is expected to make the announcement. 


