‘Don’t expect five-star facilities in quarantine’
2020-03-21
BENGALURU: Public healthcare officials are having a hard time addressing concerns of asymptomatic travellers from Covid-19 affected countries, who are being quarantined in government facilities. 


Travellers with conditions such as blood pressure, diabetes and respiratory issues must undergo 14-day quarantine, but given conditions in isolation wards of government hospitals and temporary facilities are far from luxe, there is a lot of resistance.

Officials say these travellers must understand that they have to bear with inconveniences in public quarantine. “Don't expect five star facilities in a public quarantine,” asserted health and family welfare department director Dr Omprakash Patil. 

On March 17, a 59-year-old man who returned from US escaped from a public quarantine facility at Sir C V Raman General Hospital, Indiranagar, Bengaluru. He was among 10 people brought to the 10-bed facility. Reluctant to stay on, he went missing within hours. He was traced later to his home in Anantpur, Andhra Pradesh, and was sent back to Bengaluru after much convincing.

“They take time to understand that they need to be quarantined even if they do not have symptoms. Their heath is assessed at the airport and they are sent directly to a hospital from there. They are mostly people above 55 years with high BP, hypertension or diabetes. We have to watch their health. A dietician and a doctor looks after them in public quarantine,” Dr Ramesh Krishna R, medical superintendent, Sir CV Raman General Hospital, said.

Two medical college hospitals in Bengaluru have also set up public quarantine facilities for asymptomatic travellers. In all, there are 35 travellers in the three public quarantines. Psychiatric counselling began for these patients on Friday.

At CV Raman hospital, each of the isolation wards has two beds and an attached bathroom. Food supplied to inmates is based on dietary specifications of the hospital. 

Following demands for food from outside — which was initially banned — authorities relented and began providing food from outside at government expense. Many of them are also being provided diabetic medicines.

“They are NRIs, who are probably entering a government hospital or a public health facility for the first time. It's a tough time for them and they need to be counselled. Some of them are adamant and demand more facilities. They demand a TV in each room, but that's not possible,” an official said. All of them have access to their mobile phones and other gadgets. 


