Don’t refuse to admit suspected coronavirus patients: Rajasthan govt to private hospitals
2020-03-13
JAIPUR: Reminding ethics of ‘medical profession’, the health department has pulled up private hospitals for refusing admission of a suspected coronavirus (Covid-19) person who later tested positive for the disease on March 9 at government-run Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital where all the three such patients are undergoing treatment.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Seeking help of private hospitals, the department had issued two communications on March 3 and March 8 for their cooperation in containing Covid-19.


 

“Inspite of communications and a meeting of myself with leading private hospitals of Jaipur on March 3, it was brought to my notice that admission to a suspected corona patient was denied (who was later admitted to SMS Hospital) on night of March 8. This goes against the ethics of medical profession and humanity,” Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health department wrote to Dr M N Thareja, president of Indian Medical Association (IMA), Rajasthan branch.

However, it mentioned in the letter appealing them to ensure that all private hospitals in the state extend their full cooperation for treatment and management of suspected coronavirus cases.

The officials said that 85-year-old patient was tested positive for Covid-19. They have conducted screening of healthcare staff where the patient had gone on March 8 for treatment but he did not get admission. He reached SMS Hospital at around 3am on March 9 in critical condition.

Acting on it, health department has directed all private hospitals remain prepared by making availability of separate functional isolation ward and beds for the suspected and confirmed Covid-19 patients. Moreover, a separate OPD for influenza-like illness and upper respiratory infection patients.

Also, directions have been issued to private hospitals to make availability of doctors and paramedics for management of such patients in isolation ward.

For diagnostic test, the private hospitals have been directed to coordinate with SMS Hospital for sample collection of suspected cases, if need arises.

Also, the private hospitals have been told to generate awareness among patients coming to hospitals about Covid-19 by displaying material such as posters and LED.

