Coronavirus scare: Don’t panic, but take precautions, says Chennai Corporation
2020-03-12
CHENNAI: Appealing to commercial establishments such as malls, multiplexes, wedding halls and hotels among others to not panic in the wake of fears over spread of Covid-19 (novel coronavirus), Greater Chennai Corporation has issued an advisory of precautionary measures that the establishment owners should follow.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Deputy Commissioner (health) Dr V Alby John and city health officer Dr M Jagadeesan convened a meeting with representatives of commercial establishments where public gather in large numbers and issued an advisory. Explaining that the civic body’s zonal officials and public health department officials have been in touch with places of mass gathering for more than a month now, Alby John told the stakeholders, “There is absolutely no need to panic, but we have to be careful.”

 
 
The business owners, perturbed over the onslaught of information on social media and messaging platforms, badgered the corporation officials with questions ranging from whether the virus is a cold country epidemic to diet restrictions to dealing with those showing symptoms and whether thermal screening devices have to be set up.

The deputy commissioner and the health officer appealed to the establishment owners to not rely on sensational information on such online platforms and to seek clarity from the government and through reliable channels.

“The reason for panic and uncertainty is because it’s a new virus. What is important to keep in mind is that the virus can attack anyone and hence it is imperative that all precautionary measures such as washing hands and disinfecting floors and surfaces are adhered to,” Jagadeesan said.

He clarified that N-95 masks should be worn only by health workers and the civic body has not issued any advisory to the general public to wear masks. The civic body also appealed to hotels and lodges to notify it about any foreigner they allow to stay on their premises. Responding to queries on whether the virus spreads only in cold climate, Alby John said, “That is a popular opinion, but there are no concrete studies as yet backing up the theory.”

Officials also clarified that the spread of the virus is not related to meat consumption. 

Jagadeesan took the opportunity to inform the hotel owners to treat those showing symptoms of Covid-19 in a humane manner as the civic body has received complaints about differential treatment by commercial establishments. The corporation said it has notified the drug control department on overpricing of hand sanitisers and masks by pharmacies.


