‘Don’t use lockdown time in moratorium to declare NPAs’
2020-04-13
MUMBAI: To balance the rights of two borrowers defaulting since January 15, 2020 and ICICI Bank, during the Covid-19 crisis, the Bombay high court on Saturday said the period of moratorium during which there is a lockdown will not be used to compute the 90-day NPA declaration period.


HC said its order was not to be considered a precedent and is “not a backward extension of the moratorium to January 2020”. “It is predicated on, and only on, the current lockdown period which makes normal functioning impossible,” said Justice Gautam Patel, who passed the order through video conference, given the April 15 deadline of NPA tag to trigger.

If the lockdown is lifted before the moratorium deadline of May 31, then the protection available to two real estate development firms — Transcon Iconica and Transcon Skycity — will cease to exist and computing of remainder of the 90 days will start. 

The firms had taken loans from ICICI Bank and had defaulted on instalments due in January and February 2020. They will have to pay the January instalment within 15 days of the lockdown being lifted and the February instalment within a further period of three weeks. 

Their counsel Birendra Saraf had sought orders to restrain ICICI Bank from declaring their accounts and facilities as NPA. His plea was period of moratorium from March 1 to May 31 be excluded while computing 90 days provided by law before declaring a defaulter as an NPA.With covid-19 and lockdowns directed by government, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had provided a moratorium from March 1 to May 31. For any instalment due after March 1, the moratorium fully applies. The question before the HC was if there was a default that triggered the beginning of a countdown for the 90-days to NPA declaration, would the countdown timer stop on March 1, 2020 and resume only after lockdown or moratorium ends?

Saraf argued that the entire moratorium period must be excluded, else he moratorium itself would be meaningless. But ICICI Bank counsel Virag Tulzapurkar opposed this and said, “broad-based declaration…by a Court could have all manner of unintended consequences in respect of other borrowers...''

Tulzapurkar argued that the moratorium was not available to instalments which fell due prior to 1/3/20. 

Justice Patel in a 30-page order, said “the whole of the moratorium period is, evidently, excluded for all amounts that fall due during that moratorium period.’’ 


