Don't panic on novel coronavirus: Health minister C Vijaya Baskar
2020-02-03
CHENNAI: More than 700 passengers who arrived at different airports in the state from China and neighbouring countries, where novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection has been reported, have been quarantined in their homes, said Health minister C Vijaya Baskar on Sunday. 


"All of them are free of symptoms," said the minister while addressing a press conference at the King Institute, Guindy. All of them are being regularly monitored by doctors, he said.

The minister explained that passengers who travelled with the girl from Kerala who tested positive for the virus earlier this week are also under observation by medical professionals. "The passengers, who are from Tamil Nadu, were also checked for virus but are symptom-free. However, our officers have taken their contact details and are enquiring about their health over phone, every day."

About 5,543 passengers have been screened at the Chennai International Airport for the novel coronavirus. Two passengers from Ramanathapuram and Trichy are under observation in isolation wards. Ten are under observation at Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital, but none of them has shown any symptoms of the virus, said the minister.

For safety of doctors and staff, the state government has provided medical equipment. Apart from this, 12,385 N95 respiratory masks and 55,715 triple layer masks have been readied.

"There is no threat of the virus spreading in our state, hence I request the public to stay calm and not panic," he said. Vijaya Baskar urged everyone to not spread rumours or pass on unverified messages on social media. He also cautioned the public and insisted that they take precautions, like washing their hands regularly, especially diabetics and pregnant women.

"Coronavirus is communicable. But no person has tested positive in Tamil Nadu and we are well equipped," he said. "But at the same time, people must maintain caution, and not panic."

Five samples were tested at King Institute. Four of them were sent to the National Institute of Virology, Pune. King institute has reagents and it takes 8-12 hours for the testing process. Results of these samples are expected in 48 hours, he said.

"If passengers are from Wuhan, we are drawing their samples, even if they are not showing symptoms," Vijaya Baskar said. 


