Don’t follow Italy, have separate Covid hospitals: Docs
2020-04-27
Nagpur: After the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) issued directives to around 13 private hospitals in city to be ready for Covid-19 treatment, the medical fraternity in Nagpur has warned that the decision could be disastrous for public health. Hospital managements under Vidarbha Hospitals Association (VHA) have already opposed the plan. On Sunday, TOI spoke to experts of viral diseases and public health issues. According to them, involving more hospitals in Covid-19 treatment is like creating more hotspots and putting the entire city at risk. “It’s like following the Italy model of Covid-19 treatment,” said Dr Milind Bhrushundi, a prominent name for HIV treatment in the city. “While China preferred to build a separate hospital with thousands of beds exclusively to treat Covid-19 patients, Italy allowed treatment in all available hospitals. What happened in Italy is very well known to us,” he said.An expert of community medicine, Dr Sanjay Deshpande said that risk of infection is more if Covid-19 patients are shifted to 13 hospitals instead of the existing two. “Many of the hospitals are in residential areas. They are situated in small buildings, and don’t even have facilities needed for Covid-19 hospitals,” he said. It is worth noting that not a single private hospital in the city meets the World Health Organization’s (WHO) criteria of isolation hospital. Most hospitals have centralized air conditioning, which is not allowed in Covid-19 treatment. They don’t have separate entry and exit gates. It is necessary to keep a 5-foot distance between two beds. If this rule is followed, the bed capacity of most hospitals will reduce to less than half. “This decision will affect the entire city in terms of Covid spread. How will the NMC manage so many different hospitals at different places? Citizens will suffer as there will be no good hospital left for any other emergency,” said Dr Anand Sancheti, former president of the Indian association of cardiothoracic surgeons.Doctors suggested that the government should take over one or two big hospitals exclusively for Covid-19 treatment. “It’s not possible for us to build a hospital in ten days like China, but we can assemble a Covid-19 treatment facility at establishments like Mankapur indoor stadium. Private hospitals can be ordered to provide ventilators, machines, staff and doctors there,” said physician Dr Zaid Sheikh. Infamous Italy modelItaly did not set up separate hospitals for Covid-19 Patients were treated in hospitals with non-Covid patients in nearby wardsDue to this, infection spread rapidly and many deaths were reported Medical professionals got infected with coronavirus, hundreds of them diedChina, Russia created separate singular and major facilities for Covid-19Only Covid-19 patients were treated in isolation PPE kits, sanitizers, mask-related rules were stricter 