Don’t see how rate cut would cure you of virus: Blackstone chief
2020-03-05
MUMBAI: Blackstone co-founder & chairman Stephen Schwarzman says that investors need to bracket the economic risks from coronavirus and brace for disruption for a year, accepting that there will be a decline in value of investments. But, he added, investors can bear in mind that the current situation also presents opportunities for people with capital.


Blackstone is the world’s largest alternative asset manager — a term used to describe firms which invest in real estate and private shares as against conventional assets. In India, it has invested close to $16 billion in private equity, real estate and stressed assets with the last $6 billion coming in the previous 12 months. The firm has survived several crashes despite being in a high-risk business.

 
 

Responding to the latest decision of the US Federal Reserve, Schwarzman, 73, said, “I should not be this provocative, but I don’t understand how interest rate cuts basically cure you of the coronavirus.”

Schwarzman said that while the Indian economy has slowed down, inflation is higher and there is less confidence in the business establishment. Blackstone views this as things that can be improved. “We have enormous flexibility in moving money to India because we think, for long term, India is very positive.”

Schwarzman, who has written about his learnings in setting up Blackstone in his book ‘What it takes — Lessons in the pursuit of excellence’, has highlighted how the ability to identify business cycles has enabled the firm to avoid losing money. For instance, in 2006, a comment by head of India real estate business Tuhin Parekh, that land prices have gone up 10 times, compelled Schwarzman to call off a Spanish housing deal ahead of the global crisis.

Later, at a fireside chat with Infosys chairman Nandan Nilekani at the Indian Institute of Technology-Bombay, Schwarzman said that the Indian banking system is facing issues because of which credit is constrained.

“You need to have very healthy financial institutions because economic growth is really co-related with credit extension. And if your financial institutions aren’t in great shape, then they can’t lend as much, people can’t borrow as much, they can’t spend money they don’t have and economies just slow down,” he said.

To deal with defaults, he said banks need to “charge off those losses” and attract capital to allow the institutions to make new loans that are better so the institution makes more money and things work.

To a question from Smita Parekh, wife of HDFC chairman Deepak Parekh, about what keeps him awake at night, Schwarzman said geopolitical risks and internal politics that are “uncontrollable” are matters that make him uncomfortable.

