Don’t refrain from seeking medical counsel: Hyderabad doctors to non-Covid patients
2020-05-04
HYDERABAD: The fear of contracting coronavirus is having serious repercussions as non-Covid-19 patients are delaying going to hospitals. As a result, a surge in patients being brought dead or in completely paralysed state has been on the rise. Advising people not to refrain from seeking help for fear of the virus, experts said that severe infections, strokes and cardiac problems should not be avoided at any cost.


“Earlier we saw one or two cases in three to four months but in the last 14 days alone, we have at least six patients who were brought dead to us. The fear of contracting the virus is so huge that people are delaying seeking emergency help and coming at the last moment. For instance, few days, a young male patient landed in an unconscious state because he thought that tingling in the hand during the ongoing pandemic can be avoided and came after a delay of two days from the onset of symptoms. By the time he was brought to the hospital, he had suffered complete paralysis,” said Dr Satheesh Kumar Kailasam, head of emergency medicine at Medicover Hospitals.

In yet another case, severe chest pain was ignored thinking it could be gastric pain. “In normal circumstances, a severe chest pain is not avoided but now with the ongoing pandemic people are trying to delay seeking help, hoping that the problem will subside. The patient ultimately suffered a massive cardiac arrest in the ambulance itself. Also we are seeing many cases of sepsis reaching too late,” said a resident doctor at the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS).

An untreated severe infection results in acute sepsis or septic shock in which the condition deteriorates rapidly and it becomes difficult to save the patient. “The chance of death in such emergencies is (around) 35 to 40 per cent, much higher than that of deaths due to Covid-19. In case of an emergency, it is important to seek medical attention and it should not be avoided at any cost. The fear of coronavirus should not stop patients from seeking help,” added Dr Kailasam.


