Don't suspend work over Covid-19, Telangana govt tells IT firms
2020-03-05
HYDERABAD: The Telangana government on Wednesday told IT companies in Hyderabad not to suspend operations over Covid19 fears. Officials also told companies to take prior permission before taking any such decision. The directive comes on a day when some IT companies housed in Raheja Mindspace IT Park in HiTec City suspended operations.


The city’s IT sector employs over 4.5 lakh people. So far, only one techie has been confirmed Covid-19 positive. Another techie who works in Raheja Mindspace is suspected to be positive. Asking the managers to stay calm, state IT & industries principal secretary Jayesh Ranjan announced that Cyberabad police commissioner V C Sajjanar would be the nodal officer for industry players to contact before taking any step.

 
 

The announcement was made at a press meet attended by Ranjan, Sajjanar, director of public health G Srinivas Rao and representatives of IT companies and Raheja Mindspace IT Park. On Wednesday morning, some companies working out of Building 20 at Raheja Mindspace suspended operations and directed employees to work from home after a female employee of one of the companies was suspected to have contracted the virus. The employee, had returned from Italy.

“Since some of those at the workplace were exposed to her, sanitation work was taken up by Raheja Mindspace authorities on Wednesday. From Thursday, companies can work without issues,’’ Ranjan said.

Raheja Mindspace CEO G Shravan said nine companies work out of Building 20. “Except four companies, the rest conducted operations on Wednesday without any hassle. The building houses 7,500 employees working in different companies,” he said. Sajjanar said authorities are keeping an eye on the rumours floating on social media and would crackdown on rumour mongers.

While some companies with offices in the vicinity of Building No. 20 asked employees to work from home and also cautioned them to avoid use of elevators, for many other companies it was business as usual.

In fact, many IT employees trooping into work complained about shortage of masks, some others said they have been provided masks and hand sanitisers at their offices. The day also saw companies circulating mails to keep employees informed about the Do’s and Don’ts and to prevent any panic.

In a communication to employees, US-based Pegasystems, which also has a facility in Mindspace, said that due to the changing nature of the situation and differing levels of maturity of the virus in each region, it’s very difficult to issue blanket statements on policy on particular issues and encouraged its offices to act locally and/or regionally based on specific circumstances.

IT industry representatives said they have suggested to companies to temporarily discontinue the use of biometric attendance systems and instead encourage use of ID cards. Many IT companies, especially MNCs, said they have already been following global advisories on Covid-19 and have been encouraging people to work from home in case they are unwell.

“We are providing real-time guidance to employees in all affected regions. We will continue to monitor the situation and take action as necessary to help protect employees,” said a Microsoft spokesperson.

A TCS spokesperson said the company is working closely with all relevant local, regional and global, health institutions and are implementing the latest recommendations.

Even IT body Hysea said it is working with Telangana government and has issued an advisory to member companies on how to handle cases of employees returning from abroad. “This is a broad advisory... It is up to individual companies to further take specific steps... in line with their policy and specific situation on the ground,” said a Hysea spokesperson.

