Don’t cut salary for lockdown days: Yogi Adityanath
2020-04-19
LUCKNOW: Chief minister Yogi Adityanath has said that outsourced labourers working in schools, hospitals and other institutes should be paid salaries even if they have not been able to report to work in lockdown.


In an appeal to private units and business establishments, the CM on Saturday said they should show “exemplary compassion” to their employees in this time and ensure they are paid salary for days when they were unable to come for work, .

Additional chief secretary (home) Awanish Awasthi said that while reviewing the distribution of financial assistance of Rs 1,000 to daily wagers, labourers etc, the CM said that a drive should be carried out to identify people left out of the scheme and to pay them financial assistance of Rs 1,000 each.

“We started the distribution of financial assistance soon after the lockdown started. So far, the government has already given Rs 236.98 crore to 23.7 lakh persons through direct bank transfer,” Awasthi said.

Other than the financial assistance, the government had also started clearing MNREGA dues of workers and distributing pensions. On March 30, the government transferred Rs 611 crore in the accounts of 27.15 lakh. It also transferred two months’ pension totalling Rs 871.48 crore, paid in advance, into the accounts of 86.71 lakh beneficiaries of old age, destitute women, Divyangjan and lepers’ pension schemes on April 3.

As few districts reported that Covid-19 patients there had tested negative, making the district coronavirus-free, the CM said all precautions should remain in place in these districts. “The lockdown in these districts should still continue and no relaxation should be given at this point,” Awasthi said.

The CM also said that nodal officers appointed to coordinate between the government and people from other states in UP and people from UP in other states, should remain in touch with foreign students and keep their embassies informed about their wellbeing.

As wheat purchase has started, the CM said mandis and purchase centres located in hotspots should be shifted out immediately in consultation with DMs, SPs, and mandi officials. 

