Don’t leave the dead, test them for Covid-19: Telangana HC to government
2020-05-27
HYDERABAD: The Telangana high court on Tuesday directed the state to test all those who die in government hospitals for Covid-19 before releasing the bodies. The state must ascertain whether the virus affected them or not, a bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice B Vijaysen Reddy said and added that not conducting enough tests was like inviting a Trojan horse in your midst.


The judges gave the order while hearing a batch of PILs accusing the state of conducting very few tests. They sought to know from the state, and particularly from Suryapet and Nirmal district collectors, the number of tests they had conducted. They also wanted to know the reasons and basis for changing the zones of the two districts from red to orange to green.

The bench pointed out that Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Maharashtra and AP were testing many more of their citizens and asked it to increase the number of tests to arrest the spread of the virus. “Financial constraints cannot be cited as a reason when it comes to saving lives of people from a pandemic,” said the Chief Justice. “Increase the number of tests and give us the details, including the ones you conducted on migrants and asymptomatic.”

The advocate general has been asked to table a report by June 4.

Terming the number of tests by Telangana as very low, the bench set aside a circular issued on April 20, 2020, that said that there was no need for testing the dead. 

“Unless you ascertain facts, how do you deal with the situation?” the bench asked. “If the body tests positive, it carries a danger of spreading the virus to all those who come close to it including kin and those who carry it for cremation.”

Chikkudu Prabhakar, the counsel for professor P L Visweswara Rao, one of the petitioners, wanted the state to follow World Health Organisation norms. Advocate general B S Prasad said that the state had been following ICMR norms and those of the Centre’s health and family welfare departments.

“Even a mighty state such as the US fell prey to the coronavirus and has lost close to one lakh of its people despite possessing the best medical infrastructure,” the bench said. “We cannot afford to sit back and relax. We have to strengthen our infrastructure. Doing less number of tests in a densely populated country is like inviting a Trojan Horse,” the bench said and sought details of migrant workers coming to the state.

