Coronavirus impact in Delhi: Virus pours cold water on Holi celebrations
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: While efforts are on to check and screen at least 100 people who came in contact with the Delhi man who tested positive for coronavirus, the growing scare over the virus has taken some colour off Holi celebrations this year. Families across the capital are cutting down on celebrations and cancelling Holi Milan events and pool parties in particular.


“I go to Holi parties every year, but am going to give it a miss this time. Just for a day of celebration, I am not going to invite trouble for me and my family,” said a 21-year-old man.

Speaking to TOI, he and several others said that they have scrapped their grand Holi plans this year.

Karol Bagh resident, Kavita Raj, organises Holi party at her house every year. But this time, she has booked her tickets to Goa so that she can get away from the city and go to a place, which is not frequented by tourists.

“Two of my kids are pretty fond of playing Holi and it would have been tough to explain the situation to them. Travelling to Goa was the only option left,” she said.

For Raman, a 28-year-old entrepreneur, his newborn girl is the reason he will stay away from the celebrations this year. “I have heard that children are very prone to catching the flu. God forbid if I catch the virus and it spreads to her. I can’t even partially expose her to the horror,” she said. “We will just apply tilak to each other at home.”

A few others fret that buying Chinese items may attract virus. Amid the growing fear of coronavirus, Delhiites have already shunned the Chinese products. Besides toys and crackers, colours and water guns from China are hugely popular in Indian markets. “We want to celebrate the festival at home and are avoiding bigger gatherings, but will be using the old pichkaaris. The new ones are made in China from where the virus is coming from,” said Kanha Pratab, a resident of Gol Market. 

Ravi Prasad, an event organiser, said: “We are informing customers that there will be no rain dance and pool parties. We don’t want to risk anyone’s life.” 

