Dehradun hospital staffers donate blood to avoid scarcity during lockdown
2020-03-31
DEHRADUN: In a noble gesture, the paramedical staff of Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH) donated blood after the administration of the facility urged people to come forward for blood donation in view of the scarcity of blood at the blood bank due to the ongoing lockdown. Interestingly, the staff members who donated blood are contractual workers of the hospital and their service tenure will end on Tuesday (March 31).


Govind Prasad, one of the contractual workers at GDMCH told TOI that the hospital administration has suspended the services of 57 contractual workers. “Among the 57 people, services of 31 staffers ended in February while the last working date for others is March 31. We have been told that we won’t be getting any pay after this but we feel it’s our moral duty to help the hospital in the time of crisis. We will continue working, even without pay, until the present pandemic situation passes,” he added.

Dr Ashutosh Sayana, principal GDMCH, informed that the blood bank of Doon Hospital is facing a shortage of blood as both voluntary donations and blood donation camps have stopped taking place since Holi. Thereby, the medical college administration has assured to arrange passes for people who would be interested in donating blood.

“The major source of blood donation for GDMCH is the camps that are organised by either the hospital itself or private players/NGOs. The hospital needs blood for Thalassemia patients, cesarean deliveries and emergency cases,” said Dr Sayana while adding that people who are interested in donating blood can call on the helpline numbers of the hospital and the administration will get their passes made after which they will not be stopped by the police.

Meanwhile, the authorities of Indian Medical Association (IMA) held a meeting with state chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat on Monday. During the meeting, IMA officials assured the CM that private nursing homes and hospitals will not shut their OPDs so that people get easy access to healthcare services.

On the day, the state government also announced to take over 100 beds of state’s two biggest private medical colleges — Shri Guru Ram Rai Institute of Medical & Health Sciences and Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences.

Also, the authorities of All India Institute of Medical Sciences in Rishikesh started Covid-19 tests from Monday. The institute tested 20 samples on Monday and all of them were found negative.


