Doon Hospital to start Covid-19 tests from today; Nainital resident tests positive
2020-04-25
DEHRADUN: With one more Covid-19 positive case reported from Nainital on Friday, the number of coronavirus patients in Uttarakhand has now reached 48. The patient, who has been tested positive on Friday, was found negative in his previous Covid-19 test on April 9. 

Additional Secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant told TOI that the 40-year-old man was kept in institutional quarantine since April 8 and his swab sample sent for Covid-19 test was found negative on April 9. “The man’s sample was sent for test again after he completed 14 days under observation in the quarantine facility. His reports came positive on April 25, 17 days after he was tested negative. He had come in contact of a Covid-19 positive patient earlier this month,” the official said.

On Friday, another Covid-19 patient, who was undergoing treatment at Dr Susheela Tiwari Medical College in Haldwani, was discharged after he recovered fully from the disease. With this, as many as 25 patients out of the total 48 Covid-19 patients have recovered in the last 40 days in Uttarakhand. Also, the state has done 4,767 Covid-19 tests so far.

Meanwhile, the authorities of Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH) announced that they will start coronavirus testing from Saturday. This comes almost a month after getting the nod for the same by the government. Earlier, the samples of patients from Dehradun were being sent to Government Medical College in Haldwani and to AIIMS Rishikesh. In Dehradun, which has reported the maximum coronavirus positive patients in the state so far, GDMCH has been earmarked as a dedicated Covid-19 facility. 

Dr Ashutosh Sayana, principal, GDMCH, told TOI that the staff and all required arrangements for Covid-19 tests are in place and the medical college is now geared to start tests. 

“Till now, samples of the cases from Dehradun were being sent to AIIMS Rishikesh or Haldwani Medical College but once we start doing the tests, the reports of cases in the city will arrive in just eight hours,” he added.

