Doon residents switch to waste composting at home during lockdown
2020-04-22
Dehradun: In a bid to reduce their household waste generation and keep themselves engaged during thelockdown, many residents are taking to environment friendly practice of garbage composting at their homes. Several are also putting out their videos on social media to motivate others to try waste composting at home. Some residents have even joined campaigns run by social organisations which are sharing tutorials with people explaining simple tips for waste composting.

Ashish Garg, a resident of Kewal Vihar, is one such enthusiast. “By reducing the waste that we send out from our households every day, we do our bit to save the environment and protect the sanitation workers from infections. By adopting the practice of composting at home, we can reduce waste generation by up to 90%,” he said.

To motivate people towards home composting during the lockdown, an environment-based social organisation called “Do No Trash” has launched an online campaign called — #LockdownChallenge. Pushpa Agarwal, a resident, who joined the campaign, told TOI, “The drive will play a significant role in reducing pressure on our environment and on our sanitation workers.” She added that she has been practicing waste composting for many years.

Soumya Prasad, founder of “Do No Trash”, told TOI, “The “#LockdownChallenge” drive has reached over 12,000 people so far. The idea behind the campaign was to promote waste composting among people as most of us are locked inside our homes. Composting of bio-degradable waste at home can help reduce our household garbage considerably. It does not matter if a person does it on a balcony or in a garden, composting can be done anywhere.”

City-based NGO Waste Warriors has also launched an awareness campaign across multiple social media platforms encouraging people to adopt waste composting. Naveen Sadana, outreach manager at Waste Warriors, told TOI, “We have been training a number of city residents on methods of waste composting at home. The online campaign has helped us reach out to a large number of people whom we have been motivating to take up this practice in their homes.”


