Door-to-door survey to identify likely Coronavirus infected patients in Pune
2020-03-17
PUNE: The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) on Monday started door to door survey to identify suspected Coronavirus patients. 125 teams have been constituted for the survey which will first focus on the areas like Sinhagad road and Mangaldas Road from where Covid-19 cases have surfaced. The teams will also check the travel history of the citizens during the survey. 

The civic officials said that the PMC will urge citizens not to venture out of their houses unnecessarily, so that the spread of virus can be contained. The members of the team will also create awareness about the benefits of 14 day home quarantine. 

“For first 15 days, we will concentrate on the areas where the positive patients were found. All the houses in 3 km radius from from the patients’ residece will be checked on priority. Other areas will be added in due course of time,” said Vaishali Jadhav, senior official of PMC’s health department while speaking to TOI.

Jadhav, who is coordinating the survey, said that the survey will mainly focus on reaching out to the first contacts of the patients but even the secondary contacts will be traced. 

“If any suspected patient is found during the survey, we will tell them to visit the doctors. If the symptoms are very strong and may cause concern to the neighbours, we will urge the residents to visit Naidu hospital,” said an official of PMC.

According to civic officials each team will consist of 30 members. They include health inspector, health officer divisional health officer and other staff along with support staff of the health department. The officials working in the word offices concerned will also be a part of the team which will conduct a survey. The civic administration has planned to meet chairmen, general secretaries and and other office bearers of housing societies to make sure that the drive is conducted successfully. Civic administration has appealed to the citizens to corporate and provide necessary information to the teams. 

Citizens are expected to share details about their current health conditions and symptoms like cough, sneezing, fever fatigue, shortness of breath and any other health related issues which they have recently faced. Information about their foreign travel should also be shared with the teams, said the officials.

“The survey is part of a containment plan to avoid outbreak of virus in the city,” said additional commissioner Rubal Agrawal.


