Coronavirus scare in Pune: Door-to-door survey Cantonment limits
2020-03-16
PUNE: The PCB and the Local Military Authority (LMA) will start a two-day door-to-door survey from Monday in the Cantonment’s bungalow area to identify people who show symptoms of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection. 


There are around 240 bungalows (old grant bungalows) in the area. The properties are occupied by senior Army officers and civilian families with a history of frequent domestic and foreign travel. 

“We are taking all the possible measures to prevent the virus in our limit. The drive is aimed at identifying people suffering from cough, fever, among other symptoms and screen them at the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Cantonment General Hospital. If required, we will also take their samples to test,” Amit Kumar, the chief executive officer of Pune Cantonment Board (PCB), said. 

A decision in this regard was taken at a meeting chaired by Sub Area Commander Major General Navneet Kumar of the Dakshin Maharashtra and Goa Sub Area (DMGSA) on Saturday evening.

According to the Cantonment authorities, over 1,000 people are estimated to be residing in these properties. A team of officials from the station cell and health officials from the Cantonment will be involved in the drive. “Our staffers will visit each house and screen those who had recently travelled abroad and to other cities in the country. We will maintain their records and will be in contact with them for the next few days. If any individual faces any health issue, s/he will be immediately tested at our ward. If required, the person will be sent to Naidu hospital,” VD Gaikwad, resident medical officer of PCB, said. 

“Our members will also keep records of the surrounding people who reside in the vicinity of unwell or suspected persons. This is for our reference so we can control the situation if we find someone who tests positive for the virus in the future,” he added. 

The Cantonment authorities have been focusing on creating awareness among residents through posters and pamphlets for the last few days. “Our officials are working in tandem with the Army as well as district administration to take the necessary measures to tackle the situation. We will soon conduct special awareness drives and medical check-ups in each ward. We will chalk out a comprehensive plan in this regard by taking help of the elected members,” Kumar said. 

The Cantonment authorities have urged people to come forward if they have symptoms such as cough, fever, among others. “These patients will be screened at our hospital on priority and will be provided necessary medical care. The people who frequently travel to different places, even within the state and country, should visit the Cantonment hospital,” Kumar said. 

The Army authorities too have taken counter measures and told officers, personnel and their family members to avoid gatherings. “They have been sensitized about the virus in the last few days. Activities such as weekly movie, social gatherings at clubs and mess, among others have been cancelled temporarily at all military stations. People have responded positively to our calls,” a senior Army officer from the Southern Command said. 


