Door-to-door survey helps KMC check virus spread
2020-04-13
KOLHAPUR: The door-to-door survey initiated to find the people infected with coronavirus or atleast those showing symptoms associated with the infection even before the lockdwon came into effect has helped the civic administration to keep a check on the spread of the virus. 


The door-to-door survey crossed the half-way mark on Sunday as 77,000 of the 1,40,000 families in the city have been surveyed so far. Through the survey, the Kolhapur Municipal Corporation (KMC) has identified 230 people who were required to be put in institutional quarantine. Over 300 people have been strictly advised home-quarantine. 

Authorities in the civic administration said that the door-to-door survey was initiated much before the first confirmed Covid-19 case— that of a person who travelled from Pune—was reported. Currently, the survey is being conducted in the slums where people are less organised and chances of community transmission—the third stage of coronavirus considered to be uncontrollable—are higher. 

Municipal commissioner Mallinath Kalshetti said, “We have adopted an integrated approach to tackle the virus spread. The first round of disinfecting the public places is complete. The survey helped us identify the suspects. It also helped us isolate the people who travelled from the high-risk countries or cities. The early start gave us an edge to curb the spread of the infection. After the quarantine period ends, we check the health status of the suspects and then let them go home.”

Kalshetti has been visiting the slum areas and speaking to the locals there. Many of the people residing in the slums are from outside the state. Kalshetti requested them to follow lockdown and social distancing rules.

As of now, three people from the city have tested positive for the contagion.While two people have a travel history, the third patient is a local who got infected from the first confirmed case. The immediate steps to seal the localities and the door-to-door survey has helped curb the transmission. 

A team of doctors and nursing staff from each of the 11 urban health centres visit the residences in their jurisdiction. The teams seek details of the people who have had a travel history or those who are showing symptoms associated with the infection. 

A doctor from one of the 11 teams said, “People tend to hide details of their travel history. We seek information from the locals. Many do not want to be in institutional quarantine, which has to be compulsorily observed for 14 days. We assure that they will not face any inconvenience. We have asked all the people with travel history to get admitted in institutional quarantine.”

Officials said that nowadays, people were more vigilant and immediately reported about any person having a travel history. They force such people to get screened and get the home-quarantine mark stamped on their hands.


