Doors unlocked for business outside containment zones in Gujarat
2020-05-18
GANDHINAGAR/ AHMEDABAD: After 57 days of idling, Gujarat’s economic engine will finally hum from Tuesday. A couple of hours after the Union home ministry issued guidelines for Lockdown 4.0, the Government of Gujarat announced a slew of relaxations outside containment zones. These include reopening of industries, private offices and shops, the movement of autorickshaws, two-wheelers, state transport and city buses.


“The Gujarat government will henceforth decide relaxations to be given for lockdown based on containment zones and non-containment zones,” said Gujarat chief minister Vijay Rupani. “A final list of containment zones will be declared on Monday after consultation with district collectors, municipal commissioners, and district development officers. No relaxation except for supply of essentials such as groceries, milk and medicines, and healthcare services will be provided in containment zones.”

 

Rupani said that the curfew from 7pm to 7am imposed during the lockdown will continue, except for movement for essential work.

In Ahmedabad, Jamalpur, Kalupur, Dariapur, Danilimda, Shahpur, Gulbai Tekra and parts of Maninagar, among others, have been designated as containment zones. “The modalities of how shops and establishments as well as private offices will operate outside the containment zones will be decided on Monday in accordance with the guidelines of Union ministry of health,” said Rupani.

The decision promises major relief to businesses in Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Surat, and Rajkot. Ahmedabad, which has emerged as a national Covid-19 hotspot with the highest number of corona cases and deaths, reported 276 new cases on Sunday. The city’s tally rose to 8,420 cases. The number of deaths has crossed 500. 

Restaurateurs across the state finally have a reason to rejoice as the state government has also allowed them to resume operations, albeit on a takeaway basis only.

The CM announced that wearing masks in public places is now mandatory and spitting in public is prohibited. Any violations of these norms will attract a fine of Rs 200 across the state, said Rupani.

“People have co-operated exceedingly well with the administration in the three phases of the lockdown,” Rupani said. “I expect similar co-operation in Lockdown 4.0 as well. We will have to live with the virus. The fight is long. If we strictly observe guidelines, we can continue with our activities and remain safe as well.” 

