DoT has a coronavirus advisory for mobile users in India
2020-03-11
NEW DELHI: The government appears to be going all out to create awareness about coronavirus. The Department of Telecom (DoT) is sending travel advisory to all mobile users in India asking them to avoid travelling to countries where high number coronavirus cases have been reported. ? "Indian citizens are advised to refrain from travel to China, Iran, Republic of Korea, Italy and Japan," reads the message. These five countries have reported maximum number of Covid-19 infections. 

Since late last week, telecom operators in the country have been warning users of precautions to take to avoid coronavirus. "Always protect your face with a handkerchief or tissue while coughing or sneezing. Regularly clean hands with soap. Avoid touching your face, eyes, or nose. If someone has cough, fever, or breathlessness maintain one metre distance. If needed, visit your nearest health centre immediately," says the pre-recorded English message.

 
 
Meanwhile, the number of coronavirus cases in India crossed 60 on Wednesday (March 11) as eight more tested positive in Kerala and five in Maharashtra, four in Karnataka and one in J&K. However, there have been no casualty in India so far. Among the 60-plus people found positive for Covid-19 in India, 16 are Italian nationals who were touring Rajasthan. 

The Indians nationals, who were airlifted from Iran and reached the country on Tuesday morning, have been quarantined at Hindon airbase in Ghaziabad and will be kept in isolation for the next 14 days. 

The global virus toll has crossed 4,000. The outbreak has now spread to over 100 countries with more that 110,000 cases of infections. 

The coronavirus outbreak could cost the global economy up to $2 trillion this year, the UN's trade and development agency said, warning that shock from the epidemic will cause a recession in some countries and depress global annual growth to below 2.5 per cent.

Technology companies too have announced restrictions to counter spread of Covid-19. Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon have given employees the option of working from home instead of going to the office. Apple too reportedly has told employees at most of its offices around the world that they can work from home this week. 

Google recently cancelled its annual developers conference, I/O, amid virus concerns. It joined a growing list of global events that have been cancelled since the outbreak of coronavirus. Facebook too recently cancelled its F8 developers conference, the biggest annual event for the social media giant, due to virus worries.

