Coronavirus scare: Markets slump as Delhi misses Holi cheer
2020-03-10
NEW DELHI: The Holi ebullience is certainly missing this year. Instead of the laughter and levity associated with the festival, there is a sense of seriousness around, in no small measure due to the growing reach of the novel coronavirus. Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced he would forego the celebrations, as did chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, who added sensitivity to the plight of riot victims to the sweep of Covid-19. So there aren’t going to be too many Holi milan gatherings in the city this year. Consequently, business related to the festival of colours is reported to be down at least by half.


With no reason for cheer, the Defence Colony Market Association has cancelled all celebrations. Rajinder Malik, president of the Association, said, “Our businesses were already hit by the sealing and economic slowdown. Now this coronavirus fear, due to which people are not coming to the markets. When there is no revenue generation, what festival cheer are we talking about?” 

In the Walled City, Sanjay Bhargava of the Chandni Chowk Sarv Vyapar Mandal fully concurred: “The massive slump in business at festival time is the combined effect of the riots and the coronavirus.”

Some markets are trying to attract customers with special measures, but to little avail. The traders’ association at Sarojini Nagar market has been offering free hand sanitisers and face masks to customers, even given out 2,500 masks till date. But as Ashok Randhawa of the association revealed, business is still down more than 50%. “We faced the first slump when the riots broke out in northeast Delhi, but the coronavirus scare has worsened the situation,” he said.

It is no better in the posher markets of south Delhi. The Greater Kailash M Block market association estimated that around 75% of the Holi retail business has been affected by Covid-19. Rajender Sharda, president of the body, said their Holi milan programme too stood cancelled. “This gathering is a tradition for the market, but this year we decided not to organise a meeting for fear of infection,” he explained. “Besides, business is not doing well with the entire chain from wholesale to retail being impacted.” 

With Holi enthusiasm on the ebb, Sanjeev Jain sits waiting for customers. “My shop is empty for you to see,” he said glumly. “We ordered our goods from China before December, but it seems it will be difficult to clear our stocks this season.” Yogesh Singhal, member of the Bullion and Jewellers Association in Chandni Chowk, said gold and silver normally sold less at this time due to the inauspicious Holashtak period. But even the nominal transactions were affected by the viral scare. 

In northeast Delhi, which is limping back to normalcy amid an undertone of unease, not many people are ready for the usual bonhomie between communities. In a lane in Maujpur, women observed the Holika puja on Monday and one of them, identifying herself as Monica, said, “It will be a quiet affair this year. For shagun, we will apply some gulal, but no going all out. There’s fear even now and police are around. We have told our children not to go far from home. Also, since the exams were postponed due to the violence, the children need to study.”

In such a scenario, the shopkeepers don’t have much to do. Ramesh Kumar Gaur, president of the market association of Maujpur and Ghonda, said, “Usually we put the Holi powders, balloons and pichkari on display a week before the festival, but this year we could start selling them only by March 4. Business has been poor, and only if we sell the products at half their price will we perhaps be able to get rid of the stock.”

Gaur quantified the slide in business by disclosing that he had sold around Rs 50,000 worth of Holi wares this season against Rs 2-3 lakh in earlier years. “There is no communal harmony this year and the coronavirus has added to the gloom,” he claimed. 

