Double whammy: Coronavirus threat, fear of job loss
2020-04-10
NEW DELHI: The toll-free helpline started by the central government to deal with psycho-social problems faced by people in the wake of Covid-19 crisis is getting close to 600 calls daily. People are calling to express their fear of contracting the viral infection and passing them over to families. They want to know how fatal the disease could be and what can they do to prevent it.

“Some people also call to express anxiety over possible loss of job or livelihood or domestic violence,” Dr B N Gangadhar, director of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore told TOI.

NIMHANS is the nodal agency for psycho-social support to persons affected by the Covid-19 crisis in the country.

“We tell everyone three things. First, 80% people affected by the disease develop mild symptoms and they don’t need hospitalisation. Secondly, unlike many other serious illnesses, Covid-19 doesn’t leave a scar meaning there is no residual effect on a person’s well-being. And thirdly, one can reduce the risk of infection by simple measures like maintaining hand hygiene and avoiding crowded places,” Dr Gangadhar said.

“The lockdown has changed people’s lifestyle drastically as their movements are restricted. Isolation, social distancing, uncertainty in jobs, constant fear of contracting the virus are causing panic and anxiety attacks among the people,” said Dr Alexander Kuruvilla, chief healthcare strategy officer of Practo which facilities tele-consultation.

He said queries related to mental health have grown by 50% in the last two weeks. “Most of the queries are coming from people in the age group of 21-30, followed by people aged 60 and above,” Dr Kuruvilla said.

The Practo official added that 74% of all mental health-related queries come from men and 26% from women. “Top queries discussed were loneliness, anxiety and stress management, and panic attacks,” he explained.

A leading cardiologist who recovered from Covid-19 recounted he felt he had no control over life. “I was worried whether I will be able to meet my near and dear ones and then a vicious cycle started inside my mind which was difficult to break. One has to be spiritually and emotionally strong to tide over the negativity,” the 40-year-old cardiologist said.

When the cardiologist was in hospital, he said, some people in his neighbourhood spread rumours about his wife testing positive too which was untrue, but caused them distress. A pandemic’s effect on mental health, even among those unaffected by it, could be bigger, doctors suggest. 

“Anxiety, depression and fear are some of the most common symptoms that require attention,” says Dr Nimesh Desai, director of the Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences.

“For the generation in existence, this is the first such experience of a global pandemic. But it’s important to take it well. Those who are able-bodied or able-minded have a responsibility to support the vulnerable ones, for example elderly, children, pregnant women and people with disability among others,” he adds. 


