MP: PPE-clad cops brave heat to ensure safety amid Covid-19 fight
2020-04-28
BHOPAL: Frontline corona warriors - the cops deployed in sweltering weather at containment areas across the city, are facing dual hardships, wearing the PPE kits for eight hours every day, to enforce the lockdown during the ongoing corona crisis.

The cops can’t even answer the nature’s call dressed in these PPE kits. Some of the cops, who removed their PPE kits partially while on duty, were allegedly punished by seniors for exposing themselves and others to the risk of Covid-19 infection. It is a double whammy for the cops; if they don’t wear the protective gear, they expose themselves to the risk. And if they do wear the PPE kits, it becomes unbearable for them to pass eight long hours, sweating profusely inside the plastic kit. 

Many senior officers are also of the view that it is impractical to wear the PPE kits in this hot weather. Not wanting to comment officially, they did, however, express their concern whether PPE kits are meant actually for wearing outdoor, especially in such hot weather condition. They maintained that PPE kits are meant to be worn indoors, in hospitals etc., where there are air-conditioners fitted, or for a very limited period of time.

A senior cop posted in the city said on the condition of anonymity, “The cops deployed on field duty in containment areas have been provided with the PPE kits for their protection, but they were not given proper training on how to wear, how to remove and dispose off these kits. Many cops can be seen patrolling in containment areas improperly wearing the kits or partially removed kits to get some relief in this weather. In the afternoon, cops literally suffocate in these kits.” The senior cop also said, “People can’t even stand for an hour under the scorching sun wearing the PPE kits, but the cops are expected to wear these for eight hours. An alternate solution should be sought to address this issue.”

Commandant Pankaj Kumawat, in-charge of monitoring the containment areas in the city, said that there are around 700 cops deployed in 160 containment areas, round the clock, in a shift of 8 hours each. Depending on the priority of the containment area, the number of PPE kit-clad cops could be between 1 and 3 in each shift. In some areas, more than 3 PPE kit-clad cops are deployed to monitor the situation.

He admitted that PPE kits are meant to be worn indoors, but added that the nature current duty requires that cops wear these kits while deployed in containment areas. He said, “ Cops are facing harsh time; to wear plastic like PPE kit in hot weather takes a toll on them, especially in the afternoon. The situation will get worse during the heat wave in coming months, but it is the need of the hour for their own safety. The cops are provided adequate time to rest along with drinking water at check points to keep them hydrated.”

Kumawat said that many cops remove their kits while on duty to get some relief from heat, but senior officers regularly motivate the field staff to wear the protective gear to safeguard themselves from the risk of Covid-19 infection. He also rubbished the reports that some of the cops were punished for removing their PPE kits.


