Down and out in the time of lockdown
2020-04-04
Chennai: The lockdown has been a double whammy for those who live in the city’s slums. Their daily routine militates against social distancing – they are forced to crowd around for everything from toilets to the water tanker that turns up every two days. And now they can’t go out to work either – most are dailywagers.

 In Annai Sathya Nagar, which houses close to 2,500 families, less than 10% homes have toilets. Most residents walk a km to a public toilet with eight stalls each for men and women. A local trust distributed one batch of sanitizers to residents; these are running dry. 

“When the water tanker arrives, there is absolute mayhem. Crowds of women swarm in, pushing and pulling each other. They have always squabbled for water, and it’s gotten worse since the lockdown, says Annakili, a social worker. 

She and other social workers complain that many slum dwellings inside narrow bylanes get left out when the government disinfects crowded neighbourhoods. Home remedies come handy — a brew of neem leaves and turmeric sprayed outside their doors. 

Rampant drug addiction and alcoholism that plague urban slums also lead to blatant violation of the lockdown. In Korukkupet, youth go on a rampage every evening. “They’ve managed to find bootleggers and assemble in large numbers to drink, putting themselves and others at risk,” says social worker M Loganayaki.

At a slum on sixth avenue, Ashok Nagar, groups of men stand at street corners and discuss an uncertain future. “I have exhausted my savings. So I have requested a money lender to loan me Rs 10,000. But he’s demanding huge interest,” says R Mayilvaganan, an autorickshaw driver. “No one is willing to lend us money, because they feel we can’t return it,” says D Venu, a watermelon vendor.

Most of the people work as vendors, drivers, sweepers, and domestic help. With no jobs and empty pockets, they are at the mercy of moneylenders.

“I have taken a loan of Rs 7,000 from a moneylender on the condition that I will pay him Rs 800 a month for a year – starting one month from now,” says V Selvakumar, a car mechanic from a slum in Kamaraj Nagar. “I have three kids, a wife, and an old mother. I have no other option,” he says. 

“A day before the shutdown, my brother, his two kids and wife came home. There are now nine people living here,” says Selvakumar. Most of these people used to earn about Rs 500 a day. Now they are lucky if they make Rs 100.

For many slum families, their turn for the free ration and dole of Rs 1,000 is still ten days away, and supplies are running out.


