DP Road ward with 1,000 coronavirus cases is Pune’s most intense hotspot
2020-05-26
PUNE: Dhole Patil Road ward office has emerged as the Covid-19 epicentre in Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) limits as of Saturday. 


The affected areas under this ward accounted for 1,019 positive cases overtaking Bhavani Peth ward office with 710 positive patients.

 

A report prepared by Pune Smart City Development Corporation Limited and the Pune Municipal Corporation showed the data analysis for Covid-19 outbreak in locations in the city and the number of cases.

Municipal commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad said, “The PMC has followed a strict containment plan in Bhawani Peth areas. Awareness about the virus and infection has been increased consistently. All of this has led to a reduction in the direct contact and positive cases. It has resulted in reducing the number of positive cases.” 

A civic official said a number of densely populated areas under the Dhole Patil Road ward office are reporting a majority of the cases now. The areas include Pune railway station, Tadiwala Road and the slum pockets here.

“The population density in these locations is very high, so maintaining physical distance is challenging. Most residents are using common toilets which could have triggered the virus spread,” a senior civic official said.

Many residents of these areas provide emergency and paramedical services, and also work in the big hospitals where Covid-19 positive patients have been admitted which could have contributed to the increase in the number of positive cases in these locations, he added.

Local corporators and civic officials said direct contact with positive patients and a bulk of Covid-19 cases in some slum pockets under this ward have led to a spike. 

Manjula Vasti, Gadge Maharaj Vasahat and Kawadewadi under Dhole Patil Road ward have an outbreak. Family members of positive patients, who visited their relatives in hospitals and came into contact with them, did not take adequate precautions or follow the Covid-19 norms. 

After hospital visits, they were walking around in their areas and meeting people without proper precautions which caused the spread, civic officials said. 

Positive cases in double digits have been reported in a single day. On one day the number was as high as 120 which led to the sealing of these pockets.

