Coronavirus: DRDO, DFRL contribute their ‘mite’ to fight against pandemic
2020-04-06
MYSURU: Among the many government agencies working tirelessly in the background to help the nation combat Covid-19 is the Defence Research Development Laboratory (DRDO), which in addition to manufacturing N-99 five-layered masks, has ordered a Mysuru-based private firm to manufacture 30,000 ventilators to help bridge the supply gap.
 

Ajay Kumar Singh, director of DRDO’s life sciences wing, confirmed that the agency had been working on the manufacture of body suits for healthcare personnel, sanitation workers, et al. “The suit we have designed in washable, and measures up to international standards. The suit was tested, and we found that it is suitable for use by healthcare personnel,” said Singh, confirming that DRDO had entrusted Skanray Technologies in Mysuru with the task of producing 30,000 ventilators. 

The ventilators will be designed and manufactured in accordance with DRDO’s technical blueprint, Singh told TOI. “We will assist Skanray in the procurement of some critical components,” said the senior DRDO official, adding that the agency had been making hand sanitisers for its staff and employees of other government offices. 

The N-99 masks are being manufactured at our centres in Kolkata and Mumbai, while work on personal protective equipment (PPE) kits is under way at Gwalior, Singh said. “Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL) in Mysuru is performing an essential duty at this time by preparing food for healthcare personnel. Since a common or community kitchen cannot function at this time, the food prepared at DFRL is ensuring that doctors, nurses and support staff at hospitals are well-nourished. In fact, they have been working on ready-to-eat packaged food over the past few days and once ready, the consignment will be dispatched to other places,” he added. 

Despite working with reduced human resources, DFRL is acquitting itself distinguishably in a time of national crisis. “Among the dishes being prepared are chapathi, pulao, tomato rice and beverages such as lemon juice. The demand for our products is very high but owing to the conditions of lockdown we are unable to work at full capacity. But DFRL staff is still ensuring the preparation of up to two tonnes of food, which can feed 2,000 people,” sources said. 

