DRDO pools in all partners to manufacture equipment to battle pandemic
2020-04-07
Hyderabad: With the country fighting the coronavirus pandemic, the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has now joined the battle. The ordnance manufacturer has developed equipment medical professionals and others would require in the field. The production is being carried out with the help of industry partners in various parts of the country. 

For instance, a personnel sanitisation enclosure (PSE) has been developed by the Vehicle Research Development Establishment (VRDE) in Maharashtra’s Ahmednagar. On entering the PSE chamber, an electrically operated pump creates a disinfectant mist of hypo-sodium chloride for disinfecting. According to the DRDO, the mist spray is calibrated for an operation of 25 seconds and stops automatically indicating completion of operation.

Meanwhile, a full face mask (FFM) has been developed at the Research Centre Imarat (RCI) in Hyderabad and the Terminal Ballistics Research Laboratory (TBRL) in Chandigarh. “Its lightweight construction makes it convenient for comfortable wear for long duration,” the DRDO said. 

As many as 1,000 face shields are being produced daily at the TBRL and provided to Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh. Similarly, 100 masks are produced by RCI and handed over to Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), Hyderabad. According to DRDO, a demand of 10,000 shields has been received from PGIMER and ESIC based on successful user trials.

The Centre for Fire Explosive & Environment Safety (CFEES) in Delhi has developed two configurations of sanitising equipment. The portable system can be mounted as a backpack and can be carried by operations personnel. Meanwhile, another trolley-mounted large area Sanitisation equipment can be used to disinfect an area of 3,000 square metre. Two of these systems have been provided to the Delhi Police for immediate use and will be made available to others.

DRDO has also developed a bio-suit to keep medical, paramedical and other personnel engaged in dealing with COVID-19 cases safe from the virus. The current production capacity is 7,000 suits per day. Another vendor, with experience in garment technology, is being brought in and efforts are on to ramp up the capacity to 15,000 suits per day.

As bio-suit production by DRDO industry partners and other industries was being hampered due to non-availability of seam sealing tapes, the ordnance body has prepared a special sealant as an alternative to seam sealing tape based on the sealant used in submarine applications. It has also developed a number of products and technologies for defence against Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) agents. 

The Defence Research and Development Establishment (DRDE) Gwalior, a laboratory of DRDO, has developed Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Permeable Suit Mk V with 53,000 suits already supplied to Army and National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) teams. For first responders attending to radiological emergencies, a reusable suit has been developed by Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied Sciences (INMAS) Delhi. Meanwhile, the Aerial Delivery Research and Development Establishment (ADRDE) Agra has developed various types of parachutes with fabrics similar to protective technical textiles.


