Coronavirus disaster in Delhi's Nizamuddin: Drones, masked men, 30,000 litres of disinfectant
2020-03-31
NEW DELHI: The densely-populated narrow lanes of Nizamuddin Basti have been witnessing a flurry of activity of a different kind.


Dozens of masked men on mini-tankers have been roaming around the Nizamuddin dargah sprinkling disinfectant to sanitise the area, while screening tents have been set up at the entrance of Alami Markaz, the headquarters of Tablighi Jamaat, which has emerged as a super-spreader of Covid-19 in the country.

The spokesperson of South Delhi Municipal Corporation said that a team of 34 sanitation workers and 20 domestic breeding checkers has been stationed in the basti keeping in view the “developing situation”. Till now, 30,000 litres of disinfectants have been used for spraying in the area.

A senior municipal health official said for the past two days a mass disinfection drive is being carried out in the entire area using 1% sodium hypochlorite solution. “We are using mini-tankers of the horticulture department for spraying disinfectants as the larger ones cannot enter even the main lanes. For narrower lanes, shoulder-mounted knapsack pumps are being used to sanitise the area,” the official added.



 
 

 


 


 

“A few houses are so tightly packed that workers are finding it difficult to move around even with their shoulder-mounted pumps. Currently, we are focusing on drains, mosques, pathways, community toilets, shops and lanes. Two rounds have been finished,” another civic official said, adding that contact tracing is going to be difficult as thousands of people from across the country visit the dargah.

Tablighi Jamaat, whose headquarters is at the centre of the contact tracing exercise, is an Islamic missionary movement. It focuses on urging people to return to practising the religion as it was during the lifetime of Prophet Muhammad in matters of ritual, dress and personal behaviour. Nizamuddin dargah is located a few hundred metres down the lane.

While no official of Tablighi Jamaat could be reached, Syed Kashif Ali Nizami, chief in-charge of the dargah, said, “The entire shrine has been disinfected twice. Though there is some panic in the community, appeals are being made from mosques and the dargah asking people not to come out of their houses. Police are doing their work and we will play our role. I have appealed to people not to sit together and offer prayers at home.”

Residents of the gated upscale Nizamuddin West colony are also a worried lot as a few positive cases have been found there. Yasmin Kidwai, the area councillor, has been receiving multiple requests of disinfection drives. “Disinfection need to be scaled up keeping in mind the congested area. Lack of clear communication is leading to panic and stress in the community,” she said.

While Delhi Police has deployed drones to enforce the lockdown, former mayor Farhad Suri said they should be used to increase the pace of disinfection. “Apart from the pumping sets of the corporation, I’m procuring four units so that more resources can be stationed in the area. There is an urgent need to calm the nerves and win the confidence of people.”


