Dropout rate likely to increase post lockdown
2020-06-02
Visakhapatnam: The prevailing pandemic and socio-economic crisis are likely to increase hardships for children in the state and district. Women and child welfare department and other child rights organisations point to various children-related issues, which need to be addressed as they apprehend that school dropout rate, child labour apart from child marriages and malnutrition are bound to increase in the coming days.

Speaking to TOI, Andhra Pradesh State Commission for Protection of Child Rights (SCPCR), chairperson, G Hymavathi said, “Due to the Covid-19 crisis, various socio-economic problems are surfacing. Incidence of child labour, child marriage, malnutrition and school dropout rate among children will rise. We are asking the women child welfare department, volunteers of education and panchayat raj departments to survey and check the enrolment of children as schools are set to reopen in August.”

President of Child Rights Protection Forum, G Seetaram, has written to the chief minister Jaganmohan Reddy and state chief secretary Neelam Sawhney about the enhanced risk of children from poor and lower-middle households dropping out of schools and being engaged in child labour both in the state and Visakhapatnam district. 

“If a comprehensive survey were to be done on the effect of the lockdown, there is a high probability that many children will drop out from schools and take up small-time work. Schools are closed due to the pandemic and many poor families would urge their children to earn as they are battling financial crunch. Also, although digital education is promoted, as per official data, only 23 % of students have access to internet. The department of education, in coordination with ward volunteers, village and town secretarial staff should take the necessary steps to bring the situation under control and see to it that all children attend their schools,” said Seetaram.

Speaking to TOI, district child protection officer (DCPO), A Satyanarayana, said, “We have discussed this issue with the labour and education departments and we will be working in convergence with various departments to check child labour and prevent school dropouts. For nutrition, government is providing ration at their homes.”


