Dubai-returned Bengaluru woman is Karnataka's 11th coronavirus case
2020-03-18
BENGALURU: A 67-year-old Bengaluru woman who returned from Dubai via Goa on March 9 tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases in Karnataka to 11.



After her return, the woman was placed under home quarantine. On March 16, she was taken to a government hospital when she showed symptoms of fever and cough. She has a history of chronic kidney disorder.

This comes a day after a UK-returned Bengaluru woman, 20, tested positive and she has since been admitted to an isolation hospital in Bengaluru. She was on home isolation until she developed symptoms. Her primary and secondary contacts are being traced.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

 City police commissioner Bhaskar Rao warned those resisting screening of stern legal action after a US-returned man went missing from a Bengaluru hospital and was traced to his residence in Anantapur in Andhra Pradesh on Tuesday. 

 The 59-year-old man, admitted to Sir CV Raman General Hospital, Indiranagar, Bengaluru, was reported missing barely hours after he was admitted early Tuesday. 


Passengers categorised under 3 risk groups

The man, suffering from hypertension, was brought to the hospital along with nine others since they had travelled through the affected countries.

Hospital officials alerted police around 11.30am. Police found he was from Anantapur and alerted

their counterparts in Andhra Pradesh. He was picked up when he landed at his Anantapur home. Police sent him back to Bengaluru.

City police commissioner Bhaskar Rao warned those resisting screening of stern legal action. “Anyone who resists screening or escapes from hospital during treatment will be punished,” Rao said, adding, “Deputy commissioner of police (admin) Nisha James will be the nodal officer for health-related complaints.”

Screening at the Bengaluru airport will focus on passengers arriving from China, South Korea, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and Spain by classifying them into three categories. “First category is of travellers with symptoms and they’ll be taken to designated hospitals for isolation. Second, high-risk asymptomatic passengers with history of blood pressure and diabetes or have undergone organ transplant and vulnerable to infection. They’ll be on a two-week quarantine. Third, low-risk people without symptoms or health issues would be home-quarantined for 14 days,” said Jawed Akhtar, additional chief secretary, health and family welfare department.

The government didn’t specify the public quarantine set-ups.

