Dungarpur centre provides a cheerful environment to Covid-19 patients
2020-05-28
UDAIPUR: Poha, upma or aloo paratha with sprouts for breakfast, lauki or palak cooked in dal, rice and chapatis with green salad, biscuits and melons/mangoes, tea, milk or even coffee—that’s the lunch menu for coronavirus patients in the Parda Chundawat Covid-19 Care Centre at Sabla block, around 60km from Dungarpur district headquarters.

Then there’s aerobics and yoga sessions for physical fitness and light music, bhajans, patriotic songs to keep the inmates’ mood lifted. 

The Dungarpur administration is making all efforts to ensure the well-being of the expatriates under their care. With a capacity of 112 people, the care centre is housed in the TAD hostel building, where 10 asymptomatic corona patients are residing at present. 

District collector Kanaram chalked out the diet plan after consulting a professional dietitian and nutritionist. The breakfast, served around 7am, includes poha, daliya, aloo paratha, upma, sprouts and boiled chickpeas with tea or milk. The lunch served between 12pm to 1pm includes chapatis, rice, dal with curry. The patients are served tea and snacks (biscuits/ banana or any seasonal fruit) at 3:30pm, followed by dinner between 8pm to 9pm comprising vegetables, rice and chapatis. Apart from the scheduled menu, the inmates have the liberty to request for any special item like sweets, halwa, kheer, etc. 

“Each block has a Covid care centre to care for cases that have been clinically assigned as mild ones as they are asymptomatic. In the Sabla centre, all the inmates are expatriates who have returned from Maharashtra or Gujarat. Along with their physical health, we have to ensure their mental wellness too because they are prone to mood swings and short temper,” says SDM Manish Faujdar, incharge of the care centre.

Initially, the centre was a quarantine facility which was transformed into a care centre after the state government instructed each block to have a Covid care centre for asymptomatic positive cases. “We faced difficulties in the initial days to convince our team as many of them were hesitant and thought it risky to serve positive cases. But, we held a counselling session for the employees and cleared their misconceptions and myths related to coronavirus. They finally agreed to work here, presently there is a team of around 15 staff looking after the patients,” the SDM said. 

When the inmates were brought here, they were quite difficult to manage. They threw tantrums, refused to participate in yoga and aerobics, etc. “We understood their mental condition as it was stressful to learn that they were infected. We adopted music therapy to boost their spirits. They are woken up in the morning with soothing bhajans while in the afternoon they get to hear classic songs from superhit movies. In the evening, bhajans, light music and patriotic songs keep them occupied,” Faujdar said.

The counsellors who visit here daily too have reported improvement in the behavior of inmates, who are no longer irritable.

According to ADM Krishna Pal Singh Chouhan, there are 69 quarantine centres, seven Covid care centres, two Covid health centres and one dedicated district hospital in Dungarpur which have been braving the sudden spike in cases after receiving a heavy inflow of migrant workers from the neighboring states.

