During lockdown, donate blood from home
2020-03-27
Nagpur: In a unique initiative which kicked off in city on Thursday, blood donation drive was done without donors leaving their house. CREDAI Nagpur Metro and NGO Round Table India (RTI) are arranging for ambulance and medical staff to reach donor homes and collect blood.

Since the lockdown has restricted willing blood donors’ movement, this initiative by the two organizations will ensure that blood banks remain fully stocked.

Gaurav Agrawala, secretary of CREDAI Nagpur Metro, said, “While the focus naturally remains on Covid-19, we need to have ample blood stock. We wanted to help in facilitating collection of blood from donors so no shortage arises in view of the ongoing scenario.”

After meeting with the authorities, the two organizations used their resources and tied up with blood banks and arranged for logistics to get the plan rolling. “On the first day we had seven donors till 4PM, the number might increase later. For Thursday, we have booking for around 50 donors,” said Agrawala.

The are planning to tie up with housing societies where at one place they could get dozens of potential donors.

Sharad Agarawal of RTI said, “During such times it is important valuable stock of blood is available with the authorities. And health officials have confirmed there is no fear of getting coronavirus infection from blood transfusion. Since it is perfectly safe and also crucial requirement, we decided to facilitate the same.”

Huzefa Hussain was one of the first donors today and said that it was a gratifying experience. “People need not be worried at all about donating blood because coronavirus has nothing to do with it. As long as you maintain basic hygiene, cover up with a mask, it’s all fine. I hope more people join in this cause as it will help keep our blood banks full,” said Hussain.

Speaking to TOI, GSK Blood Bank’s managing director Dr Ashish Khandelwal who collected the blood at Hussain’s residence, said, “We collected blood in staggered manner. All the social distancing norms were strictly adhered to. We plan to collect more blood in days to come, but it will be in very limited numbers.”

As of now, at least three donors are required if one wishes to avail this service.

Those willing to donate just need to call on 9890039000, 9823111700 or 9823233633 and make a booking for donation.


