During peak season, Covid-19 is pushing folk artistes to the brink
2020-04-09
Trichy: Panguni and Chithirai are busy Tamil months for drama and folk artists in the state because of the volume of festivals being held in temples in these months. But the spread of Covid-19 has turned the lives of many of the artistes upside down as temple festivals stand cancelled.

Spiritual drama and folk-dance performance are integral part of temple festivals, especially in villages on set stages where dramas are performed with social and spiritual themes. Besides this, folk artistes dress up like temple deities and perform folk art forms.

However, Covid-19 spread has hit the livelihood of these artistes in the peak season, which start with Shivaratri in the Tamil month of Masi, mid of February. The whole of Tamil month of Panguni witnesses Amman temple festival followed by Chithirai temple festivals. Vaikasi (May) is also lined up with temple festivals.

“Majority of folk dance and drama artists rely on the season for their livelihood and manage the rest of the year with the earnings,” says folk artiste D Govindaraj of Madurai-based Kalai Membattu Niruvanam.

Those who rely on the income cannot save money for such a crisis. Roughly 20,000 artistes out of 1.5 lakh folk artistes are registered with Tamil Nadu Folk Artists Welfare Association who will receive Rs 1,000 announced by the state government, he said.

General secretary of Tiruchirappalli District Drama Artists Association M S Mohamed Masthan said that artistes may have earned Rs 600-700 a day and lady artistes will earn up to Rs 1,000 during these months, but all are sitting idle at home as temple festivals have been cancelled.

During the same time last year, 43-year-old Shanmugam, drama artist and dancer from Kambarasampettai, was part of Mayana Kollai, a festival celebrated to worship goddess Angalamman in temples. Founder of Avvai Shanmugi Deiveega Nadana Kalai Kuzhu drama troop, he performs in temple festival where he would be doing the role of the Goddess. Shanmugam was booked for the next two weeks for programmes in Bengaluru, Theni and Madurai. But all the plans dropped and he is sitting idle at home.

“The government has given Rs 1,000 but that is not sufficient to run a family of four for more than 3-4 days. As many as 20 families my troop members are depending on the programmes that I provide during the festival season,” he said.

A character artiste, S Kannan, 66, who is a member of the South Indian Artists Association in Trichy, says that he was acting in awareness street plays organised by the state for dengue awareness apart from spiritual drama enacted occasionally in the city. But he has been left without job this season.


