E-Akshaya Tritiya as jewellers sell gold online amid lockdown
2020-04-25
CHENNAI: This Akshaya Tritiya, the largest gold buying festival in South India, don’t give up on the auspicious day and the sentiment because the shops are shut.


Jewellers are lining up offers online to make the most of the occasion. Over the past few days, they are calling their regular customers, urging them to make a deposit online and get gold delivered, or collect it from the shop after the lockdown ends.

"It came out of the blue and I do not know why someone from Thangamayil was concerned about my wellbeing," said S Usha of Anna Nagar in Madurai. Usha said the caller asked her if she was "unhappy" that she would not be buying gold on the auspicious day. "The caller said I can book the jewellery online and get it delivered when the shop reopens," she said.

Larger national brands, including Tanishq and Kalyan, have begun advance online with Akshaya Tritiya in mind. They have launched a video-calling feature and live chats to help customers choose their piece of jewellery. "Contactless shopping experience will be a new experience for us and for our customers. We have trained our retail team in the process. They are prepared to deal with our customers in the virtual world," said Ajoy Chawla, CEO, jewellery division at Titan Company Limited.

Kalyan Jewellers has launched a gold ownership certificate that can be purchased on the company website on or before Akshaya Tritiya. Customers can purchase gold from 2 grams upwards, and the certificate will be sent to them on the day of Akshaya Tritiya. "Owing to the extension of the lockdown, our social media channels and customer relationship managers are flooded with queries about purchasing gold on the auspicious day," said T S Kalyanaraman, MD, Kalyan Jewellers. Ananthapadmanabhan N, MD of NAC Jewellers said, "We have sent messages to customers. They make a deposit on the occasion and can buy when they want for the lowest rate.

But while people such as Usha don’t want to purchase jewellery, some are making deposits. Ranjani of Chinthamani in Madurai said she was waiting to buy something on the website of her "favourite shop" on the auspicious day. "I have browsed through some designs and put them in the wishlist," she said.

