Early start at New Town quarantine centre as flyers from Gulf check in
2020-03-20
KOLKATA: There was a flurry of activities at the quarantine centre in New Town on Thursday morning as the first lot of flyers from Gulf countries checked into the facility. Passengers on buses from Kolkata airport started arriving at the centre a little after 3am. A source said 345 passengers of four aircraft were taken inside the centre during the day.


Hours before their arrival, healthcare workers had stayed put at the gate in protective gear. After offloading their luggage from bus, the flyers were first made to queue up in two lines. Those who would take a connecting flight, were assessed first on their health condition and travel history. After analysing the threat perception, passengers found with no symptom were sent back to airport.

Flyers, whose destination was Kolkata, were then examined. Those found even with the slightest of symptoms like normal cold were marked to be kept under observation before sending all of them inside the building. Sources said those with the slightest of symptom will be under intense monitoring and if required, there swab samples will be tested.

The brand new building of the second campus of Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute in New Town came as a blessing for the state that requisitioned the eight-storey structure as its quarantine centre for flyers coming from abroad.

The hospital with a capacity of 450 beds was supposed to start operations in April with OPD services and then admit patients from July. Accordingly, 250 beds were made ready for the first phase, now the government has added more beds so that 500 passengers can be quarantined. 

“So far, the facility is spick and span and the entire building is being cleaned thoroughly — four times a day. I hope they continue this kind of maintenance,” said a passenger quarantined at the facility.

Visitors are barred from entering the building. While all health workers posted at the facility are wearing personal protective equipment, rest of the staff are wearing masks and gloves. The centre is also guarded by security personnel. “Since the hospital is yet to become functional it does not have much facility of treatment and medical equipment. But these are not required for quarantined flyers. The idea is to keep them away from moving into a crowd, observe them for symptoms and send them to a hospital with isolation facility in case they develop symptoms,” said a health department official.

All those quarantined have been given masks and told to maintain distance from each other. Health department officials said apart from essentials like food, drinking water, soap, the centre does not have any mode of entertainment. “Since they have to stay for 14 days, we are planning to install television sets,” said a source. 

Situated just about 13 kilometres from the airport, the state had earmarked this hospital building last week as the first quarantine centre. The health department has also requisitioned another property in New Town as its second quarantine facility. The ready-to-use NBCC Square, a cluster of residential complex with commercial space near the first centre, will be used when required.


