Early action, local support has kept virus in check in 3 districts
2020-04-21
Indore: Three districts of Malwa-Nimar region – Jhabua, Neemuch and Burhanpur have so far not reported any cases of Covid-19. The reason: Some quick and early steps taken by district administrations, support of local residents and traditional lifestyle of people in tribal areas seem to have kept the virus out of these areas so far.

Burhanpur district is adjacent to Maharashtra, the state which had reported its first Covid-19 case on March 9 while Madhya Pradesh reported its first case on March 20. While other districts of MP were yet to feel the heat, an alert from neighbouring state helped Burhanpur district take required steps much early.

“There are around eight lakh people in Burhapur and most of them were not much aware about Covid-19. We started spreading awareness as soon as we learnt about the cases reported in Maharashtra,” district collector Rakesh Kumar Kaul said

Public participation was the key to help check the spread of the virus. “We sealed all district borders on March 24 and by that time, we had setup a system of doorstep delivery of essential commodities. We ensured that there was no panic among people by coordinating with them through different means,” he said.

The district has completed health-survey of all people while 64 samples of patients with some symptoms have been sent for laboratory test. “We have received 40 negative reports while 14 are awaited,” Kaul said.

In Jhabua, experts say that local lifestyle, traditions, food and less populated localities appear to be key factors in having kept the virus at bay so far. Jhabua has around 11 lakh population and of them, about 1 lakh reside in urban area. Of these, administration has sent around 70 samples for tests.

“The tribal people are hard working, eat fresh and naturally-grown foods, rarely suffer from diabetes, hypertension, heart-related illness and obesity and have good immunity to combat with virus including the Covid-19,” Dr ML Bhati, who has been serving as general physician in Jhabua for around 50 years, told TOI.

He said that lifestyle of tribal people of Jhabua and Alirajpur is one of the best examples to follow. “Most of locals eat crabs, fish and chicken including Kadaknath, which are considered as great source of protein and the same is useful in increasing the body-strength” he said.

As malaria is a regular affair in the area, use of drugs like chloroquine phosphate, chloroquine hydrochloride, hydroxychloroquine have also helped build immunity of locals against this virus .

Jhabua collector Prabal Sipaha said that all borders of Jhabua have been sealed while survey and screening of people, especially in urban areas, was being carried out.

Locals too have blocked main routes that lead to their localities to prevent unknown persons from entering the areas.

Neemuch collector Jitendra Singh Raje said that like Jhabua, local conditions were not quite favourable for them when it came to keep check on the virus.

“Bhilwara, once a major hotspot of Covid-19, is around 100 kilometer from Neemuch. When first positive case was reported there, we had a discussion with Bhilwara collector over taking collective measures to check its spread. We immediately sealed all connecting routes” he said.

He said that Neemuch administration had traced 61 people from Bhilwara and quarantined them while efforts like establishing coordination with local public, religious leaders and political figures helped in spreading awareness and implementation of major steps to control the situation.

“We need to make people understand that curfew is not for law and order situation but to handle a medical emergency and thus, public participation was must. Locals supported us to help taking required steps well before to avoid spread of the disease” the collector said.


