‘Early implementation of lockdown saved our country’
2020-04-21
By: 
Dr Sudarshan Ballal

India is a resilient country. She has conquered famines, plagues, droughts and floods. This country has survived her greatest challenges because her citizens (and leaders) stepped up. When there was a food shortage in 1960s due to war, families sacrificed a meal a week for the good of the nation. When terrorists attacked Mumbai, the city was back on its feet the next day.

Our resilience is again being tested today. Covid-19 has managed to eclipse the devastation caused by polio, HIV, SARS, H1N1, Zika, Ebola and any other epidemics we have known in the last 100 years. We have watched it overwhelm healthcare systems across Europe and in the US. Media and governments across the globe are rightfully keeping a careful tally of the number of Covid patients and fatalities.

However, there is another insidious facet to the problem – it has paralysed healthcare unrelated to Covid-19. Even in the days of smallpox and leprosy, people were still able to visit hospitals for other ailments. During H1N1, SARS, dengue and other epidemics, hospitals were full but people could meet doctors and schedule surgeries. 

There is a growing urgency to have the lockdown lifted so that people can get the help (medical and economic) they need. Some are even questioning whether we are saving people from corona by sacrificing them to other diseases and poverty. So, what do we do?

I believe early implementation of the lockdown has saved our country. Our health services would be overrun if we had to combat the numbers seen in New York or London. It’s not ideal, but it is our best chance at saving the greatest number of people. If even just half of our population gets infected, a few million people will die (assuming a very conservative 1% fatality rate).

The lockdown is a little like chemotherapy – expensive, extremely unpleasant with multiple side effects and yet necessary for survival. The intended phased-lifting of the lockdown is our best chance of restoring normalcy. 

When we gained Independence in 1947, we were a poor country with lofty ambitions. By necessity we have learned to do more with less. Today, we have the fifth highest GDP in the world, we have lifted millions out of poverty and when we say we are going to land on the moon, the world believes us. There are still many things we need to fix and many people whose lives must be made better, but few doubt that we are on the rise. The British may have invented the phrase “Keep Calm and Carry On” but it is we who embody it.

The writer is chairman, Manipal Hospitals


