Jharkhand: East Singhbhum administration writes to private schools to waive off tuition fees for lockdown period
2020-04-16
JAMSHEDPUR: The East Singbhum administration is in talks with private English medium schools here to waive off fees for the period of the lockdown, officials said on Wednesday. Following government directives, schools here were shut from March 17.

The district superintendent of education on Wednesday told TOI that letters are being sent to the schools to forgo fees for the period of the lockdown starting March 25. “The fee waiver is not about any particular month, but for the total days of the lockdown period,” said DSE Vineet Kumar. 
However, the schools said they are yet to receive any circular and would prefer to comment once they receive it. “The matter of waiving fees is under consideration with the school management and as and when a decision is taken, we shall go public about it,” said Fr P Raj, principal, St Mary’s English School. Raj added that his school is yet to receive any circular from the administration.

A principal of another English medium school on condition of anonymity said, “Fee waivers will hurt the financial health of schools as the managements primarily depend on the monthly tuition fees for earnings.” 

Meanwhile, parents’ associations, who demanded fee waivers for March and April, welcomed the move. “Schools will remain shut for a long time and thus we had demanded for a fee waiver,” said Ankit Anand, a member of the parents’ association Shiksha Satyagrah.

Another such body, Jamshedpur Abhivavak Sangh (JAS), said a majority of private English medium schools may come up with several arguments to evade the directions, but it is for the local adminstration to ensure compliance. “The Jharkhand Academic Council has issued directions for the school fee waiver, hence administration should make schools honour the directions,” said Umesh Kumar, a member of JAS. 

“Private English medium schools are very particular about the fees, hence, there is a possibility that they hoodwink the government. On one hand they may waive off the fees, but on the other hand, they may increase the fees,” said 48-year-old entrepreneur S N Pathak, a Kadma resident who has two children studying in a leading English medium school.


