Kolkata: Easter prayer focuses on deliverance from coronavirus
2020-04-13
KOLKATA: Deliverance from evil, oppression, illness, hopelessness and even death has always been the focus of the Resurrection of Jesus on Easter. But this year, it has become even more relevant because of the pandemic. This was the theme of Easter Sunday’s message from both Bishop Paritosh Canning (head of the CNI church) and Archbishop Thomas D Souza (Roman Catholic Church). Both the masses were conducted online since churches are closed.


Christians belonging to parishes under the diocese and archdiocese watched the masses live on YouTube and prayed along fervently, receiving the spiritual communion, the holiest part of the Easter prayer.

This year also saw archbishop D Souza leading his parishioners once more for a noon prayer, specially called by Cardinal Oswald Gracias, who heads the country’s Catholic Christians, to pray unitedly for deliverance against Covid-19.

With the story of Resurrection on his lips, Bishop Canning read the sermon in both English and Bengali and explained why there was nothing to fear, since the Lord had risen from his tomb and the best was about to happen. “God is never in his slumber. He is watching over our trouble and suffering and will do the needful in time,” Bishop Canning advised with conviction.

At his trilingual service, Archbishop D Souza said the lockdown has now been extended till April 30 and we will now be required to stay indoors longer. “We are gradually getting used to this... we humans have this quality of adaptability. I advise all to stay indoors and utilize the time to welcome Jesus and take a journey within to cleanse ourselves,” he said. Online masses will continue from Archbishop House on Sundays.

Since early morning, Christians were seen exchanging good wishes through e-cards on the social media. They spoke of hope and the awakening of new life as is the Easter custom. 

The community missed Easter feasts, get-together and buying of goodies like Easter buns, cakes and eggs. 

