East Singhbhum administration on toes after four test Covid-19 positive in last five days
2020-05-17
JAMSHEDPUR: With samples of four migrants, who returned to East Singhbhum since May 8, testing positive for Covid-19 after the results started coming in from Tuesday, the district administration has embarked on a drive to ensure strict implementation of the lockdown.

DC Ravi Shankar Shukla said, “People’s cooperation is a must in fighting the infection and I once again request all citizens to follow social distancing norms, wash hands regularly and not to venture out of their homes unnecessarily.”

Shukla along with SSP Tamil Vanan visited market places, including Mango haat, Idgah maidan bazaar, and requested vegetable vendors and fruit sellers to wear protective masks and sanitize their place of work before resuming the day’s business. Shopkeepers have also been asked to abide by the daily allotted time frame on opening and closing their shops. Besides, consumers have been urged to follow social distancing norms and avoid crowding at public places. 

The two officials later visited inter-state, inter-district and intra-district checkpoints to check the arrangements personally and issue necessary direction to officials, manning the checkpoints. They instructed the personnel on duty to keep an eye on every person who arrives from other states and adjoining districts to ensure that they are properly scanned.

Sukhla directed all block development officers to prepare a list of people who have arrived to the district from red zone areas of different states.

The two officials also visited the quarantine centers at Chakulia and Kadma. They instructed the district surveillance team to monitor people staying at the institutional quarantine centres and keep updates on migrants put under home quarantine. 

The latest person infected by the virus in the district is a 30-year-old migrant from Patamda block. He was at the Musaboni quarantine centre after his arrival to the district on May 13 from the Hatia railway station in Ranchi. He had arrived on a Shramik special train from Chennai. The migrant tested positive on Friday and has been shifted to the Covid ward of TMH.


