Easy recovery from coronavirus a silver lining for Bihar, say doctors
2020-05-14
PATNA: Amid the gloom of rapidly rising Covid-19 cases in Bihar, there’s a small silver lining in the high rate of recoveries as well as the fact that very of those who beat the virus needed any critical care intervention except for just one who had to be put on ventilator for a brief period.

The state has seen 386 recoveries so far even as the Covid-19 tally is all set to touch the 1000 cases mark.

Dr Ragini Mishra, nodal officer for Covid-19, said, “As per data available with the health department, only one infected person with no other medical history had to be put on ventilator. That man recovered some 10 days ago and is back at home now.”

When asked about the seven deaths so far, she said, “All seven had comorbidities. They were either cancer patient, kidney patient or were suffering from other medical problems. Most of them did not need ventilator as they died all of a sudden due to cardiac arrest.”

There are three dedicated hospitals for Covid-19 in Bihar — Nalanda Medical College and Hospital, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College and Hospital and Anugraha Narayan Medical College and Hospital. So far, 226 positive people have been admitted in these hospitals and a majority of them have been discharged. “As on Wednesday, 41 positive people are in these dedicated hospitals and none of them in critical condition,” said Dr Ragini.

JLNMCH Covid-19 nodal officer, Dr Hem Shanker Sharma said after it was made a Covid-19 hospital around a month ago, 34 positive people had been admitted. “Forget serious condition, they did not even have symptoms of severe acute respiratory infections and were completely fine. One patient who had returned from Mumbai is positive for at least 20 days, but he too has no complications or even symptoms,” said Dr Sharma.

When asked about the reason, he replied, “This may be because of their strong immunity. Mostly young people are positive in Bihar and they have strong immunity. Recently, the cases have gone up because of migrants and they are in the age group of 20 to 45 years mainly.”

Dr Ragini said there was no need to panic as people were getting easily cured without any medical help. As per information shared by the state health department, 386 people have recovered in Bihar by Wednesday evening. 


