Delhi: Sagar Ratna files police complaint over Covid rumours
2020-05-25
NEW DELHI: Amid the novel coronavirus crisis, Sagar Ratna, a popular restaurant specialising in south Indian cuisine, has become a target of rumours and WhatsApp forwards.

Sarvanand Shetty who is the manager of the restaurant in Defence Colony told TOI that he has filed a police complaint against the person who is spreading a rumour that 40 delivery boys of the outlet have been tested positive for the coronavirus.

“Employees of Sagar Ratna have not tested positive. The restaurant does not even have 40 delivery boys. The condition (of restaurant industry) is already bad and on top of it such rumours are being spread,” said Shetty.

“A WhatsApp group by name O block was at the centre of these rumours while there is no O-block in Defence Colony. I have no idea about this person who is spreading these rumours. I have filed a complaint with the Defence Colony police station. We want to assure our customers that we are serving fresh and hygienic food and there is no such issue,” added Shetty.

The complaint filed by the restaurant states that the accused person is spreading rumours on a WhatsApp group named O block which has more than 200 participants. “It is a matter of fact that employees have not tested positive and these actions are causing panic among the customers of the chain and the residents of Defence Colony further hampering the reputation of the company,” it reads.

Rajinder Malik, president of the Defence Colony market association, confirmed that mass infections haven’t happened and a complaint has been filed by the restaurant manager.

President of the Defence Colony RWA, Maj (Retd) Ranjeet Singh said that police would trace down the originator who was probably not a resident of the colony. “There is no O-block as such in our colony. All these rumours were giving Defence Colony a bad name and hence we decided to file a complaint.”

Sagar Ratna in Defence Colony was the first branch of the chain of restaurants started in 1986. Now, it has more than 90 restaurants across the country.


