Eateries brace for Covid-19 impact
2020-03-21
Coimbatore: Most of the hotels and restaurants in the city have decided to close from 7am to 9pm on Sunday heeding the call of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Many of them had taken to social media in the last few days to urge customers to stay indoors and make use of their delivery platforms. They also explained about the measures they have taken to prevent Covid-19.

R S Puram-based French Door’s Instagram page has details about the cleanliness steps taken and the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India’s regulations and practices. It also said that their staff are washing hands frequently.

Café Gluttony on Ramnagar took to social media to announce that they would bake cakes and desserts based on orders and that pastries would not be readily available. “Food is available at the café, on Swiggy and Zomato. Stay safe and socially distance yourselves,” they said.

With large gatherings cancelled, final year students who had been dreaming of enjoying farewell parties are disappointed. The much-awaited events, which were scheduled for next week in most arts colleges, stand cancelled.

R K Dharshini, a IIIrd year student of Biotechnology at Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science said that farewell event, usually organized by IInd year students, was scheduled to take place between March 22 and 31. “However, on Monday, they announced that classes are over and the college was closing. We were really looking forward to the farewell because we had planned a dress code, picked up clothes and even planned to host another farewell for ourselves on the last day,” she told TOI.

Most educational institutions in the city, including all colleges belonging to the Sri Krishna Group of Institutions, had postponed farewell events several weeks ago. “They have been postponed indefinitely,” said Janet, principal of the Sri Krishna College of Engineering & Technology.

E Janavarshni, a BBA student of PSGR Krishnammal College, said, “While we understand the situation, it is extremely disappointing because we had seen our seniors enjoy the day. It usually happens from morning till evening. We thought we will make many memories and take group photos.”


