Eateries and malls face huge losses in Bihar due to coronavirus outbreak
2020-03-19
PATNA: Cinema halls and eateries are staring at huge losses after the state government’s order closing educational institutions and other public spaces till March 31 due to the global outbreak of Covid-19.


Ajay Sinha, a cinema hall owner in Phulwarisharif, described this is an unusual and an unexpected situation for the film fraternity. “There are a few movies that help us survive throughout the year. One of them was released last Friday and we were doing good business till this sudden announcement. Now we are facing huge losses,” Sinha said.

He added, “In the 
entertainment industry, where ticket sales are often referred to as financial survival, a part of it goes to the government as well so it’s not just us but the government is affected too. I am hoping the outbreak doesn’t get worse.”

Sales executive of a movie theatre near Gandhi Maidan called the ban decision timely, but rued the losses that the halls are going to make. “Just one day and we have faced such huge losses. Release dates of several films have been rescheduled,” he said.

With the spread of Covid-19, hotels, restaurants, coffee shops and restaurants are also witnessing a sharp decline in footfall. While many eateries are offering discounts, others are taking precautionary measures to fight the spread of the virus.

Rajesh Gupta, manager of a Boring Road restaurant, said, “The safety of customers is our utmost priority. All our utensils, including glasses, plates, spoons and forks are being sterilised on a regular basis. Besides, we have limited the entry of customers at one time.”

The manager of a restaurant near Dak Bungalow, Ramavatar Sharma, said, “Around 70-80 people visit my restaurant on a daily basis, however, the last one week has been a fall of 60%. In order to attract people, we are giving a discount of Rs200.”

Malls and supermarkets are also witnessing lesser footfall as people are avoiding large gatherings. “We have never received such less people at the mall, especially on Saturdays. Generally thousands visit the mall, but for the last few days, the numbers have gone down to a few hundred,” said Nafis Hussain, sales executive of a mall on Boring Road.

