Ebola drug best pick for treating coronavirus?
2020-03-10
NEW DELHI: Remdesivir, a drug developed for use against Ebola, a viral illness that caused major outbreaks in remote villages in Central Africa in 2014, may be world’s best hope to treat persons suffering from Covid-19.


According to a draft report of WHO’s R&D Blueprint, Remdesivir is the ‘most promising candidate’ among the different therapeutic options for treating persons affected by Covid-19. This is because of the in-vitro (tests performed in test tube) and in-vivo (tests performed in living organism) data for the drug is available for coronaviruses. “Further, studies in mice using Remdesivir showed superior efficacy over the drugs Kaletra+IFNbeta,” the draft report says.


 
The report adds that a clinical trial is being planned in China to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the drug in association with optimised standard of care, as the next step. Remdesivir slows the infection of healthy cells by blocking viral replication.

The WHO expert also reviewed drugs used in HIV treatment —lopinavir and ritonavir — either alone or in combination with IFNbeta. It stated that among the repurposed drugs under consideration, this would be the suitable second option for rapid implementation in clinical trials.

The use of convalescent sera-serum obtained from someone who has recovered from an infectious disease and considered to be especially rich in antibodies against the infectious agent of the disease could also be an option, said the expert group. However, the report adds: “...but it remains to be defined if sufficient amounts of sera with high antibodies titres could be feasibly collected, using concentration and purification process.”

Among the projects that should not be prioritised, the WHO group said there was consensus that Ribavirin — an antiviral medication used to treat RSV infection (a type of respiratory infection), hepatitis C and some viral hemorrhagic fevers — does not appear like a candidate worth investigating.

“The experience with its evaluation in SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) in Canada in 2003 may have resulted in higher mortality than in other countries. It also reduced haemoglobin concentration — a side-effect that is undesirable in patients with respiratory disorders,” the draft report says. Immunosuppressants and steroids were also identified as products to be de-prioritised by the experts. Anti-malaria drug Chloroquine was also mentioned in the report as a product for which there is insufficient evidence to support further investigation.

Among the non-antiviral products, statins, blood-thinners, and high-dose vitamin C were mentioned as products for which more discussion could be considered.

