Economic activities may pick up pace, curbs eased in lockdown 4.0
2020-05-16
Bhubaneswar: The state government is seriously considering allowing more economic activities and easing restrictions in Odisha during the fourth phase of the lockdown. Discussions for the same have been going on at different levels.

Though Covid-19 has spread to 21 of the state’s 30 districts, especially in the past two weeks following the return of migrants from hotspot areas, the state government is planning to fast-track the economic activities in places other than the containment zones soon. 

“Chief secretary Asit Tripathy and top officials have been holding consultations with a group of secretaries to resume economic activities. No concrete decision has been taken yet as we are waiting for the lockdown guidelines to be issued by the ministry of home affairs (MHA). It is expected to be announced by Saturday. Let us see what the MHA recommends. We will come up with our strategy after that,” a senior government official said.

During his recent address to the nation, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also said lockdown 4.0 would be enforced with a new set of rules.

Emphasising the need to move forward while fighting the pandemic, the official said the state government has been laying stress both on securing lives and livelihoods of people.

While agricultural and industrial activities have been exempted from the lockdown restrictions, the state government has been emphasising on helping the micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) to get back on track. The official said more relaxations are likely to be given for the opening of commercial establishments and resumption of transport services by adhering to social distancing norms.

Focus has also been laid on free movement of workers to cater to the workforce need in various industries and workshops.

As far as the classification of areas into different zones is concerned, the state government is mulling a different strategy like putting restrictions on a smaller area with higher incidence of cases instead of restricting activities in the entire district. The district collectors and municipal commissioners are likely to get more power in this aspect and also on taking a call to resume economic activities.

Chief minister Naveen Patnaik had also raised the issue during a video conference with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on May 11. 

During the third phase of the lockdown, the state government had allowed the inter-district operation of bus services in green zones with some restrictions on the number of passengers to be carried. The movement of individuals was also allowed in green zones and for permitted activities in orange and red zones from 7am to 7pm.

All standalone and neighbourhood shops and shops in residential complexes were also allowed to remain open during the third phase of the lockdown.


