Economies will come out stronger after coronavirus challenge: Chinese consul general
2020-03-01
Pune: China’s Consul General in Mumbai Tang Guocai on Saturday said his country as well as the regional and the world economies would come out stronger after the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) challenge.

“We are fighting coronavirus with great capability and responsibility. We are setting an example for the world in facing future challenges,” he said during a session on ‘Global Value Chains’ at the ongoing Asian Economic Dialogue in the city. 

“We are confident that with the kind of cooperation and concerted effort, we shall win this war against coronavirus. With this, we shall fight against other challenges the humanity will face in the future,” Guocai said.

As of now, the Chinese government at all levels was making a tremendous effort focused on fighting the contagion and containing its spread, he said. At the same time, the other challenge remained in revitalizing China’s economy, which was nothing short of another battle, Guocai said.

He said, “A megacity like Wuhan has been placed under scientific quarantine. Adequate focus, in terms of precautionary measures, is being put on the manufacturing hubs in China’s coastal provinces, including Shanghai and Guangdong. The manufacturing industries in the coastal provinces, too, have responded positively to the crisis and cooperation from neighbouring countries has increased.”

According to latest reports, China reported at least 44 new coronavirus deaths on Friday, taking the total number of fatalities there to 2,788 so far. Coronavirus has killed more than 2,800 people and infected more than 83,000 worldwide.

“The spirit of global village chain must precede the global value chain concept. We have to move towards a global community of shared future that is free of divisions caused by politics, caste, race and religion, among others,” Guocai said.

Zhang Xiangchen, the Chinese ambassador to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), said reforms were required at WTO to ensure that more developing nations had a voice, in the face of more protectionism and tariffs from economies like the US.


