ECR to convert 268 sleeper coaches into isolation wards for coronavirus suspects
2020-04-06
PATNA: The East Central Railway (ECR) has now decided to convert 268 sleeper coaches into isolation wards to quarantine coronavirus suspects instead of 208 coaches announced earlier.

ECR chief public relations officer (CPRO) Rajesh Kumar said of the 268 coaches, 85 have already been converted into isolation wards and work is in full swing to create the facility in rest of the coaches. “Since 16 berths are now provided in one coach instead of eight announced earlier, altogether 4,288 people can be quarantined in 268 coaches in ECR alone,” the CPRO added.

Railways has designed afresh the shape of the isolation wards with the provision to store life-saving medicines, mini pathology, oxygen cylinders, masks, hand gloves and other equipment to cater to the needs of Covid-19 suspects during isolation period. As announced earlier, the middle berths of sleeper coaches are being removed to create more space for the patients so that they can feel comfortable during quarantine days,” the CPRO said.

Danapur divisional railway manager (DRM) Sunil Kumar said work on converting coaches into isolation wards is in full swing at railway workshops at Danapur and Rajendra Nagar. “About 55 to 60 sleeper coaches are being converted into isolation wards on priority basis. Railways has given special training to 80 healthcare staff of the division to take care of the Covid-19 suspects inside the isolation wards.” he said.

Railways has also provided special training to about 250 paramedical staff, including nurses, to take care of the patients. “At least 100 railway doctors from Danapur division are ready to render their services in any emergency situation. The greatest advantage of the ‘hospital on wheels’ is that it can easily reach any part of the state or country,” the DRM said.

Meanwhile, railways is running a superfast parcel express train (00607/00608) between Yashwantpur and Gorakhpur via Patna Junction to carry essential commodities.


