EDITEDOnline frauds rising across state in lockdown, at least three cases reported daily
2020-04-26
Bhopal: The number of online fraud cases reported at the state cyber cell and district cyber cells across the state have increased during the ongoing Covid-19 lockdown. On an average, about 3-4 online fraud cases are being reported at the state cyber cell and other centres every day. Police said that although the individuals are duped of amounts ranging between Rs1,000 and Rs1 lakh, the magnitude of the fraud amount across the state may run into crores.

Cyber cell cops said that the main reason of cyber frauds is that usually the people are not aware of the general precautions to be observed while using the Internet like using strong passwords in the digital space, not clicking links shared by strangers or not sharing their credentials with strangers over phone. Police have issued an advisory of dos and dont’s for people to follow while using the Internet.

Inspector Abhishek Sonekar, posted at state cyber cell headquarters in Bhopal, told TOI that there has been a rise in online fraud cases during the Covid-19 lockdown. Most of the people are using digital payment options without observing necessary precautions, which makes them prone to online fraud.

Speaking on the major modus operandi used by online fraudsters, Sonekar said that police have found around half a dozen such common modus operandi being used by online fraudsters to dupe people. 

A popular fraud is that of hacking social media accounts, especially Facebook accounts or creating fake duplicate account in the name of the victim and sending SOS messages to people in the friend list of the victim to seek monetary help from them on the pretext of a fake crisis. The victim’s friends then transfer money into the bank account/ online payment wallet/ UPI wallet given by the fraudster in the message. Over the past two months, there has been a surge in such cases. 

Sonekar said that the another way fraudsters use to dupe is through fake online shopping, home delivery or online service websites. During the lockdown, many people search for online stores that can home deliver sanitiser, mask, grocery items and other home essentials. Fraudsters have created fake websites, fake mobile apps and even sent online links through bulk SMSes through which they lure the victim in their net and siphon money from their accounts.

Another modus operandi is to use UPI-based applications. Many people use UPI-based online payment apps on their phones. The fraudsters send fraudulent links via messages on the victim’s phone and once they click on the link, the accused hack their account. They send these links through online forms and once the victim submits his details, the information is shared with the hacker. As the UPI is linked to the bank account of the user, money is siphoned by the fraudsters.


