Covid-19 scare: Education staff back at work to give medical proof
2020-03-23
GURUGRAM: The education department employees who have returned from abroad will now be allowed to resume their work only after submitting their detailed medical reports. The instruction was issued by the Directorate of Education (DoE) in the wake of recent spike in Covid-19 cases.


Coronavirus in India live updates

According to the department, utmost care is being taken to contain and break the chain of transmission of the virus. And, in an effort to align the department’s efforts with the state’s and Centre’s measures like complete lockdown of schools, required steps have already been taken. The recent decision comes after the number of cases have started rising. In several cases, people are hiding their travel history or not following the self-quarantine protocols for all returnees from other countries, especially Europe. Thus, the department felt an urgent need to track the travel history of all its employees who would have travelled abroad in the recent past. Under the new circular issued on Saturday, the department asked all officials — teaching and non-teaching staff — to follow the mandatory medical protocols. The department’s employees who are returning from foreign travel have been asked to submit the reports to the civil surgeons upon their arrival. Thereafter, the civil surgeon of all districts will issue medical fitness certificates. This certificate will be mandatory for all employees to resume their work.

All district education officers have been strictly asked to examine the medical fitness certificates, and then allow these officials to resume their services.

“The steps are being taken after the number of Covid-19 patients started increasing. There have been instances of people not revealing their travel history, which makes it difficult for the government to fight the coronavirus. The department doesn’t want to take any chance,” an education department official told TOI.


