Coronavirus scare: Educational institutions in Patna switch to online classes
2020-03-19
PATNA: With the sudden closure of higher educational institutes because of the threat of coronavirus, colleges and universities in the state have decided to conduct online classes now.


Development Management Institute (DMI), Amity University, Central University of South Bihar (CUSB), Birla Institute of Technology-Patna, St Xavier’s College (SXC), St Xavier’s College of Education (SXCE), and St Xavier’s College of Management and Technology (SXCMT) will hold online classes for their students so that the syllabi can be completed before the final examination. They will help students utilize their free time at home in a constructive way and engage them in academic activities.

DMI dean and professor Niraj Kumar told this newspaper on Wednesday that online classes would be conducted for the students of postgraduate diploma in management. “The teachers will provide notes, podcasts and video links to the students to ensure continuity in the teaching-learning process. We have prepared a schedule, which is being sent to everyone.”

Amity University (AU) has suspended all academic activities till March 31. Its pro-vice-chancellor (VC) Vivekanand Pandey said, “We have planned to start online classes to make sure that studies do not get interrupted. Amity’s Amizone software will be used for the purpose.”

Talking about the interactive software, AU VC T R Venkatesh pointed out that it allowed the students to connect with their teachers, ask questions and clarify their doubts.

SXCE faculty member Deep Kumar has downloaded the ‘Zoom’ app to conduct the classes of BEd and MEd students. “The syllabi of these courses will be completed in the next 15 days,” he claimed.

CUSB registrar Col R K Singh said, “Virtual classes will be held so that the syllabi are completed before the exams of the current semester begin. The total number of working days should be 90.”

Meanwhile, all the institutes are adopting strict measures like sanitization of their campuses. Visitors are being thoroughly checked through infrared thermal scanners every day.


