Educational institutes look at calendar tweak to beat coronavirus shutdown
2020-03-17
KOLKATA: Academic institutions in Bengal have now gone on a preparation mode foreseeing a possibility of considerable delay — almost a month — in beginning the new session. The state on Monday decided to extend the holidays at educational institutions, including the private ones, colleges and universities, by 15 days. They will remain closed till April 15. Bengal has already become one of the foremost states to have taken the decision as a precautionary measure without even a single case being reported till now.


“We will have to adjust future holidays by curbing the scheduled vacations. I doubt if we can reduce the summer holidays since over the past few years we have been instructed to close schools well before the scheduled summer vacation dates. We have also been instructed to delay reopening of classes due to excessive heat. We hope no such instruction arrives this year. Otherwise it will be difficult for the schools to complete the syllabus,” said Ram Mohan Mission School principal Sujoy Biswas. 

He, however, said the government’s decision is for the sake of the students. 

He added that the present situation is an unforeseen one which calls for extreme measures. “We may have to rush through the syllabus later to ensure that students are taught the entire course. Otherwise, we will have to hold special classes on holidays to make up for lost time,” Biswas explained.

“The whole academic session will have to be adjusted in order to complete the syllabi and semester examinations will have to be rescheduled,” said Parthiba Basu, CU teacher and general secretary of Calcutta University Teachers’ Organisation.

Some teachers organizations have, however, expressed disappointment over the sudden extension of holidays. “Such a decision could have been taken after 10 days looking at the developing situation,” said a government school teacher.

At The Heritage School, an orientation programme was organized for teachers on March 31, which has now been called off. “We hold the orientation programme to prepare for the next term. We will now use Skype and share our plans on Google drive. We have also formed teachers’ groups with the heads of departments and teachers on social media to draw up plans,” said principal Seema Sapru. 

For students enrolled in the international curriculum, online internal assessments will be held. Once the school reopens, the authorities are likely to offer extended and after-school hours. 

“Most of the schools are done with the annual examinations and the term break is going on. So it is unlikely that the suspension will have too much impact on the academics. There will be additional classes if required later,” a senior official in the education department said.

Both Lakshmipat Singhania Academy and South City International School have decided to distribute annual examination results through email. “We do not want any gathering on the school premises, hence all parent-teacher meetings stand cancelled,” said principal of South City International School John Bagul. 

Colleges and universities have decided to ask teachers to work from home. “Only if there is any urgency can they attend the institutions,” said a Calcutta University official. He added that the practical examinations scheduled up to April 15 will be re-adjusted.

A higher education department official said there is provision of teaching the incomplete syllabus in the next semester. “With the introduction of choice based credit system, there is adequate flexibility in a programme. The holidays may be called off if the situation improves,” he said.

Presidency University has suspended classes and asked teachers to work from home if necessary, and the hostels, too, have been vacated. 

On Monday, CISCE had issued a circular informing students to maintain 1-meter distance from anyone who is coughing or sneezing. The evaluation centres have been instructed to sanitize the toilets and keep hand sanitizers. 


