Coronavirus scare: Efforts on to trace all recent visitors to China
2020-02-08
NEW DELHI: Delhi government has identified 16 state-run hospitals for isolation of suspected coronavirus infection cases. An ambulance each will be deputed 24x7 outside these hospitals for transporting the isolated patients to higher centres like All India Institute Of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) or Ram Manohar Lohia (RML) hospital for treatment, officials said.

As per the data shared by the immigration department, 2,782 Delhi residents visited China on or after January 15 and nearly 1,000 of them have been isolated at their respective homes since they were asymptomatic. “Tracing of the remaining persons is being done. Our target is to trace all of them by Saturday,” said a senior official.

In addition to the local residents, who visited China after the outbreak of the coronavirus infection in December last year, about 70 tourists from countries affected by the deadly virus have also been identified to be staying in various city hotels. The state health department is tracing them too. “None of the persons traced so far had any symptoms. But, as a precautionary measure, we isolated them at their homes. Our team will be in touch with the families to monitor their condition and flag any deterioration in health that could signal coronavirus infection,” said the officer monitoring the work to trace such persons.

Worldwide, 31,535 people have been confirmed positive for the novel coronavirus infection and, as per World Health Organisation (WHO) data, 638 people have succumbed to the disease. Though maximum cases are from China, countries like the US and Singapore are also on high-alert due to rising number of cases.

India has so far reported only three cases of coronavirus infection. All of them are from Kerala and, as per the latest medical update, they are stable.

Sanjeev Khirwar, secretary, health and family welfare in Delhi government, said that tracing persons, who visited areas affected by the outbreak in China, is important to identify any possible positive case and isolate him or her early on so that the disease doesn’t spread any further.

“All available manpower starting from the district magistrates and district surveillance officers to the ASHA workers and Auxiliary Nursing Midwifes (ANMs)have been trained and tasked to trace persons with history of travel to China. They are keeping a close watch on people already visited and are updating regularly on their health. Also, we have issued 24x7 helpline at district level, in addition to a centralised one, for people to report any history of travel or symptoms of the novel coronavirus infection,” he added.


