Eid and Ramzan during lockdown a memorable experience, say rozdaars
2020-05-24
Nagpur: This Eid is different and unique in its own way. Right from dressing up at home, greeting friends and relatives on video calls, offering prayers online with family and children keeping roza for the first time, it has been an amazing experience for the Muslim community. 

Dawoodi Bohras follow Misri calendar while rest of the Muslims follow lunar calendar. Bohras celebrated Eid-ul-Fitr on Saturday though the moon was not sighted. Rest of the Muslim community will celebrate the festival either on Sunday or Monday. 

According to rozdaars, this Ramzan taught them many new things. Professor Mohammed Ayub Khan believes that Ramzan in lockdown was a blessing in disguise as it gave them an opportunity to help the mankind. “We spent our month by helping the needy and poor. How often do we get to do that? We donated essential commodity kits, food and much more. This Ramzan all Muslims performed their best deeds,” he said. 

“Lockdown Ramzan and Eid was a very different experience. We were more relaxed as there was not much work to do. We did family gatherings and exchanged wishes on a digital platform,” said Shehr Merchant, an architect. Her mother Nilofer Kamal did miss the prayers offered in masjid during the holy month but felt it was a beautiful Ramzan experience. 

“This Ramzan will be a memorable one. It has taught the true meaning of love and patience. We prayed from our hearts for an end to the virus spread. We will be preparing all sorts of delicacies at home with my children so we can have or little family Eid celebration,” said Sumera Siddique.

This Ramzan amid lockdown, Saleha Siddique said, has taught her about adjustments and valuing whatever she has. “Every Eid we would go out and greet our relatives by hugging and bonding with them. All my friends and cousins would come to our house and we would have feast together. This time I will dress up at home and help my mother in the kitchen,” she said.

Hasan Zakir, businessmen who celebrated Eid on Saturday, said, “We had a good celebration at home. We couldn’t go out and meet our loved ones or offer namaz at masjid, but following rules was more important” he said.

Kausar Ali Khumusi, head of Nagpur Jamaat that celebrated Eid on Saturday, believes that this was the most beautiful Eid celebration as it has taught many life lessons to all. “The essence of Ramzan and Eid is to understand the value of humanity and life. Today many are struggling to go home, hence this holy month taught us to value our resources,” he said.

Being at home gave many children opportunity to keep roza for the first time. “My children were so excited to keep roza and each day they would help their mother in preparing the feast. This Ramzan will be remembered for years to come,” said Ejaz Ahmed, a lawyer.


