Eid under lockdown to be a low-key affair
2020-05-25
Coimbatore: Due to restrictions on gatherings and mass prayers, the Muslim community is getting ready to celebrate Eid-ul-Fitr, the festival of breaking the fast that marks the end of a month-long period of dawn-to-dusk fasting of Ramzan, on a subdued note on Monday.

“Following the government rules, we have informed people to conduct prayers at their houses and not to gather at mosques. Imams will conduct special prayers at mosques,” said A Faizal, joint secretary of the Coimbatore District Sunnath Jamath Kolgai Kuttamaipu. “Once the call for the prayer is made, family members will gather together and pray at their houses.”

Families and friends used to gather together and purchase dresses before the festival, Faizal said. “But due to the present economic situation, many members of the community had to abstain from shopping. Most of the people, including children, understand the gravity of the situation.”

AR Basheer Ahamed, president of the Coimbatore District United Jamaat, said the focus is now on helping the poor. “Muslims will donate about 2.5% of their income to the needy people during Ramzan. We had delivered grocery kits at the doorstep of several needy people. Depending on their financial status, almost all members made contributions to the cause.”

The Monday’s event will be a completely different one from the previous years in all aspects, except in terms of charity, said M Abdul Hakkim, secretary of the Jamaat e Islmai Hind. “We have been distributing biryani rice to poor families to ensure that they celebrate the festival. We have also decided to celebrate the festival along with the frontline workers of the pandemic, including health workers, sanitary workers and police officers by distributing biryani packets to them.”

“Every year, we used to gather at mosques on the festival day. This year, we are going to pray with our family members. It will be a rare opportunity to pray together,” Hakkim added.


