Eight more test positive, 4 of them attended Tablighi event
2020-04-06
Thiruvananthapuram: The total number of people under observation in the state for suspected Covid-19 has come down to 1,58,617 from 1,71,355 in April 4. The restrictions imposed on as many as 12,738 people who have completed 14 and 28 days of home quarantine have been removed.

On Sunday, eight more persons tested positive for coronavirus in the state, taking the total number of cases to 314, out of which, 56 have been discharged and two have died. Among the new cases, five are from Kozhikode and one each from Pathanamthitta, Kannur and Kasaragod.Of the five cases reported from Kozhikode, four people had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Nizamuddin, New Delhi. The fifth person had come from Dubai. The person who tested positive for coronavirus in Pathanamthitta had come from New Delhi. The other two in Kannur and Kasaragod tested positive after coming into contact with infected persons.

Six people who were tested positive for Covid-19 tested negative and were discharged from hospitals on Sunday. At present, 256 people who tested positive are admitted to various hospitals. Health minister K K Shailaja said samples of 10,221 people who showed symptoms were sent for testing and out of them, 9,300 tested negative for the virus.

Kasaragod has the highest number of Covid-19 positive cases. As many as 119 who tested positive for the disease have been admitted in hospitals in the district, while 18 others have been admitted to hospitals in Kannur and one in a hospital in Kozhikode.

Meanwhile, an official communique from the state government has made it clear that those who have come from abroad and or other states between March 5 and till the lock down period, should go for home quarantine for 14 days. However, those who have been declared under high risk category should continue in isolation for 28 days. Those who have come into direct contact with infected persons should also continue in isolation for 14 days. The people who had initially tested positive and then tested negative later should also continue to be in isolation for 14 days, said the official statement.

Of the 172 samples taken from Pothencode for rapid tests, 71 tested negative. The remaining results are expected late in the night or by Monday. Rapid test was conducted in the area as the authorities have not yet tracked down the primary contact of the person who tested positive for the virus.


