Eight more test positive for Covid-19 in Agra region
2020-04-12
AGRA: At least eight more people tested positive for Covid-19 in Agra, Mathura and Firozabad districts on Saturday.

Out of the eight cases, three were reported in Agra, taking the district tally to 92. Among the three cases is a couple who had visited an infected doctor. The doctor was found Covid positive after a 45-year-old Tablighi Jamaat member visited him earlier this month. On Friday, a compounder working at the doctor’s clinic, too, was found positive.

The third patient is a madrassa caretaker, who came in contact with Tablighi Jamaat members. 

Agra district chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The three new patients have been shifted to an isolation facility, and health department teams are searching for the people who came in contact with the trio.” 

In Mathura, one more person tested positive on Friday, taking the district tally to three. However, none of the patients hails from Mathura city. CMO Sher Singh said, “The 25-year-old man, who tested positive, hails from Fatehpur Sikri. He was admitted to a private hospital on the suspicion of coronavirus infection. Now, his test confirmed him to be positive.” 

Meanwhile, health officials, who are busy tracing his contacts, managed to trace the location of his brother, who had switched off his phone. Police used his mobile phone location to trace him and he was quarantined at SKS Medical College in Mathura for 14 days, said officials. 

The CMO added that the reports of 76 samples, including that of three Imams, were awaited. 

Similarly, days after a lab assistant with Paras Hospital was found corona positive in Agra, its neighbouring district Firozabad on Saturday reported four of his acquaintances, including his wife, infected with the virus, as the lab assistant had visited his village Pratappura recently defying the lockdown protocol.

Acting on a tip-off from the Agra CMO, local health authorities in Firozabad visited Pratappura village and collected 38 samples, out of which four were found to be corona positive by PGI, Saifai.

Firozabad CMO Dr SK Dixit said, “We traced the contacts and found that nearly 38 individuals came in contact with the lab assistant. We have sanitised the entire village and asked villagers to remain quarantined. The four patients, including lab technician’s wife and three of his friends, have been shifted to the isolation ward at the district hospital.” 

With the four new positives cases, the district tally now rose to 15, while none of the patients has recovered, so far. 

Meanwhile, on Saturday, Firozabad (north) police booked 11 people, including an eatery shop owner and his customers, after a video purportedly showing them violating the lockdown protocol went viral. 

According to police, the customers were found to be standing closely with each other in a queue to buy snacks like samosa and kachori. However, none of them was arrested till the time this report was filed.


