Chennai: Eight out of 39 Covid-19 convicts turn negative
2020-06-05
CHENNAI: Eight of the 39 convicts, who had tested positive for Covid-19 last week, have been discharged from the designated Covid-19 wards in various prisons after they reported negative during subsequent tests.

They have been shifted to the government quarantine facilities in their respective districts. A fortnight later, they will be shifted back to respective prisons.

Six inmates from Puzhal - I Central prison and one convict each from Cuddalore and Trichy central prisons have tested negative after being treated in the designated hospitals. The remaining 24 convicts in Puzhal-I, three in Cuddalore, two each in Madurai and Palayamkottai prisons are showing improvement, said sources.

“Apart from the 39 cases reported last week, there is no fresh case of Covid-19 among the convicts in Tamil Nadu prisons,” director general of police (prisons) Sunil Kumar Singh told TOI.

A team of doctors from the Greater Chennai Corporation is treating the convicts in one of the dormitories, which was turned into Covid-19 facility, in Puzhal prison complex.

The prison department, however, has not been able to identify the source of infection. “One of the prisons staff, who tested positive, is being treated in a hospital in Chennai,” said another officer.

Meanwhile, one of the three remand prisoners, all Bangladeshi nationals, who was booked under the Passport Act, was tested positive. They have been lodged in Puzhal-II central prison. The sample lifted from the 22-year-old Bangladeshi was positive. “The trio are staying together for several months, but only one tested positive. So, we are doubtful of the report,” said another officer.

The first case of Covid-19 was reported among the convicts when prisoners from Cuddalore and Trichy were sent back from Puzhal on May 22. They were brought to Puzhal in mid-March for a six-week para legal volunteers’ programme.

Health department took samples from 210 primary and secondary contacts of the positive cases. In all, 36 of them turned positive.


