Ernakulam medical college sets an example in Covid care
2020-04-23
Kochi: Work of the isolation ward at the Government Medical College, Ernakulam, began in January, when the news regarding the return of students from Wuhan to Kerala came. The ward could be opened within five days after completing all civil and mechanical works.

That was the first step towards the transformation of the medical college into a Covid-19 hospital with most modern facilities. “The building which housed MBBS students’ hostel was soon converted into isolation wards with bath-attached independent rooms. Public works department completed the civil works fast. We arranged piped oxygen connectivity to the isolation ward immediately. The entire works were completed in a week,” said Dr Ganesh Mohan, resident medical officer (RMO), Government Medical College, Ernakulam. 

The machines and other facilities required for the isolation ward were installed under the supervision of officials with biomedical wing of the medical college. “In fact, we had set up an isolation facility during Nipah outbreak last year. Installation of medical gas pipeline also was done immediately. We could open the isolation ward by January 25,” an official with biomedical department said. Medical gas pipeline connection was given to B and C wards, where the combined bed strength is more than 60. “Now, these wards also can be used as isolation wards if more cases are there. Medical oxygen can be given to the patients without any interruption,” the official said. “Medical gas pipeline connection is being given to ten more beds in another ward also. Now, we can admit 100 patients in the isolation facility, including the existing 30 beds,” he said.

The most important facility being readied at the medical college is a new ICU with the most modern patient care features. “The ICU with 22 beds for Covid-19 patients can be opened within a couple of days. There are five new sophisticated ventilators in the ICU among others. Point of care arterial blood gas (ABG) machine, which is to measure partial pressure of oxygen and electrolytes, etc. is there. As this machine helps conduct the test at the bedside itself, it will avoid delay in getting results from normal ABG machine, which is a big one installed in another room,” an official with the medical college said.

Similarly, it took less than a week to set up reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing facility at the medical college. “Though the government approved the project, unavailability of machines and other devices required for it was a hindrance. District collector S Suhas took the initiative to bring many components from Bengaluru and Chennai. He arranged a truck which transported the machines up to Palakkad. Then, we used another vehicle to bring it to Kochi. Still, we required many other components for opening RT-PCR testing facility. For instance, we required a pipette for drawing swab samples from patients. After much effort, we arranged it from a startup firm in Kochi. So, we could start the testing facility within a record time of one week,” an official with microbiology department said.

Similarly, operations of all other departments in the medical college were reduced in a phased manner before they all were shifted to other hospitals like Ernakulam General Hospital and Indira Gandhi Cooperative Hospital.


