Elderly in Patna hit hard by lockdown
2020-04-18
PATNA: The extended lockdown has left senior citizens, who live alone in the city, in trouble as many of them are finding it difficult to go to grocery stores, medicine shops and healthcare facilities due to lack of their own transportation.

The senior citizens are also scared of coming out of their homes as according to health experts, people above 60 years of age are more vulnerable to Covid-19.

Bishram Singh (68) and his wife Urmila Kumari Sinha (a cancer survivor) are completely dependent on their servant-cum-driver Sanjay Kumar, who helps the elderly couple in getting essential items and medicines.

Singh, a resident of Professor Colony in Kankarbagh, said his two sons – Neeraj, finance head in a multinational company in Mumbai and Manish, an IT engineer in Pune – could not return home due to the lockdown. “However, they call up every day to enquire about us,” Singh said.

He added, “Sanjay brings all essential items and medicines for us and leave the same at the doorstep. He is a great help to us in this situation. As far as cooking is concerned, we somehow manage to do it. Sometimes, our tenant sends us cooked food.”

Mohd Khursheed (73), who lives with his wife and sister in Samanpura locality, said they find it difficult to keep the house clean and cook food. “All of us are above 65 and suffering from multiple health ailments. As we have stopped taking help from our servant owing to fear of transmission of the virus, we request our neighbours to buy essential items for us. Some youths living in the locality always help us,” he said.

Suchitra Choudhary (75), a widow, is also finding it difficult to do household chores and stock essential items. “I bought essential items and medicines in bulk as my servant has stopped coming to the house due to the lockdown. My son Anumay lives in UK and could not manage to return home due to the lockdown. Both my daughters – Guddi and Mimi – are with their husbands in Gujarat and Delhi, respectively. I am totally dependent on my neighbours,” Suchitra, a resident of Rajendra Nagar road number 12, added.

Kripa Sharan (88), an artist, who retired from state information and public relations department, spends time in the company of plants at his home. “They are like my kids and I love to see them grow,” he said. “All my kids are living in Delhi. I live alone with my wife Shyama at our house in Sri Krishna Nagar. Fortunately, we got everything from the grocery and medicine shops. They delivered items at home. The milkman, vegetable and fruit sellers visit our doorstep ,” Sharan said.

N K Choudhary (70), a retired Patna University teacher and a bachelor, who lives in a flat on Budh Marg, spends his time reading philosophy and political science books and solving mathematics problems.

“I was a social science professor. However, I took interest in other subjects as well. I am not experiencing any problem in getting essential items as I place orders online. Thanks to the district administration, the vegetable and fruit sellers visit the locality in the morning and evening hours,” Choudhary said.

Centre’s advisory for senior citizens: The Centre has listed several dos and don’ts for senior citizens. It says elderly people should stay at home all the time.

“If the elderly people are living alone, they may take help of their healthy neighbours to get essential items. The elderly people should refrain from inviting anyone and hugging and shaking hands with people to avoid infection. Due to summer, it is recommended that the senior citizens consume adequate water to prevent dehydration,” the Centre’s advisory said. 


