Elderly couple left stranded after quarantined, then testing negative
2020-04-14
Ludhiana: Kamlesh (62) and Narinder Pal (72), residents of Harnam Nagar, Model Town, are yet to recover from the trauma they had to undergo while they were quarantined in a facility in Noida. The elderly couple was travelling back from Australia via Bangkok and landed at the Delhi airport at 11pm on March 21, after visiting their daughter. 

The hours spent at the airport were absolute horror as they were made to stand in long queues, where there were around 20,000 to 25,000 people and no norm of safe distancing was followed. Rather, they were pushed and shoved against each other. 

She shares, “This continued all night and we were dead tired. Around 10am the next morning we were asked to collect our luggage, and move towards counter no. 12, where the police, which had our passports, would call out our names and thereby, we would then proceed towards the place where many doctors were sitting. All we were doing is juggling between different doctors, who didn’t even check our temperature.”

She continued, “Later, we were sent to a room where some other doctors were sitting. We were straightaway told to board the bus that would take us to the facility, where we were to be quarantined. Also, the people who were young were just stamped and told to leave but as we were above 60 years of age we had to follow the protocol. While, many people opted for hotels as they could afford it, but since we had limited money at hand, we had no option but to go to the facility”. 

She added that during all this not a single screening or swab collection was done and not their temperature was not checked even once. Also, even after repeated questioning on how would they commute back to Ludhiana once the period of quarantine was over, the people in charge made false promise that it would be the responsibility of the government to drop them back.

On reaching the facility in Noida, which is newly built she was horrified at the conditions there. “I don’t want to recall my stay there as the conditions were absolute disaster. We were made to stay in a hall, which had 15 beds and two bathrooms. The condition of the washrooms was horrendous. Overflowing water, clogged toilet seats, we have seen it all. The worse was when we had to clean the toilets as there was no staff provided to do this. Also, the mosquitos made our life hell. After creating a lot of ruckus, we were provided with a mosquito repellent, towel and soap.” 

She said, “The day we reached the facility around 11 am, nothing was given to eat until 5.30pm when tea arrived. From the next morning we were given meals that included poori aalo, pasta and porridge. There were people who had heart condition, diabetes and food allergy, but nothing was considered before giving the meal”. 

Although they had their temperature checked regularly, it was on April 3, that their Covid test was conducted and they were handed over the reports on April 8, which were negative. They were made to stay in quarantine for 18 days. There were many people who had to continue their stay in the facility as their result was not satisfactory and had to undergo a retest. There were no charges for these tests but still the couple faced issues in the financial matter as well. 

Kamlesh shares, “We had limited amount of money when we landed in India as we couldn’t withdraw any money from the bank or use the ATM card. But we had in mind that as promised we would be dropped back to Ludhiana or at least some facility would be provided. But we were left stranded after the test came negative. We were told that if we wanted to go, we would have to make our own arrangement. So, we had to hire a cab, which overcharged us and finally we reached home.” 


