Eleven Tablighi attendees test positive for Covid-19 in Rajasthan
2020-04-02
JAIPUR/JODHPUR/JAISALMER/ALWAR/AJMER: Eleven people who attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Wednesday. Four are from Churu district, seven from Tonk district. 


Police had earlier identified 538 people who may have visited the congregation. Out of them, 350 are from other states and 183 from Rajasthan. There are five Nepalese too. According to officials, all of them have been screened and the district magistrates have been asked to decide if these people need to be home isolated or quarantined in medical facilities.

“It is possible that Tablighi Jamaat members from other states may have come in contact with those who attended the markaz in Nizamuddin,” DGP Bhupendra Singh said on Wednesday. 

However police is unable to confirm yet as to how many actually went for the congregation. 

ADG (intelligence) Umesh Mishra told TOI, “We have identified over 400 people who might have visited Tablighi Jamaat’s markaz but it cannot be said with certainty that they all visited during the time of the congregation. Many of them do not admit even if they had. It is most likely that the persons from other states who have been found in Rajasthan might have visited the markaz.”

The officials claimed that all the people have been screened and instructions have been given to the district collectors/magistrates in coordination with the CHMO to carry out the medical tests as per the coronavirus protocol. The officials added that depending on the results, it will be decided if they have to be quarantined or kept in self isolation. 

The 538 persons who were identified were found in Jhunjhunu, Bikaner, Dausa, Alwar, Tonk, Sriganganagar, Bharatpur, Karauli, Jodhpur, Barmer, Hanumangarh, Churu and Jaipur. The cops and the district administrations are also making constant efforts to find out more such people who attended the Jamaat gathering.

In six districts, the attendees have been confirmed and quarantined. In Alwar 104, in Jhunjhunu 37, in Barmer 13, in Jodhpur 40 and in Ajmer 2 attendees have been traced. In Bharatpur, 105 have been quarantined who attended the Jamaat congregation in Mumbai though officials suspect that they also went to Delhi.


