Emergency departments in Hyderabad see rise in Covid suspects
2020-04-29
HYDERABAD: Between 20% and 30% of patients walking into emergency departments across hospitals are turning out to be suspected coronavirus patients, said city doctors. Also, many among the suspects aredisplaying neurological, cardiac and skin-related problems — the newly identified symptoms of the virus — apart from those with cough, cold and fever, the doctors added. 


Over the last one week or so, the number of suspected cases has seen a rise and redirected for testing. “The count of suspected patients has increased significantly. Earlier, if 50 patients came in, all of themwere emergency patients. But now, about 30 of those 50 patients are Covid-19 suspects,” said Dr Ashima Sharma, head of department emergency medicine at the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), adding, “Also, since it has been proven that respiratory problems aren’t the only symptoms and patients might display other symptoms too -- very common in the initial asymptomatic phase -- we are trying to make sure that whoever has any Covid-19-like-symptoms are sent to hospitals designated for such patients.” 

Most hospitals admit to being even more cautious now and are sticking to prescribed protocol. “Apart from those with fever and cough, many others showing neurological symptoms like confusion, seizure or stroke, in addition to fever or cold, are also being treated as suspected Covid-19 patients and their samples are being sent for testing,” said an emergency department head at a corporate hospital. 

In addition to cough, cold, fever and respiratory distress, symptoms such as headaches, chills, muscle pain, sore throat and loss of taste or smell are associated with early stages of coronavirus, when the patient is asymptomatic, doctors said. Now, among the latest identified symptoms of the virus are persistent pain or pressure in the chest, confusion and bluish lips. 

“Around 25% of the patients turning up at our emergency are suspected Covid-19 patients and the numbers are on the rise. Among various symptoms in suspected patients we are seeing, fever and cough top the chart. Even patients with the slightest symptoms are being treated as suspects,” said Dr Satheesh Kumar Kailasam, head of department emergency medicine at Medicover Hospitals.


