Employees to contribute to municipality relief fund for treatment of Covid-19 patients and to run community kitchens
2020-04-09
Bareilly: The Bareilly Municipal Corporation (BMC) has decided to provide financial assistance to the needy in the ongoing fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. For the purpose, the corporation will be maintaining a relief fund which will be used in the treatment of coronavirus patients in the city.Official sources said all corporation officials, barring sanitation staff, will be contributing some amount of their salaries to this fund. An amount will also be sent to the CM-Cares fund, while the rest is utilised to provide food and to run community kitchens in the city during the lockdown period.Speaking to TOI, Bareilly municipal commissioner Abhishek Anand said, “The civic body has decided to maintain a relief fund by contributing some amount from the salaries of municipal corporation employees, and utilising it in the treatment of people diagnosed with the virus. All corporation employees (Grade I, II, III & IV), barring sanitation workers, will be contributing some amount to the relief fund. We may also contribute in the CM-Cares fund if required, as well as run community kitchens, which are currently being operated by BMC in the city to provide food to the poor and destitute.” According to information from officials, there are around 3,500 employees of Bareilly Municipal Corporation (Bareilly Nagar Nigam). Of these, around 2,000 are sanitation workers. Employees could be asked to contribute amounts ranging from Rs 500 to Rs 2,500 to the fund, depending on job profile.The civic body has been taking appropriate measures to combat Covid-19 spread in the city. Frequent sanitisation and fogging is being conducted across all BMC wards, along with unclogging of drains and cleaning of roads and public spaces. Besides, BMC is currently operating community kitchens at two places — BMC premises and Harunagla — to provide food to the needy and homeless. The civic body has also deputed its vehicles in the field, for identifying destitute and distributing food packets to them during the lockdown. Around 1,000 food packets are being distributed among the needy every day, said officials.