Employee of ration shop in north Delhi found Covid-19 positive
2020-04-22
NEW DELHI: Days after the father of a food and supplies officer died of Covid-19 in west Delhi’s Hari Nagar area, a helper at a fair price shop in north Delhi has tested positive for the the novel coronavirus infection in the capital.

The department staff and the people managing 2,000-odd fair price shops have been working on the frontline to provide dry ration to over 17 lakh beneficiary families under the public distribution system (PDS) and lakhs of others who have applied for the same during the lockdown period.

The helper of the fair price shop in north Delhi’s Roop Nagar reportedly got himself tested at a private facility on Sunday after he developed some symptoms of Covid-19. The test reports confirmed the infection on Monday and he has been admitted to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital.

District magistrate (Central) Nidhi Srivastava said that while his contacts were being traced, the shop and the areas around it had been sealed. More than 1,600 ration card holders are assigned to this shop. The helper carries out clerical responsibilities and closely interacted with a large number of beneficiaries and a few department officials in the last few days, said a source. 

“He must have got infected at least a week earlier. The fair price shops at the time witnessed huge rush of beneficiaries queuing up for their quota of wheat and rice. He might have passed on infection to many others,” said Saurabh Gupta, secretary of the Delhi Sarkari Ration Dealers Association.

Though the food and supplies inspector whose father died of Covid-19 last week has tested negative for the virus, he moved around at several shops and schools under his jurisdiction to monitor the distribution of ration. More than 700 people had been told to go into quarantine after that incident.

Delhi food and supplies commissioner Ankita Mishra Bundela said her department was quite “careful and vigilant”. “Everyone has been asked to strictly observe social distancing norms. Though the food inspector has been tested negative for Covid-19, his first contacts have been advised to stay in home isolation,” Bundela said, adding that masks and sanitisers had been provided to all officials and fair price shop staff.

PDS Welfare Association president Shailender Kumar, however, alleged that all shops hadn’t got masks and sanitisers. He also demanded that the families of those working at ration shops should also be given a compensation of Rs 1 crore by Delhi government in case he dies of Covid-19. “The government should also bear all treatment costs,” Kumar said.


