Enforce lockdown or face the music, mukhiyas told
2020-04-12
PATNA: The state disaster management department has asked all the mukhiyas and ward members to enforce the coronavirus lockdown in their respective areas more effectively or face the music.

A fresh directive in this regard has been issued in the wake of numerous complaints received about frequent violation of the lockdown, especially in rural areas, because of the lackadaisical attitude of the authorities concerned.

Altogether 615 people were arrested and 812 FIRs lodged with different police stations in the state for violation of the lockdown till Friday. As many as 6,066 vehicles were impounded and a sum of Rs 3.13 crore was realized as penalty from their owners during the period.

A disaster management official told this newspaper on Saturday that mukhiyas of different panchayats would now be held accountable for lapses during the lockdown.

“Panchayat heads and ward members have been warned of stern action if complaints of lockdown violation are received in future,” the official said and added that at some places people kept under the 14-day mandatory quarantine had been found missing.

Notably, approximately 27,000 migrant workers have been quarantined at 3,115 isolation camps set up in government schools and panchayat buildings across the state. “Complaints of social distancing not being maintained in remote areas have also been received,” the official pointed out.

The panchayat functionaries have been told to ensure that proper arrangements for the people quarantined at the temporary isolation camps are made. The government has also released funds for the purpose.

Efforts to contact disaster management principal secretary, Prataya Amrit, proved futile. Authoritative sources said he was busy in official meetings. 

The disaster management department is the nodal agency that coordinates with others to deal with the outbreak of Covid-19 in the state.

Gopal Singh, the mukhiya of a panchayat under Raghunathpur block in Siwan district, claimed that the panchayat functionaries were cooperating with the government to check the spread of Covid-19. “We are cautious and providing inputs to the district administration, if required,” he said.

Panjwar village under Raghunathpur block alone has reported 23 of the 29 positive coronavirus cases in Siwan district. Siwan has recorded the highest number of positive cases in the state.


