West Bengal: Enforcing lockdown, four cops injured in clash
2020-04-29
HOWRAH: Allegations of police assaulting a middle-aged woman turned Howrah’s Tikiapara into a battlefield with a mob of over 200 locals clashing with police for about an hour from 4.45pm on Tuesday.


Four cops were injured, two police vehicles damaged and the Tikiapara police outpost was vandalised as the mob threw bricks. The situation was brought under control after RAF personnel were deployed. The epicentre of trouble were Belilious Road and East-West Bypass. Howrah City Police Commissioner Kunal Agarwal said trouble broke out when cops pointed out that a large crowd was out on the road with no one wearing masks.

No one has been arrested till reports last came in, but police were raiding multiple places. Provisions of the disaster management Act will be invoked, said police. The congested area is under total lockdown. So, crowding and moving about without masks will not be allowed, loudspeaker messages said later in the evening. 

Locals alleged that the woman had stepped out of her home to buy fruits. When cops explained to her that she should remain indoors, the woman began arguing with cops. Soon, locals came forward in support of her and an altercation began. Locals alleged that police assaulted the woman and attacked cops. Police allegedly lathicharged the crowd of some 30 people who were outdoors in the Covid containment zone.

Soon, people across Tikiapara rushed out of their houses and started hurling bricks and stones at police. Initially, policemen were seen retreating to save themselves from the fury of the assembled mob of over 200. Some officers started appealing to the crowd to maintain peace. They also appealed to people to go back to their homes. Cops also asked people to call the special control room and place orders for food and fruits. The mob, however, refused to relent and continued hurling bricks at police.

However, amid this violent attack, some locals were seen coming to the aid of policemen. They lifted injured policemen and rescued them to safety. Some religious leaders appealed to people to stop attacking police.

Soon, RAF personnel were deployed and chased the crowd. Seeing RAF men, people ran for cover and the situation started returning to normal. Trinamool leader Md Selim alleged, “Locals and police have been having verbal duels for the last few days. Locals were demanding that police allow fruit and vegetable traders to sit along Belilious Road in the afternoon.” Agarwal rushed to Tikiapara when news reached him that the Tikiapara police outpost had been vandalised. 

“We are talking to locals. A large number of people have come forward to help out in this time of crisis,” he said.


