Enforce lockdown in letter and spirit, senior Bihar cops told
2020-03-24
PATNA: Amid initial reports of violation of lockdown, senior officials of the state government on Monday directed the officers on field assignments to adhere to the advisories issued by the government and take legal actions against the violators.


Additional director general (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar held a meeting with the senior police officers at the police headquarters and asked all the SSPs and the SPs to implement the lockdown in letter and spirit. “I have asked the officers concerned to make people aware on the one hand and initiate legal recourse on the other, if required,” he said.

Referring to the provisions of the law, the ADG said, “Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under Section 188 of the IPC, which can lead to a jail term of six months, a fine of Rs 1,000, or both. In addition, sections 269, 270 and 271 (related to Epidemic Diseases Act 1897) can be slapped against them.”

The police headquarters has also deployed additional security personnel to implement the lockdown effectively. “The senior officers have been asked to personally see whether the lockdown was being enforced under their jurisdiction. At the same time the officers found to be lax will not be spared,” Kumar said after the review of the preventive measures to contain the novel cornovirus.

“Those found to be roaming aimlessly on the roads were penalized under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act,” Patna SSP Upendra Kumar Sharma said.

A senior IAS officer said the situation would improve from Tuesday when rail and air services would stop in true sense. “Some passengers, who reached either by trains or flights were stranded in Patna. So some relaxation was given to allow them to reach their destination today. But that will not happen from Tuesday,” he said.

IAS officers join disaster mgmt team: The state government has deputed two IAS officers – Balamurugan D and Anirudh Kumar – as special officers to the state disaster management department to assist the officers concerned in fighting coronavirus effectively. 

Several ADM rank officers were deputed at PMCH, IGIMS (both in Patna), SKMCH (Muzafffarpur), DMCH (Darbhanga), Bettiah Medical College (West Champaran), ANMMCH (Gaya) and JLNMCH (Bhagalpur) to assist the district authorities.

