Chennai engineering college hostels may turn quarantine centres for coronavirus suspects
2020-03-18
CHENNAI: Engineering college hostels and government training centres may turn quarantine centres for suspected Covid-19 patients, government sources have said. 


The health department is simultaneously ramping up isolation beds in Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital for patients coming into the hospital with symptoms of flu. A block that once housed the pulmonology department will be ready with 30 beds to treat Covid-19 patients in six weeks, doctors said.

Since Monday, passengers coming into Chennai from Covid-19-affected countries are being taken to a quarantine centre – a health department training centre in Poonamallee, infectious disease expert Dr S Raghunandhan, director of institute of internal medicine, Madras Medical College said. On Tuesday morning, there were 41 people in the quarantine facility. “The government is coming up with another facility in Tambaram. It has identified hostel buildings of engineering colleges and other buildings that can be used for this,” he said.

As per the revised protocol, people are divided into three categories. The healthy ones are counselled about the disease, need for home quarantine, hygiene and are sent home in a day. About 18 of them who came yesterday were sent home on Tuesday, said joint director of public health Dr P Sampath. They will remain in home quarantine for 28 days and will be monitored by the integrated disease surveillance programme network.

Passengers above 60 years of age, especially those who are hypertensive, diabetic or asthmatic and coming from a Covid-19 affected country, are to have considered moderate risk. They are advised to stay in the quarantine facility for 14 days even if they show no symptom. “Two out of 21 people who came into the facility have been asked to stay back,” Dr Sampath said. “Twenty more people joined us this morning.”

Passengers landing with fever, cough or shortness of breath are considered high-risk category and sent to hospitals for isolation. The state is increasing the number of such isolation beds in government hospitals and private hospitals. The block at Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital is getting converted into a 30-bed isolation unit with international standards for admission of patients with infectious diseases. “In six weeks, we will have a 30-bed unit with all facilities for intensive care. The building will have negative pressure ventilation,” said hospital dean Dr R Jayanthi. Isolation rooms are negatively pressurized to prevent airborne contaminants from drifting to other areas and contaminating patients, staff and sterile equipment.

This is relevant for Covid-19 as the World Health Organization is considering “airborne precautions” for medical staff after a new study showed the coronavirus can survive in the air in some settings, she told a group of doctors at the International update on Covid-19 organised by the Tamil Nadu Dr MGR Medical University. A tower block for infectious diseases coming up on the campus will be ready by the end of the year.

The present isolation ward in the hospital was set up in January as a temporary measure to take in Covid-19 patients. “We cleared up a parking lot that can accommodate more than 85 cars to create a dedicated pathway for the ward on the first floor of the tower 2 block,” she said. 


