Coronavirus in Delhi: Ensure forms are filled on flight, airlines told
2020-03-10
NEW DELHI: Amid the coronavirus scare, over 50 passengers coming from abroad are being screened every minute at Indira Gandhi International Airport.


Airport Health Organisation (APHO) — the nodal body screening passengers — says that managing long queues becomes a problem at times because passengers reach the screening point without filling their self-declaration forms. APHO has asked the airlines to ensure the form is filled in advance, preferably before landing. This is expected to reduce the queues before the immigration counters.

The Customs department, meanwhile, on Monday issued a notice stating that passengers arriving on flights from 12 countries — China, Iran, Italy, South Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Indonesia, Vietnam, Nepal, Thailand and Malaysia — will not be able to enter the duty free shopping areas due to “operational limitations and instructions given vide Union ministry of finance.”

At present, APHO has set up thermal screening machines, and is using infrared thermometers to assess and determine the symptoms of coronavirus before a passenger reaches the immigration counter at IGI. The central government has made it mandatory for each passenger to fill a self-declaration form. One copy is provided to APHO, while the second copy is stamped and returned to the passenger, allowing him/her to proceed ahead for the immigration formalities.

A senior official from APHO, on the condition of anonymity, said that they have been catering to thousands of passengers every day. “The exact number of people whom we cater to every hour cannot be ascertained as there are people who do not fill the declaration forms while on the flight,” the official added.

Though additional infrared thermometers have been procured to meet the demand, long queues still remain a concern.

“Each passenger is being thoroughly scanned and equipment is not a problem. No passenger can pass through without being scanned and their self-declaration form being stamped. However, a few people are still reaching us without having their form filled, which is leading to long queues,” said the official.

Till early February, only four countries—China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Thailand—were on the mandatory screening list. This list was expanded to 12 countries last week, including Japan, South Korea, Nepal, Indonesia, Vietnam, Malaysia, Iran and Italy. 

On March 4, however, the central government issued a notice, stating that passengers from all countries arriving into India now needed to be scanned and their information stored in the database. If required, this database may be used to track a passenger later.

