Coronavirus outbreak: Ensure availability of medicines,says Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: Reviewing the preparedness of Delhi hospitals to deal with a possible spurt in coronavirus cases, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Friday asked the medical superintendents to ensure availability of medicines and ventilators.


Kejriwal asked the medical superintendents to contact the suppliers and the manufacturers to gauge the stock of ventilators available with them. “We will procure the entire stock. The cabinet will give the approvals to you on an urgent basis. All medicines and consumables must be available with all the hospitals, and if there is a bulk requirement, it should be immediately met,” he said.

Kejriwal also empowered the medical superintendents to hire additional staff on contract for the next three months to deal with any medical emergency.

“The chief minister assured the senior officials that all paperwork would be completed in time,” said an official, who attended the meeting.

On Friday, the number of people infected with novel coronavirus in the national capital reached 20, including one dead and four recovered. Officials, however, said there was a sudden spike in the number of coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours and the government needed to intensify its efforts to contain the spread.

“Kejriwal also directed health minister Satyendar Jain to ensure no supplier overstocks essential items like medicines and masks. Raids may be conducted against them,” said an official.

“The current situation is witnessing a rise in coronavirus cases in the city. We are in a critical phase right now, which can lead to the expansion of the virus. We should ensure whether we have adequate medical facilities and equipment to deal with the corona crisis in hospitals. We have to ensure there are sufficient number of isolation beds and wards available,” the chief minister was quoted as saying in a statement.

The CM added that there has been no community transmission of the virus until now. “But we should be prepared to handle the crisis if it happens,” he told the meeting.

Kejriwal asked the medical superintendents to ensure all the equipment are operational. He also directed the authorities to ensure that those in isolation wards do not escape from hospitals.


