Ensure total lockdown in Madhya Pradesh, CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan tells collectors & SPs
2020-04-07
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan, on Monday, directed all collectors and superintendents of police to ensure total lockdown in their respective districts to stem Covid-19 transmission. 


Chouhan said that strict action should be taken against those who violate prohibitory orders. "If someone hides corona infection or does not cooperate with the investigation, it will be a serious crime and the authorities should register FIR against such persons and send them to jail,” said Chouhan during a video conference of district collectors and SPs, here at Mantralaya. 

Chouhan said farmers were on the priority list of the state and government should make all possible arrangements for the procurement of the Rabi crops, availability of harvesters, tractors and repairing and servicing of machines. The officials should also ensure proper power supply during harvesting and sowing season, he said. 

“We have asked to prepare district disaster management groups and a second line of team. Arrangements should be made to provide ration and food to workers and labourers apart from Ayush medicines. Take action against all those private hospitals that refuse to treat Covid-19 patients," said Chouhan. 

The chief minister further instructed to identify government hospitals as Covid-19 hospital. Divisional commissioner of Indore, Akash Tripathi informed that samples of 11 corona patients in the district have come negative and they have been discharged. He said 116 patients were in good condition and 12 to 15 people will be discharged daily from Tuesday onward. 

Collector Bhopal Tarun Pithode informed that the state capital has been completely locked down and action has been taken against 630 people who violated the orders. 

It was also informed that during lockdown in Ujjain, arrangements have been made to deliver vegetables, milk and ration up to door to door. Out of eight cases of corona positive, six cases belong to the same family and situation is under control. 

In Jabalpur district, out of eight corona patients, three have been discharged while the condition of the remaining three is under control. In Gwalior district, of the two patients one has been discharged and the other too is likely to be discharged in a day or two. In Morena, 12 people belonging to the same family were infected. All are well. In Shivpuri a patient has been discharged while report of the others is awaited. 

The state government has also directed to ensure proper supply of essential commodities during total lockdown. It was also stressed that cargo vehicles and vehicles transporting online supplies should not be stopped, said the officials.

Chouhan praises health workers: CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan also praised and expressed gratitude towards the corona warriors and spoke to some of the dedicated Asha and ASM workers on telephone for their service.

 "The entire state is grateful to you for your dedication and service to the society day and night. The struggle with corona is a symbol of your indomitable ability and strong will power. Do communicate my wishes to your colleagues and other workers too," said Chouhan while talking to staff nurses Jyotika Chaturvedi, Deepshikha Gangrade (Indore) and Asha worker Binu Sonu. 


