Coronavirus outbreak: Ensure sanitisers, masks are available, says Haryana chief secretary
2020-03-18
CHANDIGARH: The Haryana food and civil supplies department has been directed to ensure the availability of medicines, masks, and sanitisers to the public at reasonable prices. In addition, the government has set-up two helpline numbers 8558893911 and 108, where information regarding the Covid-19 suspects in the state can be given. 


Haryana chief secretary Keshni Anand Arora on Monday issued special guidelines to the divisional commissioners, deputy commissioners, chief medical officers and other senior officials of the state through video conferencing from Chandigarh. She told all officers to make proper arrangements by coordinating with various departments to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. 

In order to generate awareness among the people, hoardings should be installed in public places and campaigns be organised through advertisement, television, radio, SMS, she said. 

The chief secretary said retired medical officers, paramedical staff, and ex-servicemen should also be involved in this task to handle any emergency situation in future, along with government officials and medical students.

All the officials, along with the food and civil supplies department, should ensure that medicines, masks, and sanitisers were available to the public at reasonable prices. Government staffers should also be informed about the coronavirus and sanitisers made available in offices of all departments, mini-secretariats and other populated. 

Arora said the deputy commissioners should request the private companies in their respective areas to inform the chief medical officer regarding employees who visit from other countries. Apart from this, the companies should also allow employees to work from home if possible. She instructed to prepare at least 100 isolation-beds in all districts and more than 500 isolation-beds in Gurgaon, adjoining New Delhi.

Meanwhile, additional chief secretary for health Rajiv Arora has been appointed as resident commissioner of Haryana at New Delhi and the nodal officer for coordination with the Centre for dealing with situation arising out of Covid-19.

