Ensure good facilities in quarantine centres: Jagan
2020-05-02
Amaravati: Chief minister Y S Jaganmohan Reddy on Friday directed the state administration to ensure good facilities in quarantine centres.

At a review meeting held at the camp office on Friday, the chief minister named transport and R&B principal secretary MT Krishnababu as special officer to monitor the facilities in quarantines.

The CM asked Krishnababu to be in touch with the inmates over phone and take feedback about facilities including food and sanitation in their respective centres. “Good quality of food should be provided to all the inmates and proper sanitation should be maintained. The situation should be improved immediately,” said the chief minister.

TOI in its columns on Friday had reported on the poor quality of food at quarantine facilities in Guntur district.

The chief minister directed the officials to ready a plan to handle the people coming from other states.

He said the entire administration must be geared up to tackle the large number of people coming home. “We need to have a plan as how and where to screen them and to keep them in quarantine facilities. We should be ready with a plan on how many people would be required to be kept in quarantines and how many should be allowed for home quarantine,” said the chief minister. 

The officials said all the foreign returnees would come with non-Covid-19 certificate and could be allowed for home quarantine. Similarly, pool samples of all fishermen from Gujarat were taken for testing before sending them home. The officials said that individual screening would be required in case the pooling tests turned positive.

Chief secretary Nilam Sawhney and special CS Jawahar Reddy said the administration will focus on reducing mortalities by segregating high risk patients. They said that they have screened 10,0997 patients which is the highest in the country. They said that they were conducting 1,919 tests per each million and touch 2000 mark in a couple of days.


