ENT surgeon who resumed practice in May is seventh Mumbai doctor to die of Covid-19
2020-06-03
MUMBAI: A 61-year-old ENT surgeon died on Sunday after undergoing treatment for Covid-19 for 13 days at a Mahim hospital, making him the seventh medical practitioner to succumb to the infection in the city. Dr Chittaranjan Bhave, who had a history of heart disease, resumed practice early in May after staying home the previous two months.


Doctors across hospitals went in mourning at the news. They said Dr Bhave, an alumnus of KEM Hospital, didn’t want his patients to go without treatment despite his comorbid conditions. He had begun seeing patients and scheduling surgeries only from May 4 onwards. He developed symptoms of sore throat, dry cough and fever on May 17, two days after he had carried out a facial nerve decompression surgery on a patient, who incidentally had a Covid-negative report. The patient, one of Dr Bhave’s old clients, was on chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin lymphoma and had developed facial palsy, prompting the need for surgery. The doctor’s family said a Covid-19 test on May 18 came positive the next day.
ENT doctor’s daughter denies not finding a bed for 10 hours

On the day he received his report, he didn’t have major symptoms and initially thought of home quarantine. “But later he decided that it was best to get admitted. He then called SL Raheja Hospital in Mahim, which didn’t have a bed at the time. Around 10-10.30pm, a bed had opened up,” said his friend and colleague Dr Sanjay Gala, who recalled standing behind him in the OT when Dr Bhave performed the last surgery. He was a Dadar resident and used to practice in his Mahim clinic, Maru Hospital and was also attached with Raheja Hospital.

Dr Bhave’s daughter refuted stories that her father couldn’t find a bed for ten hours. “After calling a few hospitals, we found a bed in Raheja,” she said. Dr Hiren Ambegaonkar, CEO of Raheja, said the surgeon had called him after testing positive around 10am on May 19 for a single room. “By the time a single bed was available and his wife drove him to hospital, it was 6pm. But there is no truth in the allegations that he had to wait outside the hospital,” said Dr Ambegaonkar.

Dr Bhave’s assistant too has come positive, though five others who were inside the OT at Maru tested negative. “It’s unlikely he got the infection from that case as the incubation period is 5-10 days,” said Dr Gala. Dr Bhave had diabetes and had two stents.

His wife drove him to Raheja on May 19 where he was admitted in a ward. He didn't seem breathless during the first three days in hospital. On the fourth, he developed breathlessness and underwent a CT scan that showed extensive disease. He was put in ICU on May 23 for high-flow oxygen. It is learned that his condition worsened though he was given immunesuppressive drugs. He was eventually put on ventilator on May 26. He died on June 1 after suffering a cardiac arrest.

“Except once when his condition improved marginally, his health continued on a downward slide,” said Dr Gala. “He had worked relentlessly for 30 years for his patients,” said his daughter, who, along with her mother, tested positive. She said his last rites were performed by relatives since they (wife and daughter) were under quarantine.

