Entertainment new route for cops to infuse lockdown sense
2020-04-26
Nagpur: City police, experimenting with different forms and patterns of community policing, have now extended their interest to include entertainment for enforcing the lockdown norms of social distancing and asking people to stay at home to break the corona chain.

On Saturday, city police had roped in Guinness book record-holder Rajesh Burbure and the team of Vidarbha Kalakar Sanghatna to kick-start an innovative strategy along with Swayam foundation at Variety Square to enforce the lockdown by taking entertainment to the doorstep, prompting people to enjoy from the comfort zone of their four walls. Burbure’s son Vaibhav and daughter Dhanashree, too, helped their father to spread awareness amid cheers from balconies and passers-by. 

Between popular patriotic songs, announcements were made regarding social distancing, the use of sanitizers and personal hygiene. 

Students of arts, groups and individuals were also invited to Variety Square to make murals and artistic designs related to Covid-19. 

Vicky Suryavanshi, a student of architecture, who painted a mural on the theme saving the planet from the Corona scare, said it was a welcome opportunity to be part of the police initiative.

DCP, traffic, Vikram Sali, who along with senior inspector Parag Pote had conceptualized the plan, said the aim is to ensure that people do not step out and maintain social distance. “We are trying to say that the police will even bring entertainment to your doorstep if you feel bored, but don’t step out,” he said. 

Later in the day, Burbure’s team also visited the upmarket Capitol Heights society near Baidyanath chowk where senior inspectors Pote and Sarthak Nehete took the mike to croon popular songs while appealing to the residents to clap from their balconies but not to come down. 

Volunteer Kamal Lalwani said the police would reach out to citizens through such entertainment projects and convince them to cooperate. 


