Entire village quarantined after man who died in Pauri’s isolation centre found Covid +ve
2020-05-26
Dehradun: Sample of the 48-year-old man, who died in a quarantine centre in Pauri’s Pabo block on May 21, tested Covid-19 positive on Monday. Soon after, the district administration sealed the entire village and every local has now been placed under home quarantine. All the cops deployed in the Pabo police post have also been sent for quarantine.

According to reports, the man had returned from Ghaziabad and was put up at a quarantine centre for a couple of days before he died. The health department, which had initially claimed that he died of heart attack, has now refused to comment on the cause of death saying that it couldn’t be ascertained in autopsy. However, the officials maintained that his viscera have been preserved.

The department has collected the samples of his family members — his mother, wife, and children — and also of those doctors and policemen who were involved in his postmortem examination. As many as 60 people in the village were discovered as primary contacts of the deceased Covid-19 patient.

“We have sent the seven cops, who handled the body of the deceased, in quarantine and have filled the death report,” said deputy SP Vandana Singh, while adding that cops from other police stations are being called to work in Pabo police post.

So far, Pauri district has reported 10 Covid-19 cases. Among them, eight are active cases, one patient was treated and discharged, and one patient has died.

Notably, this is the fourth death of a Covid-19 positive patient in Uttarakhand. However, the state government has been constantly claiming that none of the deaths were directly an outcome of Covid-19. In all these cases, the officials attributed the deaths to pre-existing conditions (or co-morbid illness).

The first two deaths took place at All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS) in Rishikesh and their causes were told to be “heavy blood discharge in brain” and “cancer” respectively. The third death was of a Covid-19 positive seven-month pregnant woman at Doon Hospital. The health department says that she died of tuberculosis.


