Covid-19 outbreak: Entire education system halted
2020-03-20
NEW DELHI: It is not only CBSE’s exams for classes X and XII that have been deferred by the outbreak of Covid-19. On Thursday, the University Grants Commission also asked higher educational institutions to postpone all ongoing examinations and evaluations till March 31. It is also likely that the JEE (Main) scheduled for April for admission to IITs and similar entrance tests conducted by National Testing Agency, such as those for Delhi University and Jawaharlal Nehru University, will be pushed back.


These steps will have a cascading effect on the 2020-21 academic calendar, including delay in the declaration of results, holding of entrance examinations and implementation of the admission process.

On the directions of the Union human resource development ministry, Central Board of Secondary Education and the National Institute of Open Schooling postponed their exams on Wednesday, while the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations followed suit on Thursday. Now, UGC has written to the vice-chancellors of all universities to reschedule ongoing examinations and evaluations.

Given the situation, Cambridge Assessment International Education, which provides international education programmes and qualifications, has also allowed schools to withdraw candidates from the May/June exam series while giving them a credit to use in the November or a future exam series. Christine Özden, CEO, CAIE, said the priority was safety of students and staff at Cambridge schools around the world.

Delhi government also ordered the closure of all government and private schools in the national capital for teaching and non- teaching staff till March 31 to prevent coronavirus infection. So far, the schools were closed for students while exams were continuing. “All exams have been postponed till March 31. The schools will be closed for teaching and non-teaching staff too,” reiterated the Directorate of Education, adding that teachers would carry out the evaluation work for school exams from home even as the evaluation for board exams had been suspended by CBSE.

While CISCE has decentralised the evaluation process and examiners will assess the answer scripts at their residences, CBSE is going to decide on the process after a review of the situation on March 31.

As for the exams conducted by the National Testing Agency, a senior official of the body said, “The rescheduled dates for JEE (Main) will be decided after March 31 after taking into consideration the rescheduled dates of the CBSE board exams. Other exams may also have to be rescheduled but this will depend on the decision taken by the government on March 31.”


