Entire CRPF battalion quarantined in Delhi
2020-04-30
NEW DELHI: The CRPF on Wednesday placed an entire battalion — the 31st battalion based in Mayur Vihar — under quarantine following the death of a sub-inspector due to Covid-19 on Tuesday. 

As many as 45 others from the battalion have also tested positive and around 500 personnel living at the camp, which has now been sealed, had their swabs taken on Tuesday, the results for which are awaited.

The development came amid suspicion in CRPF that the primary source of infection — a nursing attendant who had reported at the facility from J&K on April 7 and lived under quarantine for next 10 days as advised, before testing positive for Covid-19 — had failed to strictly observe the quarantine, leading to contact with others personnel inside common facilities such as canteen/toilets, before he developed symptoms around April 17. 

“It is possible that the quarantine was not enforced strictly and in line with health ministry norms that require a minimum quarantine period of 14 days. The nursing attendant was advised, as per a directive issued by Director (Medical) of CRPF, to be under quarantine for five days, which was later extended by another five days. By the end of this 10-day quarantine, however, he developed flu-like symptoms and was made to undergo Covid-19 test on April 17. The test returned a positive outcome on April 19 and he was shifted to Rajiv Gandhi Super Speciality Hospital. During contact tracing, it turned out that the attendant came in touch with 65 others at the camp, of which 32, including SI Mohammad Ikram Hussain who died on Tuesday, came out positive. On Tuesday, 12 more personnel tested positive, taking the total to 45.

“Given that 45 personnel have come out positive a call was taken to seal the camp and place the entire battalion personnel lodged at the camp, under quarantine. All personnel, totalling around 500, have also been made to undergo the Covid-19 test and their results are awaited,” a senior CRPF official told TOI.


