Erode ends 37-day Covid-19 free run
2020-05-23
ERODE: After a lull of 37 days, Erode district recorded a new Covid-19 case on Friday when a 50-year-old man from Kavindapadi tested positive for the virus.

A returnee from Chennai, he was tested negative for the novel coronavirus when he entered the district some 10 days ago. He was subsequently asked to remain in home quarantine.

Meanwhile, he went to Gobichettipalayam as part of his work. He met with an accident on Gobichettipalayam-Erode highway, fracturing his leg.

Dr S Soundammal, deputy director of health, Erode district, said, “He was initially admitted to the government hospital in Erode town and then shifted to the Salem Government Mohan Kumaramangalam Medical College and Hospital (SGMKMCH) on Wednesday evening.”

Doctors in Salem collected throat swabs and blood samples from him for Covid-19 test before performing surgery on him. “He was tested positive for the virus. Health officials are trying to trace his travel history and contacts,” the official said.

Health department officials said they have collected throat swabs and blood samples from his family members and neighbours, besides spraying disinfectants in and around his residential area.

District collector C Kathiravan has instructed the health officials to trace the close contacts of the new patient.

Similarly, Krishnagiri district also reported a new case, taking the total number of Covid-19 positive cases to 22 from 21.

In this case also, the patient is a returnee from Chennai. “He is a 52-year-old driver from Alasanatham village near Hosur. He had gone to Chennai as part of his work on May 17. He returned home on Wednesday. We had taken samples from him the same day. He is admitted to the government hospital in Krishnagiri,” said a health department official.

Dharmapuri collector S Malarvizhi, meanwhile, said the district was free of Covid-19 patients. Five people were tested positive for the virus in the district and all of them have been discharged from the government medical college and hospital, where they were undergoing treatment. “A railway woman cop was the last patient. She was discharged from the hospital on Thursday evening,” the collector said.


