Essentials in stock for lockdown period and beyond, say West Bengal retailers
2020-04-16
KOLKATA: On Tuesday afternoon, hours after the Prime Minister’s announcement of extending the lockdown till May 3, the state government took stock of essentials in the markets. During the meeting, the wholesalers gave details of the stock-and-supply scenario and flagged some loading-unloading issues that had cropped up due to acute shortage of labourers.


“As far as basic essentials are concerned, we have no supply constraint. We have listed the staples without which kitchens cannot be run. We have a steady supply of rice, pulses, atta, edible oil, salt and spices. Earlier if we had any issue with the supply, we flagged them and they were resolved almost on a real-time basis by the officers,” said Biswanath Agarwal, general secretary of Posta Merchants’ Association.

According to the association, the prices of most of the essential commodities have remained stable — the price of edible oil and pulses increased marginally. Apart from the state government, the Union consumer affairs ministry has been monitoring the prices of 22 essential commodities on a day-to-day basis, said a senior state government officer.

“Initially, there were some hitches in the supply chain. We were worried about the edible oil stock. But the state government officials coordinated with Rajasthan and Haryana governments to prioritize the edible oil supply and we could tide over the imminent crisis with supply steadying very fast. But we cannot supply edible oil in tetra packs because of short supply of packaging materials. However, there is no shortage of the 15kg tins,” said Agarwal.

The Retailers Association of India (RAI) has also assured that there is enough stock. “There is enough stock of grains, pulses and other daily essentials for the extended lockdown period and beyond. There is no need for citizens to believe otherwise and engage in panic buying,” a member said. RAI also said that the association, along with its members, is working closely with various state governments, including that of Bengal, and with the Centre to resolve supply concerns with regards to essentials.

A day after the chief minister announced the extension of lockdown till April 30, there was a fresh bout of panic buying at various pockets of the city. However, shops were asked by the government to ration staples so that hoarding could be avoided. “This policy somehow helped. We also did not run out of stock as had happened after March 24,” said Arun Tarafdar, a retailer at Parnasree. 

“About 90% buyers had earlier, when the lockdown was first announced, tried to hoard essentials and picked up as much as they could. This panic buying put a strain on the supply chain. But now people have the confidence that the essentials will not vanish. Only 10% tried to stock up on essentials in bulk after the extension was announced,” said Gourango Karmakar, a grocery retailer at Kidderpore Market.

Sources said the government must slowly extend the exemption to other categories of products. There are many items which are allied with essentials, like packaging materials. “Unless full-scale trading of packaging materials is allowed, the supply of essentials will be affected,” said Samsuddin Haq, who runs a packaging unit of grocery products. 

