EV companies tweak product strategy, defer capex to meet post-Covid scenario
2020-05-01
Chennai: The electric vehicle industry is preparing for life after lockdown by deferring capex and tweaking its product strategy to focus on new and emerging segments. EV manufacturers including Hero Electric, Kinetic, Mahindra Electric and others have indicated deferral of capex and programmes deemed non-critical in an effort to conserve cash.“We will invest only in the most critical programmes which we have already started and all other capex programmes will be postponed by 2-3 quarters. Some programmes like half tonne delivery fleet vehicle will continue,” said Sulajja Firodia, founder & CEO, Kinetic Green Energy and Power Solutions. “Of course everything is on hold and there will be substantial deferrals in terms of capex. We will use this opportunity to cut out all non-essentials though not to an extent where the business begins to suffer,” added Naveen Munjal, MD, Hero Electric. Even when there is no deferral, the capex spend is modified. “We have not cancelled any capex spends. We have only modified the spend such that the impact of Covid is taken care in business plan,” said Mahindra Electric CEO Maheshbabu. Alongside the capex tweak, companies are also tweaking their business plan. Kinetic, which just rolled out a range of fogging and spraying e-vehicles, is focusing majorly on B2B demand. “We are pushing cargo solutions for e-commerce and FMCG last mile delivery as well as waste management companies,” said Firodia. “Hero, on the other hand, is focusing on affordable personal mobility as well as courier and food deliveries. “With public transport so crowded, people may opt for affordable personal mobility,” said Munjal. “Electric two wheeler batteries can even be charged at home so you avoid petrol pump crowds.” Of course long-term product plans will not be affected but in the short-term product and features will be tweaked to suit the new normal. “The features inside the products will be revisited to make the new way of customer expectations post Covid,” said Maheshbabu.Others like Greaves Cotton, is also focusing on the available range of industrial products that will help in the transportation of the crucial supplies. “On the e-mobility front we are already a preferred partner in last mile e-mobility,” said a company spokesperson. “We have seen successful partnerships with Bounce and Big basket, helping in fleet delivery services and have recently launched a campaign, ‘Kal ko Bachao’ capturing this sentiment. Post-Covid, eco-conscious people will cut down extra expenses and Ampere electric scooters with around 90% savings as against conventional scooters will deliver lower running & maintenance cost.” 