Covid-19 in Odisha: Evacuation of tourists starts from Puri, ban on hotel bookings
2020-03-19
BHUBANESWAR: To keep Covid-19 outbreak at bay, the Puri district administration on Wednesday imposed a ban on bookings in hotels in the beach town and started evacuation of tourists. 


“We have issued an advisory to hotels and other tourist accommodation centres asking them not to accept any booking till further orders (for indefinite period). Hoteliers have also been asked to cancel all bookings of rooms, conferences, banquets and wedding parties with immediate effect for an indefinite period,” Puri district collector Balwant Singh told TOI. 

Singh said the administration on Tuesday appealed to tourists to vacate their hotels and leave Puri within two days. “I understand that the hoteliers have already started facilitating the evacuation of tourists. Hoteliers have been strictly asked not to harass any tourist. They should politely convince the guests about the crisis situation and state government’s precautionary measures against Covid-19,” Singh said.

The Hotel Association of Puri (HAP) said only around 8,000 tourists, including around 20 foreigners, are currently present in different hotels in Puri. On a normal day in March, the presence of tourists in Puri would be at least 30,000. “We now have only 10% or 12% occupancy in almost all hotels. Puri has over 400 small and big hotels. We have been requesting the tourists to leave Puri. In the next one or two days, all hotels will be vacant. We are facilitating purchase of train and flight tickets for those tourists, who find it difficult to return home,” HAP secretary Raj Kishore Patra said.

Tourists said they were extending support to the administration. “We had arrived in Puri 10 days back when there was no fear of corona outbreak. The Odisha government started restrictions three or four days ago. We were planning to extend our stay for one more week, but we cancelled it for our own safety,” said Chandrakant Sharma, a tourist from Bhopal. 

A joint team of Puri district and police officials has been patrolling at Pipili toll gate on Bhubaneswar-Puri National Highway-316 to restrict the entry of tourists, who are coming in vehicles bearing registration numbers of other states, to Puri. Over 15,000 tourists were denied entry to Puri in the last three days, sources said. 

On Monday, the district administration imposed prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPC on the beaches in Puri and Konark. Restrictions have already been imposed on movement of tourists at different destinations, including Jagannath temple, where devotees are being compulsorily asked to wear mask before entering the shrine. However, the Jagannath temple administration has withdrawn its earlier plan of securing self-declaration from devotees on their health conditions. 


