Evacuation bus fuels virus buzz in Darj, 1 arrested
2020-04-16
Darjeeling: A bus with a Haryana registration plate, which stopped in Darjeeling on Wednesday to pick up two Spanish tourists and a Portuguese national, fuelled Covid-19 rumours and sparked panic in the hills, prompting police to arrest one person for spreading canards against the three foreigners. 

Police said the bus was taking foreign tourists stuck in various parts of the country to Delhi following directives from the Union home and external affairs ministries. It had picked up three French tourists and an Italian and a Spanish national from Manipur before making the Darjeeling halt en route to the national capital.

“The Union home ministry has started a process of sending back stranded (foreign) tourists in India to their respective countries. Accordingly, a bus reached Darjeeling to take back three foreigners stuck here since the lockdown,” said T S Nath, inspector in-charge of Darjeeling Sadar police station. 

Nath said the two Spanish tourists and the Portuguese national were taken back to Delhi on special requests of their embassies. “Various embassies have arranged for chartered flights to take their citizens back home. The MHA is facilitating the return and it is an ongoing process. The three nationals have been here for over two months,” the officer said, adding safety protocol was followed and the bus scanned at various checkpoints before being allowed to enter Darjeeling town.

Nath refused to give numbers of stranded tourists in the hills, but sources said before the first lockdown, around 40-45 were stuck here. “A few days ago, two Spaniards and an Australian were sent back following an MHA order,” a source said.

 “These tourists are not the ones that come for a few days and return. They stay on for six months and even more in rented houses or homestays,” Nath said.“One should verify things before spreading rumours. It is dangerous. Our special monitoring cell will look into the incident and take necessary action against the person arrested,” he added.


