Coronavirus outbreak: Event industry, eateries face the music
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: While the cancellation of major global events and performances is making news, what is not so well known is that the Covid-19 scare has hit the events industry hard in India. With large gatherings seen as being high risk, big and small events alike are being cancelled by the hour.


Like Mariah Carey cancelling her Hawaii concert or the new James Bond movie release being postponed, Indian artistes too are either unwilling to fly abroad or are being denied visas for having earlier visited virus-suspect countries. As a result, events are being cancelled or postponed, and associated businesses such as sound and lighting, venues and security are taking a hit. The industry expects this sorry state to prevail for three months at least.

Dev Bhatia of artiste management and booking agency Unmute posted on his social media page: “Right, so to everyone working in the live events industry (or any industry), brace yourselves for the impact of the #CoronaVirus outbreak and good luck for managing the losses our businesses are going to incur. Stay strong!”

Bhatia told TOI that in the past 72 hours, he had only heard of cancellations and estimated that around 80 events across India had been withdrawn. “If the coronavirus spread is not contained in the next 15-20 days, one can expect events for next three months to be cancelled or postponed,” he said. “This will impact not only the artiste management agencies, but also venues, service providers, sound and illumination companies and host destinations.”

Among major events nullified are FDCI’s Fashion Week, a music festival in Hyderabad and Holi Moo, the Holi festival in Delhi featuring music from India and abroad. Ardaman Dua of Nightvibe, a company that curates international artiste tours and Indian music festivals, worried about gig cancellations. He has seen friends in the industry posting cancellation notices for half of around 20 performances planned for the next two months. “Cancellation impacts our livelihood,” Dua asserted. 

Holi is a major time for day parties, and vendors involved with floral and fabric décor and the local halwais undertaking the catering are caught in a sudden slump. A fabricator who invested heavily to decorate almost 25 venues in the city has seen all the events being cancelled. His associate, a caterer who was banking on the festival season, is also feeling the pinch. “People are scared even to host family functions this year,” he rued.

For restaurateurs like Umang Tewari of Big Fish Ventures, which runs multiple outlets known for their music and late-night parties, the coming weekend will be the first big test after the news of a growing number of people testing positive for the novel coronavirus in India. “We will get to know the impact on the venues this weekend,” he said. “So far, the sentiment has certainly been impacted, but we are doing everything within our control to maintain the standards of hygiene to reassure our clientele.”

