‘Even youngsters prone to Covid-19’
2020-03-27
PATNA: Contrary to the claim that the elderly people are more vulnerable to coronavirus, the average age of positive cases in Bihar is around 29 years.

Altogether six people have been reported to be infected by the virus so far. One of them, a Munger native (38), died on Saturday. Two more positive cases — a 45-year-old woman, whose son had returned from Italy, and a 25-year-old youth, who had come back from Scotland — were reported on Sunday. The fourth person, a 29-year-old who had returned from Bhavnagar in Gujarat, tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday night. Two fresh cases were reported on Wednesday night. The first is an 11-year-old kid and the other is a 35-year-old woman.


Coronavirus live updates

Earlier in March, medical journal ‘Lancet’ had stated that the average age of those, who died of coronavirus, was 69 years. 

As the deadly disease is spreading in Bihar and infecting young people, health experts claim that youngsters are not immune to the virus. Last week the World Health Organisation had also pointed out that young people were not immune to Covid-19.

Dr Hira Lal Mahto, professor of microbiology at the Nalanda Medical College and Hospital, said it was a myth that the virus did not affect youngsters. 

“The risk is higher in older people because of underlying diseases like diabetes and heart problems. Also, their immunity is not as high as that of young adults or teenagers. Hence, no matter what age group an individual belongs to, the impact of the virus will depend on the seriousness of their underlying health conditions,” he told this newspaper.

Sharing similar views, Pratyush Kumar, a health specialist at the Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH), pointed out that although the highest mortality rate was among people above 65 years of age, it was possible for young adults to get infected by the virus. 

“Any underlying or genetic vulnerability can worsen the chances of death in younger adults if they are tested Covid-19 positive,” he said.

Talking about precautions to be taken by young adults, a senior doctor at the PMCH’s virology department, said, “People should not step out of their houses and maintain distance even with family members in order to prevent the spread of the virus. Apart from that, self-hygiene is important as it can stop the transmission of the virus.”

He also urged Patnaites to focus on mental health during the 21-day lockdown.


