Covid-19: Events calendar for month close to being wiped clean
2020-03-16
PUNE: Several events scheduled across the city over the coming days have been cancelled to contain the spread of coronavirus in the city. With eight Covid-19 positive cases detected in the city, event organizers as well as authorities have swung into action to prevent further spread of the virus.


Entertainment events planned in the city on Saturday and Sunday have been cancelled. Hinglish play ‘Dekh Behen’, scheduled at The Ritz-Carlton in Yerawada on Sunday has been cancelled. Likewise, a festival of films on dance ‘Sanchari’ and screening of the film ‘Neeli Raag’ scheduled for this weekend, at the National Film Archive of India, have been called off.

The Hi Life exhibition slated to be held from March 21 to 23 has been called off indefinitely. The Kalagram exhibition that was to be held at Koregaon Park on March 21-22 has also been postponed. The annual Women’s Day Award Ceremony hosted by the Vimannagar Women’s Club has been postponed indefinitely. The Pune Comedy Festival, scheduled for March 14 and 15 has been postponed and organizers will announce new dates soon.

The NASSCOM Tech Innovation Conclave, to be held at Hotel Hyatt Regency in Vimannagar on March 20, has also been cancelled. Even recruitment drives scheduled to take place in the city have been postponed. A working professional said, “A recruitment drive for L & T Infotech was to be held on Saturday but it now stands cancelled.” Alliance Francaise, Pune has also informed students that the March Delf Examination has been cancelled on account of Covid-19. A circular stated that the exam fees paid will be refunded. 

The Sant Tukaram Mahotsav, organized by SPPU and BORI has been postponed. The event was scheduled to take place between March 13 and 15. Shiv Sena leader Mahesh Pokale has written to the district collector to keep Sinhagad Fort closed to tourists during the upcoming weekend. 

Apart from entertainment events, a major sporting event scheduled in the city has also been cancelled. The third leg of the Unacademy Road Safety World Series scheduled at the MCA stadium in Gahunje was to be held between March 14 and 20.

