Even coronavirus failed to scare this toddler’s resolute mother
2020-05-10
Vadodara: On April 8, all hell broke loose in Khatri family of Bodeli when their two-year-old girl tested positive for coronavirus. Even though Ayesha Khatri was asymptomatic, but her reports came as a shocker to the family, especially her mother Afifa, who was inconsolable after the reports arrived.A determined mother, she immediately decided to go along with her daughter to the coronavirus isolation ward even though her own reports were negative. “I was shocked and could not accept the fact that my daughter, who did not show any symptoms of the virus, tested positive,” said Afifa, recalling the day when they went into trauma. All the family members were tested after Ayesha’s 60-year-old grandfather was the first to contract the virus. “I had to go with my child as she needed somebody to take care of her,” said the woman who took maximum risk but didn’t spare a second thought on it in face of protecting her child. The mother-daughter duo stayed on the same bed at GMERS Medical College and Hospital in Gotri. “Ayesha would play around in the ward as she was healthy and the hospital staff was also supportive,” said the mother.On the eighth day, when Ayesha’s first test in the isolation ward was taken, Afifa’s samples were also collected. It came in as mixed news for the family when Ayesha tested negative, but her mother came in the grip of the unsparing virus. The doctors at the hospital, however, did not inform Afifa that she had tested positive. “The doctors called me first to inform me about her reports and only two days later they told her,” said her husband Ahmadullah, who said he didn’t know whether to cry or laugh. “I was shattered again, but what kept me going was that my daughter had tested negative and her subsequent tests also turned out to be negative,” said Afifa, who too was asymptomatic. She was reassured only when Ayesha was discharged on April 21. “She was in the high-risk category because of her age, but thankfully she fought back and got discharged,” Afifa said, holding back her tears while talking to TOI.Like mother, like daughter. And following Ayesha, even Afifa slayed the virus, and returned home only a week ago after she was discharged from the hospital. In the meantime, while her treatment continues, the reunion of mother and child left many in the area with moist eyes. “It’s a huge relief to be back home and hold my child in my arms again,” she quietly added.