AP may reach Covid-19 peak in August, predicts IIM-Visakhapatnam study
2020-05-13
VISAKHAPATNAM: Covid-19 infections may peak after August in Andhra Pradesh even if the lockdown is extended to May 31, predicts an epidemiological modelling-based research conducted by the Indian Institute of Management-Visakhapatnam. 


However, the study suggests that Andhra Pradesh would be safe from Covid-19 if strict social distancing is practised by the public.

 

The study indicates that transmissions will be threefold at the peak with no social distancing, against the Covid-19 numbers with minimal social distancing. But if the lockdown ends on May 17, the peak will be reached around July 21 with 5% of the total population infected with no social distancing, and in August with less than 2% of population infected if minimal distancing norms are followed. The research also indicates a possible second wave of infections in Andhra Pradesh even if the lockdown is extended till June 14 and no strict social distancing norms are followed. 

Speaking to TOI, Anirban Ghatak, lead researcher and a faculty of decision sciences and information systems at IIM-V, said they predicted the progression of the pandemic in states based on the extended susceptible-infected-recovered/removed (eSIR) model. “We considered nine different scenarios and effects of intervention measures with different possible dates of lockdown relaxation, followed by different levels of social distancing guidelines post-lockdown,” said Ghatak.

Ghatak added that minimal social distancing practices include the norms that were in place before lockdown such as closure of educational institutions and malls. “Strict social distancing is something that is followed in Wuhan, China, ground zero of Covid. Hubei province opened its doors only after the effective reproductive number plummeted to nearly zero, implying significant reductions in probable transmissions. This is further followed by strict social distancing,” said Ghatak.

The study covered 15 states, which have been badly hit by the pandemic, including Maharashtra, Gujarat, Delhi, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Telangana, West Bengal and Karnataka.

