Coronavirus: Every traveller will be strictly checked, says Goa health minister
2020-03-17
PANAJI: Every traveller to Goa henceforth, will be strictly checked mostly in Bardez and Salcete talukas which have a higher proportion of Goans working in the Gulf countries. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Health officers have been instructed to keep a tab on travellers and particularly, the persons under quarantine in the two talukas and give their regular updates, director of health services Dr Jose D’Sa said after a meeting with health minister Vishwajit Rane on Monday. 

 
 
Domestic travellers reaching Goa by air from Mumbai or any other destination, with a travel history to Covid-19-hit countries will also be tracked and quarantined, he said.

Rane in his social media post on Monday, stated that the directorate of health services has been told to obtain travel history of persons suspected to be suffering from Covid-19. “Any traveller arriving into the state from a Covid-19 infected country will be quarantined on immediate basis,” Rane said.

As on Monday evening, Goa noted 92 persons were under home quarantine, and one suspect was placed in isolation at GMC that has a 30-bed isolation facility. 

State epidemiologist Dr Utkarsh Betodkar said they have been strictly tracking persons about whom they have received information from hotels and other sources.

The data of international arrivals is easily obtained from airport authorities and health authorities, he said, but then added that they have to rely on hotels and others for information about foreign tourists who visit Goa after completing their immigration procedures in other states. 

Stating that their utmost priority is also the safety and security of doctors, nurses and other staff, Rane said the use of hand sanitiser is being made mandatory at all entry and exit points in hospitals. 

The directorate of health services, he said, will identify additional isolation wards and beds in private hospitals and work out a protocol for transferring patients to GMC. 

Primary health centres should have separate flu corners and segregate out patient department (OPD) for common cold and cough. Instructions in this regard were also issued, he said. 

Special ambulances equipped with trained staff will be kept prepared to transfer suspected cases to isolation facility. “Keeping in mind the safety of our staff, the ambulances will be disinfected. Paramedics will receive training to handle suspects,” he said. 

