Ex-footballer who came from Maharashtra dies of Covid-19
2020-06-07
KOZHIKODE: Former footballer Hamzakoya, 61, who played for Maharashtra in the Santosh Trophy, died at the Manjeri Medical College in Malappuram on Saturday, taking the Covid-19 deaths in the state to 15. 


Hamzakoya had arrived at his native Parappanangadi from Maharashtra on May 21 byroad along with his wife, son, daughter-in-law, and grandchildren. He was kept in observation after his wife and son tested positive on May 24.

He was tested positive along with his daughter-in-law and two grandchildren on May 26. Koya developed respiratory problems on May 31 and was admitted to the critical care unit with a ventilator facility. During the treatment, he developed cardiac problems too. According to the medical bulletin issued by the medical college, Koya was subjected to plasma therapy as directed by the medical board.

Meanwhile, the death of a two-month-old baby admitted to the Manjeri Medical College with Covid-19 symptoms raised concerns before the test result came negative.

Another case of untracked Covid-19 was reported from Payyoli in Kozhikode district where a person who went to Bahrain on June 2 was tested positive at Bahrain airport. All his contacts have been sent to quarantine and the samples of his immediate relatives sent for examination.

Payyoli municipal chairperson V T Usha told TOI that the shops and the bank he visited have been closed. "He came from Bahrain in February and was scheduled to return in April. The person had no symptoms of Covid-19 but was found positive in the test conducted at Bahrain airport," she said.

It was the person himself who communicated the information to his family and friends. "He is very cooperative and is sharing the details of his visits with us. We are in the process of making the route map," she added. As there are no Covid-19 patients in the Municipality and the surrounding areas, the authorities are attempting to find the source of infection. 


