Ex-prof of BHU, one other test Covid-19 +ve in Kashi
2020-05-16
Varanasi: The Covid-19 positive cases showed a rising trend with the detection of 18 new cases in different districts in eastern UP including Varanasi, Ballia, and Ghazipur on Friday. 

In Varanasi, two new Covid-19 positive cases were detected on Friday. The number of positive cases has now rose to 92 in the district. Among two new infected person one is an 80-year-old retired professor of Ayurveda from BHU, who lives in Shivala Assi locality in Bhelupur area, which has become a new hotspot. The other 42-year-old person is the resident of Naria Sunderpur hotspot in Lanka area. 

District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said the number of hotspots has now increased to 34 in the district including 30 active hotspots. Four hotspots including Bajardiha, Lohta, Gangapur and Nakkhighat have moved to green zone. Out of 92 positive cases, 55 have got cured. Presently there are 35 active cases, while two infected persons have died. 

While nine new cases were found in Ballia district, seven cases were detected in Ghazipur district, two in Varanasi district. Besides, a Covid-19 suspect died in Azamgarh on Friday and his test report is awaited. In Jaunpur district also, a migrant worker died at a quarantine centre. Meanwhile, 16 Covid-19 symptomatic members of a family have been quarantined in Bhadohi district. The village wher the family resides has been barricaded. Most of the infested persons are migrant workers, who returned to their homes from different cities. 

With the detection of new Covid-19 cases the total number of infected persons has reached to 10 in Ballia district. Nodal officer Dr Jiya-ul Hoda said nine persons tested positive on Friday. Earlier, the district had only one positive case. Now, Ballia has six hotspots, two in Bairia, two in Murli Chhapra and one each in Revati and Sohaon. The migrant workers had arrived from Ahmedabad (Gujarat).

Meanwhile, as many as seven persons including five members of a family of Gopalpur in Birno area of Ghazipur district tested positive for coronavirus. The other two infected persons belong to Bhikhampur of Dullahpur area and Bharthana of Manihari block. All the infected persons had returned from Mumbai. The number positive persons has reached 15 in Ghazipur now.

In Bhadohi district, symptoms of infection were found in 16 members of a family of Ramaipur village in Gyanpur area. They had returned from Mumbai recently. Their samples have been sent for testing and they have been quarantined at the hospital. The village has also been sealed for sanitization. 

Meanwhile, a 35-year-old resident of Jahanaganj area of Azamgarh district, who had arrived from Mumbai by a truck on May 13, was admitted to the hospital after falling ill. Later, he was referred to Balrampur hospital Lucknow for treatment where he died on Friday. Azamgarh DM NP Singh said that his sample report is awaited. 

A 34-year-old resident of Nathupur village in Zafrabad area of Jaunpur district died at the quarantine centre in Mungara Badshahpur area on Friday. He had returned from Mumbai on Thursday. His test report is also awaited. Team of doctors and officials reached the quarantine centre after getting information.


