Exam anxiety and pandemic impact on academic schedule grip students
2020-04-21
HYDERABAD: With the state government further extending the lockdown till May 7, students pursuing professional courses have raised concerns over the exam and academic schedule. Although online classes are being held for a majority of courses, students are wary of appearing for exams based on online mode of studies. Many state universities were set to conduct undergraduate and post-graduate exams which were then postponed owing to the Covid-19 lockdown declared by the central government. 


“With such gaps of knowledge, heading for exams, as soon as the colleges are allowed to reopen, will cause an irreparable loss to students. Thoughts of such loss is causing anxiety among students, who might already be going through lockdown anxiety,” said Abul Fazal, final year BTech student at Muffakham Jah College of Engineering & Technology, who recently shot off an open letter to the Osmania University seeking a suitable exam schedule. 

According to OU officials, all the departments have completed about 70-95% of the syllabus. In some cases, students have been given topics to work on their project reports and assignments and seek further guidance of faculty members either through email or WhatsApp. 

“The university is evolving a mechanism to grapple with the academic and administrative issues arising out of Covid-19. It is contemplating setting up of a committee to evolve a plan of action with regard to the conduct of examination, assignments, projects, practicals and evaluation etc.,” the Osmania University said in its statement on Monday.

“It is observed that in the present situation, our stakeholders have expressed their concern about the examinations and possible delay in next academic calendar. Taking note of the genuine concerns of the students, teachers, parents and institutions, UGC has already constituted an expert committee to deliberate on the issues related to examinations and academic calendar and submit its recommendations,” stated a notice issued by UGC.


