Coronavirus scare: Primary schools may be closed in Chandigarh
2020-03-07
CHANDIGARH: In a move hinting at shutting down of primary schools in coming days like in Delhi due to coronavirus scare, the UT education department on Friday asked all government and private institutions to share examination and class schedules of March. The schools were asked to treat the matter as urgent and share details on Friday itself. 


Following the Chandigarh administration’s orders, biometric attendance was suspended in schools, colleges and UT departments. Municipal corporation, too, has suspended it till further orders. 

 
 
This was decided in a meeting held under the chairmanship of UT administrator VP Singh Badnore to review the preparedness for tackling the novel coronavirus. He ordered manual marking of attendance till further orders and also asked the police department to stop use of breathalyzer for checking alcohol level.

With board exams on, schools have been keeping a close eye on students and telling those with cough and cold to inform authorities and take precautions. They have also been sanitising the school furniture and some have cancelled assemblies and scheduled trips. 

A school head said, “We had to take classes I-III for an educational trip, but following concerns of parents, we have cancelled it.”

Another school head said, “We are sanitising the furniture three times a day and students are told to cough or sneeze in crook of the elbow. All visitors have been asked to sanitise hands before entering the school. Sanitisers have been provided.” 

ABS Sidhu, Saupin’s School director-principal who is also a member of Independent Schools’ Association, said, “The department has asked for status of exams, among other things, for primary classes. Parents, mainly of pre-primary classes’ students, have also been inquiring about school closing.”

The education department also sent out advisories to schools to take measures as asked by various ministries and the health department.

‘No decision yet’

Regarding closing of schools, director, school education, Rubinderjit Singh Brar said, “We are still compiling details received from government and private schools. So, no decision has been taken on closing schools yet.”

Biometric attendance at PU

PU spokesperson Renuka Salwan said, “The staff on Friday marked their attendance through biometric system as no directions were issued to them. The authorities will take the final call on Monday.” 

‘Avoid social gathering’ 

UT administrator VP Singh Badnore appealed to the residents to avoid public gatherings and postpone Holi get-togethers.

