Coronavirus in Kolkata: Exam centres keep special rooms ready, schools suggest sanitizers
2020-03-13
KOLKATA: Several schools in the city have earmarked a room, where students down with cough, cold or breathlessness can take their exams, monitored by medical officers. This is one of the various measures that educational institutes have been taking in view of nCoV concerns among students and parents.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The Higher Secondary examinations started on Thursday, while both the CBSE and CISEC Class-XII board examinations are also on.

 
 
While many schools have deferred their parent-teachers’ meetings, one south Kolkata school has decided to send students’ annual reports by email and another institute has advised guardians, who recently travelled to foreign countries, to keep their children at home for at least a fortnight before sending them to school. 

The BSS School (BSS) has kept a room ready for examinees, complaining of cough, cold and breathing problems. “No one has yet complained of headache or sickness. But a separate room is allotted to anyone down with any disease. Every year, we come across cases of chickenpox or other seasonal diseases among examinees, for which the room is kept ready. We have allowed students to wear masks,” said BSS principal Sunita Sen. The headmaster of a school in Salt Lake has also allowed students to wear masks while writing their Class-XII board examinations.

A senior official of West Bengal Higher Secondary Council, which is conducting the board examinations, said they had advised schools and exam centres to segregate students who turned up with cough, cold and breathlessness. “We have asked school authorities to keep a separate room for examinees down with measles or chicken pox. If need be, students with cough, cold or breathlessness can be asked to take the examination separately. Till now, we have received no information of any student who had to be separated due to cough or cold,” the official said. Some schools have kept hand sanitizers ready for candidates before they enter the examination halls.

DPS Ruby Park, which is scheduled to reopen on March 19, will make wearing masks compulsory and students will be requested to carry hand sanitizers. 

Modern High School sent an email to parents, which stated, “May we also suggest that if any member of your household has recently returned from another country, that you keep your daughter home for a few days. However, please keep the school informed regarding her absence. This small precaution would make everyone feel more secure.”

John Bagul, principal at South City International School, said the parent-teachers’ meeting was tentatively scheduled on March 27. “We are keeping a close watch on the development. We are considering whether we will email the results to the parents or not, should we want to avoid a gathering in school.”

Several institutes, including La Martiniere and South Point High School, are conducting awareness workshops on coronavirus for teachers and suggesting preventive measures. Belle Vue Clinic internal medicine consultant Rahul Jain is holding several of these workshops, including the one at South Point on Friday. “This is a good way to reach out to teachers so that they can make their students aware. Viruses often spread from schools and we need to address the students and ensure they remain safe,” said Jain. 

