Covid-19 scare in Bhubaneswar: Exams of schools and varsities postponed
2020-03-17
BHUBANESWAR: As a preventive measure, the school and mass education department on Monday closed the schools in the state and postponed examinations of all classes starting from class 1 to class IX and class XI. 



Coronavirus live updates

“All government, aided, public and private schools of the state will remain closed and examinations of all classes from class I to class IX and class XI stand postponed. Schools must be closed and teachers must not attend schools but should remain available over phone for specific instructions,” said an office order issued by the department on Monday.

However, examination for class-XII conducted by council of higher secondary education (CHSE) will continue according to schedule. These examination, which started on March 3, will continue till March 28. 

Evaluation work for class X and XII will continue following all dos and don’ts prescribed by the health and family welfare department, said the office order. 

Higher education department has also issued a fresh advisory to universities, government, aided and unaided degree colleges of the state on prevention of coronavirus. It said the teachers and other employees need not come to educational institutions unless they have examination or evaluation duty. However, they must be available at their headquarters for any urgent/important duty, if need be.

Awareness creating materials, including newspaper advertisements on prevention of coronavirus, should be displayed prominently at the hostels. If any student wants to stay in hostel, they should be allowed. 

Only sixth semester examination and back-paper examination of students taking sixth semester examination should be conducted according to schedule with proper precautionary measures. Other semester examinations should be postponed till further order, said the communique.

Premier Utkal University has decided to close the hostels and asked its students to vacate their hostels by 5pm on Tuesday. Mess of the hostels will also be closed by Tuesday noon. 

“Reopening of hostels will be notified later on depending on the situation,” said Sabita Acharya, chairman of university’s PG Council. 

The university has also postponed all mid-term examinations. Revised dates will be notified later, said the notice issued by the university. 

Berhampur University vice-chancellor Govind J Chakrapani said they do not have any examinations left. “A few students are staying in the hostels, but we will tell them to leave the hostels soon,” he added. 

Sambalpur University vice-chancellor Deepak Kumar Behera said the university has no examinations after March 19. “We will conduct the remaining postgraduation examinations on March 17 and 19 by taking all precautions. Though we have not closed the hostels, most of the students have left their respective hostels,” he added. 

A Rama Devi Women’s University official said they do not have any examinations till March 28. “Science students have practical tests after March 28. But we will take a call on the examination after reviewing the Covid-19 situation. We have not closed the hostels, but most of the students have left for home,” said a senior teacher of the university. 


