‘Expert advice, curbs’ relook needed for lockdown exit’
2020-04-28
PUNE: Former Maharashtra chief minister Prithviraj Chavan has said that the Centre and state government must urgently take on board experts in behavioural economics and social sciences to identify the big industries and micro, small and medium size enterprises (MSMEs) that should be re-opened on priority.


“The definition of the MSMEs must be widened to include many more small businesses," Chavan, a technocrat and former Union minister of state with the Prime Minister’s Office, told TOI. He said the government should rethink its decision asking small units to provide accommodation for employees.

Chavan said that if providing accommodation for such staff is a must within the industry premises, then the governments should step in to provide the required infrastructure.

The senior Congress leader’s observations assume significance in view of his party being in a coalition in the state government headed by Uddhav Thackeray and in the light of the state government contemplating to extend the lockdown.

When told that the Union government has already appointed a task force comprising prominent economists and technocrats to prepare a roadmap for a staggered exit from the lockdown, Chavan said there would be a radical shift in the demand pattern after the lockdown ends as consumer behaviour will undergo a sea change.

“When people are worried about their jobs and salaries and when there is fear about a pandemic, the demand for white goods, luxury goods, vehicles and other such goods may go down. Buyers will spend on basic needs and essentials. They will be more conservative in their spending approach. There is no point in granting random concessions and approvals to each and every industry in one go when buyers’ priorities are set to change. Behavioural economists and social scientists will be able to identify sectors that need an impetus on priority," Chavan said.

Chavan defended his party chief Sonia Gandhi's demand to Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a wage protection package of Rs 1 lakh crore for MSMEs, saying the Union government should work proactively on this demand. He pointed out that the US government had already announced such a relief package for that country.

Talking about job losses, Chavan said, "There is no point in rendering lip service that employers should not retrench staff. That’s easier said than done. How will a small-scale employer afford to pay salaries unless the Union government provides funds?” he asked.

Chavan said the definition of MSMEs needed to be widened to include every small business that generates employment and is in dire need of support. Efforts should be aimed at “inclusion” of more business and not the bureaucratic exercise of “excluding” business by opting for “technical definitions” to decide which business can qualify for grants, he felt.

Chavan also questioned the series of restrictions that are being imposed on businesses while allowing them to work outside the containment and red zone/hotspot areas. “How can a small cloth store owner provide accommodation for staff living in containment zones and cannot travel back home?” he asked.

Chavan said that if such restrictions are needed, the authorities identify properties around the MIDCs to provide accommodation, food and transport for the staff. He pointed out that there were restrictions even on shops selling poultry items and perishable goods. “When farming and allied activities constitute the top priority sector that has been opened up even during the lockdown, every effort should be made to promote shops selling the produce. Else, the economy will suffer heavily,” he said.

