Experts discuss role of technology in lockdown
2020-05-18
PATNA: The Covid-19 pandemic has made a paradigm shift in consumer behaviour with the deeper penetration of technology in the national economy. With the changed market landscape, e-commerce industry has recorded a considerable growth during the prolonged lockdown.

Presenting these views at a webinar organized by Patna University (PU) economics department on Sunday, Cestor College of Toronto (Canada) management studies project coordinator Rabindra Singh discussed in detail about the penetration of technology in Covid-affected economy. He observed that both India and Canada were making optimum use of technology to recover their economy from the downturn created by the pandemic. This peak level technology penetration will be of a long-term global character. Even though adaptation of technological advancements has got several constraints in Indian circumstances, its prospects are quite high in the area of human capital management and supply chain management, he added.

In her presidential address, PU economics department head Raj Luxmi observed that despite being largely an agrarian economy, India may turn towards growth trajectory with deep technology penetration in remote rural areas by shifting to e-marketing of farm products.

Prominent among those who participated in the webinar included Saroj Sinha from economics department, Sweta Saharan from Magadh Mahila College, Preeti Sinha from Patna Women’s College, Satish Bharadwaj from Patna College and Puja Agrawal from B N College.

In another webinar organized by PU Women’s Studies Centre on Sunday, the experts discussed the impact of Covid-19 on informal sector workers and women. Prominent speakers were College of Commerce, Arts and Science principal Tapan Kumar Sandilya, BIT-Mesra (Patna) professor Manju Bhagat, Asian Development Research Institute (ADRI) faculty Barna Ganguli and Onoh Foundation director Nabarun Ganguli. Centre director Sunita Ray presided. 

Another webinar was conducted by the Educational Development Council, Bihar, on ‘Lockdown and Judicious Use of Online Technology’. Prof Gulab Chand Jaiswal, Dr Nagendra Kumar, Prof. Ismail Md Zain, Prof. Amrendra Behera, Prof Saket Kushwaha, Prof. Gyandeo Mani Tripathi, Prof Shailaj Kumar Srivastav, Prof Kamal Prasad Bauddha and Dr Nimisha Srivastava spoke on the topic. 


