Experts suggest to follow precaution, coronavirus has different life span on different surfaces
2020-05-07
PRAYAGRAJ: At a time when Covid-19 pandemic is making people apprehensive about ways to protect themselves, TOI speaks to number of experts on the issue of behaviour of the dreaded virus and its life-span on different surfaces.

Based on path-breaking research worldwide, the experts spoke about the life of the virus on various surfaces like veggies, fruits, cardboard, wood, utensils, different metals etc. which also suggests about what precautions one should take while saving himself.

Talking of the behaviour of coronavirus, a former student of Allahabad university and presently research associate, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Dr Archana Bajpai, said, “A study recently published in The Lancet journal carried out by independent researchers from Hong Kong by Prof Alex W H Chin of the University of Hong Kong has shown that the virus is unstable at high temperatures. While the virus has a long lifespan at a low temperature such as 4 degree Celsius, interestingly the virus is sensitive to heat i.e. 50% reduction in virus one day at 37 degree Celsius and no-virus in five minutes at 70 degree Celsius.

Nevertheless, these studies do not support the myths such as taking a hot bath or sitting in the sun will prevent the virus infection as these measures will only help in killing the virus on the surface and, will not kill the virus that has already entered the body, cautious the expert.

She further explained that the same study also has its findings on the life span of this virus on different surfaces. “The study concluded that the virus has a low life span on surfaces such as paper and tissue (One hour), 24 hours on wood and cloth, 48 hours on glass and more than four days life span on steel and plastic.

Talking of another important factor i.e. transmission of virus through different surfaces, another alumni of Allahabad University and who is research associate at Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Vipul Gupta said, “A study, published in reputed NEJM (New England Journal of Medicine) by Dr Van Doremalen and Bushmaker of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, USA, and Morris of Princeton University, also from USA) has shown that the virus is not viable in copper for more than four hours, which in a way is good news for all the households in India which uses copper primarily in kitchens”.

He further added that while there are no shreds of evidence of coronavirus spreading through food, but there is no such thing as zero risks. “Unwrapped fruits, vegetables should be washed thoroughly under running water and left to dry and for packaged food products, it will either help to leave them for more than 72 hours or wash/wipe them with bleach (carefully diluted at permissible level) or sanitizer/alcohol before using them”, said Gupta.

Indian culinary requires food to be cooked on high temperatures; there are chances that viruses, if any, will be killed while cooking. This is important for takeaway foods from the local market if the food is freshly cooked and is delivered with minimum human contacts, he added.

Talking on the issue, Prof SI Rizvi of the department of Biochemistry of AU said, “The main difficulty in dealing with this novel coronavirus is that it is absolutely new to humans and as researchers are still grappling to study its stability, one of the most intriguing property of this virus is that in around 80% patients, it does not cause any symptoms”. Thus, an effective lockdown is the only effective way out to pin the virus in confined areas.

Likewise, Prof IR Siddiqui of the department of Chemistry, AU said, “While scientist and doctors worldwide are doing their best to develop effective vaccine against Covid-19, the only way to prevent its spread is to follow necessary guidelines like social distancing, handwashing, sanitisation, avoiding to be in mob etc. In addition to this, vegetables and fruits purchased from market must be thoroughly washed, preferably first with potassium permanganate solution and then by sufficient clean water. 

