Experts want plan to check pressure on ecosystems due to Covid-19
2020-06-04
Nagpur: Some of the country’s key environmentalists from Maharashtra have called for an action plan in view of the Covid-19 outbreak, which has put tremendous pressure on terrestrial ecosystems. The forced reverse migration of people and unprecedented rise in unemployment rate has increased dependence of people on forests and wildlife. 

“It is high time government phases out coal-based power projects. Our development model is energy intensive. You cannot think of agriculture, industry, irrigation and transportation without energy. However, if the same energy is generated by polluting the environment, how can you expect sustainable clean development?” asked Kishor Rithe, ex-member National Board for Wildlife (NBWL). 

“In 2012, the energy demand was more than the installed capacity in India and many parts of the country faced load-shedding. Many players were applying for coal mining leases and thermal power plants. However, the energy sector has changed in last eight years and power demand is 40% of total installed capacity today. Hence, pollution level needs to be reduced by phasing out coal-based power plants,” said Rithe.

Bittu Sahgal, founder, Sanctuary Nature Foundation (SNF), said, “The government and policymakers need to recognize that forests, wetlands, grasslands and mangroves are infrastructure, not impediments to infrastructure. Maharashtra is India’s largest large dam builder, but every large dam catchment is in tatters.”

“We need effective soil and moisture conservation works, coupled with natural regeneration. This will create millions of jobs by putting our people to work, using nature based solutions to reduce floods, droughts and recharge aquifers. Our climate crisis can also be mitigated this way,” Sahgal said.

Debi Goenka, executive trustee, Conservation Action Trust (CAT), Mumbai, called to save mangroves that are one of the most important gifts of nature to mankind. In addition to producing oxygen, they also clean polluted waters. Mangroves can sequester huge quantities of carbon. They provide a natural defence to extreme climatic events such as cyclones and tsunamis. Yet, they are destroyed for development.

“We will also have to stop investing in projects along our coastline that are vulnerable to sea level rise. Projects such as Mumbai’s coastal road project, Navi Mumbai international airport, underground metro III project in Mumbai have been planned without considering impacts of sea level rise,” Goenka said. 

Covid-19 outbreak has put tremendous pressure on terrestrial ecosystems and consequently, poaching incidents have escalated. Hence, large development projects that are likely to be detrimental to environment will have to be viewed with extreme caution, cautioned Anish Andheria, president, Wildlife Conservation Trust (WCT).

“Covid-19, apart from killing nearly four lakh people since February 2020, has broken the back of the global economy. It will take many years for life to return to normal. This is too stiff a price to pay for allowing activities and traditions that have a negative impact on forests, wildlife and environment on the whole,” said Andheria.

“With less than 150 Great Indian Bustards (GIBs) and around 700 lesser floricans left in the wild, India certainly needs to take urgent measures to prevent extinction of these two resident and endemic bustard species. MoEFCC must ensure that India has safe and secured habitat for future reintroduction of bustards from conservation breeding programme,” said Kedar Gore, director, Corbett Foundation.

Deepak Apte, director of BNHS, said, “Sea level rise is not only threatening coastal areas with inundation, but also loss of productive agriculture lands, freshwater sources getting saline etc and causing newer areas of conflict.”

Apte called for a separate marine policy since the issues of these ecosystems are vastly different than terrestrial. It also requires a dedicated and highly trained cadre of enforcement agencies who understand the subject. “We need a separate ocean climate policy, stronger CRZ, and enhanced enforcement to contain illegal trade.”

“Our current focus of Blue Economy only looks at harvesting regimes with little or no focus on resource conservation. We require a fundamental shift in the Blue Economy model that is being pursued currently. Sustainability word is merely used to make policy papers nice but it is purely cosmetic. But one thing is certain, our climate solutions rests on the health of our oceans,” he added.


