Experts moot sewage testing to track spread of Covid-19
2020-05-27
Madurai: While testing sewage to track and assess outbreak of a disease is still a relatively new field of study, experts said that with more research, it could be greatly helpful when it comes to the Covid-19 pandemic since testing samples of people is still limited. At the same time, practical implementation of sewage testing and studies at the grassroots level is still a challenge.The Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC), a United Nations-hosted organization has recommended all countries to do testing of wastewater to monitor the status of the emerging pandemic, said Dr PS Navaraj, who is a member of the council. He said that research on the same is being done across the world and that it must be properly studied in India as well. “A variety of sewage samples could be collected from septic tanks and sewerage network in Covid-19 hospitals, quarantine facilities, containment areas, raw sewage entering sewage treatment plants, and treated sewage etc., The samples can be collected 2-3 times a week for testing. Health planners can develop a strategy accordingly,” said Dr Navaraj, who is also the founder of Madurai Science Forum.Assistant professor of community medicine Dr Sudharsan B, meanwhile, said that such testing of sewage following a reverse methodology could greatly help in prediction and assessment of spread of Covid-19. “Such testing to monitor an outbreak has been done earlier I the case of polio virus, which too leaves traces in faeces. It is a non-invasive method to study outbreak of a disease in a community without having to test every single person in a population,” he said. At the same time, the doctor said that practical implementation would be difficult in India when we can’t be sure of the origin or source of all sewage. “The method works better for nations, which have a fixed common sewerage network and can easily define which areas it is connected to. We won’t be able to get accurate results when we can’t be sure of the source of the sewage. We have a number of open drains as well and open defaecation could also be a factor,” added Dr Sudharsan.