Coronavirus scare in Bihar: Poultry products safe, say experts
2020-03-13
PATNA: Amid rumours that novel coronavirus can spread through poultry products, especially chicken, experts from Bihar Animal Sciences University said there was no evidence to suggest transmission of the deadly disease through consumption of non-veg food like chicken, mutton and egg.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Dr Pankaj Kumar, assistant professor of department of veterinary microbiology, Bihar Animal Sciences University, said fake news about spread of coronavirus through poultry products was unnecessarily creating panic among people. 

“Many families have stopped consuming non-veg food. However, the virus has nothing to do with consumption of poultry products. Indians cook food at a very high temperature, which kills all forms of viruses present in it. Hence, consumption of properly cooked food is totally safe.” Dr Kumar, however, said raw meat should not be consumed.

Meanwhile, poultry traders said chicken sales were badly hit owing to the covid-19 scare. Aditya, owner of a wholesale poultry farm at Phulwarisharif, said chicken sales have gone down by 30-35% owing to the virus threat.

“We have been receiving fewer orders these days. Even our permanent customers, who sell chicken and eggs at different places in the city, have stopped placing orders in bulk,” he said.

Munna Alam, a chicken-seller on Bailey Road said, “I used to sell at least 20-25 chickens per day. Now, the sales have come down to 10 chickens per day. Even during Holi, very few customers turned up at my shop.”

Many locals also said they have started avoiding non-veg food, especially eggs and chicken. “We still don’t know about the reason behind the spread of coronavirus. Hence, we have stopped consuming non-veg food as a precautionary measure,” said Pallavi Shrivastava, a resident of Gola Road.

“I have completely stopped eating non-veg food. Most hotels and restaurants serve stale meat,” said Shreya Gupta, a resident of Boring Road. 

