Expectant mothers in Vidarbha being tested for Covid-19
2020-05-14
Nagpur: Health departments of municipal corporations and respective district administrations across Vidarbha are testing expectant mothers in Covid-19 containment zones on priority. 

In Nagpur, NMC conducted special camp in the containment zones and tested many expectant mothers. Out of them, six have been tested positive so far and they are already admitted in the Covid hospitals. In Akola, 3 such women have been admitted and waiting for delivery while one each is admitted in Yavatmal and Amravati. 

“Pregnant women, whose delivery is expected in next three-four days, need medical care during institutional delivery. If tested positive post-delivery, entire nursing home, delivery room and staff may land into isolation/quarantine. To avoid this, administration is making it a point to diagnose Covid-19 infection in pregnant women on priority,” said Dr Prashant Uikey, HOD of Obstetrics and gynaecology department of IGGMCH. 

Doctors at IGGMCH had conducted delivery of a Covid-19 positive woman on April 29. She was discharged on May 13 after testing negative. 

If expecting mothers are tested Covid-19 positive before delivery, special arrangements can be made for delivery and risk of infection to doctors can be avoided. Both covid hospitals in Nagpur have separate arrangements, labour room for covid-19 mothers. Full post-operative theatre clean-up as per national health protection guidance can be ensured after delivery if they are tested before. The number of staff in the operating theatre can be kept to a minimum, and all wear appropriate PPE kits during delivery of Covid-19 mother. 

Doctors said that it’s always beneficial to test pregnant women at any stage. “ICMR guidelines clearly state that all pregnant women in containment zone need to undergo covid-19 tests. Even if their deliveries are not due in next five-six days, we came to know how vulnerable they are for the infection,” said gynecologist Dr Shama Kedar. 

According to her, infection can be avoided by boosting immunity of these women if they are found vulnerable for it. There are currently no data suggesting an increased risk of miscarriage or early pregnancy loss in relation to COVID-19. 


