Coronavirus scare: Experts advise not to panic in case of flu-like symptoms
2020-03-12
PUNE: Health officials have urged citizens to not panic over flu-like symptoms, as the novel coronavirus infection has so far been detected only among travellers and those in immediate contact with them.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

People with a recent history of international travel, who have flu-like symptoms, are suspected to have contracted the novel coronavirus infection. The officials said such people should self-report to doctors at Naidu Hospital. Those who have flu-like symptoms, but don’t have a recent history of international travel, can seek treatment from a neighbourhood physician, the officials clarified. 

“District health officials have directed all private medical practitioners in Pune to refer patients with the history of international travel in the past 28 days and also have flu-like symptoms to Naidu Hospital,” said Sanjay Patil, president of the Indian Medical Association’s (IMA) Pune branch.

“We have been receiving a lot of queries from people from across the city and even those from outside about whether they need to be screened for novel coronavirus infection (Covid-19), as they have flu-like symptoms. People with no history of international travel should not panic. Only symptomatic people, who have recent history of international travel, should report to the hospital to rule out the possibility of contagion,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate said.

Covid-19 and the seasonal flu are similar in many ways. Both are respiratory diseases that spread through the droplets of fluid from the mouth and nose of someone who is infected. Both are contagious, produce similar symptoms and may cause severe symptoms in some.

“There has been a sudden rise in cases of viral illnesses following the drop in temperature and also the wide fluctuation in the mercury levels. We have been seeing many patients complaining of cough, cold and fever. Many of them often ask whether it is the Covid-19 infection. We clear their misconceptions and treat people without any recent history of international travel,” senior family physician Prakash Mahajan said.

The doctors stated that Covid-19 and seasonal influenza viruses “have a similar disease presentation”. Both viruses are transmitted by contact, droplets and fomites. As a result, the same public health measures, such as hand hygiene and good respiratory etiquette (coughing into your elbow or into a tissue and immediately disposing of the tissue) are important actions all can take to prevent infection.

Senior physician K K Aggarwal, president of the Confederation of Medical Associations of Asia and Oceania, said, “To tackle any disease or infection, it is imperative to dispel myths associated with it. There are certain misconceptions surrounding the new coronavirus as well. I urge people to get information from reliable sources only and not rely on forwarded messages or remedies propagated via social media platforms. They must stay informed and undertake hygienic practices.”


