Explore rapid antibody test, home isolation for Covid-19: Bombay HC to Centre
2020-04-10
NAGPUR: In view of huge spike in coronavirus cases, the Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court on Thursday directed the Union ministry of health and social welfare to explore possibility of using the rapid antibody blood test for suspected cases for fast results.


“It would be necessary for the ministry to consider whether this test could be conducted due to short time taken for result. The aspect of home isolation as an alternative to hospital treatment is also a relevant,” Justice Atul Chandurkar said adding that these measures would help reduce the pressure on hospitals at this crucial time.

Referring to ICMR’s April 4 advisory on rapid antibody based blood test, amicus curiae Anup Gilda earlier prayed for directives to conduct it on suspects, as it gave results within 30 minutes and would lead to early detection and action.

While granting time to respondents till April 20, the HC made it clear that the directives issued on March 23 would be carried out in the true spirit. “The state’s response to HC’s suggestions regarding funds generated by public trusts/charitable institutions and Wakfs, be placed on record. Similarly, the collector and municipal commissioner, may consider whether wearing of mask by the public while coming out in public places should be made mandatory,” Justice Chandurkar said.

The directives came while hearing an intervention application by Dr Anup Marar through counsel Tushar Mandlekar highlighting importance of rapid antibody test to identify and screen the Covid-19 patients. It was in petition filed by CH Sharma and PIL by businessman Subhash Zanwar through counsel Ram Heda.

According to Mandlekar, the testing facility, which is time consuming and costly is available only at two places in the city. He also highlighted the aspect of home isolation contending that it wouldn’t be necessary to admit all positive patients in hospital as home quarantine for 14 days is also recognized by the ICMR and it would prevent crowding of hospitals.


