Face police action if you spread coronavirus rumours in Kolkata
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: Kolkata Police has set up special teams — both at Lalbazar and in each police division — to flag down and take action against widespread rumour-mongering regarding the Covid-19 scare. The cops have decided to take the carrot and stick policy in this regard — it will be encouraging for those who bring baseless rumours to the police’s notice, while legal action will be taken against all those spreading canards.

Special drives have already been undertaken across the city where cops are trying to reach out to the community asking them to desist from any speculation. The cop action comes amid reports of Odisha police arresting a person for spreading Covid-19 related rumours and the social media being flooded with “home grown remedies” and theories about the outbreak.

 
 
Police commissioner Anuj Sharma himself led from the front with a tweet in Bengali on Tuesday morning. “Do not listen to rumours or pay heed to them. Do not believe anything unless checking its veracity and truthfulness. Take all precautionary steps to stop the spread of the coronavirus. Stay safe, stay healthy,” he tweeted. His tweet got 60 tweets and 220 likes within a short span of time.

The Behala police division — officially the southwest division — has promised to take out a tableau in the area on Wednesday. “We will highlight on how it is important not to spread fake news and rumours as that can only manifold the care and stop people from taking proper care,” said DC (SWD) Nilanjan Biswas.

The cyber and social media cells of Kolkata Police are keeping an eye on the social media. Sources said that it was necessary to act given a section of men was selling fakes evoking God while others were living in false beliefs neither propagated by the state administration and World Health Organization (WHO) nor any established doctor.

A senior IPS officer said that “forwarding unverified message as true in effect was fostering nothing less than creating fakes”. He recounted how once — after a fake message went viral — he had to call up the control room and verify facts. “In case of any misinformation or when you feel unsure about a piece of information, do get in touch with the nearest cop or police station. We urge all individuals to carry the numbers of the local police stations,” he said.

