Facing lockdown heat, coolies want to be absorbed in railways
2020-05-16
NAGPUR: With all eyes on migrants, coolies working at the Nagpur station seem to be among the forgotten lot, facing troubled times amid Covid-19 lockdown. Some are even demanding that the railways take them on as employees.

“Hauling luggage of passengers is an easier job than bearing the load of life like this,” says Rahul Khadse (35), who stays in Ambedkar Nagar on Hingna Road with his family. Khadse’s condition is so bad that for six consecutive days his family of six lived only on dal and rice.

“Though train operations have started partially from May 12, my family members are preventing me from going to the station. They fear I may come in contact with some Covid-19 infected passenger,” says Khadse.

There are 158 coolies at Nagpur, including three at Ajni station. Ahead of the lockdown, over 100 coolies returned to their native places in Rajasthan. Two families living in rented houses in Mominpura are still stuck as the area has been sealed due to several Covid-19 positive cases. Those who returned to Rajasthan are still better placed, as they have small farmlands, but those in city are vulnerable.

The remaining coolies, who are entirely dependent on the present job, are facing tough times. “During the 55-day lockdown, we supplied them food kits at least four times through employees’ union and other sources,” says Central Railway spokesperson & ACM SG Rao.

“For us, lunch and dinner is one and the same now. We are dependent on NGOs to serve food in our areas, and if we don’t get any, I turn to GMCH, where food is supplied to patients’ relatives by some NGOs. We get some food grains from PDS shop but the stock is insufficient to fulfil the requirement of my six family members. I have not paid rent for last three months,” said Siddharth Ramteke (40), a luggage porter from Chandan Nagar. 

“The starting of special trains has not lifted our fortunes as passengers feel that if they come in contact with us they might get infected by Covid-19. Very few call for us to lift their luggage,” said. 

Suraj Meshram, president of Jan Shakti Coolies Union, says from May 13, due to few trains only 10 coolies are being called to the station in two shifts. “Of these, only two of them are getting a chance due to Covid-19 scare,” he says.

Coolies are quasi railway employees and have valid licence to work at the station. In 2007, then railway minister Lalu Prasad Yadav had decided to induct coolies as gangmen. But failing to cope with the tough job of gangman, many returned to their old profession.

“The lockdown woes have made them repent their decision to leave the job of gangmen, where they would have at least got fixed salaries. The coolies should be absorbed under Group D category,” said Meshram.

“As it is, due to modern luggage with strolleys and escalators on every platform, we coolies have been sidelined and there is no future,” says Runali Raut, a woman porter, who took up the profession mantle after her husband passed away.


