Facing stiff challenges, computer coaching centres trying to reinvent themselves as lockdown eases
2020-06-14
MADURAI: While already striving hard to make profits amid stiff competition from online learning courses, private computer coaching centres face grim prospects when they reopen post lockdown relaxations. The centres are yet to receive any guidelines for reopening.

“For us, it is a seasonal business. The months of April and May are when school students, especially Class X and XII, are on summer vacation and actively look out for skill development courses, including computer courses. However, this year everything has turned topsy-turvy due to Covid-19. We are facing huge losses,” said Akila AP, a trainer at a private computer coaching centre in Koodal Nagar that has branches across Tamil Nadu. Following on the heels of other coaching centres, computer training centres too are trying to shift to the online space to engage students. However, so far there has not been much success.

“We already had started giving online training for working professionals, so we quickly tried to do the same for students as well. However, in a city like Madurai, infrastructure is an issue as not everyone has computers and mobile phones at home. However, right now, even schools and colleges are forced to provide coaching online, so things will change slowly for sure,” said S Gopal, a computer trainer at a private computer coaching centre in Goripalayam. Computer trainers also expressed concerns over limited job and project opportunities in the software industry which may hold back students from taking up the course. 

Another challenge for online classes has been the need for purchasing license for the softwares. “For online computer training, both the teacher and student must have access to a computer or laptop and the required licensed software. We can teach theory all we like but for practical training, licensed software is a must which is mainly the reason students depend on the centres. Costs may also go up for certain softwares but we can’t even increase the fees as students will likely not accept it,” said Jaikumar C, who manages a computer training centre specialising in AutoCAD courses for engineering students.

However, despite the struggles, the centres remain hopeful. Trainers said that shift-based systems in schools and colleges may still make interested students take up computer classes in their leisure time.


