Failure to inform authorities about coronavirus ‘illegal & punishable’: MP government
2020-03-09
BHOPAL: The Madhya Pradesh government will make mandatory disclosure of travel history by visitors to or from Coronavirus-hit countries. Nondisclosure of travel history will be punishable. The move comes after the Kerala fiasco where a family that traveled to Italy returned without declaring their travel history to the country-hit and later they tested positive for the disease.


Sources said failure to inform authorities about travel history to Covid 19 impacted countries and symptoms would be considered a crime. The rule would apply to Indian and foreign nationals. 

So far there has been no confirmed case of COVID-19 in MP. However, over 500 people have been placed under quarantine. 

Another measure for self-discourse, comes in backdrop of health department finding it tough to trace such people with travel history. In view of rising cases from France, USA, Spain, it was decided to have dedicated aerobridges of these countries also in addition to the 12 countries already on list of mandatory screening, according to union ministry of health. 

Health department screens people via a list provided by Indian bureau of immigration. However, the address and numbers can be outdated. In some cases contact numbers were found to be changed. Also permanent address of foreign nationals can be hard to trace. 

Union health ministry has asked AIIMS Bhopal administration to designate a part of the new emergency wing for setting up of isolation beds for suspected COVID-19 patients. 

This isolation facility will have a capacity to hold patients at a given point of time and once confirmed to be positive and later transferred to a designated facility. One such facility has been designated outside Bhopal in a private medical college. 

After the Rashtrapati Bhavan decided not to organise the traditional Holi gatherings as a precautionary measure, PM Narendra Modi tweeted that people must be careful about rumours being regarding COVID-19. The state government too has initiated a ‘Namaste, Aadaab’ campaign, asking people to avoid handshake.


