Jaipur: Fake online sites selling liquor dupe many during lockdown
2020-04-30
JAIPUR: With lockdown in place and no liquor stores open, cyber experts have been receiving regular complaints about fake webpages claiming to sell liquor online and promising home delivery anywhere in the city. People who made online payments have been duped as they received no alcohol.

Mukesh Choudhary, a cybercrime expert who also provides his expertise to Rajasthan police said, “Since the lockdown, many people have sent us mails stating they paid money online for alcohol which were supposed to be delivered at home. But none did not receive it. Essentially, they were defrauded. This is the latest fraud which has been observed since lockdown came into effect.” 

Most of these are webpages which have been made on social media platforms like Facebook which advertise 24x7 home delivery of alcohol. 

Many of these fake online alcohol-selling pages also give out mobile numbers to give a sense of authenticity, but once the payments are made, the numbers become inactive. According to experts, the biggest challenge for them is that none of the persons who were duped have registered official complaints.

Choudhary added, “Such type of complaints are supposed to be registered at the government portal, but there is no check if these matters actually reach the police stations concerned well in time or not.” 

A complainant from Mumbai wrote a mail claiming that a person from Bharatpur who had a similar webpage had assured him of alcohol delivery in Jaipur and even took a payment of Rs 65,000 following which the complainant never heard from him again.

Cyber experts claimed that while 90% of the cybercrime cases reported during the lockdown period have been of financial fraud, the fake online pages of liquor purchase are also increasingly coming to light. 

“There was a trend of OLX fraud which was prevalent in the Mewat region, especially in Bharatpur and it appears that the same set of fraudsters have now shifted focus to duping people by promising alcohol delivery,” Choudhary said. 


