Coronavirus: ‘False negatives’ queer anti-Covid fight
2020-04-11
MUMBAI: A Mumbai doctor who developed dry cough and fever was relieved to test negative for Covid-19 at the BMC-run Kasturba Hospital laboratory recently. His relief, though, turned into dismay a couple of days later when he tested positive at a private hospital he drove himself to, due to worsening of his symptoms; he continues in hospital.


Elsewhere in the city, a 30-year-old man tested negative in a private hospital only to test positive later at Kasturba.

False negative reports are clearly emerging as an additional challenge amid a raging epidemic. “There is a big problem of false negatives,” said Dr Jayanti Shastri, head of civic-run Kasturba Hospital’s Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, which is the main testing centre.

Studies from Wuhan, the Chinese province where the Covid-19 pandemic began, found false negative reports could be as high as 30%. A third of all Covid patients could thus receive a negative result—despite exhibiting clinical symptoms.


 


A false negative result means a patient’s test results are “negative” even though he harbours the virus. Such patients get sent back from hospitals or, worse, they get a false sense of relief, drop their guard, and spread the infection at home and within the community.

Experts listed a series of reasons—the nature of the virus, the incubation period of the infection, improper collection of samples, types of kits available in the market and so on. “There needs to be an adequate amount of viruses in the body for a test to detect it. This is called limit of detection by equipment,’’ said Dr Shastri.

She said the ideal time to test would be five days into the infection when there is adequate viral load. However, infectious diseases specialists like Dr Tanu Singhal said the test’s sensitivity drops beyond seven days of symptoms.



Coronavirus waxes and wanes in patients, can give false -ve result

Doctors agree patients (especially those without symptoms) have no foolproof way of knowing if they are in their fifth or seventh day of infection.

Mumbai doctors have found another “mischievous” fact about the novel coronavirus—its presence in the patient’s body waxes and wanes every day, contributing to the false negative tests.

“A patient may test negative today, but will test positive a few days later,” said Shastri, adding that is the reason the BMC discharges a patient only after two consecutive tests taken 24 hours apart are negative.

“The virus presents a lot of public health dilemmas or it is like an enigma,” said Dr Shastri.

The Wuhan study looked at two groups of positive patients—severe and mild. It found sputum samples showed the highest positivity in both groups: 89.9% in severe and 82.2% in mild.

Nasal swabs, though, had a positivity of 73.3% in severe cases and 72.1% in mild ones while it was further down for throat swabs (60%, 61.3%, respectively).

Doctors here, too, report similar findings.

Dr Nilesh Shah of Metropolis Laboratory said nasopharyngeal swabs have to be taken from “deep inside”.

“If the collection isn’t done properly, you are likely to get a negative even if the patient has the virus,” he said.

Dr Singhal said published medical literature showed nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs in ideal conditions detect 50-60% of cases.

“This sensitivity drops further if the collection method is not proper or if a sample is not transported and processed properly,” added Dr Singhal.

Moreover, there are several Covid test kits available in the market. Each kit may have different sensitivity and show different results.

A public hospital doctor said they rely heavily on a patient’s clinical symptoms. “We have seen cases where patients test negative despite their CT showing a coronaaffected lung,” said the doctor. However, the doctor added a word of caution: “This doesn't mean the test is unreliable. It only means people should follow the 14-day quarantine rule even if they test negative.”

