Pune: Covid-19 positive woman’s four kin home quarantined
2020-03-22
PUNE: Four family members of the 41-year-old woman, admitted at Bharati hospital and testing positive for the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection, have been home quarantined and their throat swab samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) to rule out the infection.


“The woman's son, daughter, niece and mother have been home quarantined, and their swabs have been sent to the NIV for testing. They have flu like symptoms. Their reports are awaited,” said a health official of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC).


 
On Friday, the woman's throat swab sample sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) to rule out swine flu (H1N1), had turned out to be positive for Covid-19 and negative for H1N1.

The woman, a resident of Sihagad Road, did not give any history of foreign travel or any known contact with foreign travellers or with a person found infected with the Covid-19 infection. 

The health authorities, however, dismissed it to be a classic case of community spread of the Covid-19 in India, underlining the likelihood that the woman might have come in contact with a person with recent history of international travel or any close contact of such travellers of which she might be ignorant.

The woman attended a marriage in Vashi (Navi Mumbai) on March 3. She developed symptoms like sore throat and was unwell since March 8.

"Her symptoms initially started with sore throat and dry cough. She developed fever two days later, following which she visited local general practitioner, who gave symptomatic treatment. But her symptoms were not relieved with the medications

Her fever and cough persisted, and she gradually developed shortness of breath," said Bharati hospital's infectious diseases expert Sujata Rege.

On March 16 morning, the woman was admitted to a private hospital on Sihagad Road, where she was found to have pneumonia. In view of her worsening respiratory status, she was shifted to Bharati hospital around 11.45pm on March 16. 


