Family’s Covid-19+ patriarch admitted
2020-04-12
Ahmedabad: Irfan Dudhwala and his family members had known since Thursday morning that a medical team and cops would be knocking on their doors in the already quarantined Matawali Pol in Dariapur area of the city. Dudhwala’s 70-year-old father had tested Covid-19 positive. That his father was Covid-19 positive came to light as the list of Covid-19 positive people was leaked on the social media. Dudhwala’s father has been bed-ridden for the last five years due to paralysis. The health officials shifted him to the isolation ward of SVP Hospital. Dudhwala told TOI: “My father was paralytic. But we didn’t have any issue with his treatment. The only thing that bothered us, and it still bothers us, that he needs assistance, and we are not sure whether the hospital staff will be able to provide that help in his daily activities.”Dudhwala, who works with an electronic company, said, “We requested the officials to keep my father quarantined in the house and treat him here, but they refused, saying it was not possible. We insisted that one of us accompany him. They agreed to take my younger brother along.”As the quarantined community in this cluster was still in disbelief, Dudhwala too wondered whether his father had really tested positive. “I have been asking for the test result, but nobody replies to my queries. I contacted the private laboratory, where the samples were analysed. However, the lab also refused to give the information,” he said. “I received calls from two of my neighbours who are kept in the same isolation ward at the SVP Hospital. They informed us about my father’s well being and sent us his videos too,” he said. However, the family is still sceptical. Dudhwala showed two forms for self-declaration stating that the family accepts a 14-day quarantine upon the return of a family member from abroad. “My father was bed-ridden. We have not filled the forms. Yet they show that my mother has accepted the quarantine,” said Dudhwala, adding that there were 105 families in Matawali Pol which were quarantined for more than a week.He also raised question over the return of his younger brother Azharuddin from the hospital on his own. “He is supposed to remain under quarantine. Yet, he was allowed to return on foot. No one bothered to ensure that he returned to this quarantined area without contacting other people,” said Dudhwala.