Family of man who died in an abandoned house quarantined
2020-03-31
LUDHIANA: The family of the man who was found dead in an abandoned house in a village in Machhiwara has been put under quarantine. His last rites were held up for over five hours as the villagers and his relatives insisted on a coronavirus test.


After the body of the 42-year-old mentally-ill man, who allegedly had fever, breathing problem and cough, was found, his relatives resisted the cremation and demanded the health department take his samples for the novel coronavirus. After the health department officials convinced the villagers and relatives that he had not died of the disease, they cremated him around 3pm Sunday. 

Dr Jaspreet Kaur, who is posted at Community Health Centre in Machhiwara, said the family of the deceased has been put under quarantine as a precautionary measure and a sanitary officer has pasted a poster outside his house, even though he didn’t die there. His family comprises his wife, a 22-year-old son and a daughter. His brother and his wife also lived in the joint family. 

The health officer said the deceased was not a Covid-19 case and there were various facts to support the argument, one being he didn’t have a foreign travel history and there was no evidence of him having visited the Hola Mohalla festival in Anandpur Sahib. 

Health officials said the deceased was a smoker and had respiratory issues. They added that as of now none of his family members has shown any symptoms. 

Former sarpanch of the village Gurpreet Singh said at present, there were no health issues in the village.

‘Health team didn’t even touch body’

Former sarpanch Gurpreet Singh had first spotted the body. After the health team had left, the body was kept in front of the deceased’s house. People said the deceased used to wander for days and had returned a week ago and was being treated for fever and cough for the past few days. Some villagers had voiced the apprehension that he may have visited Anandpur Sahib, where the state’s second corona-positive case had gone. Some women, who had spotted him near the village gurdwara recently, said he appeared to be breathing with difficulty. Cautious, family and villagers were wary of touching the body and insisted for a corona test before the funeral. They said the health department team told them “no report of corona test is issued for the dead”. The former sarpanch said the health department team didn’t even touch the body. About 20 persons were there at the cremation ground, where they maintained social distancing and wore gloves and covered their faces.


