Family of six who recovered from Covid-19 to donate plasma
2020-04-29
BAREILLY: The health department in Bareilly has informed King George’s Medical University (KGMU) and state surveillance officer that the family of six, who have recovered from novel coronavirus infection, have agreed to donate their plasma for treatment of Covid-19 patients.

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam told TOI, “Following directions received from higher authorities, to persuade patients who have recovered from the infection to donate their plasma, I approached the family of six, who agreed to the proposal. I have informed authorities at KGMU and the state surveillance officer about it. They will now decide on how and when the plasma will be collected.” He added, “Of the six, plasma will be collected from those patients whose weight is above 55 kg and haemoglobin level over 12.5 grams per decilitre.”

One of the six patients, a 28-year-old woman, told TOI, “When we were approached for donation of plasma, we immediately gave our approval. It would make my family very happy if plasma therapy helps save someone’s life. We don’t want any family to suffer from Covid-19 and wish quick recovery for all patients.” She added, “Of the six members in our family, my sister-in-law and I don’t fulfill the weight criteria. We’re waiting for officials to screen us.”

Explaining the procedure of plasma therapy, an official said, “The body of a Covid-19 patient produces antibodies to attack the virus. These antibodies are secreted by immune cells found in plasma. The plasma from recovered patients is transfused into patients suffering from Covid-19 to boost their immunity.”

The family of six live in Subhash Nagar. They tested positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly last month. Two of them were discharged on April 13, while the remaining four returned home on April 17.

A 34-year-old man who works at a Noida-based firm that reported several cases of the infection, was the first Covid-19 case to be reported from Bareilly. After he was tested positive when he returned to Bareilly, it emerged that he had also infected his parents, wife, brother and sister. Only the man’s two-year-old-son tested negative. The family, which has been under home quarantine, reunited with the child on Tuesday, after he was returned by relatives a month after he was relocated to their house. 


