Maharashtra: Family with ‘home quarantine’ stamp travel unchecked for 400km, detained
2020-04-03
PUNE: Police on Monday detained 16 members, including nine minors, of a Mumbai-based family at the Vadgaon-Talegaon checkpoint for travelling in a multi-utility vehicle despite being stamped for home quarantine.


They had gone to Omerga on March 22 to attend the last rites of a relative. They travelled 400km without being checked from Omerga to Vadgaon.



A team of Vadgaon Maval police, led by Suresh Nimbalkar, intercepted their MUV at the Vadgaon-Talegaon Phata check point on Wednesday morning. The police found the “home quarantine” stamp on all 16 people and referred them to a temporary quarantine facility in Vadgaon Maval.

“The family had gone to Omerga on March 22 to attend the last rites of the relative. They were stuck in Omerga following the announcement of a nationwide lockdown. Being from Mumbai, they were told to undergo a medical check-up at a government hospital in Omerga on March 31 and were stamped for home quarantine,” investigating officer Vishwas Ambekar told TOI.

The officer said despite the home quarantine order, the family of three men, four women and nine children decided to leave for Mumbai the same night. “They travelled at night and entered Pune city via Hyderabad-Solapur highway. We stopped their vehicle at the checkpoint around 9am on Wednesday. We immediately alerted the health officials after finding the ‘home quarantined’ stamp on all of them,” Ambekar said. 

The officer said the family was immediately referred to a temporary quarantine facility in Vadgaon Maval. “The health officials at the quarantine facility said none of the family members showed any symptom of Covid-19 infection. The family will still have to remain in quarantine at the facility for 14 days,” Ambekar said. 

“We are also probing how a vehicle with 16 people travelled unchecked for nearly 400km, from Omerga to Vadgaon Maval, after crossing the borders of Osmanabad, Solapur and Pune districts,” a Pune rural police officer said. 

The police have registered an offence against the MUV driver under the relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Epidemic Act. 


