Family of boy found +ve in Korba quarantined at Kamptee
2020-04-06
Nagpur: Immediately after 16-year-old boy tested positive in Korba district, Chhattisgarh, on Saturday, the district administration here identified and home quarantined his eight family members in Kamptee. The administration has also traced, examined and quarantined 30 persons from rural parts of the district having Delhi connection as per orders of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).TOI on Sunday had reported the teenager who is a Jamaat member was camping at a mosque in Katghora town, Korba, and tested positive fr Covid-19. At present, he is undergoing treatment at AIIMS Raipur.Kamptee tehsildar Arvind Hingne told TOI, “We received information about the positive patient from Chhattisgarh government so quarantined his family members. All eight were asymptomatic. He left from Kamptee on a religious tour on March 1. He first went to Bilaspur and then Korba,” he said.Hingne added the boy was among four-member group and process to identify and trace remaining three was on.Resident deputy collector Ravindra Khajanchi said, “44 people were from rural parts of the district as per list received from MHA. 30 have been traced, examined and quarantined. One person was having some symptoms and has been admitted at Mayo Hospital. Remaining 29 are under quarantine at Vanamati. Test reports of all are awaited. Remaining 14 are out of district and state,” he said.Ramtek police on Saturday arrested five persons of whom two were stamped on their hand for home quarantine. PI Dilip Thakur said, “Four from Wadi including two home quarantines and one from a village were roaming in Panchala village under Ramtek police station. Villagers informed us. We arrested all five for violating Section 144 and norms of home quarantine and Disaster Management Act- 2005. One of Wadi residents’ grandmother was in the village so they had come here. They were out to find liquor,” he said.Thakur added they were handed over to their family members after testing and serving notice.