Family pitches tent on farmland, develops bond with nature to beat lockdown blues
2020-04-10
Coimbatore: Life hasn’t been the same for 62-year-old N Sampath and his family since the nation went into lockdown mode to fight Covid-19. From the hustle and bustle of the city life, they have today taken refuge in mother nature’s lap. A businessman from Sullivan Street in Coimbatore, Sampath and his family, along with their three pet dogs, have been staying in a tent that they have erected on their agricultural field at Alandurai for the past 18 days. The tent is the new home for Sampath, his 54-year-old wife S Manimegalai, sons Pradeep Shri Ayyappan, 31, and S Pooja Shri Ayyappan, 23, and daughter-in-law P Monisha, 24. The recent downpour too hasn’t deterred them from their decision to stay there until the end of lockdown. Sampath, who runs a petrol bunk at Podanur, said it was to mainly to comply with the government’s direction to maintain social distancing that they moved out of their house on Sullivan Street. His son Pradeep said, “We had rented out a few portions of the house and hence it was not possible for us to maintain social distancing by staying there. So, we decided to move to our agricultural field, which is spread across five acres. The tent, which is made of tarpaulin, is equipped with cots. We have gas stove and enough provisions.” The agricultural land is filled with guava plants and coconut trees. It also houses a farmhouse. Pradeep said they have stopped watching television and brought down the use of mobile phones. “We are making the best of our stay here by roaming around the agricultural field, enjoying the nature. Every day we sight peafowls, sparrows and parrots, and being with them is altogether a different experience. Every evening, we bathe in the Noyyal,” he said. Alandurai and surrounding areas had witnessed heavy rain a few days ago. While they have a farmhouse nearby, the family stayed put in the tent. “We, however, use toilets and bathrooms in the farmhouse. Otherwise, we stay in the tent. Our mother cooks food in the open field by using firewood. Everything is a new experience for us,” Pradeep said. He said the farm workers were given leave and that no one was allowed inside the agriculture field. Manimegalai, meanwhile, appreciated what the environment had to offer them. “We are very much happy here. We have stocked provisions for a month and plan to stay here until the Covid-19 outbreak is controlled.” The new lifestyle has also gone down well with Pradeep’s younger brother Pooja. “It is a unique experience and there is no stress at all.” However, Sampath’s daughter Nivedhitha Sri, who is married to government hospital doctor Dr K Karthikeyan and settled in Dharmapuri, has missed this rare opportunity to unwind with her family and explore the pristine nature.