Bhubaneswar: Families of new Covid-19 cases will be in home quarantine
2020-05-09
BHUBANESWAR: The Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) will not create containment zones in Surya Nagar, Mancheswar and VSS Nagar from where three more Corona positive cases were reported on Thursday. 

BMC officials said instead of containment zone, they will ensure home quarantine for the family members of the infected persons. The infected persons have been sent to the Covid hospital. 

According to new quarantine guidelines, the family members of the Covid positive will be in home isolation for 21 days. “During this period, active surveillance will be carried out,” said BMC commissioner Prem Chandra Chaudhury. 

On April 22, the BMC removed the containment tag from three localities - Surya Nagar, Bomikhal and Satya Nagar. All the three localities reported 30 positive cases then when the total number of cases were 46 in the city with 18 being from Bomikhal alone. So far, the city has reported 50 positive cases out of which 16 are active cases. 

The BMC commissioner said the latest case reported from Surya Nagar is related to an old case. “The contact tracing of other two positive cases are being done. Since the three cases are isolated ones and in three different localities, we thought home quarantine will be sufficient,” Chaudhury added, while informing that swab samples of close family members have been taken. 

On Wednesday, the BMC re-launched the household survey to find out whether anyone has returned from other states hoodwinking the officials. With 16 active cases, the city is now is red zone though rest of Khurda is being treated as orange zone. 

The BMC said despite three more positive cases, all shops, including the standalone ones and located within residential complexes except multi-brand and single-brand malls have been allowed to open. Besides, shops that repair and service electrical and electronic appliances, including air conditioners, motor garages, tyre shops, battery shops and lubricant shops have been asked to open. 

The government will also allow courier and home delivery of food besides book stores. The offices of big business establishments and industries have been asked to resume with 33% employee strength. 


