Nagpur: Family time and prayers to mark Ramzan in lockdown
2020-04-23
NAGPUR: This Ramzan, the hustle and bustle in the markets and streets will be missing due to the lockdown. Many faithful, though, see it as an opportunity to spend Ramzan with the family and in prayer at home.

The holy month of Ramzan began from Wednesday evening for the Bohra community with their first roza on Thursday. The other sects will begin the Ramzan celebrations depending on the sighting of the moon. The first roza will be observed on Friday if the moon is sighted on Thursday evening, otherwise onset of Ramzan will be Saturday evening. This Ramzan will be different as, for the first time, there won’t be any mass gatherings, celebrations or iftar parties.

The masjids in the city are also closed because of the lockdown. So, corona will taken the sheen off the holy festivity celebrations, as people will not be able to go out and buy new clothes, offer namaz or pray in masjids, or meet friends and relatives. However, some are taking it as an opportunity to spend quality time feasting and fasting together.

“For the Bohras, the celebrations come early. All the members in my family have decided to keep roza. We saw the moon and began our Ramzan from Wednesday evening. We will have iftar parties at home within our family only,” said Malik Fidvi, a businessman.

Three weeks earlier, directives have been issued to all community members to maintain social distancing, avoid mass gatherings and iftar parties. Also, groceries and essential food items have been distributed so people can avoid going out. “Being a Bohra we began our Ramzan celebrations from Wednesday after sunset. We are very excited for our first roza tomorrow. We will offer namaz five times a day and wish for this negativity to fade away,” said Tayyeb Arif.

Swaima Ahmed, an educator, is very excited for the holy month to begin as she is looking forward to keeping roza with her family members. “This Ramzan will be remembered for years to come, even though we won’t be able to go out for mass celebrations. All the community members will celebrate it at home, giving an example of peace and unity amid such situation,” she said.

Ahfaz Taji, a restaurant owner, has done all the preparations to begin the celebrations of Ramzan. He believes that being grounded at home during Ramzan will offer more time with his family. “Every year we look forward to the celebration of Ramzan. Our prophet has advised us to make the most of our time during roza and dedicate it in offering prayers. We have stocked our pantry to avoid going out unnecessarily,” he said.

Hasnain Shakir, a businessman, added, “We will surely go out and buy new clothes after this lockdown is lifted. But for now, we stand with the government. We will celebrate iftar with dates, fruits and dry fruits, and spend the day time praying with family,” he said.


