Family sticks to quarantine norms, stays at home
2020-04-01
Thiruvananthapuram: She chose responsibility over emotion on a day she lost her husband to a pandemic. In the early morning hours of Tuesday, when the death of Abdul Azeez from Pothencode was confirmed, the medical college authorities rang up his family and gave an option to come to the hospital and have one final look at him. There was also a reminder that they were under home quarantine and sample results were being awaited and usual advice is to stay isolated. The family replied that they would stick with home isolation and wouldn't want to see his lifeless intubated body through the window. The hospital authorities then shot a video and sent it to the family. That was their way of parting, watching him lying motionless on a screen. 

At the mosque, medical college principal, superintendent and head of forensics accompanied the body. There was no one to receive the body and jamaat secretary Nujum signed on the papers and received the body for burial. A few minutes later, one of the relatives of the deceased arrived at the mosque. He was not under quarantine and he watched the burial from the top of the mosque building. ``We are shattered, this is too much to take in. We are not even able to give him a proper farewell, but we have to be responsible,'' the relative said.

Jamaat president Hasheem said that the family was very co-operative when they were briefed about the protocol to be maintained for burial. ``They didn't raise any objection, understood the protocol,'' he said. A four member team made the burial pit and jamaat had no trouble summoning people to dig the pit and to handle the body. `` I have been doing this all these years, why would I not do it now?'' asked Jaleel, who made the burial pit as per the instructions. Unlike the six feet pit, the burial pit was dug at 10 feet. It was made in two levels with first level for placing wooden planks. 

``We have been taking all precautions right from the time we started hearing news about the outbreak. The Friday prayer was stopped weeks back. There is a scare among our residents and it is understandable, we never thought we would have to face a day like this when we lost one among us to this disease,'' said Nujum. The prayer prior to burial usually held inside mosque was cancelled and it was done near the burial pit. The entire rites was over in 15 minutes.


