Farmers stare at losses due to lockdown
2020-04-01
Jaipur: Farmers in Rajasthan are facing immense difficulties in selling their perishable produce like fruits and vegetables amid lockdown. Thousands of tonne of farm produce are either packed or ready for sale but due to low demand in the market farmers fear that they will be hit hard this year. Hastimal Rajpurohit, a farmer of pomegranate in Barmer district, said that he is not sure he will be able to sale even one fourth of his produce. “Earlier, around 400 tonne of produce was sold in the market within a few hours. Now, not even 20 tonne of fruits is sold for two days. After harvesting, transportation from one place to another a permit is required the process of which takes days to complete. At the time of harvest, it is difficult to find labour as well,” said Rajpurohit. Farmers say that perishable items cannot be kept for more than two weeks. “If it was wheat or cumin, we would have stocked it until price becomes stable. But with perishable items, we cannot keep them for long. There is also no cold storage facility available. Many farmers have already packed their produce but nowhere to sale. My condition is better as I can afford this loss but small farmers who have taken loans on interest will be ruined,” said Rohan Vishnoi. There have been incidences in last week when due to low prices in the market, farmers sent tons of cucumber to the goshalas to be fed to the cows. “I am getting minimum price in the market. What is the point of letting them rot? Now, it is being used for some animals,” said Kishan Lal, a cucumber farmer. As per the wholesalers, it is not just the availability of produce in the market but also the supply of the produce to nearby town. Jinen Ghelani, one wholesaler explained that one big mandi in the city works to transport produce to the nearby town which has now stopped.“Mandis are very important for the sale of produce. But with street vendors finding it difficult to go to mandis, restriction in transport to nearby cities and state is hampering our business,” said Ghelani. 