Farming fad during lockdown in Kannur
2020-04-29
KANNUR: When our world is confined within the four walls of the house and its compound, even the terrace becomes a farm and many people have taken it as a new task to overcome the monotony and as a source of sustenance.


From jails to Kudumbashree units and individual households, farming is the ‘in-thing’ today and the officials with the agriculture department feel that they should tap this opportunity.

There were over 14,000 vegetable plants in the TxD Coordination unit of the agriculture department at Chalode and all those plants were given to the individuals via Krishi Bhavans and many of them came directly to buy it, according to assistant director N K Bindu.

“In these Covid times, many individuals are showing interest in agriculture and this is a habit that we should promote even after lockdown, because it is a very positive attitude,” she said.

Most of the agriculture offices and even the district agricultural farm at Karimbam, in Thaliparamba have great demand for seeds and seedlings, especially vegetables and even plantain, said the officials.

Even in the urban areas, where there is no land available, people and establishments are now discovering the spaces around them, according to Kannur municipality agriculture officer Valsala E. The biggest example is the sub-jail in Kannur town.

“It is happy news that more and more people are now into agriculture in their spare time and the jail has around 700 grow bags with a variety of crops,” she said.

Though there is space constraint, the jail has variety of vegetables and daily two remand prisoners are given the duty to take care of it and it has also helped them to meet the need of vegetables occasionally though, said warden T K Janardhanan, who said they are planning to expand it further. Similarly, the district jail is also into agriculture and even in the Covid days it is progressing, under the supervision of the agriculture office in Puzhathi, said agriculture officer Smitha Haridas, who added that the people’s interest now is mostly genuine.

The Kudumbashree Mission is also planning to scale up its involvement in agriculture to make sure there is no wasteland in the state, and the action plan would be formulated soon, said the mission’s district coordinator M Surjit. Strengthening agriculture practice is the only way to arrest the food scarcity in the coming days, he said.

Apart from farming in the small pieces of land or the terrace, farmers who practice agriculture on a large scale should approach it as a business and amalgamate traditional practices with technology, opined Biju Narayanan, a farmer based in Ulikkal, who also runs an agro farm.


