Farmers waiting for migrants in Punjab slam 14-day quarantine
2020-05-25
BATHINDA: The Punjab government’s decision to impose 14-day compulsory quarantine on everyone entering the state has been criticised by farmers who are impatiently waiting for migrant workers to arrive for paddy transplantation.


The farmers have been hoping that migrant workers, who make an annual trip every summer specifically for paddy field work, would arrive before the transplantation window closes. However, the 14-day quarantine has put a spanner in their plans.



Migrant labourers, mainly from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, start arriving in Punjab and the rice-growing areas of Haryana by the first week of June for paddy transplantation, which usually begins by June 15 in both the states. Punjab even allowed paddy transplantation to start from June 10 this year to beat labour shortage.

The farmers have tie ups with labour contractors who bring in migrant workers specialising in paddy transplantation to do the job at a pre-decided rate.


Wage negotiations leading to friction

They also lure the migrant workers by providing for food, lodging and other facilities to ensure they come back each season for paddy transplantation as the local labour in Punjab and Haryana is not that efficient and charges more money. Transplantation rates varied between Rs 2,600 and Rs 3,000 per acre last year.

The farmers were expecting the migrants farm labourers would start returning to Punjab after trains start operating from June 1. However, the 14-day compulsory quarantine would leave very little time for paddy transplantation, which ideally should be completed before end of June. Only Basmati can be transplanted in July.

The shortage of migrants means the farmers need to convince locals to work in their fields when paddy transplantation rates are soaring — to Rs 4,000-4,500 per acre. The wage negotiations between local labourers and farmers have already led to friction in many areas of the state as some have even started demanding up to Rs 6,000 per acre.

“We were in touch with labourers in Bihar, who have been coming to our village for the last many years. They were ready to come to Punjab if they get trains or other mode of transportation but that changed today when we told them about the condition of 14-day quarantine. They are now reluctant, saying they will confirm after consulting others,” farmers Harnek Singh and Mangal Singh from Bathinda told TOI.

Similarly, farmers Ram Singh and Gurnam Singh from Mansa said labourers from Western UP “had assured us a few days ago that they would convince their family members and come but in the latest circumstances we are pessimistic now.”

A Punjab agriculture department official, who did not wish to be named, said, “The arrival of migrant labourers is crucial for transplantation. The farmers are making efforts for engaging local labourers by settling wages but despite that role of the migrant labourers cannot not be minimised as they have skills to transplant paddy.”

