Farm activities give fillip to OMCs in time of lockdown
2020-04-12
Mangaluru: A national drop in consumption of petrol by 15.5% and over 24% for high-speed diesel (HSD), during March, due to the lockdown, has reflected in Karnataka as well. The five sales regions of Bengaluru, Belagavi, Kalaburagi, Mangaluru and Mysuru, under oil marketing companies BPCL, HPCL and IOCL, have registered 9.6% drop in sales of petrol and 22.8% drop in sale of diesel, respectively.

This drop in consumption has been more perceptible in urban pockets in the state, according to Karnataka State Federation of Petroleum Dealers (KSFPD). However, they have got some relief, as sales in rural areas have risen slightly, on the back of robust activity in the agriculture sector in the state. There is a steady sales pattern in rural pockets, especially for diesel, across Karnataka, said a KSFPD office-bearer.

Confirming this summation, Rajendra Kumar Kataria, secretary, agriculture and horticulture, said rabi harvesting is going on in many places across the state. The department has been proactive in getting combined harvesters from neighbouring states, and small harvesters for use by farmers in Karnataka. “Since the movement of these vital agricultural implements is exempted under various government orders, there has been an increase in agriculture activities,” he said.

Early sowing of kharif crops is on in many of the traditional paddy growing areas of Old Mysore region. “The green war room set up in my office is constantly monitoring the supply of seeds and fertilisers, of which there is adequate stock, and is available for farmers,” said Kataria. “Agricultural activities will pick up in April and continue in May. All 162 agriculture marketing units have been geared up for the same,” he said.

There is also a separate supply chain management cell in the agriculture department that follows up with retailers and manufacturers, to ensure food production goes on uninterrupted, he said. With various parts of the state receiving pre-monsoon showers over the last few days, harvesting and sowing activities have truly picked up, Kataria said, thanking the petroleum dealers for fuelling this essential service that will help feed people across the state.


