Father of US returnee student tests +ve for Covid-19
2020-04-02
Agra: The 54-year-old father of a US returnee student, who was tested Covid-19 positive on March 26, has found to be infected as well. This is the 12th case of Covid-19 reported in Agra, on Wednesday.The father is said to be a doctor and owner of a nursing home. Both the father-son due are being treated at the quarantine facility of SN Medical College. Teams from the health department are conducting screening of people living within a three-kilometre radius of the doctor’s residence and nursing home. Health condition of the family’s contacts, nursing home staff and patients admitted are also being monitored.On March 27, Agra police had booked the 22-year-old student and his father for not following quarantine protocol and failing to alert authorities after the former’s return from the US. On orders of district magistrate Prabhu N Singh, an FIR was registered under IPC sections 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 271 (disobedience to quarantine rule).According to sources, the asymptomatic youth was pursuing his under graduation in the US and had boarded a flight for New Delhi international airport from New York. He landed on the night of March 20, and after screening, left for Agra along with his father early on March 21.A copy of the FIR read, “After reaching Agra, the youth did not follow quarantine protocol and stayed with his parents. On March 25, the youth complained of severe throat pain and he reached district hospital with his father to provide samples for test. Next day, he was found Covid-19 positive.”Chief medical officer of Agra district, Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The student’s father has now been tested Covid-19 positive. Both are being treated at the quarantine facility at SN Medical College. At least 10 people, including family members, staff and other patients, have been quarantined in the nursing home owned by the father. Our teams are conducting screening of people living within three-kilometre radius of their house. The family’s contacts have been asked to remain at home for 14 days.”District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 12 positive cases have surfaced in Agra. Out of these, eight people have been cured of the disease and are quarantined at home. Four are being treated at SN Medical College. On Wednesday, 55 people were screened while samples of 47 were sent for lab testing. Reports are likely to be out by Thursday evening. People are advised not to step out of their houses without a valid reason.”