Lucknow: Fatwa says victims of coronavirus can be buried in graveyard
2020-04-17
LUCKNOW: A day after locals in Aishbagh did not allow the burial of an elderly man who died of coronavirus, Darul Uloom Farangi Mahal based Darul Ifta issued a fatwa on Thursday clarifying that Muslims who die of the virus have to be buried in graveyards as an Islamic and WHO mandated protocol.


The clerics also condemned the protest by some locals who did not allow burial in Aishbagh graveyard on Wednesday night and termed it as “inhuman, un-Islamic and shameful”.

Darul Ifta issued fatwa after receiving a query from Lucknow resident Syed Ayaz Ahmed on the issue. 

Ahmed had asked whether the Islamic ritual of ‘ghusl’(bathing the body before burial) could be followed for a person who died of coronavirus. Further, he enquired whether the body of such person can be shrouded and ‘namaz-e-janaza’ (prayer for the dead) be offered and whether such person can be buried in a graveyard for Muslims.

Signed by four clerics, Maulana Khalid Rasheed Farangi Mahali, Maulana Nasrullah, Maulana Naeem-ur-Rahman Siddiqui and Maulana Mohammad Mushtaq, the fatwa stated that ‘ghusl’ can be performed but with the exception that it will be done by flowing water over the sealed body. The seal should not be opened.

The body will also not be needing a separate shroud and that the plastic in which it is wrapped by medical professionals will be enough to be considered as a shroud. Namaz-e-Janaza will also be offered for the dead. 

Condemning Wednesday’s incident, Maulana Khalid Rasheed said, “The act by such people is unIslamic, inhuman, against Shariah and absolutely atrocious. The act is defamatory of Muslims and those who die of this pandemic, should receive respect and sensitivity, not ostracization.”

“In the entire world, wherever people are dying of this disease, their last rites are being performed as per their rituals and traditions. Christians and Jews are burying their dead in graveyards and the same has been clarified by WHO in its guidelines issued on March 24,” he added. 

