Kolkata: Faulty screening, community spread behind more transmission in non-Covid hospitals
2020-05-16
KOLKATA: Covid infections have been more rapid and virulent across hospitals that were not designated for pandemic patients. Three of them had to shut down temporarily while another came close over the last one month. More than half a dozen doctors and close to 50 nurses tested positive at these facilities, forcing nearly 200 health workers to go into quarantine.

 Faulty screening and a failure to gauge the extent to which the virus had spread in the community led to the situation, believe hospitals and experts.





Charnock Hospital, the first to shut down on April 14, had allowed a positive patient to be treated at its ICU that resulted in four doctors and a dozen nurses testing positive. Multiple healthworkers, too, got infected forcing a shutdown. “We had failed to gauge that a community spread had already happened. So, even though we were screening patients, we were not as cautious about the asymptomatic ones who ended up infecting our health workers,” said managing director Prashant Sharma. He added that while screening is now stricter, a Covid unit has been set up in a separate building. “All inpatients are being treated like Covid positives and we are testing as many as possible,” Sharma said. Charnock reopened on Wednesday.

Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre & Research Institute (SGCCRI) — the state’s first modern cancer hospital — had to shut down most sections after a lung cancer patient tested positive on April 17 and was moved to MR Bangur, a designated Covid hospital. More than 50 health workers went into quarantine and many more stopped attending work forcing a near closure. The authorities had to seek help from the police after neighbours started demanding a closure. It took SGCCRI more than a week to revive normal services.

Last Monday, Peerless Hospital was forced to shut down after 16 healthworkers tested positive and around 70 had to be quarantined. Here, too, asymptomatic patients led to a transmission, admitted authorities. “While none in our Covid unit was affected, the spread happened in the non-Covid sections. Initially, we didn’t have the resources to test everyone and went by symptoms that was wrong. We admitted a patient who had tested negative at MR Bangur but turned positive here,” said Peerless superintendent Sudipto Mitra.

Set to reopen next week, Peerless will now have a 38-bed Covid unit that has been segregated from the rest of the hospital. Covid test has been made compulsory for all inpatients. “Those who can’t be tested for some reason will be treated as Covid positives and each healthworker is being trained to prevent transmission,” added Mitra.

Many were plain lucky to avoid transmission during the first phase of the pandemic, felt pulmonologist Raja Dhar. “When the first wave hit us, few were prepared and we didn’t know what to expect. By the time hospitals started receiving positive patients, community spread had begun and asymptomatic patients had multiplied who could not be intercepted,” said Dhar. He added that hospitals were now wiser and screening has been stepped up. “It’s a learning process for the health community and mistakes will now be fewer. This will help to curb transmission,” he added.

