Favipiravir & Tocilizumab hold most potential in Covid-19 fight
2020-04-30
PUNE: The Task Force for Repurposing of Drugs (TFORD) for Covid-19, which has been constituted by the Union government, has ranked Favipiravir and Tocilizumab as the drugs that show the most readiness and potential in the fight against the disease.

 


This is the group's first assessment of several drug candidates for use in India against Covid-19. 

"Based on the scoring system, Favipiravir and Tocilizumab seem to show promise in terms of readiness and potential, amongst the 19 candidates profiled so far," said a release from the National Chemical Laboratory's Venture Center in Pune, which is helping coordinate the research. 

"Both these drugs have the potential to be manufactured in India. The TFORD developed an evidence-based scoring mechanism to assess drug candidates for their potential as Covid-19 therapy in India. There will be greater clarity on the potential of these drugs for treatment of Covid-19 as more clinical trial results are published in the coming weeks," the statement added. 

Favipiravir is an antiviral drug which has been approved in Japan. It is used for treating Influenza and is currently being tested in 18 clinical trials for Covid-19. 

Results from two studies have shown positive outcomes; data is awaited from the other trials. 

Tocilizumab is an immune-modulator approved for the treatment of several autoimmune diseases. It is being tested in 24 clinical trials for COVID-19 worldwide. Early results have indicated it can be a promising therapy for patients who are critically ill.

“Drug repurposing means that the drug is already in use for some other ailment. Now, its use in effectively treating Covid-19 is also being tested. We are not just looking at antivirals, but a larger picture. For example many people have died of infection and possible inflammation due to Covid-19. Here, Tocilizumab can play a role," said Premnath V, the head of innovations at CSIR-NCL and director of the Venture Center, an incubator hub linked to the lab.

"Remdesivir was being talked about as a potential drug for Covid- 19 but we do not rely on unpublished medical reports. Hydroxychloroquine too has mixed results so it's lower down on the scale. More clinical trials are awaited and we will have more results within a week or two," he added. 

The TFORD has been constituted by the principal scientific adviser to the government for inter-disciplinary assessment of drug candidates, coordination and to support informed decision making. 

"This is the first such readiness score and potential score we have prepared based on the assessment of molecules we are examining for repurposing of drugs. The scores reflect verified information available so far on clinical trials, efficacy, safety and readiness to manufacture the drugs,” Premnath said. 


