Covid-19 scare in Mumbai: FDA stops face masks sale without prescription
2020-03-07
MUMBAI: In order to prevent hoarding due to fears of an outbreak of Covid-19, the state Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on Friday said chemists would no longer be allowed to sell personal protection equipment (PPEs) and N95 face masks without a medical prescription.


Worries over an outbreak were also reflected in the number of people getting admitted to the BMC’s Kasturba Hospital. 

 
 
On Friday, 13 people got admitted into the quarantine facility—more than three times the number of patients until a week back. 

“On Thursday, 16 got admitted but were discharged after testing negative,” said S Kakani, BMC additional municipal commissioner.

The FDA directive has been prompted by buying and hoarding of these equipment due to fears of Covid-19. The note said these equipment would be needed by medical staff who will be on the forefront of dealing with the virus in case of an outbreak. There is not a single COVID-19 case in Maharashtra at this moment, assured state officials.

Several cities, including Mumbai, have reported a shortage of N95 masks and sanitizers, among other things.

“At present, N95 mask and personal protection equipment can be bought at a chemist without a prescription,” said the note. In the past few weeks, though, there have been complaints of both PPEs and N95 masks being sold at a premium or being hoarded.

It is to prevent these practices that the state has decided to restrict their sale, said a state official.

On Thursday, the World Health Organisation said prices of masks had surged across the globe since the start of the outbreak. Surgical masks have seen a six-fold increase, N95 respirator prices have trebled, and gowns have doubled, it said.

Meanwhile, the union ministry of health and family welfare on Friday advised against mass gathering in order to prevent COVID-19. The ministry has said states could take necessary action to ensure that mass gatherings of activities are postponed.

Between January 18 and March 6, 82,613 international passengers were screened for COVID-19 at Mumbai airport. Of them, 516 travellers were from Maharashtra .

At present, 22 patients are in isolation at various government facilities. 

Apart from the 13 in Mumbai, four are in Pune, three in Nashik and one each in Nashik and Nanded.


