Fearing lockdown extension, trio on 160km cycle trip home
2020-04-11
Nagpur: Riding on bicycles, a labourer couple and their co-worker had reached Paoni, 60km from here on NH-7, on way to their native place Kochewani, near Katangi in Balaghat district of Madhya Pradesh.

After seeing the news two days ago that the lockdown would be further extended beyond April 14, Raju Hande (29), his wife Mangala (24), and their co-worker Rashid Usman (30) decided to leave for Kochewani, 150km from Nagpur, on Friday.

TOI also found a truck on the same highway transporting pulses, and carrying at least 25-30 migrant workers to Uttar Pradesh. Both the incidents reveal that the second phase of mass exodus of labourers from cities has started.

“We at 4am from Gittikhadan, where we worked at a civil construction site. We were offered two bicycles by a common friend, David Anna, for whom we worked earlier. We had somehow pulled on, hoping that the lockdown would end on April 14, but with the extension, it is impossible now,” said Hande.

On way to Kochewani, the Hande couple, riding doubles, and Usman had made a brief stop at Paoni to have food brought by his father-in-law Yashwantrao Nagpure, who stays at Piparia near the Pench Tiger Reserve (PTR). 

“Wahabhai Qureshi, the owner of the house where we worked at Gittikhadan, is a driver and his financial health too is not good. But he was kind enough to offer Rs1,000 each before we left. We will stay with our families now in our native place, where we have kids living with their grandmother,” says Hande.

Both, Hande and Usman are neighbours in the village and their financial condition is extremely poor. For the last five years both were in Nagpur and used to earn Rs400-500 per day. The duo saved money to fulfil the needs of their families at Kochewani. They also don’t have any farm land to substitute their income.

TOI also found a goods carrier loaded with pulses from Kalamna Market in the city, also carrying at least 25-30 labourers between Manegaon and Khawasa on the MP side. The truck was heading towards Banaras. The migrants were seated in the space atop the driver’s cabin and others were seated inside . 

“I offered these labourers a lift. All were working in Kalamna and belonged to Uttar Pradesh. They wanted to leave earlier during the lockdown but had no alternative. Now that the lockdown is to be extended, they want to return,” said driver Ramsharan Dube.

Earlier, many such migrants from other states had left for their native places on foot. As a precautionary step against spread of Covid-19, many were pursued by the police and put in shelter homes and community halls along the way, and are being sheltered and fed there.

Nagpur district SP Rakesh Ola was surprised about this movement. “It is impossible these truck carrying labourers went through unchecked from the several check-posts in between. I will check up.”

Deolapar API Pravin Borkute says, “The labourers must have left the shelter home at Katta near Deolapar and taken a lift from the truck driver. It is impossible to ferry so many migrants openly, especially when we have check-posts at all major spots along NH-7. The truck will be stopped at the next post.”

“Those living in shelters were hopeful that the lockdown would end, but if it is extended many will flee from the shelters,” says Subhash Dahate, a caretaker with a NMC shelter home.

RTO officials said, “It is true that under Motor Vehicles Act (MVA), 1988, goods carriage means any vehicle constructed or adapted for solely carrying goods. Ferrying people is in gross violation of traffic rules under Section 184 of the MVA. But due to lockdown there is hardly any movement, barring essential commodities.” 


