Gujarat: Fear of coronavirus sends devotees on the e-mode
2020-03-18
VADODARA: If fear of coronavirus has sent professionals to work-from-home mode, their devotion has gone a step ahead — it has gone on the e-mode, with scared bhakts showering piety digitally.

While the deadly virus has virtually brought the world to a standstill, it has failed to deter the die-hard spirit of devotees who have easily switched lane to follow online aartis, havans and discourses!

Stating that all religious events for the next fortnight have been cancelled across its more than 1,200 centres in India and abroad, Swami Vivekjivandas of Bochasanwasi Akshar Purushottam Sanstha (BAPS) said that the temple trust has asked devotees to organize online satsang on Sundays instead of organizing gatherings at temples. “We have already appealed to the devotees to avoid crowding at temples and instead utilize the facility of online darshan,” he added.

Talking to TOI, Gyanvatsal Swami of Swaminarayan BAPS Temple, Vadodara said: “Ever since the outbreak of coronavirus in the country, there has been a ban on large gatherings. In such a scenario, the BAPS has also issued an advisory to its devotees asking them to take all precautions. But there are many devotees too, who would make a round of the temple daily, come what may. So, we decided to relay live images of Lord Swaminarayan to the devotees through our website.” 

Gyanvatsal Sami said that the followers have been enabled to witness live aarti as well as listen to the discourse of Mahant Swami Maharaj online. “We will continue with this digital darshan till the coronavirus scare subsides,” he added. 

With the holy month of Chaitra beginning March 21, many temples plan to organize havans and other religious gatherings in the city.

A popular Hanuman temple in the city has also adopted technology to help devotees pray together at the grand yagna. “We organize Navratri in Chaitra every year and a yagna is performed in Tarsali area. This year, we won’t have a huge gathering due to coronavirus threat,” said Rakesh Patel, president of Shree Maruti Mandal.

Trustee of Shree Somnath Trust, PK Laheri, said that devotees to the shrine are being screened with temperature guns and given sanitizers at the entrance to the premises for the past few days. Protective masks are also being provided to the staff members. Somnath Temple has online darshan for several years now. In the meantime, the temple trust has cancelled all major gatherings.


