Fear of contracting Covid-19 has grappled the population, say psychiatrists
2020-06-06
BAREILLY: Over the past two-and-a-half-months, a 23-year-old youth has got himself admitted to Bareilly’s district hospital three times, complaining of severe cough. “I have severe cough. Please help me, or I’ll die of novel coronavirus,” he has been repeatedly heard telling doctors. After examining the patient and conducting tests, experts have now diagnosed him with hypochondria — a mental illness in which the patient believes he or she has a serious illness.


Psychiatrists in UP told TOI that with Covid-19 cases rising, cases of hypochondria too are on the rise, as many people have started obsessing over contracting the infection.

Dr Ashish Kumar, a psychiatrist at district hospital, said, “In this case, the patient was first admitted to the hospital’s general ward. The case was later referred to me. The patient wasn’t actually suffering from cough, but would start coughing repeatedly no sooner than he would spot a doctor or relative. After counseling, he has now been discharged. However, the patient’s condition relapsed after a man in his neighbourhood was tested positive for Covid-19, and he was back in hospital.”

Kumar added that eight people were admitted to Bareilly district hospital in the last two-and-a-half-months, all of them claiming they have contracted Covid-19 as they have similar symptoms. “They neither had any physical symptom, nor did their test reports come positive, but they believed they were ill. They all had anxiety and were diagnosed with hypochondria.”

Even the helpline number is flooded with calls of people fearing they have been infected by covid. S Dhananjai, a clinical psychologist in Moradabad, said, “We have been receiving calls on the helpline number all the time, with people saying they feel feverish and fear they might have contracted the virus. But their body temperature when checked turns out normal.”

Experts said most of the patients developed this fear after reading or listening excessively to news related to Covid-19. Psychiatrists said they advise patients to consume limited news related to coronavirus and not to believe news from social media. Patients are being advised to engage themselves in some activities and to talk to family and friends over non-corona topics.


