Fear is the key: Office commute, behaviour change in Covid-19 times
2020-06-15
KOLKATA: Putting on multiple layers, including full-sleeved clothes, masks, gloves, shower caps and face shields, and carrying multiple bottles and dispensers of sanitizers, homemade food and water bottles — going to office is no longer a simple act for a large section of citizens. With Covid cases on the rise, office-goers pointed to various measures they have been taking to ensure safety. But the fear of contracting the infection is still looming large. 


“No matter the heat or humidity outside, I don’t leave home without a double layer of clothing, with full sleeves, as well as knee-length socks under trousers. I also wear elbow-length industrial gloves, a mask and cover my head with a shower cap. I wear spectacles to cover my eyes. While driving to work, I don’t even swipe cards to refill fuel, preferring UPI transactions so there is minimum contact with strangers,” said Meghmallar Das, who works with a telecom firm and has to go to office twice or thrice a week. Earlier, Das used to take public transport. 



Pharma executive Avijit Das said every time he goes to office, it feels like gearing up for war. “Since I have to depend on public transport, I mostly use autos and bike taxis. Even then, I completely cover my body, wear gloves, a mask and a face shield. I also take immunity-building medicines, like vitamin C tables, vitamin D tablets and zinc capsules. I need to be extra alert as I have a small son and elderly parents at home,” the Behala Silpara resident said.

Some others have even started wearing complete PPE kits while travelling to and from office and many have shifted to greener means of transport like bicycles and walking. 

At workplaces, too, employees have cut down on cigarettes, tea and bathroom breaks and mostly stick to their cubicles. They also ensure not to use office cups or bottles. Some have even been carrying sticks or handkerchiefs to press elevator buttons and touch door handles. “I have been carrying my own coffee mug and am no longer sharing cigarettes, or even lighters, with colleagues. I have kept a bottle of sanitizer at office and clean my desk and chair at the start of the day. I even carry food and water from home and eat at my desk,” said Subhasis Saha, who has been cycling to office. 

The sanitizing protocols after returning home are also difficult. “I have made a makeshift enclosure outside my flat door where I take off most of my clothes and keep them in a bucket of disinfectant-mixed water. I wash my hands and feet there, and then rush to the washroom as my wife cleans the floor immediately. All this while my three-year-old daughter tries to hug me as my wife keeps her at bay,” said Arijit Bose, a marketing executive with a cement company.


