Bengaluru: Fearing extended lockdown, people scramble for travel passes
2020-04-29
BENGALURU: Anticipating a second extension of the lockdown, Bengalureans on Tuesday lined up before centres issuing travel passes. Most want to visit their hometowns and villages for various reasons.


Sathvik, who was at the DCP west office to get a pass for travel to Sirsi, was worried about his ailing father. “If the lockdown ends on May 3, it’s not a problem. But since there is talk of an extension, I don’t want to take a chance and leave my father alone back home,” he said. 

 

Police said they’re getting at least 1,000 applications for passes every day. “The reasons provided are bizarre in some cases. While some cite marriage, some want to be with friends who are spending the lockdown period alone,” said a police officer. “People are being given passes for deliveries and funerals. For funerals, the pass is valid for three family members of the deceased,” added the officer. 

People wanting to travel to Tamil Nadu are facing a tough time as police there have put in place stringent restrictions. A couple wanting to visit Chennai for a relative’s funeral was asked to show a photo of the deceased to prove the request was genuine. Jurisdictional DCPs are issuing passes for travel within Karnataka.

Half a dozen pregnant women in their last trimester who want to visit their hometowns for delivery were seen waiting for hours in front of the ADGP (communications, logistics and modernisation) office on MG Road to avail interstate travel passes. 

Some said though they’ve come in person, police insist on medical certificates to ascertain their pregnancy status. Jyothi, a resident of Byappanahalli, was seen clutching her medical documents and a letter from a doctor certifying she’s fit to travel. Keen on going to her hometown Hyderabad, she wants the pass before May 4 when she would be entering the eighth month of pregnancy, during which travel is discouraged. 

“...I enter the eighth month in a week, just around the time when the lockdown is due to get over. I think the lockdown will be lifted and I’m afraid of staying back here for delivery as I have little help for infant care,” explained Jyothi. 

Anitha, who’s in her final month of pregnancy, said: “It is too risky for me to wait here, but I don’t want to stay alone at home. I tagged along with my husband in case they wanted proof,” she said. Anitha wants to go to Tirupati for delivery.

