Fearful to free: 2 of Goa’s Covid-19 survivors recount their journeys
2020-04-17
PANAJI: Twenty five-year-old Roy (name changed) is among Goa’s six cured Covid-19 patients and is presently in facility quarantine. While he will be allowed to return home in a few days, Roy’s excitement of being reunited with his family has almost entirely given over to apprehensions of how people in his village will treat him. 

On the other hand, 29-year-old Akshay (name changed) who was among the state’s first three patients to be detected with Covid-19 on March 26, is not so keen on going back home. “I will have to sit in because of the lockdown and will get bored. At least I have friends here,” he told TOI over the phone from a quarantine in North Goa. 

Both the young men, nevertheless, agree on one thing — that they received dedicated medical care from doctors and nurses while battling the virus in hospital. 

Akshay said he was admitted to the TB hospital in Margao a day after he returned to Goa from Australia. He was later shifted to the ESI hospital which is the state-designated medical facility for Covid-19 cases. 

“I had received a call from my shipping company informing me that one of my colleagues had tested positive for coronavirus. The company also told me to get tested,” he said.

But even after being admitted to the isolation ward, Akshay did not exhibit the typical symptoms of Covid-19. His condition remained normal for most part of his stay. The young man credits Dr Ira Almeida, medical superintendent of Hospicio, Margao, for keeping him under strict observation despite him not showing the telltale signs of Covid-19. “I’m thankful that Dr Almeida did not take me lightly while I was in isolation,” he told TOI.

Roy, on the other hand, was shifted directly from Dabolim airport to the Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital, Bambolim, no sooner had he landed from Barcelona, Spain. He said he felt unwell while on the flight from Barcelona and took medication when he was in transit at Doha, Qatar. “But when I reached Dabolim airport on March 14, I felt feverish again,” he told TOI.

He said he was checked at the airport and taken straight to the GMC in an ambulance. Even the friends who travelled with him were not aware of this, he said.

Despite his travel history — Spain is among the world’s Covid-19 hotspots — Roy’s mild symptoms of fever and cold did not appear to merit his isolation. He was also not tested. “The doctors probably thought I was feeling unwell due to my tiring journey, and told me to go home,” he said. 

When he felt ill once more after reaching his residence, Roy decided to shift to his old home in another village assuming that ongoing construction work at his new residence was worsening his condition. “But even after shifting, I continued to have high temperature. Two days later, I visited the GMC and was put in isolation,” he said.

Interestingly, although Roy had all the symptoms of Covid-19, his first test for the virus came back negative. It was only during the second test that his Covid-19 status was confirmed. 

His younger brother, too, contracted the disease despite Roy maintaining social distancing during the two days he was at home. “I never thought something like this could happen and I would expose my dear ones to the deadly infection. I feel very sorry,” he told TOI.

His brother has since been cured and was shifted to a quarantine facility on Thursday. Another great relief is that Roy’s mother, who was tested twice, has been declared Covid-19 negative.

Now that he is back in good health, Roy said he would follow the doctors’ instructions in toto and would stay indoors for a month after he goes home. “How can I forget that just a few days ago my muscles ached when I tried to take two steps? How can I forget that I struggled to catch a breath?” he said. 


