Patna lockdown: Feeding the poor residing in slum areas
2020-04-13
PATNA: The nationwide lockdown is really hard on the poor people who earned their livelihood on daily wages. In this period of crisis, a voluntary organization has been feeding the poor, especially those who live in the slums.


Manthan, a voluntary organization of the Patna Jesuit Society (PJS), claims to have distributed cooked meals among nearly 5,000 people in 13 Musahar hamlets in different localities of Patna since the lockdown was imposed from March 25 to contain the Covid-19 spread.

Manthan director Fr Juno Sebastian SJ said the Jesuit organization distributed khichdi, rice, dal and chokha (mashed potato) among more than 5000 people belonging to the Mahadalit community. “The volunteers served food to the marginalized people living in slum areas like Rupaspur, Khagaul, Shahpur and Naubatpur in the district,” he said.

“The volunteers maintain social distancing and hygiene while serving the cooked food to needy persons,” said Fr Juno. He also thanked the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) for helping the Manthan to reach out to these needy people and provide them cooked food.

He said the members of Manthan also distributed ration among 300 widows, elderly and sick people in 14 villages of Danapur and Bihta blocks. Fr Juno said the Manthan team, headed by him, comprised Fr Jose Karyakat, Sr Gracy and Sr Pushpika.

Fr Juno said Covid- 19 has badly affected people from all walks of life. “But the people belonging to weaker sections are worst hit from this pandemic. When we reached Murgiyachak Musahari, an old woman said she had not eaten anything for the last three days. This is a very painful situation,” he recalled.

He said Manthan had been working in more than 50 Musahar villages under Danapur, Phulwarisharif and Bihta blocks of Patna district. “More than 90% of the Musahars in these villages are daily wage workers and go to nearby towns for construction works, cleaning the roads and ragpicking among other works for their livelihood,” he said.

