Felines susceptible to Coronavirus: Bengaluru's animal experts recommend safety protocol for pets, too
2020-04-13
Since news of a cat testing COVID-19 positive in Hong Kong broke earlier this month, pet parents have been a worried lot. And with Nadia, the New York Bronx Zoo's Malayan tiger testing positive as well, their concerns have only increased. Even cases of pet abandonment are cropping up around the city, informs Saleela Kappan, a Bengaluru resident who takes care of eight cats. "It is sad that despite having no substantial data around pets and COVID-19, we are seeing cases of pet abandonment being reported in various animal rescue groups," she says. This, despite global health organisations (think World Health Organisation and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) insisting there is no danger of contracting the virus from pets. But given the instances of animals contracting from humans, what should pet parents be doing? Bangalore Times gets experts to weigh in...


'Coronavirus infections are not new to cats and dogs'
Before drawing parallels, experts advise a proper understanding of how a Coronavirus reacts in pets, first. "Studies in China show that adult cats are susceptible and the virus does multiply in their respiratory system in a week. But after that, the cat's immune system takes over and it does not translate into a disease. But this cannot be generalised for cats in India, as specific studies on the same, are yet to be done here," says small animal specialist Dr Pampapathi Gourannanavar, who has been getting several calls from worried pet parents of late.
Veterinarian and animal expert, Dr Ansar Kamran adds, "Coronavirus infections are not new to cats and dogs. But these translate into different issues and diseases among cats, which in no way transmit to humans," he shares, pointing out that we will have to wait and watch, since there have only been a couple of stray incidents of felines being infected by the strain of CoronaVirus that causes COVID-19.


'Cats are susceptible to contracting from humans'
Dr Umashankar, veterinarian and assistant director of Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP), stresses that Coronavirus cannot be transmitted from pets to humans, but on the other hand, cats are susceptible to contracting the virus from us. "If you are a cat parent, it is advisable to self-isolate for a minimum of a month and not come in contact with your cats or handle them. And if handling, ensure you are wearing gloves, a face mask and sanitise your hands before holding your cat," he says. Dr Pampapathi agrees, adding, "My advice is that if you have tested positive for COVID-19 keep yourself away from the pet just like you would, from other people. Also, when bringing your cats to the clinic, bring them in crates or cat carriers and avoid holding them, to ensure their safety."


'It is our responsibility to protect them'
While animal experts around the globe await further studies on COVID-19 and pets, pet owners have begun taking precautions to ensure the safety of their four-legged companions. "We have five domestic cats and we ensure safety protocols are followed for them. It is better to keep them indoors and protect them. We are more dangerous to them than they are to us, hence it is our responsibility to protect them," says Bindu Subramaniam, a pet owner in Bengaluru.
Actress Samyukta Hornad, who, in addition to being a cat parent, also goes out to feed strays, ensures she wears gloves and follows safety protocol such as not petting the dogs and feeding them from a distance. Her advice is, "People should ensure that their cats do not come in contact with any other pet or stray or human, and maintain social distancing while out for a walk. I do not want to give in to the wrong news and my advice to cat parents is the same."



Use pet shampoos, not sanitiser
While experts recommend safety protocol for pets, they caution against using products like sanitisers (that can be chemical-laden) on them. Urging pet parents to stay away from sanitisers as much as possible, Dr Pampapathi shares, "cats are good at cleaning themselves. And they do not like anything on their paws or whole body as such. The only thing I would suggest, is to keep the cat indoors." Instead, use cat and dog shampoos for cleaning or bathing your pets, as these are pet-friendly and devoid of harmful chemicals.


