Maharashtra: Fever watch on five Covid-19 clusters to check spread
2020-03-18
PUNE: Five clusters of novel coronavirus which causes Covid-19 have been identified in the state in Pune, Navi Mumbai, Mumbai, Nagpur and Kalyan wherein more than one case of the contagion has been seen in a residential pocket or zone (cluster).


Coronavirus in India live updates

“There are certain areas or demographics in which more than one case of the Covid-19 infected is seen. These areas are called clusters. The list of clusters could evolve every day depending on the spread of the virus,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate told TOI on Tuesday.


 
Awate said,“We have identified five clusters, one each in five different cities in Maharashtra. Strict measures are being taken in the form of fever surveillance within a three-km radius of such areas to rule out active transmission of the Covid-19 virus in the community. So far, there has been no community spread identified anywhere in the six clusters.” 

Agra was the first city in India to implement the strategy after six residents contracted the infection from their relative who had returned from Italy. 

The four positive cases of Covid-19 in Pune, all residents of Sinhagad Road area, have led to implementing the strategy in three to five km radius of Sinhagad Road area to curb the spread of the virus in the community in the city as well.

Union health minister Harsh Vardhan also called upon states to adopt the cluster containment strategy making district collectors more accountable and laid emphasis on contact tracing and strengthening district surveillance teams to avoid widespread community transmission.

“In the cluster containment approach, we immediately start checking and sensitising every household within a 3km radius of the house of an infected person and those who have come in contact with the affected to prevent the community spread of the virus,” public health expert Vaishali Jadhav of Pune Municipal Corporation said. 

The cluster containment strategy is aimed at containing the virus within a defined geographic area by early detection, breaking the chain of transmission and thus preventing its spread to newer areas, senior public health expert Subhash Salunke, former director general of the state health department, said.


