Fever clinics to be set up as 1st point of care for Covid patients
2020-06-12
Bhopal: The health department has undertaken an ambitious plan to counter the Covid-19 pandemic. Guidelines for opening fever clinics in rural areas have been planned, with one fever clinic to be set up per block. In urban zones, one fever clinic will be set up per one lakh population. If the area is a hotspot, there would be two or more fever clinics per lakh population.

To boost Covid-19 management, the first point of care for suspected Covid patients, a fever clinic will address patients suffering from influenza-like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI). It would add to the current strategy of contact tracing, sampling and testing along with treatment capacity addition, said a health department official.

In rural areas, fever clinics have been formed in civil hospitals, community health centres and primary health centres. In urban areas, they are in medical colleges, district hospitals, urban PHC, civil dispensaries and Sanjeevani clinics, he added.

Proposed outcomes of fever clinics include identifying people with SARI/ILI (comorbid or high-risk conditions like pregnancy) and home isolation of patients with no likelihood of Covid with necessary precautions. Both these measures would give a data of percentage home isolation of total FLU/OPD cases.

Referral of patients needing immediate care to CCC/DCHC would be matched with sampling the likely Covid patients with mild and moderate symptoms and then referring them to CCC/DCHC.

Infection control measures at fever clinics has been stressed in the new measure. The medical officer has been made responsible to ensure that all personal protection equipment used by the staff and the patients should be disposed off properly in accordance to the bio-medical waste management guidelines.

Besides all areas in a fever clinic, which have access to an infected patient, should be disinfected by wet mopping by 1% sodium hypochlorite solution on eight-hourly basis. 


