Kerala: Fever cases reduce by half during lockdown in Ernakulam
2020-06-06
KOCHI: During the lockdown period (April and May), the number of fever cases in Ernakulam reduced by more than half. Ditto with malaria and chicken pox cases, even as dengue cases increased. There was even a leptospirosis death. 


But now, with lockdown relaxations, fever cases are gradually increasing and those who fall sick now have to go to a fever clinic before meeting a physician.



From 2017 to 2019, more than 10,000 fever cases were reported in April per year and 14,700 cases in May on an average. But this year in April, there were just 5,460 cases and in May it was 4,700.

Health experts said the main reason for this was that people were not going out or mingling with others. Also, they were at home, relaxed and eating home-cooked food. All this must have helped bring down fever cases and reduced risk of infection. “Fever cases had drastically reduced. Those who had fever during that time opted for self-medication rather than going to a hospital. Only serious cases reached hospitals,” said Dr T P Vijayan, physician, General Hospital.

However, with increased relaxation and change in climate, things are slowly changing in June. “If anyone who has travel or contact history develops fever, they should immediately call Disha helpline and get guidance for Covid testing. If not, they should stay at home, isolate themselves, try to take telephonic advice from a known doctor. If cough is accompanied by breathing difficulty, then they should immediately go to hospital. Precautions should be taken to prevent spread of the infection while at home and even outside,” said Dr Sheethal Binu, physician, Sunrise Hospital.

During the first four days of June, 1,147 fever cases and 127 suspected cases of dengue were reported. These cases were from in and around the city like Kalamassery, Thrikkakara, Cheranelloor, Kaloor, Chottanikara. 

“In the last one week, we have been seeing a spike in fever cases, especially dengue,” said Dr Shyamla Menon, physician, Medical Trust hospital. “We have to be extremely careful during monsoon as the risk of all communicable infection is high during the rains,” said district medical officer Dr M K Kuttappan.

He said it has been decided that any person with fever will have to go to a fever clinic where they will be screened by a team of doctors. Also, their travel and contact history will be taken. If need be, their blood tests, including Covid tests, would be done and based on their medical needs, they will be referred to a doctor.

“Unlike in the past, patients cannot meet a specialist directly. Instead, they have to go through the fever clinic. We can’t take any chances now,” Dr Kuttapan added.


