Few takers for hotel quarantine in AP, most line up for govt facilities
2020-05-27
VISAKHAPATNAM: The district administration, medical and health departments and hoteliers’ association have jointly agreed to keep around 1,000 rooms ready as paid quarantine facilities for foreign returnees to the city but barely 50 rooms are occupied, with nearly 200 returnees in the past week instead opting to stay in free government quarantine facilities on account of financial constraints. 

Speaking to TOI, Dr Devi Madhavi, head of the department of community medicine at Andhra Medical College-King George Hospital (AMC-KGH) and in charge of quarantine centres in the district, said, “So far we have around 248 foreign returnee passengers kept in various hotels and mostly in government quarantine centres. Some of them alighted in Vizag in the four flights under Vande Bharat Mission between May 19 and 23. Some others alighted in Tirupati and Vijayawada airport and were brought to their native district Visakhapatnam by special buses. Those who alighted in Vizag but natives of other districts were sent to their respective home towns by buses. Seven of them hailing from Gulf countries have tested positive for Covid-19 so far.”

 


On the low occupancy of quarantine facilities provided by hotels, Singu Prasanth, president (HR) of AP Hotels and Restaurants Association told TOI, “Most of the returnees are petty employees in Gulf countries, including labourers. They have not got last two months’ salary and in the airport they said that they do not want to spend Rs 15,000 for 14-day’s stay at budget hotels but would rather opt for free government quarantine facilities in hostels and colleges, which are also of standard quality.” 

He added, “So far, we have 30 foreign returnees who have opted for 3-star Daspalla Executive Court, five others opted for 5-star facility at The Park and nearly 15 returnees are staying in a few budget hotels. Pregnant women and elderly above 65 years of age are staying for three days for Covid-19 test and once they test negative, they are being sent home.”


