Pune: Fewer shops open, association wants traders to wait till Covid curve flattens
2020-05-09
PUNE: Fewer non-essential shops opened shutters on Friday than the day before with the traders’ association insisting on total resumption of business after the lockdown exit.


Many shops dealing in gadgets, electronics, stationery items, garments and toys had reopened on Thursday after a gap of around 50 days. Several traders said they decided to keep the shutters down in response to an appeal of the Federation of Trade Associations of Pune. 

“We cannot force any shop to shut. But the federation wants the shops to start operation once the Covid-19 curve in the city flattens a bit,” Federation of Trade Associations of Pune secretary Mahendra Pitaliya said.

“We had a video conference with the municipal commissioner and our members on Friday noon. Over 1,000 traders attended the meeting through a cellphone application and a social media platform,” he said.

“We shared our concerns with the commissioner. We will review the situation after May 17, when it will be clear if the lockdown is lifted or extended,” Pitaliya said.

On Friday, areas such as Kothrud, Karve Road, Model Colony, Kalyaninagar and Baner were among the few where most non-essential stores opened. A Baner resident said, “Shops dealing in gadgets and electronics are allowed to remain open on Friday. But I did not see these shops open.”

Kalyaninagar residents said several shops dealing in hardware and stationer items, toys and sweets functioned till 7pm. But areas such as FC Road, JM Road, Navi Peth, Tilak Road, Satara Road, NIBM Road and Salunke Vihar Road did not have a single non-essential store open. 

“I had gone to drop some medicines to my grandmother at her Satara Road house from Deccan.Barring a few wine shops, no other store selling non-essentials was open,” architect Gaurav Shah, said.

NIBM Road residents said though a certain part of the area was a containment zone, stores selling essentials were forced to shut by noon. “Shops selling essential items on Salunke Vihar Road are open for two hours,” local resident Harsh Basur said. 

