Ficci: Some drugs may not last beyond February because of coronavirus crisis
2020-02-16
NEW DELHI: Production of several commonly used medicines such as paracetamol, ibuprofen, some antibiotics and diabetes drugs may be adversely hit along with smartphones and solar equipment if the supply disruption caused by the outbreak of coronavirus in China lasts beyond two months, lobby group FICCI has assessed based on feedback from industry.


In several cases, Indian drug-makers have raw material stocks of two to three months and so do not see any immediate problem but this could change if the problem persists, the study said. “Also, if the shutdown extends beyond February, then there may be some rise in prices of pharmaceutical products made in India,” the study said.

 
 

 
PM Modi personally monitoring coronavirus situation: VardhanUnion health minister Harsh Vardhan said on Thursday that PM Narendra Modi is "personally monitoring" the situation arising out of the coronavirus scare. 

India depends on China for around 70% of its bulk drugs and drug intermediates, according to industry estimates. This is the first-of-its-kind study based on feedback from the industry. The government has said there is ample stock of medicines to continue till April. However, the health ministry is working on a plan with measures to ensure there is no crisis in case if the lockdown in China continues for another fortnight impacting supplies. The government has identified specific drugs for which APIs are sourced from Hubei province, epicentre of the outbreak, and alternate production plan is in the making, officials told TOI earlier.

 
Coronavirus may hit 28% Indian importsThe country’s construction, auto, chemicals and pharma sectors are expected to be the worst affected due to COVID-19. Five import items heavily dependant on China - electrical machinery, machinery & mechanical appliances, organic chemicals, plastics and optical & surgical instruments - that make up about 28% of India’s import basket could be hit the most. 

 
 

In certain segments, such as penicillins and their derivatives, China accounts for over 90% of India’s import of the ingredient, the study said. In several product segments such as telecom equipment and organic compounds, China’s share is around 70%. On Tuesday, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman is scheduled to meet industry representatives to assess the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak.

Apart from pharma raw materials, the Ficci study said, India's production of smartphones faces the risk of disruption in case the prevailing situation continues beyond February, the report cautioned while stating that the impact of the outbreak on the automobile sector is divided. The report said that industry estimates show that China accounts for some 85% of the total value of parts and components used in smartphones in India (cells, display panels, camera modules and printed circuit boards). India imports mobile phone components worth Rs 7,000-8,000 crore from China every month.

“According to feedback received from industry, Indian industry could still manage the challenge till end-February (as inventory is expected to last for next 3-6 weeks),” the report said.

“If the crisis is prolonged, then for March and April production, they will have trouble and there will be a shortage of devices. As an alternative, some components can be sourced from South Korea, Vietnam or Taiwan; however, this is going to be the "last resort" only because it would require the smartphone makers to make changes in design and software,” the report said.

Regarding the automotive sector, the report said opinion on the likely impact on automobile sector is divided. While Maruti Suzuki does not expect any serious impact, TATA Motors and MG Motor India think otherwise, it said.

It said that according to Fitch Solutions, vehicle production in India may suffer contraction by 8.3% in 2020 in the wake of increasing risk of supply shortage due to the coronavirus outbreak in China. “With 10 to 30% share, China is one of India’s largest suppliers of automotive components and this explains the entire scenario. The downside may be much higher for the electric vehicle segment in India,” the report said.

The impact of the outbreak will have severe implications for the country’s solar industry as bulk of solar cells, modules, inverters and robotic module cleaning systems for the solar energy projects are imported from China.

The industry has urged the government to support solar developers by considering the situation in China as force majeure and grant extension of scheduled commissioning date without any financial implications to the developer. “The extension granted should be of sufficient time considering the date of complete recovery and the normal condition reinstated,” the report said.

