Fight against Covid: GMC’s funds drying up, say councillors
2020-04-15
GHAZIABAD: From carrying out sanitisation drives to providing food to about 12,000 people everyday — the Ghaziabad Municipal Corporation(GMC) is at the forefront of the battle against Covid-19. But with the lockdown being extended, councillors say tough times are ahead for the corporation as funds for development work are drying up.

GMC’s income through house, water and sewer tax constitutes a major source of its revenue and during normal months it collects Rs 12 crore, but the collection has stopped since March, according to the councillors. In addition, it has set up a mega community kitchen in Kavinagar and is distributing 12,000 food packets daily, with the cost being Rs 30 a packet.

“The resources which have been diverted in the fight against coronavirus will sooner or later take toll on GMC’s funds and it will require aid from the state government,” said BJP councillor Rajender Tyagi. “GMC’s major source of income in form of house, water and sewer taxes has stopped and it would require huge impetus to bring things back on track,” he added.

But the GMC commissioner is confident of a sail through. “It is true that since March, the collection of taxes has been severely hit. But through our reserves, we have so far managed things well on our own and any apprehensions that it would impede development work is unfounded,” said Dinesh Chandra, municipal commissioner.

Chandra further said that GMC mega kitchen has employed more than 100 gardeners. “Our community kitchen is preparing food for 12,000 people every day for the past many days now, industrial houses and Good Samaritans have also pitched in with money and essentials. We have also received donations from officials and employees, which have gone a long way in keeping our kitchens running,” he added.

GMC has also procured 26,000 litres of sodium hypochlorite, which is being used to carry out sanitisation drives. “Apart from the transportation cost, the sodium hypochlorite has been provided to us for free by a company in Kota,” said Chandra.


