Fighting Covid-19: Is Tamil Nadu prepared?
2020-03-07
CHENNAI: Over the weekend, watching a movie, shopping at malls, eating at restaurants, visiting places of worship and travelling by public transport systems may mean subjecting yourself to the risk of Covid-19. The city has bigger threats with events such as the IPL, which will have a gathering of more than 30,000 people at the Chepauk Stadium, coming up this month.


There are no positive cases of Covid-19 in the state. Yet, the growing epidemic remains a threat. The only solution to manage the situation is aggressive preparedness. Even out-patient wards of public urban health care centres are not following basic infection protocol – disinfecting surfaces, encouraging patient and attenders to use sanitizers or display information about the virus. Many public places do not display information about the virus.

 
 
“I don’t know if we are prepared for the epidemic yet,” said former city health officer Dr P Kuganandam. “A global emergency like this is everyone’s responsibility. If the response is inadequate, we must get the sanitary inspector and health inspectors on the field to ensure protocols are followed. And if that force isn’t enough, police help must be sought,” he said. “We must make use of every opportunity to tell people about this virus,” he said.

 
 
So far, the health department has been screening people at airports and the port. Passengers walk past thermal scanners and are screened by a health desk. Airports have added new equipment, including air sanitizers. The government is keeping a track of people who are on home quarantine. “We may not be able to stop the virus. But we know this epidemic can be pushed back. Washing hands and cleaning surfaces will help us stay healthy. Collectors have been instructed to ensure standard hygiene protocols are followed,” said health minster C Vijayabaskar.

 
 
Vijayabaskar said the government has called all stakeholders to be prepared for the virus. Some people who have been advised to remain in quarantine were reported to have left their houses – either to meet friends or seek medical information. “We have told people not to leave their homes. If they need help it will be sent to them. We have a special ambulance to transport people with symptoms,” said director of public health Dr K Kolandasamy.

Public health officials have the authority to cancel big events, IPL included, if there is a risk of epidemic. “We are not there yet and I hope we will not be pushed to do that,” the minister said.


