Fighting fit, Covid warrior doc wants to join duty in civil hospital
2020-04-28
Surat: He returned home two days ago, battling the dreaded virus as a patient. Now, the doctor is rearing to go back to his duty at the Civil Hospital in Bharuch to fight his half-done battle with coronavirus.

Dr Brijesh Narola, 28, a lone gynaecologist in the hospital has urged the authorities to allow him to join duty and serve patients requiring his services during lockdown. He had tested positive for Covid-19 on April 17 and after testing negative twice was discharged from the Jayaben Modi hospital on April 25.

According to the protocol, a patient must remain under home quarantine for 14 days. However, Dr Narola, who has also offered to donate his plasma for the critical patients suffering from the infection, wants to return to his frontline duties in order to serve poor patients. 

Well-versed about the difficulties faced by the pregnant women during the lockdown, Dr Narola said, “I can’t wait for 14 days in home quarantine to get over. If a doctor remains in the house, who is going to treat the poor patients visiting the civil hospital! My wife is facing health issues as she is in the last days of her pregnancy. Being a gynaecologist, I give her advice on phone and suggest medicines. But the poor patients from rural areas have no other option but to visit the civil hospital.” 

Dr Narola, who had no symptoms of the virus, but attended to a pregnant security guard at the civil hospital on April 14. The security guard had tested positive for the virus on April 16. 

“I have dual purpose to rejoin duty. First is to regain confidence of my patients that I am fine and healthy and secondly to serve the poor patients, especially those from rural areas who require my services in the period of crisis,” he said. 

Dr Narola lives alone in Bharuch’s Zadeshwar area as in March, his wife, Sejal, had gone to her parental home in Surat’s Katargam area for her delivery which is due on May 15. “On an average about 15 patients visit the civil hospital during the lockdown. The hospital’s OPD was shut after seven staff members were tested positive for coronavirus. In the last few days, the hospital has been made operational and I am told that the patients are returning home in my absence.”

A senior doctor at Civil hospital in Bharuch said on condition of anonymity: “We appreciate the spirit of the doctor, but we have to follow the protocols of home quarantine. Considering his appeal, we have sought permission from the higher authorities to get him back on duty as soon as possible.”


