Final-yr PG students jittery about working in GMCH’s Covid ward
2020-05-03
Aurangabad: The final-year postgraduate students working as resident doctors at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) are finding themselves in a tight spot as they have had to give an undertaking to the hospital administration that they are ready to work in the Covid-19 ward.Incidentally, the term of the course for the 121 final-year postgraduate students in GMCH Aurangabad has ended. They were scheduled to appear for their final exams on May 15. However, in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak, the exams have been postponed. The directorate of medical education and research (DMER) has issued a directive as per which all final year resident doctors, who want to continue their duty with the medical college, should sign up to work in the Covid-19 ward. The term of those unwilling to work in the Covid-19 wards will not be extended, states the directive. Hence, the resident doctors are now in two minds over whether to continue their services at the GMCH or not. Subsequently, they are required to give an undertaking that they are willing to work in different department as heads of department decide and also in the Covid-19 ward.When asked, GMCH medical suprintendent Suresh Harbade said that the condition was stipulated to merely fulfill an official documentation which gives the institution an assurance that that the doctors agreed to work beyond the expiry of their term.However, resident doctors are getting jittery with an undertaking that they have signed and given to the GMCH stating that they are agreeing to work in the Covid-19 ward willfully. According to president of Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD), Aurangabad chapter, Amir Khan, the undertaking has been sought by the institution so that the doctors and their families do not blame the institution later if they get infected with Covid-19. In a meeting held with the GMCH administration, the Mard members also raised concerns of resident doctors working in the Covid-19 ward about the quality of PPE kits. However, the administration told the members that the PPE provided to them were as per standards and if the PPE was of thicker material, it would cause sweat and discomfort to the doctors and make it difficult for them to work.Meanwhile, the resident doctors are still waiting for their stipend for the last two to three months. The GMCH administration has assured that the payment will be cleared soon.