Finding safe key to unlock lockdown
2020-05-22
The restrictions were firmly in place and people were learning to adapt when panellists had talked about life during lockdown in the last TOI Debate held in April. Now, standing at the crossroads, where choice has to be made between savings lives and the economy, it is better to evaluate and rethink before charting the path into an uncertain future, feel panellists at this month’s TOI Debate

Nagpur: The big question now is, has the lockdown proven effective, at least in Nagpur, and is it safe to open the economy? To begin with, almost every panellist agreed that lockdown can’t be stretched to the entire city, and should be restricted to containment zones only.

For Rajan Agrawal, who owns a transport company, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has so far done a fabulous job along with cooperation of citizens. “Yes, there have been some exceptions, but largely it has been one of the best managed places across the country,” said Agrawal.

Giving it a thumbs down, lawyer Tushar Mandlekar contended that NMC had clearly overstepped. “The municipal commissioner sidelined everybody and there was arbitrary detention in so-called containment zones. There was no distinction between high-risk and low-risk contacts. Behind one dead person, 2,000 people were quarantined in a week,” said the lawyer. 

To highlight what he termed as a contrasting approach, Mandlekar said that in one case only one floor was made containment zone in Mumbai and not the entire building.

He also drew attention towards the front-line warriors, comprising over 2,000 cops, who are asked to detain and transport people, and man containment zones. “They haven’t got 50% of their salary yet and no tests are being conducted for them. There is discrimination even while opening shops. The civic chief is the only one taking the decisions,” said Mandlekar and added that guidelines of the centres were not followed. “People’s fundamental rights can’t be taken way,” he said.

Agreeing with a couple of his points, entrepreneur Monica Bhagwagar was of the view that NMC did simple things right like constant patrolling and sanitization drives that proved to be very effective. “It is encouraging to see authorities taking care of people,” she said.

She does feel for those living in containment zones, or migrants whose lives have gone haywire. “But people don’t listen without applying force. There is method to the madness, which is OK by me,” she said.

Educationist Mrunalini Dasture said that the lockdown was a success. “Credit to the individuals and NGOs who are doing a lot of work for the needy,” she said.

“Sentiments won’t work in such situation,” said orthopaedic surgeon Dr Sushrut Babhulkar, who felt many people are dying due to the lockdown. He gave example of patients who couldn’t reach hospitals due to strict lockdown rules.

“Effective testing is missing and no realistic data given. Don’t enforce administrative decisions, instead first consult epidemiologists,” he said.

To this, Mandlekar added that on April 4 ICMR had said it would conduct rapid tests but it is still not happening. “If done, it can be effective in remote areas,” he said.

According to Dr Babhulkar, lockdown was to establish a system and prepare hospitals for the epidemic. “As soon as lockdown opens, things will explode,” he said while emphasizing on ramping up testing.

Activist Jammu Anand voiced the concern of people in containment zones. “They don’t even understand what has happened. The administrator has too much power and everyone else was left out. Policies for conducting tests were not followed,” he said.

In Agrawal’s opinion, everyone has a different approach towards work. “In contrast to that in Ahmedabad, the NMC chief has done well. But I don’t know what will happen if the lockdown is lifted,” he said.

The migrant situation could have been handled better, is what resort owner Sandeep Singh felt. “It’s true that you cannot force a person to stop at one place. Transportation arrangements are in place now but already 70-80% migrants have left,” he said.

Mandlekar added that India has failed to handle migrants well. “It was a complete chaos,” said Dasture and added that it seems there was no planning and later some played politics.

“Centre should have given people time to understand the situation,” said Dr Babhulkar and added that the condition of migrants in Nagpur is better than other places.

Regarding the exit policy for lockdown, Agrawal that restrictions should stay in containment and buffer zones while the rest should be opened. “Instead of sector, relaxations should be region-wise,” he said.

Terming it a serious situation for seeking justice, Mandlekar said it was the first time courts were shut for two months and only corona related matters were taken up.

Offering suggestions, he said let everyone start businesses and take everything online. But open with precautions, as there is also risk of increase in cases. 

Singh said every sector is important to the economy. “Hotels etc will come back to life but wildlife will be shut till October-November, a major loss for this segment, which impacts rural and tribal population. In an exception to the rule, maybe we can start safaris in rainy season for their livelihood,” he said.

Bhagwagar foresees many more industries facing the same situation. “But don’t open everything in one shot, go slow and steady. There is going to be a spike in Covid-19 cases during festivals also,” she said.

For Dasture, creating awareness holds the key to keeping infections in check after the lockdown is relaxed. “Focus should be on areas with low literacy levels. The government and political parties should identify individuals and agencies for the task. Also, take help of media,” she said.

Putting forth plight of workers, Jammu Anand said trade unions are demanding cash transfers from government but it is not listening. “Labourers have lost livelihood. Provide them Rs15,000 a month for the next six months and open up all sectors,” he said.

Anand added that front-line workers will have to be better equipped to handle any spike in cases. “ASHA and sanitary workers are now well aware of Covid distancing. It will be continuing process, but livelihood has to be put ahead,” he said.

Dr Babhulkar called for taking action based on data and science, and not on emotions and economic concerns. “We decided to shut down based on experience of other countries but lockdown cannot teach us more now. Understand hotspots and risky areas. Rapid testing has to be rolled out immediately and quarantine people intelligently,” he said.


