Fino helps keep rural cash circulating during lockdown
2020-04-20
Mayur Shetty | TNN

Mumbai: Fino Payments Bank, which acts as a business correspondent for several large commercial lenders, is helping keep retail cash in circulation in rural areas. The bank is incentivising its business correspondents who are largely kirana stores owners to offer the cash in their till for withdrawal to Jan Dhan account holders who in turn spend it for basic requirements.

Fino has a network of around 2 lakh banking points across the country, largely in rural areas. These banking points are helping in the disbursements of government relief in the form of direct benefit transfers into basic bank accounts. The government has until now transferred Rs 36,659 crore into Jan Dhan accounts through various schemes in the wake of the Covid-19 crisis. Given the number of accounts they have to service and limited working hours, bank branches are finding it difficult to cope with disbursements and are making the use of banking correspondents.

Speaking to TOI, Rishi Gupta, MD & CEO, Fino Payments Bank, said that one of the bank’s main businesses — remittance by migrant workers to villages has dropped by over 70% after the lockdown. “We were doing a million transactions a day before the lockdown and continue to do a million everyday because of the government transfers into Jan Dhan accounts,” he said.

To motivate and drive Fino customers to deposit cash at merchant points, the bank is waiving off deposit charges, where applicable, for April. The move is aimed at ensuring a healthy cash flow within a micro-market.

To meet the rural demand for cash, Fino has activated all the business correspondent in rural areas. “We talked to the government and local administration to allow banking correspondents,” he said. “Our banking points are present in almost all villages where customers can withdraw cash to make purchases thereby helping local cash remain in the local economy. This rotation of cash cycle is beneficial for everyone in the village and it also helps avoid unnecessary travel in the lockdown situation,” he said


