Delhi's Nizamuddin congregation: FIR registered against maulana, others of Tablighi Jamaat
2020-04-01
NEW DELHI: An FIR has been registered against maulana Saad Kandhalvi, head of a faction of Tablighi Jamaat, and other members of the organisation for violating government directions by holding a religious meet.


Crime Branch, which is investigating the case, is also analysing an audio clip in which Saad is allegedly heard asking people not to fear novel coronavirus, calling it a conspiracy against Islam.


 
 
After conducting a health check-up, police reprimanded some of the Jamaat members after they were found spitting while being taken to the buses.

It was found that 3,400 people had attended the religious meet between March 11 and 13 and then left for different parts of the country. Eight men from Kyrgyzstan were found staying at a guesthouse in northwest Delhi. They have been shifted to a quarantine facility in Sultanpuri.

Delhi Police spokesperson Mandeep Singh Randhawa said that a case under Epidemic Diseases Act and IPC sections 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 271 (disobedience to quarantine rule) has been lodged.

Meanwhile, an FIR was registered against the maulavi of Jama Masjid, Wazirabad after 12 foreigners who had attended the programme in Nizamuddin were found staying inside the mosque. Police will soon quarantine them. A case has also been lodged against the owner of the house in Bharat Nagar where the Kyrgyzstan nationals were staying.

The Jamaat members on Tuesday defended themselves by citing a letter written by them in response to a notice issued by ACP Lajpat Nagar. They claimed that the evacuation of Alami Markaz had to be stopped midway due to the lockdown and its members were stranded because trains were suddenly stopped.

However, officials pointed out that long before the lockdown, Delhi government had called for suspending all gatherings. In fact on March 24, a day after the lockdown was announced, police had taken 1,200 Jamaat members to the airport. Despite being asked to stop the programme, another 1,000 people regrouped at the mosque between March 24 and 29 without anyone’s knowledge.

Police said they weren’t given any information about people falling sick inside the mosque. No medical check-up facilities or doctor was available there. When the area SHO visited the mosque on March 23 to serve a notice asking the organisers to vacate the building, he was told that it was a religious event being held behind closed doors after adopting proper quarantine measures.

It was only on March 28 when a WHO team and the area SDM reached Alami Markaz that they discovered that people inside the mosque were also symptomatic of infection from the virus.

Ashraf, a spokesperson of Tablighi Jamaat, claimed that they never violated any provision of law. It did not let the visitors, who came to Delhi from different states and nations, violate the medical guidelines by thronging ISBTs or roaming on the streets.

In a statement issued on Tuesday, the Jamaat said: “Markaz Nizamuddin would like to humbly offer the entire premises as a quarantine facility to help the authorities tide over the challenge of the current pandemic.”

Delhi Police has written a letter to Delhi Government seeking immediate action against Tablighi Jamaat members, including 157 foreigners, who are currently staying at various places and mosques in Delhi.

