FIR against local cleric, 17 foreigners with Tablighi links
2020-04-11
RANCHI: Police have registered an FIR against 17 foreign members of Tablighi Jamaat and the amir (chief cleric) of Badi Masjid in the city’s Hindpiri area for violations of visa rules, malignancy (Section 269 of IPC) and wilful negligent act. 


Talking to TOI, Ranchi SSP Anish Gupta said: “We have lodged an FIR against 17 foreign members of Tablighi Jamaat, who stayed in the city’s Hindpiri area on a religious tour, for violating visa rules. A cleric has also been booked for malignancy and harbouring them without providing adequate information about their travel details, which is mandatory.” 

The FIRs were filed on the basis of the findings of a DSP-rank official assigned to investigate the matter by Gupta soon after the district administration and police shifted the group of foreigners to quarantine from Badi Masjid to on March 29. 

Hindpiri police station in-charge Radhika Raman Minz said: “The foreigners have been booked for violating visa norms as they failed to report to Foreign Registration Office (FRO) upon their arrival. They have also been charged for violating Section 144 of CrPC, which prohibits assembly of more than four people at a place. The Badi Masjid cleric has been booked for violating the lockdown orders and hosting foreign nationals and concealing information from authorities, which is in direct violation of the lockdown orders and Epidemic Disease Act.” 

Police sources said more such FIRs will be registered in this connection in due course as investigation progresses against people who might have heled harbouring the foreigners at their residences between March 17 and 29. “Police will act in accordance with the law against anyone found violating the rules,” Gupta said. 

Meanwhile, 14 of these foreigners and the cleric continue to be in quarantine while three others, including the 22-year-old Malaysian woman who tested positive for Covid-19, her husband and four-year-old son are at Rims.


