FIR against 155 for violating lockdown in Nalanda
2020-04-27
BIHARSHARIF: Nalanda police on Sunday lodged FIRs against five known and 150 unknown persons who allegedly violated the lockdown and pelted stones on policemen at Sakunat, a containment zone, late on Friday night.


Nalanda SP Nilesh Kumar said, “When a police team reached Sakunat on Friday night to take some suspects of Covid-19 for quarantine, hundreds of residents came out of their houses to protest and pelted stones on policemen in which a cop sustained injuries.”

“On Friday, a 55-year-old woman and her 38-year-old daughter were tested positive for Covid-19 from Sakunat locality. The woman’s 24-year-old son, who is a tailor by profession, was earlier tested positive. No arrests have been made so far,” the SP added.

However, while some residents of the locality accused police of picking up Covid suspects late night and misbehaving with them, some said that many residents have unnecessarily been quarantined and they were not being provided proper food. They also rejected the police claim of pelting stones.

Sakunat locality was sealed and declared containment zone to prevent further spread of the virus where 22 persons were found positive. As drones and 24 member NDRF team have been engaged in sanitization work at containment zones— Sakunat and Sheikhana—no fresh case was reported from Nalanda since Saturday.

Of the 34 cases reported from the district so far, three have been tested negative and two reports of the Biharsharif doctor have also tested negative. A health department official said the doctor will be released from hospital after 14 days. 

Nalanda DM Yogendra Kumar Singh said that sanitization work was being carried in the containment zones, which have been completely sealed. He said that workers engaged by the Biharsharif Municipal Corporation were supplying essential commodities to the residents of those localities after receiving orders on WhatsApp numbers.

He said all the doctors at Asthawan PHC and Asthawan referral hospital and 14 relatives of the ambulance driver have been quarantined. His village Onda under the Asthawan block was also sealed and sanitization work was being carried out there.

