Maharashtra: FIR over videos linking poultry with coronavirus
2020-02-20
PUNE: The state animal husbandry department on Wednesday lodged an FIR with the cybercrime police station here in relation to three misleading videos uploaded on the social media and a video-sharing platform, which linked the spread of coronavirus infection with consumption of poultry meat. 

 
 

“We have registered an offence under Section 505 (1) (b) of the Indian Penal Code, which refers to acts intended at causing fear or alarm to the public,” inspector Jayram Paygude of the cybercrime police station told TOI.

The move comes close on the heels of a delegation of poultry farmers and breeders’ body meeting animal husbandry, marketing and dairy development minister Sunil Kedar recently to raise their concern about a sudden fall in the demand for poultry meat due to misleading videos and messages.

The minister had then instructed the state animal husbandry commissioner to take appropriate steps. Assistant commissioner of the animal husbandry department Shriram Sitaram Pawar on Wednesday filed the complaint with the cybercrime police station.

Paygude said the department came across three such videos, in which the presenter was seen urging people at large against consuming chicken and eggs. The presenter claimed that the coronavirus was transmitted through the flesh of the animals and birds, especially poultry chicken and eggs.

According to the complaint, these videos, along with the long text messages, were circulated on different social networking sites, among others. “Many people, who received these video clips forwarded them without understanding the facts. This caused undue fear among people and they stopped eating chicken and eggs, thus, adversely impacting the demand of eggs and meat,” he said. 

“The contents of these videos were examined by the authorities from the animal husbandry department, which were found utterly false and misleading,” he added.

“We are yet to ascertain the motive behind these videos and why people circulated them on the social networking sites,” he said.


