Firms use Covid as launch pad for new products, services
2020-05-26
Chennai: For marketers every crisis is also an opportunity. The Covid pandemic has thrown up a host of products and services customized to cater to the specific needs of consumers battling the epidemic. FMCG products, health security systems, wellness kits, software solutions, vehicle disinfection packages — a range of pandemic-related products and services have flooded the market. 

FMCG brand Marico has launched ‘Veggie Clean’ vegetable wash for perishable products, while auto major Kinetic has introduced fogging and spraying electric vehicles for disinfecting factories, malls and office premises. 

Garage equipment manufacturer and distributor ATS has debuted vehicle sterilization solutions like Ozone Air Sterilizer while online auto portal Droom on the other hand is offering its Germ Shield Service (antimicrobial coating for automobile and real estate) in the form of a franchise opportunity on a pan India basis targeting 20 cities and 200 franchisees. 

Others like Dabur, ITC and Cavinkare are tweaking their existing portfolio to tap the boom in health and sanitization products. 

“In the wake of the Covid outbreak, Dabur has strengthened its immunity-boosting portfolio with the introduction of new ready-to-use immunity-booster products,” said Dabur India CEO Mohit Malhotra. These include Tulsi drops, Amla juice, Giloy-Neem-Tulsi juice and Ashwagandha capsules, to name a few. The company has also launched a 6-in-1 Immunity Kit comprising its immunity booster products.

Other FMCG players like ITC and Cavinkare, for instance, have introduced hand sanitisers in 50 paise and Re 1 satchets for bottom of the pyramid customers. ITC has extended its Savlon brand to offer surface disinfectant sprays for tables, door knobs, chairs, sofas, etc in homes and commercial areas that are touched by several people.

Services too are offering Covid-specific solutions from garages to home offices. Garage equipment manufacturer and distributor ATS ELGi has launched a new range of vehicle sterilization solutions - Ozone Air Sterilizer which uses ozone (a natural form of activated oxygen) to eliminate bacteria, virus, moulds, allergens, odours and pollutants in vehicles. Said Praveen Tiwari, MD, ATS ELGi: “Disinfecting a mid-size car or a commercial vehicle cabin ranging from SCV, LCV to HCV is possible in approximately 10 minutes, while an SUV or a van would complete the process in 20 minutes.” 

Others like Godrej Security Solutions have announced their entry into the health security segment with the COVID Defence Security Range of products — Vigi-Guard turnstile with sanitizer dispenser and the Dual Sensor Thermal Camera for elevated body temperature screening. “The product restricts the entry of any person who has not disinfected their hands and can also be retrofitted to existing Godrej turnstiles and flap barriers,” said the company in a statement. “It also can be used alongside Godrej’s Facial recognition system with Temperature Sensing.”



