First suspected case of coronavirus in Bihar
2020-01-28
PATNA: The first suspected case of coronavirus has been reported in Bihar. A 29-year-old research scholar, who returned from Tianjin in China, was admitted to the isolation ward of Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) on Monday with symptoms similar to that of coronavirus.

The woman from from Chhapra, doing PhD in neuroscience, had arrived at Kolkata on January 22 and reached home the next day. State health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar said the woman had 102F fever and was taken to the government hospital at Chhapra Sunday night. On Monday morning, she was brought to PMCH, where her sample was collected and sent to a virology lab in Pune.

However, the woman told a section of media that she did not have fever or any symptom of coronavirus and was completely fine. But symptoms, including breathlessness, fever and cough, were marked in the form signed by her and submitted in the virology lab of PMCH. 

State surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra, who has been made the state nodal officer for coronavirus, said she got to know about this case from a phone call from the woman’s family. “On Sunday, her brother told me over phone that she had fever, cold and breathlessness. We immediately arranged a mask for her and sent her to Chhapra sadar hospital, where she was kept in isolation throughout the night. She was brought to PMCH on Monday morning,” Mishra said.

“As per the Centre’s protocol, any coronavirus suspect has to be kept in an isolation ward of the hospital. Her report will most probably come on Wednesday and if it is found to be negative, we will allow her to go home,” added Mishra.

The state health department will keep monitoring the woman’s family members over the next 28 days. Officials, however, said none of them had developed any symptom till now.

The Centre has alerted Bihar about three other students studying at Wuhan in China, of which two are natives of Sitamarhi and one is from Muzaffarpur. Mishra said of them, the 22-year-old Sitamarhi student had reached Danapur on January 19 from Kolkata and was under surveillance. But he has not reported any symptom yet.

“We talked to the family members of another Sitamarhi native, who informed us that he is not coming to India. The one from Muzaffarpur has reached Delhi but will not come to Bihar. We are keeping a tab on their movement,” Mishra said.

The state has already alerted the hospital superintendents and civil surgeons, especially in the seven districts near Nepal where one coronavirus case was confirmed.

