Covid-19 in Rajasthan: First China-like containment zone locks Jhunjhunu down
2020-03-20
JAIPUR: In a first in the state, China-like lockdown has been imposed in Jhunjhunu where a Covid-19 positive couple and their child, who had returned from Italy, roamed freely in market places and hospitals in the city.



Coronavirus in India live updates

Police have cordoned off the area within the one-km radius of the house, where the three infected people lived, and the government has deployed health department teams. The family had returned from Italy on March 8.

The lockdown will help to prevent any formation of Covid-19 positive clusters.

The state government has imposed the cluster containment strategy within a defined geographic area for early detection, breaking the chain of transmission and preventing its spread to new areas.


‘310 teams of medical staff were formed’

Jaipur: In China’s Wuhan, many medical students from Rajasthan were stuck inside their hostel rooms during the lockdown to contain the outbreak. Taking a cue from it, the state government has quickly formulated the cluster containment plan to ward off the risk of spreading. The curfew, imposed in the one-km periphery of the house of the infected, will prevent transmission, morbidity and mortality.

In 12 hours after the three tested positive, 310 teams of doctors and nursing staff were formed to reach out to at least 8,000 houses in the one-km area around the infected family’s house.

While the entire area is under lockdown, health teams have so far disinfected 60 houses. Specific entry and exit points have been created and police have been deployed to prevent anyone entering the containment area. In the threekm radius, people are given entry only after proper screening. People in the five-km radius are also being screened.

“We did not allow anyone to enter the one-km area except some students, who had to appear for an examination. The area has been completely sealed with the help of the police,” said Jhunjhunu district collector Umar Deen Khan.

There was a check on outward movement of people from the containment zone except for availing essential services, including emergencies, and government business.

