First Covid-19 positive case at Trichy; co-passengers being traced
2020-03-27
TRICHY: A 24-year-old man who flew in from Dubai and was admitted to the isolation ward of Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) here tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. Public health and preventive medicine department was in the process of identifying the co-passengers of the man, the first Covid-19 case recorded in Trichy. 


The information was confirmed in a tweet from health minister Dr C Vijaya Baskar in the evening. “One new # COVID-19 positive case reported from Trichy. 24 Y Male, Dubai Return at # Trichy GH. Pt in isolation & stable,” it read.

MGMGH hospital administration said he was a native of Erode district and has been to Dubai looking for a job. A bachelor, he landed at Trichy airport in the early hours of March 22. The public health and preventive medicine department official said he had symptoms of cough and fever. Hence he was isolated at MGMGH the same day.

His swab sample was taken and sent to the viral research and diagnostic laboratory (VRDL) at government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur the next day. After testing his sample, the laboratory sought to repeat the test on March 24 and it was reconfirmed at the King institute of preventive medicine and research at Guindy in Chennai. He has been kept at the intensive care unit (ICU) of the isolation ward. Doctors said his health condition was stable.

As soon as the infection was diagnosed, public health and preventive medicine department swung into action to check the list of 85 passengers who were on board the flight with the man. “We have been checking the list of his co-passengers in order to reach out to them,” said an officer.

As on Thursday evening, five patients including him were being kept at the isolation ward. A day after shifting all the 600 patients from the six- storey superspecialty block at MGMGH, the hospital administration got fire and rescue service personnel in Trichy to conduct a mass cleaning of their campus. They sprayed disinfectants using their equipment.

