Covid-19 in Maharashtra: FIRs possible against travellers flouting home quarantine rules
2020-03-18
PUNE: Divisional commisisoner Deepak Mhaisekar on Tuesday said stringent measures, including filing of FIRs under Section 188 of IPC, would be taken against incoming travellers violating home quarantine norms. 


“Though a tracking method is in place and our staffers are conducting regular checks, it is the duty of the individual to adhere to the home quarantine rules. Over 1,090 people are currently under home quarantine and there will be more under institutional quarantine,” he said. 

The state government has made health check a mandatory for travellers from the US, Dubai and Saudi Arabia and suggested institutional quarantine and home quarantine for them in accordance with the Centre’s guidelines.

The Centre had earlier issued instructions for all incoming travellers, including Indians, arriving from China, Italy, Iran, Republic of Korea, France, Spain and Germany after February 15, should be quarantined for a minimum period of 14 days. 

The state on Monday said incoming passengers screened at airports and told to remain under home quarantine would be stamped on the back of their hand, “home quarantine”, with immediate effect.

As part of the home quarantine protocol, the Pune district administration has made an mobile application. Once downloaded by the quarantined person, the officials can keep a track of the individual. “If the person switches off the cellphone, our teams will visit his or her residence,” Mhaisekar said.

Presently, Pune distirict has 250 people for surveillance of such quarantined persons. All corporations have appointed operators and they are calling the home quarantine people. The operators are checking their condition and the scanned copies of the latters’ addresses would be with the administration to ensure that they were not out of the administration’s radar. 

Under Section 10 of the Epidemic Act, 1897, the administration can take steps to contain the spread of the virus. Forceful institutional quarantine can also be imposed on people not adhering to the home quarantine protocol. Officials said housing society members might also be reached out to for keeping a track on the home quarantined individuals.


