First plasma transfusion on covid-19 patient at KGMU
2020-04-27
LUCKNOW: In the first plasma transfusion on a covid-19 patient in Uttar Pradesh on Sunday, a 54-year-old government doctor from Orai was transfused with plasma donated by Canada-based woman doctor, who incidentally was Lucknow’s first coronavirus patient and recovered after quarantine and medication. Convalescent plasma therapy on the critical patient was conducted by doctors of King George’s Medical University (KGMU), which also recorded its third plasma donation on Sunday.

Both the recipient and donor had matching blood group and this expedited the decision to conduct plasma therapy. Antibodies from covid-19 survivors reportedly help in treating coronavirus infection.

“The doctor from Orai was transfused with 200ml plasma on Sunday night. And the donor was the first covid-19 patient of Lucknow,” said head of transfusion, KGMU medicine department, Prof Tulika Chandra. A patient transfused with 200ml plasma should display uphill response within 24 hours. If not, a second unit of 200ml plasma is transfused after 24 hours, she said. The Orai doctor’s condition was extremely critical which led KGMU doctors to conduct the therapy.

“The patient, who is father of a MBBS student of the university, had high fever for eight days and also had difficulty in breathing. He came to Lucknow on an ambulance on Friday and was admitted in the isolation ward’s ICU. Swab samples of the patient and his wife were sent for testing on Saturday and the reports confirmed infection. The woman has mild symptoms and has been admitted to the isolation ward,” said Dr Himanshu, in charge infectious disease unit, KGMU. He may have contracted the infection while treating patients in Orai, said doctors.

Prof Chandra said, “While the therapy works faster on moderately affected patients, we decided to go for plasma therapy after consultation with the family.”

Besides the Canada-based doctor, two other covid-19 survivors — Dr Tauseef Khan of KGMU and 54-year-old Lakhimpur resident Uma Shankar Pandey — had donated their plasma for the cause. The NRI’s doctor’s two-year-old son and in-laws were also diagnosed with the virus. While the son recovered, in-laws are still under treatment at Central Command’s base hospital. “She was excited about donating her plasma so that lives could be saved,” said head of transfusion, medicine department, Prof Tulika Chandra.

