First Covid-19 death during treatment in Amravati
2020-05-10
NAGPUR: The Covid-19 toll in Amravati reached 12 after a 53-year-old man, who had tested positive on May 8, died on Saturday morning. He became the first from Amravati to die during treatment in the isolation ward at Covid hospital here.

Except Amravati, all red zone districts in Vidarbha recorded positive cases on Saturday. Nagpur recorded highest 13 cases, followed by Akola (10) and Yavatmal and Washim (1 each). With this, total Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha reached 633.

The day also marked a significant surge in the number of recovered patients. In Nagpur, 14 patients with Satranjipura connection were discharged, Yavatmal (4) and Amravati and Akola (1 each), taking total number of discharged patients from Vidarbha to 138. This means, about 22% patients in the region have recovered and discharged. 

The deceased from Amravati was a resident of Pinjara Galli in Patwapura locality of Masanganj ward. AMC team sanitized the entire locality which has been declared as a containment zone. Six members of the deceased’s family have been sent into institutional quarantine. The district now has 60 active patients while five have recovered and one has been referred to GMCH, Nagpur.

Most of the positive cases recorded in Nagpur on Saturday have Mominpura connection. Of these, two patients suffering from Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) were admitted to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). One of them is a 24-year-old youth from Parvati Nagar and another is a 51-year-old man — the first case from Jawahar Nagar in Manewada.

After 42 patients on Friday, Akola recorded 10 new cases on Saturday, taking the total cases from the district to 147. One of them is a 26-year-old woman from Khangan plot area. She had delivered a baby earlier this week at a women’s hospital in the city. After delivery, she developed symptoms of Covid-19. She is admitted to the government hospital. Now, authorities will be checking medical staff and doctors of the women’s hospital. 

In Washim, a truck driver from UP was tested positive on Saturday. The cleaner of this truck had died of Covid-19 in Washim on May 2. The driver was quarantined in district hospital. Washim, which is in the green zone, now has a new patient. But, this patient has no local connection. 

A 75-year-old woman from the containment area of Indira Nagar tested positive in Yavatmal. She was already under institutional quarantine. Now, Yavatmal has recorded total 95 cases. However, 14 patients have been discharged so far, making it 81 active cases in Yavatmal. 

The civil surgeon told TOI that her team has traced the two missing close contacts of the positive patient from Ner. Now, a total of 14, including the three tested positive from Wali Saheb Nagar of Ner municipal council limit, are in the isolation ward. Twenty Tablighis lodged in the isolation ward were discharged but they are detained in institutional quarantine because their respective states are yet to approve their return. District collector MD Singh has decided to carry out a door-to-door survey in Yavatmal city and Ner MC limit from May 12 to 15. 

No Covid-19 positive patient was detected in Chandrapur on Saturday. The only patient in the district so far was detected on May 2. Health department sources informed that the condition of the patient, who was shifted to Nagpur for treatment, is stable. 

Administration has prepared a list of 89 contact persons. Out of 57 samples sent for testing, 49 tested negative. Report of eight samples is awaited.


