First intra-state train after lockdown to chug into Mysuru on Friday
2020-05-22
Mysuru: In what is a huge step towards return to normalcy, a train from Bengaluru will arrive in Mysuru at 12.30pm on Friday – the first intra-state rail journey since the enforcement of the lockdown. The train will subsequently leave Mysuru at 1.45pm. 

Regular passengers have appealed to the railway authorities to ensure that all safety norms are followed on the train in order to scotch any chance of the infection spreading on board the vehicle. 

Railway authorities, however, have decided not to alter existing seating arrangements on board the train, which means that there is no scope for social distancing during the journey. Moreover, the South Western Railway (SWR) authorities have decided to operate the LHB train between Bengaluru and Mysuru on Friday. 

Fearing transmission of the Covid-19 infection, commuters have petitioned SWR authorities to reconsider going ahead with filling all seats on the train. Hemanth Kumar, a Mysuru resident who travels to Mysuru regularly, called on the authorities to ensure that passengers sat a safe distance apart from one another. 

Ahead of recommencement of operations on the Bengaluru-Mysuru route, Mysuru district in-charge minister ST Somashekar, MP Pratap Simha and SWR, Mysuru division manager Aparna Garg visited the city railway station on Thursday and took stock of the readiness of the terminal to receive passengers. They inspected the measures taken to ensure social distancing, and the overall standards of hygiene. 

Aparna said that the LHB train trundling into Mysuru could seat 106 passengers in each coach — there would be 14 coaches on the train. “We have decided to keep only one entrance and one exit at the railway station. The subway at the Mysuru station will be closed. Passengers will be allowed on board the train only after they are subjected to thermal screening. We will not deploy additional security personnel on trains to enforce safety guidelines. We appeal to the passengers to adhere to the rules and stay safe,” Aparna added. 

Passengers are mandated to wear masks, come to the station 90 minutes prior to the departure in order to undergo thermal screening, etc. Tickets will not be distributed at the station, and all passengers will have to book them on the IRCTC website. Trains will not ply on Sundays, since the state government has decided to heighten restrictions on the last day of the week. 

SWR has decided to operate trains on two routes – between Bengaluru and Belagavi, and on the Mysuru-Bengaluru line. While the Bengaluru-Belagavi tri-weekly express will depart from Bengaluru at 8am every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, the train will leave the border district at the same time on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Services between Bengaluru and Belagavi will recommence from Saturday. 

The Bengaluru-Mysuru special train will depart from Bengaluru at 9.20am and chug into Mysuru at 12.45pm, and leave the Heritage City at 1.45pm on all days except Sunday. 

Trains on Konkan route from June 10 

Meanwhile, trains will resume operations on the Konkan Railway route from June 10. The trains will be operated in accordance with the pre-monsoon schedule. The Thiruvananthapuram Central-Mumbai Lokmanya Tilak Terminus special (daily) will leave the Kerala capital at 9.30am and reach its destination at 5.45pm the next day. The train from Mumbai will leave at 11.40am, and reach Thiruvananthapuram at 6.25pm the next day. 

The Ernakulam-Nizamuddin superfast special (daily), meanwhile will leave the Kerala metropolis at 1.15pm, and reach the national capital at 1.15pm two days later, while the train from Delhi will depart at 9.15am and reach Ernakulam at 12.15pm on the third day of the journey. 

Train 02284 Nizamuddin-Ernakulam junction weekly Duronto special will leave Nizamuddin at 9.15pm on Saturday and reach Ernakulam Jn at 4.10pm on third day with effect from June 6 until further advice. Train 02283 Ernakulam Junction-Nizamuddin weekly Duronto special will leave Ernakulam Junction at 11.25pm on Tuesday and reach Nizamuddin at 7.40pm on third day with effect from June 9 until further advice.


