First Covid patient given plasma at PGI recovers in 3 days
2020-06-13
Chandigarh: First Covid-19 patient to be given convalescent plasma therapy at PGIMER, Chandigarh, was discharged on Friday after recovering within thee days of the transfusion, making it first such case in the northern region. The patient, 60-year-old Ashok Goyal from Kurukshetra in Haryana, had no comorbidity.

PGI is one of the centres of ICMR’s national trial on convalescent plasma therapy for coronavirus-positive patients, who require oxygen therapy.

“The patient had come in a serious condition with pneumonia requiring oxygen therapy. After plasma therapy and supportive care, he was taken off oxygen therapy in three days as his condition improved,” said Prof Pankaj Malhotra, principal investigator of the study at PGI.

He said, “There are around 400 such patients in other centres for trial and almost half of them have undergone it. By this month, trials will be over and the results will be out in another 2-3 months. Currently, ICMR is doing an interim analysis of the trial. There is a ray of hope now and donors can come forward as there is no adverse effect.”

Six patients enrolled at PGI, who had suffered moderate Covid-19 infection, have been given this therapy. As it is an open label (where the patients and investigators know they are getting which medication/ treatment) randomised control study, half the patients are under standard medication, while three have been transfused with plasma. Those given plasma were transfused 2 units, along with standard medication.

PGI was chosen as one of the ICMR sites in the last week of April. On May 9, first cured Covid-19 patient donated plasma and the first corona patient eligible to get the therapy got enrolled on June 1.

“I was breathless, but soon after the transfusion, I could feel the effect. As I was in PGI, I had no fears in asking to be enrolled for the study,” said Goyal, who runs a chemist shop.

BOX

What the therapy is all about

Convalescent plasma is taken from patients, who recover from Covid-19. There are many reports showing this therapy useful in early stages of the disease. The therapy works through the antibodies present in plasma. The patients, who have recovered from the virus infection, are eligible to donate plasma, which is then stored in blood bank to be given later to patients with severe infection


