First positive Covid-19 case reported in Marathwada
2020-03-16
AURANGABAD: A 59-year-old woman from Aurangabad with a travel history to Kazakhstan and Russia has tested positive for coronavirus, making her the first positive Covid-19 case from the eight districts of the Marathwada region. The Pune-based National Institute of Virology on Sunday confirmed her tests to be positive.


The woman, who is currently being treated at a private hospital, is said to be stable and under the watch of senior doctors of the hospital, officials of the Aurangabad municipal corporation’s health department and district health department said.

Sources said the woman was part of a 30-member group that, through a private tour operator, had been on a tour of Kazakhstan and Russia. The group comprised two other people from Aurangabad. Also, the woman’s daughter-in-law, who is a Mumbai resident, had joined her in the trip abroad. All other group members are from different places across the country. Officials are trying to track down everyone from the group, and others who came in touch with them, to test and quarantine them at their homes. They are also in touch with other state governments.

Aurangabad district collector Uday Choudhari told TOI, “The woman has tested positive for Covid-19. The administration and the health department are taking preventive measures and for now, there is no need to panic. All the tests carried out on the 16 other suspected patients over the past few days have returned negative.”

Authorities said soon that after the 59-year-old patient’s reports were received, the health department started identifying her close relatives, all those had come in contact with her since her return, her domestic help, driver etc. and they are being made to opt for home quarantine.

District civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni, who personally paid a visit to the ailing woman, said: “Her swab samples were collected and sent on Friday. We received the reports on Sunday. Her condition is stable and we are maintaining a close watch.”

Following the WHO norms, a team of health officials has been dispatched for counselling and quarantining the patient’s neighbours. Doctors have already recorded her travel history.

The woman had returned from her foreign trip on March 3, but only started showing symptoms three to four days ago. She went to the hospital on her own and got admitted. “At the time of admission, the woman had cough, fever and difficulty in breathing,” said a doctor.

Authorities said it has been mutually decided that the woman would continue with her treatment at the private hospital. Earlier, the administration had decided that those with symptoms would be treated at district civil hospital, while those testing positive for Covid-19 would be treated at the isolation ward of Government Medical College and Hospital, Aurangabad.


