Bengaluru: First flyer gets a big cheer, two refuse institutional quarantine
2020-05-26
BENGALURU: When Ankita Singh walked into the terminal at Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) in the wee hours on Monday, she was greeted with a loud cheer from airport staff. Ankita was the first passenger to arrive at the airport on Monday and flew on the first flight out since the nationwide lockdown was imposed two months ago.

Ankita, who works as an information security lead for a Bengaluru-based firm, flew to Ranchi, her hometown, to be with her family. She boarded an Air Asia flight (I5 1621) bound for the Jharkhand capital.

Ankita was pleasantly surprised with the grand welcome and the contactless arrangements made at the airport. She had booked tickets twice previously during the lockdown, but commercial flights had remained grounded. Monday was the first time her tickets weren’t cancelled.

“KIA staff greeted me by clapping and welcoming me into the airport building,” Ankita said. “I was quite impressed with all the arrangements in place keeping social distancing in mind. It’s all automated now – from check-in to boarding. Guidelines are in place and they make sure people adhere to it at all times.”

The weather in Bengaluru on Monday evening was the cherry on top of the cake for Sameeksha Agarwal, a medical professional, who touched down at KIA a little after 4pm on a flight from Pragyaraj (Allahabad).

Sameeksha was worried as she had only an acknowledgment of her registration on Seva Sindhu portal and did not have an e-pass. “But it was smooth,” Sameeksha said, speaking on the arrival process.

Although the resumption of flight services was by and large smooth at KIA, there were, inevitably, a few minor hiccups. Some passengers who flew in from the six states hit by a high prevalence of Covid-19, refused to be quarantined in an institutional facility. Police were seen escorting many such passengers away at the airport.

“Several people who arrived from the six states refused to go into institutional quarantine saying they had not been informed of the rule at the airport from which they took off,” a senior police officer said. “While most flyers complied with the rule, a few did not, and our personnel had to step in and help airport and health authorities ensure that they were sent to an institutional quarantine facility.”

The state government has made seven-day institutional quarantine mandatory for those arriving from six states – Maharashtra, New Delhi, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. Flyers in institutional quarantine will be tested at the end of their quarantine period and, if negative, will be sent home where they will have to stay in quarantine for another seven days.

There were also minor issues with regard to segregating transiting passengers, who were flying onward to other destinations via KIA, said sources. All flights arriving from red zone cities were made to park in stands and bays located some distance from the airport terminal, sources said.

Ankita Singh, the first passenger to arrive at KIA and who flew to Ranchi, said airport authorities were obviously adapting to the new rules and keenly observed the behaviour of passengers on the Bengaluru-Ranchi flight, especially with regard to adherence to social distancing norms. 

Till 5pm on Monday, KIA recorded a total 74 flights – 43 departures and 31 arrivals. The first flight to depart from Bengaluru was an Air Asia aircraft to Ranchi at 5.15am and the first arrival was an Indigo flight from Chennai at 7.35am.

“KIA will continue to operate as per flight schedules,” a BIAL spokesperson said.

