First Covid-19 death in Aligarh, 14 JNMC staff, including doctors, quarantined
2020-04-22
AGRA: A day after two men tested positive for Covid-19 in Aligarh, one of them died at AMU’s Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College (JNMC) on Tuesday.

All 14 health workers, including five doctors and four nurses of the medical college, who came in contact with the deceased, have been quarantined. The 55-year-old patient was admitted on the recommendation of Anjum Mirza Chughtai, an associate professor of medicine, who has been suspended for gross negligence, after it emerged that the patient was initially treated in the emergency general ward, in violation of all protocols.

Officials said the patient, with suspected covid symptoms, was admitted to the general ward without following protocol on the directions of Dr Chughtai. Even hospital authorities were kept in the dark about it. 

Talking to TOI, JNMC’s principal, professor Shahid Ali Siddiqui said all 14 health workers including five doctors, four nurses and five technical staff, who were on emergency duty on Sunday night, have been quarantined, as they were exposed to the patient before he was shifted to the covid isolation ward, where he later died. 

All 33 staff members of the isolation ward, who attended the patient on Sunday and Monday, have also been asked to go on 14 days “passive” quarantine.

Aligarh DM C B Singh told TOI, “We will lodge an FIR against the doctor for not following protocol. He neither informed hospital authorities nor the health department about the admission of a suspected covid patient in the medical college.”

State president of Janhit Manav Adhikar Association, Vinod Pandey, who lodged a complaint with UP chief minister against the suspended AMU doctor, told TOI that the patient, who died from the novel coronavirus, was first treated by the doctor at a private nursing home, which is allegedly owned by his relative. Dr Chughtai had even sent him for an X-ray to a diagnostic centre in the city, before directing medical college staff to admit him in emergency general ward, even after knowing the patient’s infection status. 

The administration also cancelled the license of Mittal Diagnostic Centre for violating protocol and conducting X-ray of a suspected covid patient. Pandey urged the administration to also cancel the medical registration of the doctor, as he had put several lives at risk with his negligent act. 

Talking to TOI, chief development officer Anunaya Jha said 23 samples of primary contacts of both the covid positive patients had been sent for testing, of which, eight were found negative for the infection. The reports of the rest are awaited. He said Dr Chughtai and his wife have also been home-quarantined, while other contacts are being traced.

