First death, unexplained virus cases in 3 states raise US fear
2020-03-01
Troubling new signs that the coronavirus is spreading in the US emerged on Friday, as cases not explained by overseas travel or contact with a person known to be infected were reported in California, Oregon and Washington state.

Officials from the three states announced that their testing had found new cases: a high school student from north of Seattle; an employee of an elementary school in Oregon, near Portland; and a woman in California, in the heart of Silicon Valley.

Sixty-five cases of the virus have been reported in the US, but until this week, all of the cases could be explained by overseas travel or contact with someone who had been ill. The three new cases on Friday, and a case earlier in the week, in California, were the first in the US where the cause was mysterious and unknown — a sign, experts warned, that the virus, which has killed more than 2,800 people worldwide and sickened tens of thousands of others, might now be spreading in the US.

Despite anxieties, Trump has defended measures taken by his administration and lashed out at Democrats who have questioned his handling of the threat. Trump asserted that Democratic complaints about his handling of the virus threat are “their new hoax” intended to undermine his presidency. 

Meanwhile, Iran is preparing for the possibility of “tens of thousands” of people getting tested for the new coronavirus as the number of confirmed cases spiked again on Saturday, an official said. Covid-19 has killed 43 people out of 593 confirmed cases in Iran, health ministry spokesman Kianoush Jahanpour said. The new toll represents a jump of 205 cases — a 150% rise from the 388 reported the day before. 

South Korea, the second hardest hit country, reported 813 new cases on Saturday — the highest daily jump since confirming its first patient in January and — raising its total to 3,150. In Italy, four more people died from coronavirus, bringing the total to 21, while the number of those testing positive jumped to 889 from 650 the day before. Pakistan confirmed two more cases of coronavirus, bringing the number of positive cases to four 

Saudi Arabia said it would bar citizens of the Gulf Cooperation Council from Islam’s holiest sites in Mecca and Medina over concerns about the virus’ spread. The GCC is a six-nation group including Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. On Thursday, the country closed off the holy sites to foreign pilgrims.

Officials in Ecuador on Saturday confirmed the first case of the virus in the nation.Health minister Catalina Andramuno Zeballos said the patient was a 70-year-old Ecuadoran woman who lives in Spain. It was the second case in South America, following a Brazilian case reported on Wednesday. Meanwhile, officials confirmed a third case of the new coronavirus in Mexico. 

