First Coronavirus Death Shuts Down Indore
2020-03-26
Indore: After five cases of coronavirus, including the one referred from Ujjain, came to fore early Wednesday morning, Indore district administration enforced an indefinite curfew under section 144 of CrPC.

District collector Lokesh Kumar Jatav said that the decision was taken in interest of public health and to maintain law and order situation as there was a threat of spread of coronavirus and people need to maintain social distancing to control the situation.

“With enforcement of curfew, people have been prohibited from coming out on roads and visit public places in the areas under IMC limits,” the collector said.

He said that people involved with health facilities, police, IMC, judiciary, media, fuel stations, food and drug manufacturing have been exempted from curfew restrictions with special permissions.

“From Thursday, outlets of essential commodities like fruits, vegetables, grocery, milk and life-saving items will be allowed to remain open from 7AM to 2PM,” collector said.

General public has been advised not to panic, stay at home, take required precautions, maintain social-distancing and follow rules to help administration deal with the situation, the collector said.

People have also been asked not to buy/store excess of grocery items as there is adequate availability of the same in market while the shopkeepers have been warned of strict action if found selling essential items more than the MRP.

A helpline — 0731 2567333 has been set up for public to share information about any suspect of coronavirus. A rapid response team will act on the call, carry-out health check-up of the suspected patient and decide on whether to send him/her to isolation or home quarantine.

BOX

Lockdown & curfew: Know the difference

Lockdown is an emergency step to deal with any difficult situation, usually the one that can be solved by crowd-control, while curfew is usually enforced in critical circumstances.

During lockdown, essential services and facilities are usually available but in curfew, the administration decides on giving relaxation to some particular services depending on the situation.

In lockdown, people are advised to stay at home and not to come out until its required the most while in curfew, people are strictly prohibited from leaving their houses and can even face legal action if the order is violated


