First Covid +ve patient in Mysuru cured, discharged from hospital
2020-04-08
Mysuru: Two weeks after Mysuru started registering Covid positive cases, there is some good news. The district’s first Covid patient has been tested negative to novel coronavirus and has been discharged on Tuesday. This has brought down the total positive cases to 34.

The patient, however, has to remain in quarantine at his home for two more weeks as a precautionary measure. This has brought some relief to officers and health staffers who are fighting the pandemic since three weeks. 

Deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar announced that the first positive patient is cured of virus and discharged. 

The 35-year-old patient got admitted voluntarily soon after arriving from Dubai in the third week of March. He arrived at Bengaluru airport from Dubai via Goa and then took a cab to Mysuru. He was tested positive on March 21. Since then he was quarantined at the isolation ward in KR Hospital.

His awareness had helped to contain the spread of virus as he didn’t meet any members in his family or friends soon after arrival from Dubai. He headed directly to KR Hospital with complaints of fever. 

Mysuru Medical College & Research Institute (MMCRI) dean and director CP Nanjaraj told TOI that he was the first Covid positive patient in Mysuru. He is cured of illness as two subsequent tests showed no Covid virus in him and even the chest X-ray was clear. The individual, however, has to lead life in isolation at home for another two weeks, the dean said.

90 samples sent to NIMHANS 

An excess load of samples has forced the Mysuru district authorities to take help from their counterparts in Bengaluru as they have sent 90 samples to NIMHANS. 

MMCRI dean and director CP Nanjaraj told TOI that nearly 80 samples are pending at Mysuru lab while another 90 plus samples have been sent to National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bengaluru. “As the sample load was heavy, we have sought assistance of Bengaluru lab for tests,” he said.


