First buy, then try: Covid concern takes all the fun out of shopping in Delhi
2020-05-24
NEW DELHI: You can still window-shop, but the days of trying without buying are over. Whether it’s shoes or textiles, you are not welcome to get tactile. As the city’s markets stagger to their feet after the long lockdown, early shoppers are returning underwhelmed. When Kriti Gupta (name changed) went to Connaught Place on Saturday to buy formals, the salesman told her she would need to pay the price of the dress before trying it on. To prevent contamination of goods, they weren’t letting shoppers touch dress material, shoes and even bags, she said.

As stores try to keep both shoppers and staff safe from the coronavirus, finding the right colour, cut, size and fit has become a test of your judgment and imagination.

If shopping is your idea of post-lockdown therapy, it might leave you cold. Cautionary signs are everywhere. You need to await your turn if five shoppers are inside a store. At the door, greeters ask you to wear a mask, and at some places they press disposable gloves into your hands. Whether it’s South Extension or Connaught Place, Kamla Nagar or Preet Vihar, the leisurely, air-conditioned shopping experience is history, TOI found.


With no trial rooms or AC, shopping feels like a chore
A Preet Vihar store for clothes and accessories was letting customers in only after thermal scanning. They had to sanitise their hands and wear plastic gloves. “I came here because I desperately need summer clothes for my daughter,” said Shalini Jain, who lives nearby. “But with the air conditioner turned down, the store was so humid that choosing clothes was no pleasure. Since only a few trial rooms were open, we decided to take them anyway.”

Another shop for women’s clothing and shoes nearby was following the same rules. The lift and escalators were not working and customers had to await their turn in a covered parking area. They gave tokens at the entrance and also took down personal details of the shoppers after sanitising their hands. But inside, the atmosphere was drab. New arrivals weren’t showcased. Shopping felt like a chore.

There was more freedom at a foreign brand’s store in South Extension. You could feel the clothes, the aircon was working, the new stuff was on display, and cash wasn’t a no-no.

“But what about social distancing?” said a worried shopper, “they are not regulating the number of people allowed inside at a time.” However, Vijay Kumar, a South Extension trader, said their showrooms cover 2,500-8,000 sqft, so allowing only 5-6 customers at a time would be impractical.

“We take all precautions. Even disposable masks are provided to people for safety, because we don't want our shops to close again. Also, I think, customers are more than alert now,” Kumar said.

At a men’s store in Kamla Nagar, the restrooms and trial rooms were closed. They were giving customers a 30-day exchange window instead. There were no water bottles for customers at the counter, and digital payments were preferred. “Trial rooms are closed for the safety of customers,” said a salesman. “If everyone starts trying on clothes, not only the trial rooms but also the apparel would need to be sanitised again, which is impractical.”

“We don’t want to dissuade customers, but they should get used to shopping like this because this crisis is not going to get over soon,” he added.

