Fish worth crores likely to perish in harbour lockdown
2020-04-02
KANYAKUMARI: The fishing harbour in Thengapattanam village has been shut till April 14 after two men from the Muslim-dominant village who attended the religious conference in Delhi tested positive for Covid-19. The duo tested positive on Tuesday, following which the district administration instructed the immediate isolation of the village and closure of the harbour.


This has put boat owners, fishermen and traders in a spot of bother as several crores worth of fish is already on the verge of decay due to the lockdown and impact on export. “There are more than 150 deep sea fishing boats with their catch worth several lakhs each in the queue to unload their catch inside the harbour,” a fisheries official said.

While the official expects around 150 to 200 more such boats to return with their catch in the next four days, those involved in the trade said that the number of boats could be much more and the loss they would incur due to decay of fish would run into several crores of rupees. Last weekend the officials and stakeholders had reached an understanding to unload fish from 20 boats per night.

“We cannot finish unloading the huge stock of fish at this speed. Now that the harbour has been closed we are clueless on what to do with the stock,” said a boat owner. Following the closure the officials and stake holders tried convincing villagers of Erayumanthurai that also shares a portion of the harbour to allow unloading fish and transport it.

But the villagers declined fearing Covid-19 infection as most of the trucks connecting the harbour are shuttling to Kerala, which is among the worst affected states. After several rounds of talks on Wednesday the fisheries department, police and stake holders decided to give a try to take nine boats out of the harbour per night and to unload them through a cumbersome process.

Accordingly, not more than nine deep sea boats will be allowed to unload per night. Since unloading cannot be done at the harbour the boats have to be taken out to a couple of spots in neighbouring coastal villages and should be anchored about a kilometre away from the shore. The stock of fish should then be brought to the shore in smaller boats. 

