Goa: Fisheries industry stares at Rs 110 crore loss due to lockdown
2020-04-22
PANAJI: Goa’s fisheries sector has suffered losses of around Rs 110 crore after fishing activity came to standstill during the initial 15 days of lockdown. Fishing activity resumed in full swing after the Central government allowed fishing and commercial fishing activity with necessary hygiene precautions, ten days ago.

“We have intimated the Central government about the state’s loss on account of the fishing ban during the 15-day period,” a fisheries official said.

Goa exports fish and there are about 16 seafood and marine products’ exporters. Export of sea food to Kerala and Karnataka has not stopped, but other exports have ceased since the lockdown, he said, adding, “There is abundance of fish available for local consumption and all cold storages have been full,” he said.

Goa also procures fish from Maharashtra and Karnataka. The official also said that Goa’s losses will be limited as mechanised fishing will be stopped for the season by May-end with the annual 61-day fishing ban coming into force from June 1. The two months see complete cessation of mechanised fishing while traditional fishermen continue to go into the sea.

A source said during the initial lockdown period, fishing activity had not stopped completely. 

“Many continued their activity clandestinely. This was more so in the Salcete belt,” he said. 

The official said they were informed of these violations, but they could not do anything about it “for obvious reasons”.

Another official said, “Local fish vendors have been the worst affected during the ongoing lockdown as most markets are still closed while many fly-by-night operators have been selling the sea catch”. This, he said, happened because government encouraged home delivery of fish. 

“At many places, vendors are seen sitting by roadsides or at any other open space to sell fish. Mostly, these are new operators,” he said. 

Traditional fish vendors will continue to suffer until the lockdown is not lifted fully, he said.


