Fit & Fine: 1K go home from quarantine so far
2020-04-26
Indore: The district administration on Saturday discharged 180 people from quarantine facilities. Around 1150 inmates have so far returned home, vacating about 20 quarantine facilities while at present only 825 inmates in 25 centres are left. 

“Around two weeks ago, there was a sudden rise in number of positive patients. With that, a large number of their primary contacts were shifted to quarantine facilities across city”, said IDA CEO and nodal officer Vivek Shotriya, adding that many people have completed their 14 days isolation period and being released after tested negative. 

“At present, we have around 20 quarantine facilities lying vacant. Of this, a few have been converted as Covid Care Centre and special quarantine facility, while use of other centres is being planned,” the official said. 

He said they have received some requests, wherein, family members of suspected patients or asymptomatic positive ones are approaching them to provide shelter in quarantine facility/CCC. 

“In one of the cases, husband of a woman, who has been kept in CCC after she got infected with virus but showed no symptoms, requested us to keep him with his wife. The man said he did not want to bother their children and people of his locality are also raising objection over his visits to the area as they fear they might get infected,” Shotriya said.. 

He added that the person was not infected nor suspected to the disease but as he had no place to go, he has been provided shelter, at a ‘safe’ place, away from the hospital where his wife was kept. 

The senior official said that efforts are being made to increase immunity of patients and keeping them stress-free through different ways. “So far, 1142 people have been released while 379 inmates have been sent to hospitals after they were tested positive,” he said. 

===

// 8 pvt labs in city can conduct Covid-19 test 

District collector Manish Singh on Saturday gave relaxation under Section 144 of CrPC to eight private laboratories of the city, which have been provided required permissions for sample testing of Covid-19. In his order, the collector said that Central Lab, SRL Diagnostic, Sampurna Sodani Diagnostic, TRUTEST Laboratory, Unipath Specialty Lab, Newberg Supratech Lab, Metropolis Healthcare Limited and Dr Lal Path Lab of Indore have been given permissions to operate and conduct testing for Covid-19. So, the labs have to take all precautions like social distancing while the workers will have to wear masks, gloves and use sanitizers on regular basis. 

// Anganwadi workers leading from front, help identify 4 positive cases 

In one of the worst-affected Covid-19 cities – Indore, over 1,000 Anganwadi workers are engaged in corona battle as frontline warriors. They are carrying out survey of people and helping the health department in identifying suspected cases. Devshri Dubey, Manju Soni, Lajwanti Shinde and Manjula Sekhawat are some of the Anganwadi workers, who have helped identify four positive cases in Rajnagar and Sarafa area. Some of the Anganwadi workers are contributing in the fight by making masks. Mitali Bharaga of Khatipura area, who faced shortage of clothes, used new dresses of her mother to prepare masks. Anita Kothari of Simrol, Reera Rathore and other workers of Harsola have made around 1,000 masks. 

//All govt employees to use Aarogya Setu app 

Collector Manish Singh has asked all government employees to download ‘Aarogya Setu’ application and use it for self-assessment of their health. The collector has asked the government employees to approach chief medical and health officer Dr Pravin Jadia or the health officer Dr Amit Malakar to get their samples tested if they have any symptoms like cough, cold and fever. 


