Kerala: Five from Bengaluru flout quarantine norms, detained in Thrissur
2020-05-21
THRISSUR: Officials of the health and police departments in Thrissur woke up to a major challenge on Wednesday when they intercepted five people coming from the red zone areas of Bengaluru, awaiting their bus at the KSRTC bus stand without adopting quarantine measures.

The five people arrived by interstate private bus and had come to KSRTC bus stand to proceed to their local destinations. Three of them were from Chalissery in the border area of Malappuram, while the other two were from Kodungallur in Thrissur. The police saw them at the bus stand and alerted the health officials.

“The consequences are grave. These people were coming from a red zone and they had not arranged a local transport from the point they were alighting from the interstate bus. Their plan was to board a local bus and proceed to their homes, without adopting quarantine measures. It is not known whether they were already infected or are just asymptomatic. They were probably unaware that they could transmit the virus to all those they encounter enroute,” said a health department official.

Health officials in Thrissur were unaware of their arrival and free movement in the district. The local bodies in their areas may have received information about their trip from the borders. Even the officials there may not be aware that they were planning to use public transport from Thrissur to their homes, the official said.

The two passengers from Thrissur were sent to institutional quarantine in an ambulance while the three from Chalissery were sent to their home villages in a vehicle arranged by them, after ensuring they would be put in quarantine there.

It was a nine-member group; four of them had already left for their home towns. Two of them were later traced from Kodungallur while the remaining two are yet to be traced.

Health official said yet another group of eight people from Bengaluru had alighted from another interstate bus at Mannuthy later. However, they were immediately sent for quarantine.


