Five more coronavirus testing centres to come up in Pune Metropolitan Region
2020-05-30
PUNE: Five more coronavirus testing centres are set to come up in two months in the Pune Metropolitan Region.

There are 21 facilities in operation, including nine government laboratories and 12 private laboratories, with nearly 3,500 tests being conducted daily. 




The testing facilities will be ramped up with two to three more government laboratories and more private laboratories, and the testing facilities doubled to 7,500 so that random sampling, mainly from the containment areas can be conducted, health officials said.

Pune divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said at present over 2,500 samples are being tested at the government’s nine laboratories while the private laboratories can check about 1,000 tests, per day. With more machines for the government laboratories, testing facilities can improve, he added.

District health officials told TOI that because of the cost factor in private testing, people prefer government laboratories. This imposes a load on these facilities and unless the private laboratories reduce their charges of Rs 4,500 per test , there would be no respite. 

“People prefer government laboratories as they feel more assured about the test results. Some test positive at private laboratories, but approach government facilities for verification,” a government health official said.

A patient whose test results were negative at a private health laboratory also went to a government facility to reconfirm it. 

Statistics from across the country show there is more load on government testing laboratories than on private entities. 

Over one lakh tests are conducted per day in private and public laboratories but 70% of the testing capacity in private laboratories lies unutilised.

A private laboratory representative told TOI that they can test 160 samples a day but they don’t get enough. “We have been told to increase the capacity by getting more machines,but we need more people coming to us too,” the representative said.

The government facilities in Pune are taking on the maximum load and now with more machines and random samples to be collected from containment zones in the coming months, the load is only going to increase. 

“We have sent our proposal for more machines for the government laboratories. It will help test more in the community, especially in the hotspots,” a health expert said.

