Five more Covid-19 hospitals open
2020-04-21
Sambalpur: Chief minister Naveen Patnaik inaugurated five more standalone Covid-19 hospitals in Bargarh, Nabarangpur, Sundargarh, Jagatsinghpur and Angul districts on Monday. The hospitals have a total of 825 beds.

Petroleum minister Dharmendra Pradhan, coal minister Pralhad Joshi and state health minister Naba Kisore Das joined the inauguration programme through video-conference.

While the 150-bed hospital in Angul will be managed by SUM Hospital Bhubaneswar and supported by MCL, the 200-bed hospital in Bargarh will be managed by Vikash Multispecialty hospital and supported by IOCL. The 200-bed hospital in Sundergarh will be managed by the district administration through the DMF and with the support of NTPC. The 75-bed facility in Jagatsinghpur’s Paradeep will be managed by the district administration with support of the state government and Paradeep Port Trust. The 200-bed centre at Nabarangpur will be managed by the district administration and Christian hospital, with the support of Nalco.

“This is a war and we have to win,” said Naveen while praising the district administrations for successful establishment of these hospitals. He also appreciated the sacrifices made by doctors, health workers and their family members for the cause.

Appreciating the efforts made by Odisha government in the fight against Covid, union minister, Dharmendra Pradhan said that Odisha is a leading state in the fight against Covid and has put in place a robust health mechanism. Pradhan also expressed confidence that Odisha will be highly successful in containing Covid. Union Minister Pralhad Joshi also appreciated the steps taken by the State Government in the fight against Covid 19 and informed that the Nalco and MCL employees have contributed Rs.2.5 crore to the Odisha CMRF.

With the inauguration of the five Covid-19 hospitals, state's dedicated Covid hospitals are functional in 26 districts with a bed capacity of 5000 now. The Government Covid hospitals will provide specialised treatment to the patients free of cost. 


