Two 12-year-olds and three others test positive for Covid-19
2020-03-15
PUNE: Five residents of Pimpri Chinchwad isolated at YCM hospital tested positive for the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection on Saturday, pushing up the case tally to 15 in the district and 31 in Maharashtra.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Of the 15 Covid-19 infected cases in Pune district, seven patients are quarantined at Naidu hospital in Pune and eight are quarantined at YCM hospital in Pimpri Chinchwad.

 
 
Earlier, three residents of Pimpri Chinchwad had tested positive for the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection on Wednesday (March11). They were a part of the 40-member group that visited Dubai between February 23 and 29.

“The four persons who tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday are the close contacts of one of the three Covid-19 infected co-travellers. The fifth positive patient is a 21-year-old man who returned from Thailand on March 6. He was quarantined two days ago when he complained of minor illness,” said a state health official.

Among the four close contacts found infected with the contagion, two are women and two are children. Of the two women, one is 40-year-old and the others is 33-year-old. Among the Covid-19 infected children, who are also the close contacts of the infected traveller, one is a boy and the other is a girl. Both are 12-year-old.

“All of them are stable and recovering. They have been moved to another civic-run isolation hospital in Bhosari,” said Shravan Hardikar, the municipal commissioner of Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC).

Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram and divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said all the isolated people were stable.


New flyers’ protocol

The collector said a new protocol had been put in place to screen travellers returning from foreign nations (see box). “We have had flights early morning and there are no reports of any traveller returning from the high-risk countries,’‘ he said.

Ram said with the chief minister invoking the Epidemic Act, 1897, people not adhere to the norms to check disease spread would face strict action under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. Both the commissioner and the collector said individuals under quarantine should complete mandatory 14 days of isolation. 

Under the Essential Commodities Act, action had been initiated against people selling sub-standard sanitizers and masks, the divisional commissioner said, adding sellers of loose masks are also being taken to task.

The authorities said a 510-capacity quarantine facility had been readied in Pune, while 13 facilities had been readied for 1,068 persons in the division.


Co-travellers under watch

Thirteen co-travellers in the group of 40 visiting Dubai between February 23 and 29 have tested positive for Covid-19 in the state since their return on March 1. The remaining 23 co-travellers quarantined at various hospitals have tested negative for the contagion. 

Test reports of four among them, residents of Belagavi (Karnataka) and Raigad, are awaited. “After the Pune couple tested positive, we drew the list of other co-travellers from the tour company. We then tracked, isolated and tested them. We have also tracked the people who may have come in their contact and are keeping a watch over them,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate told TOI.

The Pune couple, who live on Sinhagad Road, were the first two travellers who tested positive for the contagion a day after they were quarantined at Naidu hospital on March 9. The couple’s 23-year-old daughter and another co-traveller were found infected with the contagion the next day. Three more co-travellers of Pimpri Chinchwad tested positive for the contagion on Wednesday. 

“Thereafter, a few co-travellers also tested positive in Mumbai, Raigad and Ahmednagar in the next two days. Two co-travellers, residents of Yavatmal, tested positive for the contagion on March 15,” Awate said.

(With inputs from Umesh Isalkar)


