Jaipur: Five SMS Hospital staff test positive for coronavirus
2020-04-23
JAIPUR: Five Sawai Man Singh Hospital staff, including a 55-year-old assistant professor of general surgery, tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. They have been admitted to the same hospital for treatment. The four other infected healthcare staff are a 26-year-old computer operator, 29-year-old male nurse, 43-year-old ward boy and a 27-year-old trolley man.


So far, nine doctors, including four from general surgery, four from the anesthesia department and one from the medicine department, from the hospital have been found infected with the virus.

Out of the nine doctors, three surgeons were found positive for the virus late on Tuesday. They had operated upon an emergency hernia patient who tested positive. The three have been put in isolation at the same hospital. Before that, four anaesthetists and one physician had tested positive. In addition, three nurses and two ward boys of the same hospital, which is the main Covid-19 treatment hospital in the state, were found infected. Besides, 18 family members and close relatives of one of the two wards boys were also diagnosed with Covid-19 earlier.

Jaipur: “Healthcare workers take the maximum risk in the coronavirus battle. We are strongly committed to protect them. We will not leave any stone unturned in providing maximum possible protection to them. However, if they unfortunately get infected, the best possible care will be provided to ensure their speedy recovery. They are the true corona warriors and the nation salutes them,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

The computer operator, who tested positive for the virus on Wednesday, was working at the lifeline drug store in the hospital. The lifeline drug store has been disinfected. Since, many patients buy medicine from the drug store daily, health department officials are taking details of patients who have been supplied drugs from the store.

SMS Hospital officials are taking all necessary precautions to prevent its staff from being infected, claimed Dr D S Meena, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital. “We have been screening our staff for Covid-19 thrice daily.”, Dr Meena said.

