Five new coronavirus positive cases in Ludhiana
2020-05-11
LUDHIANA: Deputy Commissioner Pradeep Kumar Agrawal has informed that five new coronavirus positive cases have been reported in Ludhiana in last 24 hours. He said that a total of 4,063 samples have been taken in the district till Sunday, out of which reports of 3,542 samples have tested negative. He told that 131 cases belong to the district out of total positive cases. He informed that a total of 10 patients have been declared cured till Monday and six deaths have been reported in the district.

The deputy commissioner informed that the two patients are residents of Kabir Nagar out of five positive patients, while one each patient is from Bhai Himmat Singh Nagar, Sundar Nagar and village Kishangarh near Khanna in the district.

District magistrate Pradeep Kumar Agrawal informed that a three-member committee has been formed in the city to conduct regular checks of shops allowed to open during the ongoing lockdown. The committee comprises of additional deputy commissioner (Khanna), deputy commissioner of police (Law and Order) and city SDM (West). This committee would further constitute zone wise sub-committees to conduct the regular checks of shops. He said that two-day deadline (till May 12) is given to the shopkeepers to make necessary arrangements as per the Covid-19 protocol and if any shopkeeper is found not following the protocol, their shops would be closed on the spot and an FIR under Section 188 of IPC would be registered against them. In other parts of the district, sub-division wise committees would be formed by respective SDMs in consultation with the DSPs.

He further informed that five trains carrying migrants departed for different states from Ludhiana railway station. He said that each train carried around 1,200 persons. On Sunday, the trains departed for Hardoi (Uttar Pradesh), West Champaran/Bettiah (Bihar), Jaunpur (Uttar Pradesh), Azamgarh (Uttar Pradesh) and Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh). He informed that more such trains would depart for other states in the coming days as well. 

Agrawal said that every employee of district administration is working 24X7 to check the spread of Covid-19 in the state, and the situation is completely under control. He urged the residents to stay indoors and follow all directions of the Punjab government if they want to fight Covid-19 pandemic.

