Five deaths of Covid +ve patients reported in a day
2020-06-13
Dehradun: Deaths of five Covid-19 patients were reported in Uttarakhand on Friday, taking the toll of novel coronavirus patients to 21 in the Himalayan state. On the same day, the state reported 69 new cases and with this the tally has now reached 1,724.

Additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant said that a 56-year-old man and a 25-year-old woman, both Covid positives, died at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Rishikesh, on Friday.

“While, the cause of the 56-year-old’s death was refectory septic shock, ARDS, coronary artery disease, the 25-year-old died of refectory septic shock, ARDS,” Pant said, adding that a 70-year-old man, also a Covid positive, died at Doon Hospital and his cause of death was cardiac arrest.

According to the health department, the other two deaths took place earlier this week but their samples tested positive on Friday. “A 58-year-old woman had died at Mahant Indiresh Hospital whose sample tested positive on Friday. In another case, a 76-year-old woman died at US Nagar district hospital and she too tested positive on Friday,” Pant said. Even though the state’s Covid toll reached 21 on Friday, the state government is yet to acknowledge that any of the deaths were due to the infection. Instead, they have attributed the deaths to co-morbid illnesses.

Meanwhile, of the 69 fresh Covid cases reported on Friday, 30 are from Haridwar district. Abhishek Tripathi, in-charge of Covid war room at the health directorate, said, “All 30 cases from Haridwar are returnees from different red zones. 

Dehradun reported 17 new cases, followed by nine in Udham Singh Nagar, seven in Rudraprayag and three each in Tehri and Chamoli,” he said.

Besides, 61 patients recovered and were discharged from various hospitals on Friday and with this, the total recoveries in the state are now 947. So far, samples of 43,000 people have been collected in the state, of which results of 4,417 are pending till 3 pm on Friday. 

Of the total samples tested, 4.53% have turned out to be positive, which is around 2% less than the national average.


