Moradabad: Five who attacked health staff, cops test positive for Covid-19
2020-04-22
BAREILLY: At least five of the 17 persons arrested for allegedly attacking a team of health staff and policemen in Moradabad’s Nawabpura locality on April 15 have tested positive for Covid-19. Following this, the entire Nagphani police station was quarantined.

Senior superintendent of police Amit Pathak told TOI, “It is really a setback to us. All policemen, including the station house officer of Nagphani, had come in contact with the accused while arresting and shifting them to jail. They have been quarantined.”

According to police sources, at least 73 policemen have been quarantined.

Meanwhile, the five attackers, who tested positive for novel coronavirus late on Monday, are kept in a temporary jail set up at a public school on Delhi Road.

According to health officials, 15 fresh Covid-19 cases, including a doctor and nurse working at a quarantine centre, have surfaced in Moradabad, taking the tally to 69. The district has witnessed three deaths so far.

Among the new cases is an inmate housed in the district jail. He was arrested on April 11 for stealing a car.

Mainather police inspector (crime) Paan Singh said, “The accused were arrested on April 11 and sent jail the next day. Their samples were sent for testing and one of them has been found positive.”

Seven policemen, including the Mainather SHO, have been placed under quarantined. 

A young woman, who is a Delhi University student and had come home to Moradabad after lockdown, also tested positive on Tuesday.

Moradabad chief medical officer (CMO) Dr MC Garg said, “Of 58 samples, 40 tested negative while 15 are positive for Covid-19. We have sent the remaining three for a repeat test. Among 15 positive cases, three are women, a 5-year-old kid and 11 men. We have now 69 active Covid-19 cases in Moradabad.”

The CMO said that a 70-year-old Rampur resident, who was diabetic and already quarantined at Teerthanker Mahaveer University, succumbed to the pandemic on Tuesday.

Notably, two persons, including a government doctor and a private nurse, had died of Covid-19 on Monday.


