Five coronavirus cases in Pune: 3 of family, co-traveller, cab driver
2020-03-11
Pune: The daughter of the couple who tested positive for coronavirus, one of their cotravellers from a group of 40 on the Dubai tour they went for on February 23, and the cab driver who drove the family from Mumbai to Pune on March 1 when they returned, were among the five confirmed Covid-19 cases in Pune on Tuesday.


The 27-year-old co-traveller is a resident of Sinhagad Road and the 43-year-old cab driver is from Manjari Budruk in Pune.

District collector Naval Kishor Ram on Tuesday said there are five confirmed cases of coronavirus in Pune. The health of all five is stable, he added. A health official said they have fever, sore throats and headaches, but are recovering.

The couple, who live on Sinhagad Road in Pune, were the first two travellers who tested positive for the contagion a day after they were quarantined at Naidu Hospital in Pune on Monday.

“We have quarantined the couple's daughter, their 18-year-old son who did not travel to Dubai, and two co-travellers who are residents of Pune,” a civic health official told TOI.

Of the two co-travellers, the Sinhagad Road resident tested positive for the infection. He is originally from Yavatmal, he added. The second co-traveller is a 24-year-old man from Hadapsar. He, and the couple's son, have tested negative for the infection.

Another civic health official said, “After returning from Dubai, the couple's daughter was travelling around in her father's car. He already had symptoms like fever, cough and a sore throat. The daughter is an IT professional and works in a software company in Pune.”


Three from a family, co-traveller & cabby test Covid-19 positive

Health officials on Tuesday traced the 36 other co-travellers who were part of the group that visited Dubai and returned to Mumbai by flight on March 1. “None of them have any symptoms,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate told TOI.

Three of the 36 co-travellers are from Belagavi in Karnataka. The rest are residents of Mumbai, Pune, Pimpri Chinchwad, Thane, Ahmednagar, Beed, Nagpur, Raigad and Yavatmal.

“We have advised them home isolation for 14 days. Health officials in their districts will monitor them. Those who develop symptoms will be isolated at the designated hospital in their districts and tested for the coronavirus infection at Pune-based National Institute of Virology,” Awate added.

He said they have informed Karnataka health officials about the three travellers from Belagavi.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said a five member team of revenue, health, police departments and authorities from Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad municipal corporations will monitor the people who have interacted with the Covid-19 infected persons. “Any person from their office or their neighbourhood showing any symptoms will be tested,” he added.

The district administration has readied 21 places with 207 beds for patients. “We do not want to create panic. Our team will handle the situation as we have the data,’’ Mhaisekar added.

The divisional commissioner has told Indian Medical Association members to keep records of foreign travel history of their patients and report to the district administration if they come across such persons. “We have directed IMA office-bearers that they should sensitise doctors to immediately report to us such cases,’’he said.



