Coronavirus scare in Rajasthan:‘Ramganj youth mingled with over 200 people’
2020-03-27
JAIPUR: Curfew has been imposed in Ramganj area of Walled City after a person tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. 


“Curfew has been imposed in a 1km radius of the house where the person tested positive. Intense contact tracing in the area has started,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

Across the state, five persons tested positive for taking the total count to 43. While two persons contracted the disease in Bhilwara, one person each tested positive in Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur in addition to the Ramganj case. 

The two who tested positive in Bhilwara are son and granddaughter of the 73-year-old Covid-19 person who died today (Thursday) after testing positive a few days ago, said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

The 35-year-old Ramganj resident had returned from Muscat in Oman. He first landed in Dubai at 10am on March 11. He reached Delhi on March 12 and boarded a Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation bus from Dhaula Kuan to Jaipur. He got of the bus at Ghat Gate in the afternoon and hired a rickshaw to reach his home in Ramganj.

After a gap of 14 days, the health department is now finding it difficult to identify his co-passengers in the bus. 

Health department officials claimed that he remained in home quarantine from March 12 to March 24. However, on March 24 he developed symptoms of Covid-19. He was rushed to Covid-19 OPD at the SMS Hospital, where his samples were taken for testing. “He has been tested positive for Covid-19,” said a health official. 

While investigating further, the health department found 33 persons, who were in his direct contact, 22 among them are from his family and relatives. Sources in Ramganj say he had offered prayers at Rehmania mosque atleast three times as there are chances of him getting in touch with 200 persons. 

In Jhunjhunu, a 45-year-old person tested positive. “He had returned from Dubai and landed here on March 21. He came to the district hospital complaining that he has fever. His samples were sent to laboratory for test and on Thursday he tested positive for the disease,” said Umar Deen Khan, Jhunjhunu district collector. 

Khan said so far six persons have tested positive in Jhunjhunu and all of them have travel history. 

