Five of a family linked to Noida firm test positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly
2020-04-01
Bareilly: Two days after a 34-year-old man, employee of a Noida firm where several cases of Covid-19 have emerged, was found to be infected by novel coronavirus, five of his family members, including his wife, mother, father, brother and sister, also tested positive on Tuesday. However, the man’s two-year-old son tested negative. Meanwhile, the health department has admitted another man, who works in the same Noida firm, to isolation ward and his sample for Covid-19 test has been collected.The man had returned to Bareilly from Noida on March 22 and stayed with his family in their house in Subhash Nagar locality. Health officials said the man claimed that he learnt through WhatsApp on March 26 that his colleagues have been tested positive and he went to the district hospital on March 27 to get himself tested. After the sample of the man was collected, he was admitted to the district hospital’s isolation ward. His six family members, including his two-year-old son, were shifted to the quarantine ward.Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Vineet Shukla said, “Covid-19 cases in Bareilly increased to six on Tuesday and all of them are linked to the Noida firm. Besides, all positive cases belong to one family which resides in Subhash Nagar locality.”He added, “After the first case was reported on Sunday, we began active case surveillance and sanitization exercise in one-kilometre radius of the patients’ house. However, with cluster of cases being reported here, we will increase the radius up to three kilometres of the patients’ house.” District epidemiologist Dr Meesam Abbas said, “We have collected sample of one more man who too works in same Noida firm and his report for Covid-19 test is awaited. This man who lives in Bareilly’s Durga Nagar locality returned to the city on March 18 and he is suspected to have come in contact with a positive case. Besides, the family of six persons who tested positive came in contact with 11 persons in Bareilly. We are tracing more contacts of the family.”Health officials said a medical store owner and his son tested negative for novel coronavirus. The 34-year-old man had purchased a cough syrup from the medical store on March 23 and was under self-medication for cough for four days, said officials.Meanwhile, the doctors and staff involved in the treatment of positive patients will be quarantined at Hotel Uberoi Anand after their shifts get over. The district administration acquired the hotel for quarantine of the health staff.“Doctors, nurses, ward boys and sweepers who are in contact with the positive cases will live in quarantine at this hotel. After their shifts get over daily, they will go to hotel instead of their homes,” said the CMO. ReplyReply allForward