Delhi: Five test negative for coronavirus
2020-02-05
NEW DELHI: The total number of persons isolated at various Delhi hospitals with suspicion of coronavirus infection has gone up to 12. While seven people with the history of travel to China are admitted at Ram Manohar Lohia (RML) hospital, five others are at Safdarjung Hospital.

Officials said admissions had been done as a precautionary measure because they had symptoms such as fever and cough. The tests reports are still awaited.

Meanwhile, five of the evacuees, who were shifted to the Army’s Base hospital from Manesar camp, tested negative for coronavirus, an Army source said on Tuesday. “We are not taking any chances. Anyone with history of travel to China, where the novel coronavirus infection is widespread, is being screened and isolated until tests confirm that they don’t have the virus,” said an official.

Among those admitted to RML hospital is a 38-year-old man who returned from China on Sunday.

At Safdarjung hospital, doctors said, five people admitted to an Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) facility after being evacuated from coronavirus-affected Wuhan in China were shifted on Tuesday. “Among those shifted are three men and two women. The five have been shifted as a precautionary measure after they showed basic symptoms like cough and sneezing. Some had a medical history,” said a doctor.

A total of 406 people have been quarantined at the ITBP facility in Delhi’s Chhawla area since the last week after they were brought in two batches from Wuhan onboard separate Air India flights.

 
Coronavirus: 406 people kept at ITBP facility test negative Tests conducted for coronavirus on 406 people, who were evacuated to Delhi from China's Wuhan city to a ITBP facility here, have been negative till now, a senior official of the border guarding force said on Monday. 

ITBP spokesperson Vivek Kumar Pandey said the centre now has “401 inmates and they are being well taken care of”. Another official said that samples of all the people quarantined at the facility have been collected by doctors in coordination with National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) and Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR), and they are being sent to laboratories at AIIMS and Pune for further tests.

Over 600 Indians were evacuated from Wuhan. The remaining evacuees have been kept at another quarantine facility set up by the Army in Manesar (Gurgaon).



Coronavirus live updates: China virus toll nears 500

According to Chinese government officials, the death toll from the coronavirus epidemic has risen to more than 420 while the number of those affected by the deadly disease has crossed 20,000.

India has reported three cases of coronavirus so far, all from Kerala. Delhi has not reported any case of coronavirus so far. However, as a precautionary measure, a public advisory has beenissued to prevent coronavirus infection.

The state’s health department has also launched a 24X7 helpline on which people can report about symptoms of the disease and history of travel from affected nations.


