Flat ownership Act to be in place after lockdown
2020-05-08
Jaipur: The urban development and housing (UDH) department will implement the long-pending Apartment Ownership Act in the state once the lockdown is over.

The town planning department has prepared rules and sub-rules of the Act after inviting public suggestions and objections. Now, the draft will be forwarded to the legal and finance department to receive approval.

A senior official at town planning wing said, “Implementation of the Apartment Ownership Act, which ensures land rights of flat owners, is in the final stage. The notification will be issued once lockdown is over.”

The Act, despite getting approval from President Ram Nath Kovind in July, is waiting to come in force in the state where number of apartments is increasing at a steady pace.

According to the Act, every person to whom any apartment is allotted, sold or transferred by the promoter, will be entitled to exclusive ownership and possession of the property.

Once implemented, it will give land rights to flat owners over the land on which an apartment is constructed. Currently, apartment owners in multi-storey buildings do not have land rights.

According to the Act, every person to whom any apartment is allotted, sold or transferred by the promoter, will be entitled to exclusive ownership and possession of the property. 

“The Act is need of the hour as it is mandatory for the developer to issue sub-lease to purchasers claiming their right on the land on which the apartment is constructed,” said a town-planner.

The Rajasthan Apartment Ownership Act was passed in the state assembly on April 8, 2015. 

An official informed that on April 24, the Act was sent to the central government for approval. The Centre directed the government to remove clauses 6, 11 (1) & (2) from the draft to avoid conflict with the Centre’s Real Estate Bill.

“The governor in February 2018 sent the Act to the state government for re-examination. The amended Act was passed in March in the assembly. The Act, which was sent to the President in April 2018, was given final approval in July,” said the official. 


