Fleeing Wuhan: 14 Indian students to fly to Kolkata from Kunming
2020-01-24
Kochi: As the coronavirus scare spreads, Indian students studying in universities located in places close to Wuhan city are desperately trying to get back to their homes. Students who are generally dependent on Wuhan airport, which is closed, are trying to reach India through other nearby airports.

Medical students from Three Gorges University, located in Yichang in western Hubei province, said authorities have provided them masks and gloves. Wuhan is little more than 300 km from Yichang and students generally take a train to reach Wuhan to catch international flights.

“We are being told to stay back in the dormitory as the risk is high while travelling. As of now there is no quarantine in this region. However, we want to leave the university before the nearest airports close,” Manasa Manoj, a final year medical student who hails from Perumbavoor near Kochi told TOI over phone.

She also said two days ago some of the students who were doing internship at the Yinchang Central Hospital were asked not to report for duty. “There was a case of pneumonia. But, there was no confirmation regarding coronavirus,” she added. There are about 14 students from the university, mostly Keralites, who plan to leave Yichang by Thursday night or Friday morning to catch a flight to Kolkata from Kunming airport.

Meanwhile, Mukesh Mohan, a graphic designer, who reached his home in Tripunithura by Thursday afternoon from Beijing said that he made the travel prior to the reporting of the virus scare. “Chinese authorities have issued warnings and taken precautionary measures. There was no extra checking of passengers at airports. The number of people gathering at public spaces has reduced,” he said.

However, Mohan who plans to return to China on February 8 is uncertain about the future. “I don’t know what the situation would be like then. If travel bans are imposed it will be possible to make a return journey,” he said.


