Coronavirus outbreak: Flight from Yangon lands in Gaya with no passenger
2020-03-12
GAYA: Probably for the first time in Gaya airport’s history, Air India’s international weekly flight from Yangon landed empty at the airport. The AI flight operates on Yangon-Gaya-Delhi route. 


The 13-member crew flew the empty aircraft from the Myanmar capital on Wednesday afternoon.

Confirming the zero passenger flight from Yangon, Gaya airport director Dilip Kumar said, “Another international flight, a chartered flight also from Yangon, landed and took off with no passengers. The chartered flight was booked to fly 107 tourists from Gaya to Yangon. However, no passenger reported for the flight and the aircraft returned empty. Though the Yangon flight landed with no passengers, 21 flyers boarded at the Gaya airport for the Gaya-Delhi section of the flight.”

Tourist footfall has nose dived at the Gaya airport due to Covid-19 outbreak. According to the airport director, as against an average of 400 tourists, the footfall was only 52 on Wednesday. 

In another Covid-19 related development, Hla Tin, the 40-year-old Myanmar national kept in the isolation ward of the ANMMCH at Gaya, has tested negative. Subsequently, he has been discharged from the hospital. According to Gaya civil surgeon Dr BK Singh, the virological test report of the Myanmar national was received on Wednesday. Earlier, on Sunday, the Myanmar national during screening at the Gaya airport was found suffering from fever and other symptoms of Covid-19. He was immediately shifted to the isolation ward of the ANMMCH. A couple of days back, a Sherghati resident studying medicine in China was also discharged from the hospital as his virological test report was negative. 

According to Gaya International airport director Dilip Kumar, altogether 18,986 passengers have so far been screened at the airport.

“Screening counters have been set up near the two aerobridges and screening was being done with the help of three infra-red thermometers. Two doctors and seven paramedical staff have been deputed at the airport,” he said.

