Covid-19 threat: Madurai flower market to shut after 50 years
2020-03-22
MADURAI: The Madurai flower market will down shutters for the first time in 50 years as part of precautionary measure for Covid-19 and to observe Janata Curfew on March 22.

President of the Madurai Meenakshi flower market association, Pookadai S Ramachandran, said that to the best of his memory, this was the first time that the market was going to be shut in the last 50 years. “Even during bandhs, we were given exemption because our product is perishable, but now because we fear for our lives and that of others, we will be closing shops on March 22,” he said.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Ramachandran added that the flower market was witnessing a considerable dip in the sales for the past one week. “The price of flowers has hit an all-time low because temples are closed and celebrations and festivals have been cancelled or postponed,” he said.

Even when leaders like Indira Gandhi, MGR, Kalaignar and Jayalaliathaa died, the flower market only closed temporarily for a few hours to pay homage to the leaders. “We play an important role during any sort of social event and cannot afford to close down completely,” said Ramachandran.

On Saturday, over five tonnes of jasmine that arrived in the market sold for just Rs 120 per kg, which was very low. “If not for Covid-19, it would have been selling for nearly Rs 800 on a Saturday, because Sunday would generally be a busy day,” said Chellam, a vendor.

Ramachandran said that almost all the flowers, which were used for decorations and garlands, sold for less than Rs 20 per kg. Pitchi was the only flower that sold for Rs 200 as the supply was low on Saturday. Samangi, Arali and Chendupoo sold for as less as Rs 20 per kg.

Flower farmers, traders and vendors, too, come under the agrarian community, like their counterparts, who cultivate paddy, pulses and other condiments. “While, their produce would stay for some time, our products become dry and withered in a day. It has hit farmers and traders because the banks that loaned us will start pressuring us by March 31, this is the first time that we are facing uncertainty of this magnitude,” he said.

