Flow of non-Covid patients increases in private hospitals
2020-05-22
Nagpur: As norms are eased in the fourth lockdown, allowing inter-city movement of people, the flow of patients has increased at private hospitals in the city. Some hospitals have found this surge mysterious while others have attributed it to relaxation on movement within as well as outside city limits. Emergency patients with abdominal pain, headache, vertigo, fever, chest pain, renal colic and due deliveries are flocking to private hospitals again. In bigger cities of the state, a similar trend has been observed but it has been due to shortage of beds and doctors in government and civic-run hospitals, which are mainly catering to Covid patients.At the same time, while IGGMCH has not seen much of an increase, number of patients at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) has gone up substantially. “This is because of seasonal change and people getting fed up of putting up with their suffereing,” a senior GMCH doctor said.Medical superintendent at Orange City Hospital and Research Institute (OCHRI) Dr Noorul Ameen said gradually footfalls are increasing. “Emergencies for a variety of reasons are increasing. In last two days, the flow has increased. During first three lockdowns, less people ventured out of home. I feel fear psychosis seems to have lessened. OPD and casualty patients have increased,” Dr Ameen said.Dr Ameen added that people are no more able to bear their pain and are therefore rushing to hospitals. Managing director of Kingsway Dr Prakash Khetan said there has been a gradual increase in number of patients as people have been allowed to travel across the state border. “People have started going for elective surgeries. They wanted to come but were unable to travel. Both new and old patients have started coming. Majority of our patients come from Rewa, Satna and Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh,” he said. Vidarbha Institute of Medical Sciences (VIMS) administrator Dr Mona Hinduja said their being a multispecialty hospital all types of patients are coming. “When lockdown started there was a drop and now it is increasing. But patients are not giving their proper history and identity, fearing we wouldn’t admit them and refer them to government hospitals,” she said. Private hospitals are also facing staff shortage as many staff members have returned gone back home. Dr Khetan said they had sent nurses from Kerala on “elective vacation” as there was no workload. “But we are functioning smoothly. As the load increases, the staff will return and will be compensated with additional work hours,” he said.Dr Hinduja said they have to send ambulances to ferry staff members living on the outskirits. “Yet we are facing shortage of manpower in every shift. We didn’t force anyone, we managed in whatever staff is available.”OCHRI director Dr Anup Marar said, “We are working with 1/3rd staff only.” 