Flyers from Singapore, HK to also be screened for coronavirus at MP airports
2020-02-11
Bhopal: Not just China, those with a recent travel history to Singapore, Thailand and Hong Kong will be subjected to screening at airports across Madhya Pradesh. So far, MP has not reported any positive case of Novel corona virus infection. 

More than 10 days after World Health Organization declared the outbreak as a ‘Public Health Emergency of International Concern’ on January 30, around two dozen suspected people have been tested for the deadly virus in MP. It includes people from Bhopal, Indore, Gwalior, Mandsaur, Jabalpur and Khargone.

For the past four days, MP health department task force to deal with virus spread has on-record decreased the suspected samples sent for testing to NIV Pune. Health department officials neither confirmed nor denied if any more test samples were sent to NIV Pune on Monday.

Health officers to deal with nCoV skip training:

One-third of health department officials at the front line of surveillance and control of diseases like Coronavirus, Zika, H1N1 have missed their scheduled training for the second time. A health department circular identified 11 epidemiologists who did not attend the training programme in Bhopal.

Epidemiology is the area of healthcare that deals with the incidence, distribution, and possible control of diseases, illnesses and other factors. The epidemiologists are from Betul, Agar-Malwa, Mandsaur, Rewa, Shahjapur, Chhindwara, Panna, Harda, Sidhi, Annuppur and Ratlam. The training under Ayushman Bharat for district nodal officer (Epidemiologist) was scheduled for January 17 and 20. 

Earlier in 2014, a health department proposal inviting doctors to apply for a two-year post doctoral training — India Epidemic Intelligence Service Programme (EIS) — was missed by many in the health department. The programme is run by National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) to train doctors on how to investigate and contain serious health threats.


