Flyer from Chennai tests positive for Covid in city
2020-05-27
Coimbatore: A 24-year-old man, who landed at the city airport from Chennai on Monday evening, tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday.He was shifted to the ESI Hospital for treatment from the institutional quarantine facility. He was the only one to test positive among the passengers who arrived at the city airport on Monday. Officials say the man is asymptomatic.Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said, “All the other passengers in his flight have tested negative for the novel coronavirus. However, we have informed the passengers who sat in front of him and behind him to remain in strict home quarantine. A native of Chennai, he came down to the city to reportedly visit a family friend for two days.”He confirmed that all the remaining 363 passengers, from whom samples were collected at the airport on Monday, tested negative for the virus. They have moved to their houses, where they will remain in quarantine for 14 days, from the institutional quarantine centres.A source said the new patient was employed with a star hotel in Chennai, where he was working as a room service attendant.Meanwhile, Indigo Airlines, which flew the man, issued a statement saying he was seated with all precautionary measures, including face mask, face shield and gloves, and that no one was seated in his vicinity, significantly reducing the possibility of transmission. The airlines said the crew has been kept in isolation for 14 days. The district’s Covid-19 count will, however, remain nil, as the new case has been added to the Covid-19 tally of the state’s capital from where he might have contracted the virus. This is the second patient to get added to Chennai’s count from the district.On Sunday, a pregnant woman travelling to Nilgiris from Chennai via road was tested positive after samples were collected from her at Burliar on Coimbatore-Nilgiris border. She was subsequently admitted to the ESI Hospital. Dr G Ramesh Kumar said, “She is also added to the Covid-19 tally of Chennai from where she must have been infected. She is also asymptomatic.”The district last recorded a Covid-19 case on May 3. “As per the new guidelines, a person who got infected abroad, in another state or district, would bet added to the Covid-19 tally of that place and not to the location where they were tested or treated,” said a health department official.At least 160 people, meanwhile landed at the city airport from New Delhi and Chennai as on Tuesday afternoon. They have been taken to the institutional quarantine facilities after collecting nasal swabs from them for Covid-19 test.