Focus on non-Covid-19 health issues: Experts
2020-04-29
Bhopal: Focus on non-Covid-19 health issues such as immunisation, vaccination and maternal health, stated a proposal sent to the Covid-19 strategy, technical committee and district administration.

“Non-COVID-19 work related to immunisation, maternal health services and related tasks would reinstall confidence in the people and provide other needed essential health services. Antenatal healthcare is also a priority,” said Bhopal chief medical and health officer (CMHO), Dr Prabhakar Tiwari. Instructions have also been issued for lifesaving services like dialysis. 

Experts have stressed on the need for optimising antenatal care during the Covid-19 pandemic. In MP, about 55% of pregnant women in the age group of 15-49 years are anaemic, 28% women have body mass index (BMI) that is below normal, going by the National Family Health Survey IV. Early supportive therapy and monitoring is needed for pregnant patients, experts said. Pregnant women beneficiaries receive supplementary nutrition. Nearly half of the pregnant women avail TT vaccination, IFA tablets as a component of ANC services through health workers. Many ANM and health workers have been roped in for COVID-19 tasks. 

Pregnant women in containment zones to be tested for Covid-19: Even if asymptomatic, pregnant women residing in clusters/containment area or in large migration gatherings/evacuees centre from hotspot districts who are likely to deliver in the next five days should be tested, according to ICMR guidelines as on April 20. Bhopal is a hotspot district and three of its main hospitals — JP hospital, Sultania hospital and Indira Gandhi hospital — have reported COVID-19 cases. ICMR guidelines also advise that asymptomatic pregnant women should be tested in the health facilities where they were expected to deliver and all arrangements should be made to collect and transfer samples to testing facilities. Women should not be referred to other hospitals for lack of testing facility.

Given the risk to doctors and patients, the largest maternity care hospital in Madhya Pradesh has samples of only a handful of pregnant women. Most of them were close contacts of a doctor who tested positive for COVID-19 on April 9.


