Focus on Markaz Nizamuddin after rise in Covid-19 cases
2020-04-01
HYDERABAD/VIJAYAWADA: With a sudden spike in novel coronavirus cases in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, the focus has now shifted to ‘Markaz’ (central office) of Tablighi Jamaat at Hazrat Nizamuddin basti of old Delhi. About 1,800 people from both Telugu states had attended the biannual three-day session, which was held from March 15. Most of the positive cases reported in the two states are either participants at the congregation or their close contacts. All six deaths reported thus far in Telangana are linked to old Delhi.


The virus spread among the locals, as some participants came from Covid-19 affected countries, including Indonesia, Philippines and Thailand. None of the participants had shown symptoms of the disease when they left the Markaz before the official lockdown. About 1,000 people, including some from the Telugu states, are still stranded at the Jamaat headquarters. Most of them had travelled by train while a few by air. The first victim of coronavirus in Telangana went to Delhi by train and returned to Hyderabad by air after his health deteriorated.

According to Jamaat sources, 746 people from AP and 1,030 from Telangana attended the congregation at the century-old Markaz. Most of those who attended the meeting from Telangana and AP have been traced and kept under isolation, while about 300 are yet to be contacted. Some are in Delhi and could not reach their homes due to lockdown.

As the congregation was held with people sitting and offering prayers close to one another for over three days with infected foreign nationals in an enclosed atmosphere, it led to easy spread of the virus among the delegates.

Mohammed Ilyas Rizvi, principal secretary, minorities welfare, AP, has appealed to the attendees to voluntarily notify themselves before district collectors. “They can also inform on helpline No. 104 immediately in their own interest as well in the best interest of society to stop the spread of the virus,” Rizvi said.

While some people on social media are blaming the Markaz event, Moulana Yusuf, a senior official of the Jamaat, issued a clarification that of the 2,500 people who attended the event, 1,500 managed to leave for their home. The lockdown by Delhi government and later by the Centre had forced the remaining 1,000 people to stay back. “Markaz offers the entire premises as a quarantine facility to help authorities tide over the challenge of current pandemic. Throughout its 100-year existence, Markaz Nizamuddin has an unblemished history of cooperating with administration an upholding the rule of law in letter and spirit,” he said.

Out of the 40 cases reported in AP, 22 people had attended the Delhi meeting or came in contact with the participants. A majority of people in quarantine in Nizamabad and Karimnagar districts in Telangana had attended the event. Many are yet to be traced in both states.

Muslim religious leaders stepped in and and urged people, who attended the Markaz meet, to undergo Covid-19 tests and cooperate with the government officials. Krishna district collector A Mohammed Imtiaz said all those with Covid-19 symptoms have been quarantined. Even relatives and close contacts were kept in isolation.


