Karnataka: Focus shifts to home quarantine, neighbours to keep tabs
2020-06-02
BENGALURU: Karnataka appears to have shifted its Covid-19 surveillance strategy from institutional quarantine to home quarantine and vigil by local bodies and neighbours, given the logistics involved in handling a minimum of 27,000 persons estimated to enter the state every day.

 


“With travel restrictions easing, there could be many asymptomatic carriers and testing all of them won’t be possible. We will have to move to home quarantine taking logistics into consideration. Anyone who enters Karnataka and is in home quarantine must alert the health department if they develop any symptom and go to a fever clinic,” said health commissioner Pankaj Kumar Pandey. 

According to the new standard operating procedure (SOP) announced on Sunday evening, institutional quarantine for seven days is mandatory only for travellers without symptoms from Maharashtra. Earlier, travellers from Delhi, Gujarat, Rajashthan, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu too had to undergo institutional quarantine.

As per a rough estimate by the health and family welfare department, a minimum 6,000 people will be entering Karnataka via domestic flights every day. With train services resuming, there would be 7,000 people entering the state, apart from close to 10,000-15,000 entrants through roadways. 

“To enter Karnataka, Seva Sindhu registration continues to be mandatory. Also, health screening at border check posts continues,” Pandey said. 

Experts involved in chalking out Karnataka’s surveillance strategy say Covid-19’s trajectory in the state will henceforth depend on how asymptomatic carriers behave and vigilance on the part of gram panchayats, ward committees, RWAs and neighbours. 

Officers admitted that some people have been entering the state skipping the Seva Sindhu portal and such instances are likely to increase in future. The BBMP on Sunday identified two people, one each in Vrishabhavathi ward and Shankar Muttt ward, who entered the state evading the authorities. Acting on tipoffs, BBMP officials visited their houses and hand-stamped them for home quarantine. Posters of home quarantine, bearing names of the inter-state returnees, were also put up in front of those houses. 

The experts, however, pointed out that returnees from other states could also be carriers of the infection and hence14-day home quarantine must be strictly be followed. 

“A father-son duo who returned from Rajasthan tested positive for Covid-19 in Bengaluru on May 30 after they were sent home post seven days of institutional quarantine. As their test results came positive, they were taken to a Covid-19-designated hospital. Though it’s not possible to test all asymptomatic persons, it’s essential to strictly isolate inter-state returnees during home quarantine,” said a member of the Covid-19 taskforce. 

In another flip-flop, the state government which recently issued a circular to set up private labs for Covid-19 testing at airports and railway stations, now says asymptomatic persons needn’t undergo testing. 

“Asymptomatic passengers need not undergo tests at kiosks in airports and railway stations. The kiosks will be used for those who come to Karnataka for business purposes and need the test result within 24 hours,” said Pandey.

“No one knows who could be a carrier. It’s a mystery. Maharashtra is said to be a Covid-19 hotspot in the country and we will have to continue with seven-day institutional quarantine for those returning from the state,” said Dr CN Manjunath, nodal officer, testing and labs, Covid-19 taskforce. 


