Focus on Covid spots, not broad lockdowns may be way forward
2020-05-10
NEW DELHI: With economic activities coming to a halt for several weeks due to the nationwide lockdown, there is a thought within the government to zero in on areas with Covid-19 cases for restrictions rather than putting a blanket ban on activities across a district or the larger part of any city, sources said.


TOI has learnt that discussions are on to push economic activities in a big way outside containment zones to tide over the economic losses due to the Covid-19 crisis. Though the government has announced several relaxations to kick-start construction, manufacturing and retail activities, some states have imposed restrictions over large geographical areas to prevent the spread of the virus. Construction activities are yet to pick up due to various reasons, including shortage of labourers.


Read our coronavirus live blog for all the latest news and updatesSources said the movement of goods has also not picked up in a big way since manufacturing is yet to start on a large scale. The number of e-way bills per day now stands at six lakh as compared to nearly 22 lakh before the lockdown started. However, there has been nearly a 100% rise in their number in the past three weeks – from 3.2 lakh a day to 6 lakh – which is being seen as a positive trend.

 
Lockdown till May 31 can stall coronavirus pandemic, says studyA possible maximum of 3 million people will be infected by Oct if the ongoing third phase of lockdown till May 17 is "implemented with full vigour" but the absence of the two lockdowns may have seen a projected maximum that would be as high as a staggering 171 million cases, a study of the Mumbai-based International Institute for Population Sciences said.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage “Extending restrictions that impact large areas is not a viable option. Hence, we need to adopt strategies that can deal with Covid-19 cases in a particular location and also pave the way for more economic activities,” said a source. The government has said the country has to live with Covid-19 virus and adoption of safe practices are needed to win over the health crisis.

More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Lockdown 3.0: What's allowed and what's not in the three zones
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
The third phase of the nationwide lockdown, which began on March 25, ends on May 17.

