Kolkata: Focus on shelters for homeless after two shifted to Covid-19 hospitals
2020-04-09
KOLKATA: Reports of two pavement dwellers — one from Metiabruz and the other from Bowbazar — contracting novel coronavirus have prompted Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) and Kolkata Police to take a closer look at shelters housing more than 10,000 vagrants and homeless across the city. Civic officials and police officers are concerned since the crowded shelters do not allow social distancing. They fear the shelters could become hotspots for Covid-19 if even one person contracts the virus. 





An abandoned four-storied building near the Kalighat temple that now houses 4,000 street dwellers tops the worry chart and civic officials as well as cops are desperately trying to find a way to prevent it from turning into a Covid cluster. 

Among the proposals doing the rounds is regular thermal checks to identify a person if he or she develops fever and then isolate the group till the person is tested. With only a handful attendants at the centre, KMC health department officials are keeping their fingers crossed and hoping the situation does not go out of hands. 

“The condition at the shelter in Kalighat would have been fine in a normal situation. But now that social distancing is required to keep Covid-19 at bay, the situation is really worrying. The congregation of 4,000 homeless people, who are fed twice a day by two NGOs, is by no means acceptable in the present context. But then, what do you do about them? Apart from the space crunch in the building, lack of sanitizers or masks is also a problem, not just among inmates but also among KMC medical staff who visit the shelter,” said a senior KMC health department official.

An official at KMC health department felt a majority of vagrants could pose a potential threat to adjacent localities in Kalighat that are densely populated. “There is no facility to individually check if the pavement dwellers are running temperature or suffering from cough and cold. At the most, we can arrange for random checking,” the civic medical officer said.

However, police officers from Kalighat police station have swung into action following a direction from Lalbazar that has asked the cops to do a video photography of meal being served to all the homeless at the civic shelters. “Now, we need to follow the basic norms, including maintaining physical distance among the homeless at the civic shelters. Cops also need to wear masks as non-compliance will lead to punishment,” said a senior police officer. Some other areas where cops are keeping a vigil on shelters for the homeless include Bowbazar, College Street, Rajabazar, Entally, Canal East Road, Kidderpore, Garden Reach and Bhowanipore, among other areas.

At Bowbazar, the cops became active following report of a pavement dweller contacting novel coronavirus. Cops on Monday roped in KMC medical officers to do a thermal screening among the pavement dwellers who have taken shelter at three places in Bowbazar. “We are conducting regular thermal screening among the pavement dwellers who have taken shelter at three places in Bowbazar as local residents are scared following report of one of them contracting novel coronavirus,” said a KMC official.


