Coronavirus scare: Focus now on prevention, says Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan
2020-03-14
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: After two new Covid-19 cases were reported in the state on Thursday, the chief minister said that the state should exercise caution to curb the spread of the disease. 


Addressing the media after a review meeting in the evening, Pinarayi Vijayan said that the new cases came from persons who had visited Middle-Eastern nations. “Medical colleges in Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode are testing samples. And 65 new persons were admitted in hospitals on Thursday; 33 others who were under observation removed from list as they have no disease. Those removed from list is over 4,000 now,” said the chief minister. 

We are facing a situation that is not fully under our control and so the focus now is on prevention. We should take full precaution and keep our homes, premises clean and ensure personal hygiene. LSGD bodies should also take care and field workers should also be cared for; government will ensure the same, said the chief minister. 

“At present, the situation is bad as more cases are being reported. But we should not panic. Instead we should take the initiative to check the spread of virus in the community, he said. 

State ministers have been asked to convene a review meeting in all the districts on Saturday. All local bodies and the police have been asked to work in tandem with the health department to spread the awareness. 

The chief minister asked persons, who have suspected symptoms, to avoid public transport. “Such persons should contact helpline numbers and they will provide all assistance and give immediate care,” he said. 

To create awareness among the people, it has been decided to start announcements at railway stations across the state. Steps are being taken to make the announcements inside the trains also. 


New cases in Kannur and Thrissur 

The 44-year-old-man from Kannur, who came from Dubai, tested positive for Covid-19, one week after he came on leave. District collector T V Subhash said the person, who is a driver in Dubai, reached Kannur via Kozhikode airport on March 5. Though he had cold at that time, he contracted fever on March 7, following which he was taken to Kannur medical College in Pariyaram from where they collected samples and asked him to undergo home quarantine. After the result came, he was shifted to an isolation ward, said the officials. 

He had maintained contact with a few relatives, who are quarantined at home. They will be hospitalized if need arises after a medical test. 

The Covid-19 patient in Thrissur was a co-passenger of the Ranni family from Italy, who arrived in Kochi by flight QR-514 from Doha on February 29. The 21-year-old man contacted the health authorities after learning that the Ranni trio had tested positive for Covid-19 on March 8, and was quarantined in the General Hospital. 

He was among the five passengers in the high-risk category. Reports said he had attended an engagement function. 

Thrissur district collector S Shanavas said efforts were on to track all those who had meet the patient. He would be shifted the medical college hospital if necessary, the collector said. 

