Nagpur: Fogging starts to quell Covid-19 misconceptions & mosquitoes
2020-03-21
NAGPUR: Misconceptions about how novel coronavirus (Covid-19) spreads and the prevalent mosquito menace posing the risk of vector-borne diseases have forced the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) to start fogging drive, usually a post-monsoon activity carried out in October to December, in residential areas even before the summer has peaked.


The drive was initiated early as corporators demanded it in view of the fluctuating temperatures, after the recent untimely rains, which provide suitable breeding conditions for mosquitoes.

Following directives from district administration, the civic body has also started fogging once in a day around MLA Hostel, which has been converted into a Covid-19 quarantine centre in Civil Lines. According to sources, large swarms of mosquitoes can be seen around MLA Hostel due to an adjoining nullah. Fogging is being done there so that those in quarantine may not panic. This will also prevent mosquito breeding and help curb vector-borne diseases.

NMC malaria and filarial officer Deepali Nasre told TOI, “City witnessed some spells of rain on March 10 and 15 following which there is change in atmospheric conditions. It has caused rise in number of mosquitoes. Corporators have demanded fogging citing misconceptions among people that Covid-19 spreads through mosquitoes. Though we clarified that Covid-19 is not a vector-borne disease, the drive has been launched to curb mosquito menace.”

Nasre said water samples of a few areas have showed there are no Aedes aegypti mosquitoes, which cause dengue. “Despite this, we have started fogging, which is done one hour after sunrise and after sunset. One machine has been engaged especially for high court and adjacent areas after receiving complaints about a large number of mosquitoes there,” she said.

Nasre said fogging will be stopped after rise in the temperatures, adding, “I appeal to all to use mosquito nets at home.”

The officer also tried to allay fears about health problems due to fogging. “Fogging is being done as per guidelines of National Vector-borne Disease Control Programme. People have to take care only when fogging is done inside houses. In such situation, people should be out of home for one hour and enter only after opening windows and doors. There are no problems if fogging is done on streets using moving vehicles, as we are doing,” she said.

Meanwhile, dengue cases have increased this year compared to the corresponding period of last year. The civic body has recorded 11 positive and 49 suspected cases between January 1 and March 14. Suspected cases always mean they are tested positive and treated for dengue in private hospitals. These cases are tested negative in NMC as it conducts the test using different methodology. Last year, there were 3 positive and 8 suspected cases between January 1 and March 31.

Corporator Sunil Hiranwar in a press released alleged that NMC was not doing fogging in his ward despite repeated letters. “NMC officials say there is shortage of diesel. I request municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe to provide all facilities to health department as their job is very crucial,” he said.

Also, the NMC has continued distribution of medicines as part of the nationwide drive to prevent filaria.


