Follow advisory to fight coronavirus: Deputy cheif minister
2020-03-20
KANPUR: Deputy chief minister Keshav Prasad Maurya on Thursday said Central as well as the state government were mustering the best available resources to counter coronavirus. Everyone should cooperate in this struggle and avoid movement in crowded places to check the spread of the virus, he added.


The deputy chief minister, who was in the city to highlight the achievements of the Yogi Adityanath government in three years, said: “People need not panic, instead they should follow expert advisory and keep themselves restricted in their houses as much as possible for a few days. The government has got success in minimizing the spread of the virus and in that effort people’s cooperation was remarkable.”

He advised that there was no need to seek face mask for everyone. 

“If everyone would run for a mask then it would be a panic-like situation. Instead of panic, there is a need for caution. BJP has cancelled all its programmes to follow the advisory,” he added.

He said in Kanpur as many as 78 beds had been reserved as isolation beds.

Giving the breakup, he said, “12 beds are at Ursala Horseman hospital, 6 at IDH, 50 at community health centres, 10 at maternity wing of Lala Lajpat Rai hospital. Apart from this, 115 beds are being readied for the purpose.”

He later inspected the preparations at UHM hospital.

The deputy chief minister on this occasion also provided financial assistance to five victims of natural calamities like rain and hailstorm.

District magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari welcomed the deputy chief minister at the police line helipad and presented him a N-95 mask which he wore most of the time.

The health department officials also apprised Maurya with its ongoing efforts to fight the virus. The officials stated that quarantine beds have been set up at Rama Medical College, Mandhana (40), UHM (20), Naraina Research Hospital (25) and Kanpur University (30).

So far, 561 suspected cases have been verified. Around 12 samples had been sent to KGMU, Lucknow, out of which 11 have been found as negative while sample of one was rejected as it did not have history of foreign tour.

The health department also claimed that as many as 702 suspected cases were reported, 147 out of which had completed 28 days quarantine time while 380 cases are passing through quarantine phase.


