Food and groceries priority of citizens, says VNIT’s Covid-19 study
2020-04-05
NAGPUR: A group, comprising a VNIT professor, his students, government officers and young professionals, has developed a risk perception assessment tool for Central India to recommend to the government Covid-19-related problems and preparedness of citizens. 


Under the banner of Confederation of Risk Reduction Professionals (CRRP), the group has been surveying citizens zone-wise in real time to know their vulnerability and preparedness for the health disaster and the situation arising out of it – complete lockdown. 

So far, health was people’s priority which has now shifted to uninterrupted supply of food, power and water as the city and nation drift towards the next stage of the contagious disease. 

The ‘Response to Coronavirus Pandemic’ survey is being conducted by VNIT, Nagpur, in collaboration with Keio University, Japan. The group is trying to understand key priorities and establish an improved understanding of the community risk perception.

The five-minute survey seeks personal details such as age, gender, occupation, area of residence (NMC zone) and recent history of viral fever. This is followed by queries on the source of information which could be social media, government, newspapers or TV. The most important part is regarding immediate priorities. Participants are given a range of options, including social interaction, travel and transportation, food, water, power, job, access to banking services and education.

Sameer Deshkar, professor at VNIT’s architecture department, said the questionnaire assesses the vulnerability and preparedness of citizens. “Based on the survey, we will recommend to the government the status of people and their needs,” he said.

The online survey started on March 24 when the nationwide lockdown was announced. “We have received around 320 responses so far. The trend of people’s priority is shifting from only health services to food and groceries,” he said.

Data such as life support services, from where you are getting them, how reliable is it and the risk perception will be integrated with GIS mapping and shown in the final report to the government. As the Covid19 phase changes, the disaster priority of people, too, will change.

“We are noting the emerging requirement of people in different zones. The lifestyle impact on the individual and community. Some questions have been posed to villagers, too. As the city is closing down, we want to know how it will impact them,” he said.

The village survey is taking place through calls to every sarpanch, said Deshkar, who is the coordinator of the international centre of excellence on resilient cities.

“CRRP is India’s member in the You Inspire initiative of the United Nations. SAARC nations are part of it. District disaster Management officer Ankush Gawande, VNIT students Harshita N, Vibhas and Shruti are part of the team,” said Deshkar, who is one of the directors on the CRRP board.

