Food companies miss Ramzan demand in lockdown
2020-05-08
MUMBAI: A subdued Ramzan this year due to the lockdown is proving to be a lost marketing opportunity for several packaged foods companies. 


Branded products in falooda mixes, Bombay halwa, phirni and certain instant curry masalas drew a significant chunk of their sales during Ramzan. Sales of these products for some companies are only half of what was clocked in the same period during Ramzan last year.

Gits Food Products director (sales & marketing) Sahil Gilani said some of the company’s dessert instant mixes such as falooda, kheer, phirni and Bombay halwa do over 50% of their annual sales during Ramzan. Additionally, the Gits gulab jamun mix sees a monthly surge of 25% in specific regions during this season. 

 


“While the demand remained high, we unfortunately weren’t able to push the products into the market due to major supply disruptions on account of the lockdown,” said Gilani. “Gits Gulab Jamun mix had a higher pipeline stock as it’s a big seller all year round, so we managed growth on that,” added Gilani.

During Ramzan, which coincides with the summer season, 50% of Rasna’s drink mixes were consumed outdoors. “It’s made and sold on the streets. That’s certainly a lost opportunity for us,” said Rasna CMD Piruz Khambatta.

Mother’s Recipe (Desai Foods) executive director Sanjana Desai said the company gets good sales from the paste category (ginger-garlic paste, garlic and ginger pastes) in the domestic market during Ramzan. “In fact, the bigger SKUs (stock-keeping units), that is 300gm and above, usually witness huge demand and an exponential sales jump. Even products such as seviyan kheer (payasam), an instant mix product, would be in high demand along with garlic pickle and sweet pickle,” said Desai.

Apart from a surge in demand across all key categories like pickle, papad and pastes, Desai Foods was anticipating strong incremental business this year from the newly introduced range of chutneys, an accompaniment to samosas and snacks during the festive season. “But unfortunately, there were issues with supply and fulfilment during the lockdown,” said Desai. 

Even in the international markets, its Madras Curry Powder, accompanied by ginger-garlic paste and garlic paste, see huge demand. “Every year we see The sales projections of these products rise between 50% and 100% during Ramzan,” said Desai. Much of the company’s consumption would have increased due to the large-scale sampling that it used to do in areas with huge gatherings during the Ramzan period. None of this is now possible. 

“At present, sales are coming from filling the general shortages of essential food items and through hyper local delivery and other sources of supply that we have created to service the markets to ensure our products are available to our consumers,” said Desai.The industry is now pinning its hopes on the festive season that will commence in August and extend up to Diwali, to make up for the lost opportunity.


