Covid-19 scare: Food delivery apps issue safety tips for staff, patrons
2020-03-14
KOLKATA: While ordering food on apps gets you your favourite dishes at your doorstep, it has also been ferrying the nCoV fear to foodies’ homes. To put customers at ease, delivery apps Swiggy and Zomato have issued a set of instructions for employees and customers, advising prevention measures, including an option for the latter to get food dropped off at their doorstep instead of having to receive it directly from the delivery partner.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In an e-mail sent to customers, Swiggy has listed a series of steps taken by it to maintain a “safe and healthy environment”. It says that it has asked its delivery partners to self-quarantine in case they have symptoms and they will be provided free medical consultation and will receive financial support during the period of recovery. 

“Additionally, you may ask the delivery partner to leave the package by the door (in case of online payment) in case you are unwell or prefer so,” the e-mail said. 

Zomato, too, has been utilizing its partner app, as well as SMS services, to broadcast WHO’s best practices and important information such as Covid-19 testing laboratory locations as issued by the ministry of health. It has issued a similar guideline for stakeholders too. “We are using multiple channels of communication to sensitize our employees, users, restaurants, as well as delivery partners. We have advised all our employees to exercise their right and best judgement to work from home and have also created an internal emergency response team to reach out to for support,” said a Zomato spokesperson.

She added that Zomato has always had an option on the app to add cooking instructions for the restaurants and delivery instructions for the partner, including having the packet dropped off at the doorstep. “In case you want to avoid contact with our delivery partner, you can request Zomato Valet to leave your package at the door via delivery instructions on our app. Please note that this will only work on orders paid online,” the Zomato e-mail said.

The company is also sharing videos with its partners so that they can “focus on their well-being while ensuring the safe handling of food,” added the spokesperson. 

Both firms, however, said there has been no change in their volume of orders. “Our business has not been affected and we are confident that with the right practices and adequate social distancing, we can help curb the spread of Covid-19. We cannot emphasise enough on washing your hands properly before you eat any kind of food — whether cooked at home or ordered on Zomato,” said a Zomato spokesperson. 


