Delhi lockdown: Food kitchens so that no one goes hungry
2020-03-27
NEW DELHI: With the objective that nobody sleeps hungry during the 21-day lockdown, Delhi government has decided to rope in charitable and religious organisations, civil society and not-for-profit organisations to provide cooked food to the city’s poor.


Delhi Disaster Management Authority has started a hunger helpline where people can call up for food. District magistrates have been asked to ensure that packed food is delivered at their doorstep.

The helpline, officials said, would be open between 11am to 3pm and 6pm to 9pm and manned by DUSIB officials. It will direct people to the nearest night shelter or pass on the information to the DM for delivery of packed food if the need arises. 

A nine-member advisory panel under deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia has also been formed for coordination and effective implementation of measures taken by the government for providing food. Apart from two bureaucrats, the government has roped in civil society members and experts in the fields of urban planning, homeless and disaster management.

Following PM Narendra Modi’s call for a day-long ‘Janata Curfew’ on Sunday, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal had last week announced a slew of measures, including enhancement of ration by 1.5 times to 72 lakh public distribution system beneficiaries and free lunch and dinner at night shelters for the needy.

With a complete lockdown till April 14, a large number of daily wagers, causal workers and those working in shops, offices and factories may face problems to arrange for food.

Apart from the 220 night shelters in Delhi, where anyone can go and eat lunch and dinner, the government has also decided to open feeding centres at least two school buildings in each municipal ward and provide meals to 500 people each.

“The district magistrates have been asked to identify pockets where poor people may need food. By opening feeding centres in schools, we will be able to decongest night shelters and also maintain the norms of social distancing,” DUSIB member-expert Bipin Rai said.

On Wednesday evening, about 18,500 people had food at night shelters and officials said the number was likely to increase in the coming days. Officials said their target is to provide free food to at least 1-1.5 lakh people every day. 


