Foods boosting immune system key in battle against Covid-19
2020-05-01
PUNE: The human body has an excellent immune system that gets into action every time there is a viral or bacterial attack. Supporting this immune system with nutrient foods is crucial in our current fight against Covid-19, say nutritionists.


“Viruses will survive only if they enter our cells. Our body has an excellent surveillance and defence mechanism through the immune system involving white blood cells. If we want these WBCs to be potent and effective, it is important to consume raw food before meals. This food can be carrots, cucumbers, onions or even raw tomatoes,” says city nutritionist Vibhusha Jambhekar.

“It is essential to focus on nutrients in the food rather than the calories. Consuming food with good nutrients will boost the immune system,” she says.

A good immune system helps the body detect viruses and attack them. “People should focus on home-based and organic food as far as possible. In addition, make sure to consume foods of different colours. Having whole grain food and fibres keeps the gut clean and prevents bacterial infections,” says Amreen Shaikh, head dietician and nutritionist at Wockhardt Hospital in Mumbai.

The inclusion of turmeric, which is a part of Indian cooking, is good for immunity as it had anti-inflammatory properties, says Shaikh.

Jambhekar says certain molecules are synthesized in the body whenever there is a virus. “These molecules are called interferons which are like red alerts. They alert the whole body that there is an infection. Interferons are stimulated by the peel of the lemon. Just grate a lemon peel and add it to your food,” she says.

Along with consuming proper nutrient food, it is important to maintain hygiene in the kitchen. Nutritionists say that while people are rigorously following hand hygiene, they should also keep kitchen spaces clean.

“Kitchen hygiene involves regular cleaning of the platform and drawer handles, which are touched frequently. The sinks should be cleared of pooled water,” says Jinal Patel, consultant dietician at Apollo Spectra hospital in Mumbai.

Patel also suggests that food be covered while being cooked so that nutrients are not lost. Even the extra water from cooked food, which contains nutrients, can be reused for cooking.

