Coronavirus outbreak in Nagpur: Food delivery apps ensure restaurant kitchens keep working
2020-03-20
NAGPUR: District collector Ravindra Thakre’s directives led to all city restaurants closing their doors for walk-in customers, however, they are still serving food by delivering it to customers via several online applications.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Thakare has also cleared the confusion on whether food delivery chains like Zomato and Swiggy could operate. He said they can continue operations as their functioning doesn’t involve crowds and, therefore, probability of contracting the virus was less. “The delivery boys deliver food directly at home and in entire operation no other person is involved,” he told TOI. 

This means restaurants can keep their kitchens open but cannot allow walk-in customers.

While some restaurants are sending their own employees for delivery, a bulk of these establishment owners are relying on online food delivery apps.

TOI spoke to several restaurant employees, and most of them blamed the coronavirus outbreak for business going down. However, some of them claimed that their delivery orders have not been affected due to recent order by the collector.

An employee from a Wardha Road-based restaurant claimed they have closed the front door of the restaurant, but is allowing customers who want to have food inside the restaurant in from a small rear door. “We are also giving home deliveries and people are also using online applications to order food from our restaurants. However, orders have decreased. We have also announced a holiday for some of our staff, but are serving them food since they have nowhere else to go.”

Owner of an online kitchen restaurant told TOI that since the outbreak of coronavirus orders for food have decreased. “Customers have reduced orders in the recent past. They are also avoiding junk food, due to which business is slack,” he said.

Employee at a restaurant franchise located in Sadar claimed, though, business has not been affected after the establishment closed for walk-ins. “Several orders are coming through online food delivery applications. The closure of restaurants has not affected us as now a days people anyway prefer to eat at home rather than at a restaurant,” he said.

The owner of a restaurant on Manewada Road revealed that they are also allowing customers to pick up food from the restaurant along with online applications. “The business is slow due to the recent incidents, and we are also buying materials in smaller quantity so food does not go waste. Business is down almost 50%. I hope in the coming days business will be back on track.”

TOI also spoke to some of the food delivery boys, who claimed that their work has not been affected due to the recent closure of restaurants. “My work has not reduced a bit, even though restaurants are closed. I started working at around 10am and till 3.30pm I have delivered around 10 orders from different restaurants to houses in different areas,” said a delivery boy.

