Football will provide joy to the world post-Covid: Tim Cahill
2020-06-15
Alongside luminaries such as Cafu, Xavi and Samuel Eto’o, Tim Cahill is now an official ambassador for the Fifa World Cup 2022 in Qatar. Having retired after a stint with Jamshedpur FC in the Indian Super League (ISL), the Australian legend who starred at four World Cups speaks exclusively to TOI about the coronavirus pandemic, preparations for the World Cup and his grounding experience in India. Edited excerpts.



The Fifa World Cup in Qatar is still more than two years away, but given the chaos that the coronavirus pandemic has sparked, will there be any impact?

One thing I know is that everything is on schedule. Eighty percent of the competition stadiums are on its way. The coronavirus has affected different countries in different ways, but with the Word Cup (preparations), everything is on schedule, which is really impressive.


What kind of impact would the World Cup in particular and football in general have on people across the world, once fears over coronavirus dies down?
The World Cup is one of the biggest shows on earth. It’s the beauty of football. All countries involved can have some real positive energy to look forward to. Football is a massive conduit for countries, fans, foundations to bring the world together. It plays a massive role. It plays a role through the vision of how we know the game and happiness that it brings. Football will play an important role when we make a comeback. Not having sport on television is difficult, but I know the World Cup is something to be excited about.


The Bundesliga was first to restart and now La Liga and Italian football have followed. Do you think finances have taken precedence over people’s lives?
I have taken a cautious role. It all comes down to the powers that be in making the decision. As an individual, for me, health is paramount, that always comes first. At the moment, it seems like things are breaking in very slowly. It’s a trial and error situation. To be absolutely honest with you, I don’t know the answer. What I do know is that the first port of call has to be health.


You had a glittering 20-year career, which included stints in England, US, China and Australia. Why did you choose India as the final destination before hanging up your boots?
India is definitely a country which I was really interested in. We have a really close relationship with India because of cricket. One of my closest friends is Brett Lee, David Warner, (Steven) Smith, Shane Watson, a lot of guys who I know very well and speak till this day. When I joined Asia, I started to learn more about Asian Cup, different countries, also realised how big the markets were with football, on the pitch business, commercials, the whole element. Getting that opportunity later in my career, I couldn’t turn it down. Now being an ambassador for the World Cup 2022, I get to do amazing projects off the pitch, and hopefully soon I will be heading to India to really cement strong foundations with world football.


You could play only 11 matches for Jamshedpur FC because of injury, but how was the overall experience in India?
Amazing. It wasn’t just about football, it was just as much about off the field, in my interactions of helping the club develop stronger professional ties with my knowledge as a footballer who played four World Cups, Premier League and around the world. We were three hours away from an airport and I was training twice a day, helping players to really make the most of this opportunity. I loved it. It grounded me to live so close in the village with local families, to see thousands of people at the stadium, travel around, understand the culture, the food, the logistics of travel. It opened my eyes in a whole different level. I was really blessed to have such a brilliant career to share with my teammates and also clubs I had played against (in India). It was really grounding.


The ISL started with big names like Robert Pires, Zico, Alessandro Del Piero and Roberto Carlos. You were the last real big-name player to play here. What does India need to do to attract the big guns?
India has so much going for them. They have the infrastructure, fans, stadiums and amazing facilities. The structure of the games and formatting of the league needs to suit the players. More games they play, the more professional things can be. It takes time. You have to build those levels and you really have to continue to progress and attract those names, and at the same time attract players who will help grow the league and not themselves individually. I think the league is fantastic.

