Covid-19: Footfall at Jaipur malls dips 50%, Holi business hit
2020-03-06
JAIPUR: The effect of coronavirus could be seen in the market on Thursday. As the news of an Italian couple found positive of coronavirus broke, people have started avoiding going to crowded places.

As per the Confederation of Real Estate Developers Association of India (CREDAI), there is 50% fall of customers in malls.

CREDAI (Jaipur) president Nitesh Kishore said that they have been witnessing decreasing number of customers in the malls. “The effect can be seen. Due to the threat of coronavirus people are not coming to the malls. On our part, we are also taking precautions. At World Trade Park and GT Central malls of Jaipur city, we have provided thermal screening that will start working from Firday at the entry gates. This way we would be able to detect any sick person,” said Nitesh.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and other leaders of the country have declared that they will not participate in the ‘Holi Milan Samaroh’ and have advised people to do the same.

Following this many residential welfare association of the city have cancelled the Holi Milan Samaroh that are being organised every year.

President of Shyam Nagar Residential Welfare Association, Pradeep Gugalia, said that their organisation has decided to cancel the event. “Every year, we have been celebrating Holi with great enthusiasm. We used to play with colours, dance and cultural programmes used to be organised. But due to the spread of coronavirus and warnings from the health officials, we have decided to cancel it. We have 12,000 members in our committee which increases the chances of contamination even more,” said Pradeep.

Though regular visitors are going to temples and other religious places, there is a slight decline in their numbers too.

Mahant of Moti Doongri temple Kailash Sharma said that they celebrated their Holi samaroh on Wednesda. However, we are taking precaution. Priests have been asked to wear masks and a separate queue has been created for foreigners, he said.


