Foot-operated sanitiser dispensers latest pandemic product in Chennai
2020-05-28
CHENNAI: Foot-operated sanitiser dispensers are the latest buzz among street-side vendors, who have been busy selling masks during the pandemic. Apart from small industries and shops, even public are buying such foot operated dispensers, say vendors. 


Dubbed as ‘touchless hand sanitiser,’ these are priced between Rs 1,000 and Rs 1,500. While the average price is Rs 1,500, vendors say some variants in the market are priced as high as Rs 5,000. 

On Bazaar Main Road in Madipakkam, a vendor was selling foot-operated dispensers, made of both PVC and steel. “I bought them from Parry’s Corner. While several shopkeepers bought it to place in their shops, a few customers bought it for their houses too,” said the vendor. 

However, not everyone has been lucky with sales. On NSK Road in Nanganallur, T Jaisingh, who used to supply furniture, canopies for weddings and outdoor events, took to manufacturing and selling these touchless hand sanitisers as business has remained dull due to the lockdown. 

“I have put them up for sale the past two days but there have been hardly any takers. Initially, I planned to sell it for Rs 1,500. Now, I am ready to give it for as less as Rs 1,000,” said T Jaisingh. According to Jaisingh, there are manufacturing units in Puducherry and several of them have taken to this business after the lockdown was relaxed.

The pandemic has also given rise to several cottage industries making face masks. Vendors are spotted across the city, selling masks in bicycles and motorbikes. Vendors who sell fruits, vegetables on pushcarts, provision stores, everybody has stock of face masks. On Medavakkam Main Road, vendors were seen selling three masks for Rs 50. Most of them are made of cloth and can be washed and reused, according to the vendors. 

This has, however, not gone well with the pharmacists. “About a month ago, authorities were very strict with us and had laid down stringent rules for sale of masks and sanitisers. Some pharmacies in South Chennai were even sealed. Now sanitizers are sold on the streets and no one knows whether they are alcohol-based or just soap water,” said S Gokul, a pharmacist from Nanganallur.


