Coronavirus scare: For now, Delhi government bans all sports events
2020-03-14
NEW DELHI: Delhi government put a temporary ban on all sports gatherings, including the Indian Premier League 2020, seminars and conferences in the wake of novel coronavirus threat. On Friday, it also ordered the immediate shutting down of public swimming pools in the city till March 31.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Addressing a press conference, deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia said district magistrates had been asked to ensure that all directives pertaining to the novel coronavirus were implemented. They have also been asked to keep close watch on the possible spread of infection in their respective areas.

“Social distancing is the most effective way to stop the spread of Covid-19 in Delhi and India. So it is important to avoid any big event that sees huge public gatherings,” Sisodia said. Delhi has so far reported six cases of positive cases of nCov infection.

During a discussion in the special Delhi Assembly session later in the evening, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the coronavirus outbreak was at the containment stage and the Centre and state government had been working together to deal with it. “We have closed schools, cinema halls, universities to contain the spread of infection. The people have supported us in all the precautionary measures we have taken,” Kejriwal said.

The CM also emphasised that healthy people shouldn’t use masks but rely on regular washing of hands and use of hand sanitisers to avoid infection. “If you wear a mask, you may touch it get infected. Only infected people should wear mask to avoid spreading the virus,” Kejriwal said.

Health minister Satyendar Jain said home quarantine was the best solution for individuals with symptoms of coronavirus infection but revealed that over 500 hospital beds had been readied for Covid-19 cases. He also said that private hospitals should be permitted to run test laboratories.

BJP’s Ramvir Singh Bidhuri, leader of the Opposition, urged the AAP government to rope in 96 private hospitals, which were given land on concessional rates, to set up isolation wards and provide free treatment to Covid-19 patients. “The administration must ensure these private health facilities place 5,000 free beds at the disposal of Delhi government and provide free medicines and investigation facilities to coronavirus patients,” Bidhuri said.

The BJP legislator also asked the state government to provide masks and hand sanitisers to DTC and DJB workers and direct the daily disinfecting of ATM machines.


