India’s oldest couple to beat Covid-19 are home for Easter
2020-04-07
KOTTAYAM: Thomas, 93, and his wife Mariamma, 88, consider themselves particularly blessed that they will be able to celebrate yet another Easter. Till last Friday they weren’t so sure, because the couple was still in the Covid-19 isolation ward of Kottayam Medical College Hospital in Kerala.

Thomas and Mariamma are the oldest couple in India to have contracted the virus so far and to have recovered. 

Discharged on the evening of April 3, after almost a month in hospital fighting for their lives, they look back on what they went through with incredulity and a little bemusement. “The initial days in isolation in the ICU were very tense and everything was strange,” said Thomas. “Whenever I woke up, the unusually cold temperature and unfamiliar people made me think that I had landed in some foreign country.”

The couple contracted the disease from their son and his family who had come home from Italy for a vacation on February 29. A few days later they tested positive for Covid-19 and on March 8, so did Thomas and Mariamma. In the ICU, for Mariamma it was the thought of her children and grandchildren which was a concern. “I used to cry at night,” she recalled. The nurses had a tough time consoling her and make her sleep. Soon, however, the couple got adjusted to the critical care unit. 

The couple had several old-age related health issues which made treating them more difficult. They had diabetes, hypertension and cardiac problems. Once, the health condition of Thomas deteriorated further and he had to be put on ventilator. He also suffered a cardiac arrest during this period.

The medical team held meetings every hour to assess their condition but there was one thing that intrigued them. Initially, the couple had been admitted in separate rooms. “We had never stayed separately since our marriage. We slept in the same room and living even a second without seeing each other was unimaginable,” said Thomas. Mariamma, too, was disturbed by this. Sensing that there could be a psychological toll, the doctors soon shifted them to the ICU ward where they both could see each other.

Soon after arriving home in Kerala’s Pathanamthitta district following their discharge, Thomas told Rijo Moncy, his grandson, that he “wanted to see the news on TV”. “The same night he also made me read out the newspapers and how they had reported his case,” said Rijo.

Thomas has no doubt that he and his wife owe their recovery to the doctors and nurses who looked after them.

