For homeless in Goa, coronavirus is just a cold, but the big worry is food
2020-03-24
PANAJI: Originally from Kerala, sexagenarian Raju Vellan has been in Goa for over 40 years and used to work as a daily wage labourer before resorting to begging. He carries a pocket-sized radio and a tiny tub of Vicks VapoRub with him everywhere he goes. “I have all the information about corona,” he says with a tinge of pride, hoping that he is validated for his awareness.


“I have this if I catch a cold,” he adds, flashing the ointment.


 
 Even after saving money, homeless are unable to buy food


Vellan sleeps on Panaji’s pavements like several other homeless people who beg for alms during the day and drift into slumber under the starry sky by night. He was given food by “a friend” on Sunday and is optimistic that his well-wisher will not let him go hungry in the coming days as well. His counterparts, however, are neither aware of the perils of the coronavirus nor have access to food in the wake of the extended curfew in Goa.

Faucina Fernandes, originally from Maina, has been scavenging for food on the streets of Panaji for the past five years. She had no idea about the reason behind the city’s empty streets nor about the coronavirus.

“I will have to starve,” Fernandes, says. “It’s okay if the people wish to stay inside for their own safety.”

As measures to tackle the potential outbreak of this pandemic intensify, the homeless seem to have been overlooked. While staying safe and infection-free for the homeless is a Herculean challenge, managing to feed themselves even once a day is another battle altogether.


Absence of sanitation makes homeless highly vulnerable

Ramesh Rivonkar, 52, begs for food near restaurants in the Panaji market and often manages to get fed with the leftovers by customers as they exit the hotel.

 With eateries downing their shutters owing to the curfew, he is left to starve on the streets besides having absolutely no access to medical care or shelter.

“I’ve seen people wearing masks and going about because of a new epidemic. But I didn’t know about the curfew. I don’t know how to fill my stomach,” he says.

He has managed to accumulate some money from having begged last week. However, he has not been able to purchase food and water on Sunday and Monday as markets have been closed. “Even if I decide to leave the city to go to some other town, the buses are not operational,” he said, remaining hopeful that things would improve in the days to come.

Lack of a home to self-quarantine and absence of sanitation make the homeless highly vulnerable. Medical superintendent at the North Goa district hospital in Mapusa, Dr Mohan Pednekar, however, says they are not at risk yet as they are not directly in the line of fire.

“Most people flying into Goa from Covid-19 affected areas are being screened with thermal scanners and those with symptoms are being quarantined at the GMC,” he says.

