Covid-19: For ‘wider participation’, Goa CM defers ZP elections by two days
2020-03-20
PANAJI: The Goa government, which was adamant on going ahead with the zilla panchayat (ZP) polls on Sunday despite the central government calling for social distancing, decided to postpone the polls by two days after PM Modi called for ‘Janata Curfew’ from 7am to 9pm on March 22. They will now be held on Tuesday.


“Respecting the appeal made by PM Modi for ‘Janata Curfew’ on March 22 and in the interest of wider participation of the electorate in the ZP elections, the state government, in consultation with the state election commission (SEC), has decided to postpone the ZP polling date to March 24,” CM Pramod Sawant said.



TimesViewBy postponing zilla panchayat elections by mere two days for ‘wider participation’, chief minister Pramod Sawant is knowingly risking public health. On a day when Prime Minister Narendra Modi appealed to the country to exercise ‘restraint’ and emphasised on social distancing in the nation’s fight against coronavirus, Sawant with his shortsightedness has proved that people’s safety is last on his list of priorities. The chief minister seems to have forgotten that democracy is for the people and not for the politicians. Modi minced no words in underlying the gravity of the threat and said there is no room for complacency, but Sawant through his repeated actions has shown that he is unaware of the gravity of the pandemic. Even the religious bodies—church and temples—have cautioned and advised people to pray privately. But Sawant, who is guilty of addressing large gatherings, has shown scant regard to any of the guidelines. His first and foremost responsibility is the safety of the people, including children and senior citizens. By his highhandedness, Sawant is putting lives at risk. He should stop behaving selfishly and put people first. 

While the SEC is yet to finalise counting day, which was earlier scheduled for March 23, there will be no change in the campaign period that ends on Friday.



Coronavirus in India live updates


Immediately after Modi called for ‘Janata Curfew’ on Sunday over the spread of coronavirus, Sawant met with state election commissioner R K Srivastava and chief secretary Parimal Rai late Thursday night.

The opposition had earlier been demanding that the ZP polls be deferred in view of Covid-19 scare.

The government last month had postponed the election date from March 15 to March 22. The last ZP polls were held on March 18, 2015, and the first meeting was conducted on March 25 that year. “The five-year tenure ends on March 24. We have to constitute ZPs before that,” Srivastava had told reporters last month.

A total of 203 candidates are in the running for the elections to two bodies – South Goa ZP and North Goa ZP – each consisting of 25 constituencies. BJP has fielded candidates for 43 seats while Congress has put up candidates in 38 seats. MGP, which has an informal pact with Congress, will fight the elections in 17 seats. AAP and NCP have put up candidates in 17 and six constituencies respectively. Besides, 79 independent candidates are in the fray.

Forty-nine members remain to be elected to the ZPs as one from Sancoale has already been elected unopposed.

Thirty of the 50 constituencies are reserved for women, ST, SC and OBC. A total of 9,500 staff were roped in for the elections that were to be held across 1,210 polling booths.

The high court last month declined to stay the reservation of constituencies done by the government.

Although the high court admitted the petitions, a division bench stated that it would not interfere with the election process and would hear the petitions in eight weeks, after replies were filed by the government in the matter.


