For want of medicines, proper treatment, 145 TB patients died in Agra during lockdown
2020-05-16
Agra: A total of 145 tuberculosis patients have died in 54 days – between March 20 and May 12 – in Agra district. Relatives claimed that these patients died due to lack of proper treatment andmedicines during the Covid-19 lockdown. In contrast, only 27 patients had died from January 1 to March 19, the health department data revealed. In 2019, only 99 TB patients had died between March 20 to May 12. During the same period in 2018, the number of deaths of TB patients was 44. 

Between January 1 and May 12, a total of 5,817 TB patients were registered in the district. Out of these, 172 died – 145 of them during the lockdown. According to the sources, treatment for the first stage of TB failed on 123 patients and their treatment regimen had to be changed.

A health department official said, “Majority of the deaths of TB patients during the lockdown were those seeking treatment at private centres. As most of the private hospitals and clinics were not operating, these TB patients had to suffer. The out-patient department at SN Medical College was also not operating. Only the emergency cases were admitted and provided treatment.”

Wife of a 35-year-old TB patient who died last month said, “The health of my husband who had been a TB patient for the past six months deteriorated on April 18. He had run out of his medicines. He was taken to the emergency ward of SNMC but was denied treatment. He died on April 20.”

District tuberculosis officer UB Singh said, “TB patients have low immunity. All the staff is deployed on Covid-19 duty. Medicines are being supplied to registered patients. However, OPDs in the private and government hospitals are closed, which is causing problems to the patients. Any TB patient not getting treatment or medicine can directly contact my office.” 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “I will review the work being done for the treatment of TB patients. The mortality data will also be analysed. Time-bound action will be taken to ensure proper treatment of TB patients and adequate availability of medicines for them.” 


