For docs fighting pandemic, no sacrifice is too big
2020-05-23
Meerut: Dr Javed Ali Huda had barely removed his PPE after a long day attending to the patients at the emergency OPD of Meerut’s Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial (LLRM) Medical College when he received the news of his father’s death. He had to give the funeral a miss. “I wanted to go home and see my father one last time. But, I am a doctor and could not have risked the lives of others back home,” he said.In Meerut, which has recorded the second highest Covid-19 cases in UP so far, several other doctors have made such personal sacrifices in the line of duty.Dr Ali, the 30-year-old junior resident doctor, said, “I was put on a video call and my family sent me pictures of my father’s burial. I am under home quarantine currently and will be tested for Covid-19 on Saturday. If I test negative, I have my travel pass ready to return home.” His 20-year-old brother and 15-year-old sister, are meanwhile, consoling their mother back home.In another case, Dr Nirupama Gupta, 36, who has two more days to complete her Covid-19 ward duty before getting tested and going on quarantine, has missed her daughter’s fourth birthday and her wedding anniversary as her husband, who is also a doctor, is on Covid duty in Kerala.“My husband has been studying cardiology in Kerala for the last two years. I am in Meerut and my daughter is in Delhi with my in-laws. She wore fairy-like pink wings on her birthday as we saw her cut the cake over a video call. My daughter and my mother-in-law stayed with me in Meerut until the pandemic broke out. However, when my Covid-19 duty started, I sent them to Delhi where my father-in-law lives. I couldn’t have risked their safety,” the doctor said.“Not just this, it was our wedding anniversary on Thursday and my husband and I could talk only at 9pm, because I was in the Covid-19 ward duty and couldn’t have picked up calls there,” said Dr Nirupama.Meanwhile, Dr Adeeb Khan, 26, has started living with his sister and brother-in-law – both of them doctors too – at their house in Meerut instead of living with his elderly parents in the same city, hardly a few kilometres away. “My parents are old and will have a constant risk if I go back to home after duty every day. This is why I decided to move in with my sister and brother-in-law,” Dr. Khan said.Recounting a harrowing experience, Dr. Khan said, “During my duty, I came in contact with a gunshot victim who had to be treated immediately. During the process of reviving him, we had to remove our face shields due to fogging and even our gloves tore apart. Later, he tested Covid-19 positive. I was put into quarantine and luckily tested negative.”