Covid-19 in Delhi: For restaurant owners & staff, a recipe for disaster
2020-03-19
NEW DELHI: A day after leading restaurant chains announced voluntary closure of their outlets till March 31 to check the spread of the novel coronavirus, it became starkly clear on Wednesday that returning to normalcy would not be easy for the hospitality industry. The sector is looking at massive job cuts, loss of revenues and permanent cessation of operations if things did not quickly come back on track.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Already, February has proved one of the slowest months in recent history with the risk of infection deterring people from eating out. The pandemic couldn’t have come at a worse time since March is the month when annual taxes are paid and various licences come up for renewal.

While restaurateurs are considering ways to stay afloat, the employees stare at an uncertain future. Many have already been sent on unpaid leave or asked to take a pay cut. The contracts of outsourced labour such as housekeeping, security and parking have also been terminated in many establishments.

Restaurant body National Restaurants Association of India (NRAI) is reaching out to ministries and government departments for support. Anurag Katriar, president of NRAI, said the central and state governments had to step in. Else, the industry, which employs around eight million people, is looking at huge job losses. 

“We are meeting the authorities for restoration of input tax credit, deferment of licence renewals due in March, extension of licenses for a quarter without additional fees, GST relief and moratorium on repayment of interest on loans,” disclosed Katriar. He revealed that restaurateurs in their capacities are also reaching out to landlords for concession in rent dues. At his company, deGustibus Hospitality, which employs 700 people, Katriar is planning pay cuts to avoid job losses.

Priyank Sukhija of First Fiddle Restaurants, which employs around 1,000 people across India, felt the government needs to consider itself a senior partner in the hospitality industry for its survival. While the decision was taken to close outlets to ‘flatten the curve’, if the situation persisted for a few months, most restaurants would not have funds to sustain themselves, said Sukhija.

The hotel owner expects the government to offer a bailout package on the lines of the one given by governments abroad. Sukhija suggested that the government could utilise ESIC social security funds that various organisations contribute as a percentage of the salaries paid to staff salaries, given that this is an unprecedented emergency.

Inderjeet Singh Banga of Biggie, which employs around 900 people, pointed out that to stay afloat a business needed to meet fixed costs such as rent, salaries and loan repayments. In the present scenario, the decision to cease operations is bad both in this context, he said. He was sure that if the government did not give clear directives to save the industry, numerous conflicts would arise between landlords and restaurant tenants, with the unfortunate possibility of closure of outlets and job losses. “After the airlines, we are worst hit by the virus,” Banga asserted. “That is why we need help from the authorities.”


