For failing to enforce lockdown at Anand Vihar ISBT, 2 senior Delhi govt officers suspended, 2 get notice
2020-03-30
New Delhi: Taking tough action against officers for failing to enforce the Centre’s guidelines on containment of Covid-19 by allowing thousands of migrant workers to congregate in large numbers at Anand Vihar ISBT in violation of the lockdown, the home ministry on Sunday initiated disciplinary proceedings against four Delhi government officers for “dereliction of duty”.

While two officers — additional chief secretary Renu Sharma (transport department) and principal secretary, finance Rajiv Verma — have been suspended with immediate effect, two other officers — additional chief secretary, home and land buildings department Satya Gopal and SDM, Seelampur, Ajay Arora — were issued showcause notices. It is also contemplating initiating proceedings for major penalty against both Sharma and Verma.

A home ministry release issued late on Sunday evening said, “It has been brought to the notice of the competent authority that the... officers, who were responsible to ensure strict compliance to the instructions issued by chairperson, national executive committee, formed under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, regarding containment of spread of Covid-19, have prima facie failed to do so. “These officers have failed to ensure public health and safety during the lockdown restrictions to combat Covid-19. Due to the serious lapse in performance of their duties, the competent authority has initiated disciplinary proceedings against the officers.”

Sharma oversaw deployment of buses to bring migrant workers to Anand Vihar ISBT and ferrying them to 8-9 locations in UP on Saturday. Verma was responsible for distribution of food through hunger relief centres. He was to oversee various locations across the city to make sure work was being done by DMs and SDMs who report to him.

The availability of DTC buses to ferry migrant workers in large numbers to the UP border and ISBT has been at the centre of discussion with regard to crowding of inter-state borders and streets in the capital on Saturday. The Delhi government was accused by UP of not doing enough to hold back migrants, a charge that has been denied. The UP government subsequently made arrangements to transport people from the border to hinterland destinations to clear the human logjam.

Home ministry sources said they decided to initiate disciplinary action against the officers as their inability to manage the migrant worker exodus had put a large number of people at risk of Covid-19 infection at a time when it has affected over 1,000 people across the country. The action is also a warning for other officers as they enforce the guidelines issued by the home ministry under the Disaster Management Act to not go lax in their implementation.

While the Seelampur SDM was issued show cause notice as Anand Vihar bus station falls under his jurisdiction, the transport secretary was suspended for failing to prevent/contain congregation of large number of migrant workers, in violation of social distancing guidelines, at the bus station.

