Lockdown heroes: For K Samantha, service knows no bounds
2020-04-13
HYDERABAD: At first, it sounds like an impossible mission. But riding back and forth in her auto rickshaw across the twin cities, almost covering 1,500 kilometres in a week’s time, did not deter K Samantha, a transgender person, from reaching out to those who are in dire need of help and support after the lockdown came into force. 


With the collective effort of Women and Transgender Joint Action Committee that came forward to support the transgender community to get donations and groceries and police, who gave Samantha a pass to move from one place to another, the 35-year-old was able to provide succour to over 300 trans persons, who are at the risk of poverty and ill health in these times of crisis. 

 

Speaking to TOI, Samantha said, “The transgender community is one of the worst affected with livelihood and mobility entirely stopped since lockdown. With the help of some activists, our friends from the community have pitched in to collect donations and groceries for the needy trans people. I have decided to help them distribute the essentials by transporting them in my auto from one place to another.” 

With limited access to government welfare schemes, the transgender community is buying and distributing essentials from donations collected from online fund-raising campaigns that came to their aid during the lockdown period. 

Rachana Mudraboyina, a founding member of Telangana Hijra Intersex Transgender Samiti and founder of Transvision, tells TOI, “Samantha has to cross check posts of two districts and enter the city every day to distribute these essentials. Before she starts distributing essentials in the twin cities, she wakes up at 6am, gets grass to feed her cow in the village, cooks for her single mother and then comes here to help us distribute the groceries.” 

Now, Samantha has been selected by the Telangana government as one of the health workers, who would be working to ensure various health services, including distribution of antiretroviral therapy (ART) drugs that help treatment of HIV, reach people during the lockdown period. 

“We would like to thank the government and civil society networks for this opportunity to prove that transgender persons have equal rights in society and are capable of any volunteer work in times of crisis,” Rachana added.


