Forces salute frontline Covid warriors
2020-05-04
Kochi/T’puram: Expressing solidarity with state’s health department and honouring Covid-19 frontline warriors in the region, Southern Naval Command (SNC) of Indian Navy undertook thanksgiving gestures such as naval officers visiting health workers, flypast of aircraft and steampast of naval ships at Kochi on Sunday in accordance with the directive of the chief of defence staff (CDS).

In Thiruvananthapuram, Indian Air Force and Coast Guard also conducted activities on Sunday to honour the frontline workers. Indian Coast Guard illuminated its ships at Shanghumukham area on Saturday and Sunday. Indian Air Force under the aegis of Southern Air Command showered flower petals over Government Medical College Hospital and General Hospital from Sarang helicopter. 

Commodore N Anil Joseph, station commander Kochi naval area, Commodore Arti Sarin, command medical officer and Commodore G K Dutta, chief staff officer (personal & administration) visited Ernakulam General Hospital and honoured the doctors, nurses, paramedics, police personnel, firemen, sanitation workers and other frontline workers there. The officers conveyed the appreciation on behalf of the Indian Navy and applauded their efforts in successfully treating the Covid-19 patients and also thanked them for their efforts in maintaining Ernakulam as a ‘green zone’.

The hospital was selected as a representative for all medical fraternity, health workers and all agencies of the state involved in the fight against Covid-19. Dr Anita, GH superintendent, Dr Kuttapan, district medical officer, Dr Ganesh Mohan and Dr Geetha of Kalamassery Medical College, Dr Sreedevi, district health officer and Dr Shyamini, port health officer and others at general hospital, Ernakulam, were also present.

As part of the thanksgiving gesture, Chetak helicopters of the Navy showered flower petals on the district hospital. Subsequently, seven aircraft flypast consisting of two Dornier aircrafts, a SeaKing helicopter, two advanced light helicopter (ALH) and two Chetak helicopters of Indian Navy was conducted over Marine Drive. This was immediately followed by steampast by seven fast interceptor crafts of the Navy, in the channel, displaying a banner “India thanks corona warriors”. Rajendra Maidan, Ernakulam, was open to the public for a limited time adhering to social distancing protocol to witness these activities and show their support.

Earlier in the day, the SNC band played some famous numbers on a warship berthed opposite the Cochin Shipyard Ltd (CSL) and near the Vikrant-Venduruthy bridge, epochal landmarks of Kochi.

The ships of SNC, anchored in the centre of the Ernakulam channel, undertook the traditional ceremonial illumination, along with the firing of green flares and sounding of siren, in the evening, showcasing Indian Navy’s solidarity.


