Foreigners to face coronavirus screening at Big Temple fest
2020-02-04
THANJAVUR: As foreign tourists are expected to participate in the consecration of Big Temple on February 5, the public health department has sought the list of foreign tourists from the tourism department in order to set up screening protocols for novel coronavirus (nCoV). 


“As per the standing order issued by the union health ministry, the number of foreign tourists has been restricted to 50 from 100,” district tourism officer Jayakumar said. 

“With prior approval from the HR&CE department, 100 foreigners had registered to participate in the consecration ceremony in Thanjavur. However, as per the district administration instruction, we have limited the number to 50. However, all of them are from western countries,” Jayakumar told TOI.

When contacted, Government Medical College dean Kumutha Lingaraj told TOI all foreign tourists would be allowed after proper screening protocol. When asked about providing masks to devotees, the dean said she did not know how feasible it was. As five lakh people are expected to attend the consecration, the health department has made elaborate arrangements to maintain public health. Collector M Govinda Rao said five bike ambulances will be in motion around the temple while seven advanced ambulances would be stationed nearby. This apart, 16 ambulances will be stationed at various spots, he said.

“A total of six medical camps have been established at various places around the temple along with the team of doctors and drugs. Twenty-six mobile medical units are also in place. Moreover, two emergency wards have also established – one at the Government Raja Mirasudar Hospital and Government Medical College Hospital. Private hospitals are also instructed to be alert to house patients if any need arises,” he added.

DGP J K Tripathy visited Thanjavur Big Temple and inspected the security arrangements and gave various instructions to higher police officials in the evening.


