Foreigners choose to stay put in Goa despite coronavirus scare
2020-03-14
CALANGUTE/COLVA: The spread of coronavirus around the world is causing a ripple effect, with several countries, including India, imposing air travel restrictions. With many beginning to cancel their holidays to Goa, some foreign visitors who are already in the state have decided against altering their travel plans.


Speaking to TOI, a group of Russian tourists in the Calangute-Candolim beach belt said they are enjoying their stay and have no plans to curtail their holiday. “There is no problem for us as we can still fly back. It’s only a problem for those who want to come to Goa and enjoy the lovely weather here,” they said.

Some chartered tourists said they expect to fly back at the end of their 10-day holiday. Another group of Russian tourists who have been in Goa for nearly two months, said they would be staying for another month as scheduled.

“I think this whole coronavirus scare is just a hype. I feel completely safe in India, and I’m not going to change my travel itinerary just because of coronavirus. I feel there is no need to panic,” Jan Graveson, a British musician who spends a lot of time in Goa and Mumbai, said. 

Graveson travels regularly travels between the UK and India, said she would be going to the UK shortly, but the visit has nothing to do the Covid-19 impact. “I want to visit my dad who is 86 years old. I’ll be back to enjoy Goa,” she said.

Senior citizens Vincent James and his wife Blum have been holidaying in the state since the past fortnight. They have been visiting Goa every alternate season to give the chilly climes in England a miss, and both of them are relieved that they are here while their country is on the verge of a lockdown due to the virus. 

“We are just hoping that it does not strike Goa or India as hard as it has in England, otherwise we will have to undergo the misery of screening, 14 days quarantine, blood tests, et al,” said Vincent, and in a lighter vein added, “We have read that the virus cannot survive in heat, so we are spending a lot of time in the sunlight.” 

Tourism stakeholders said with the suspension of tourist visas, they do not expect any more foreign tourists in the near future. 

“Foreign tourist arrivals have been declining over the past few years. But the number of domestic tourists has remained steady,” a guesthouse owner in Calangute said.

