Rajasthan: Foreigners travelling in train, bus to be screened for coronavirus
2020-03-08
JAIPUR: At all major tourist destinations, including Jodhpur's Mehrangarh Fort and Bikaner’s Junagarh Fort, the health department has deployed teams for screening foreign tourists for Covid-19.


Moreover, foreign tourists will be screened not only at the international airport in Jaipur but also when they enter the state by buses, trains or by other means of road transport. The decision has been taken after two Italian tourists have tested positive for Covid-19 in Jaipur recently.

While giving impetus to screening of foreign tourists, the health department spotted an Italian group of two tourists who arrived in Bikaner on Saturday morning. They reached Delhi on February 24 and since then they have been travelling in Rajasthan. A team of Bikaner’s chief medical health officer spotted them at a hotel and conducted screening for Covid-19. They reached Udaipur from Delhi airport travelling in a cab. However, the health authorities claimed that they do not have any symptoms of influenza-like illness. They have plans to visit Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, and Jaipur.

“We have screened 350 foreign tourists on Saturday, who reached from different parts of the state, most them are from France, Germany and other European countries,” said a Bikaner’s health department official.

Strengthening screening for Covid-19 in the state, the health department issued orders to railways, transplant and roadways department to help in conducting screening of foreign tourists. The department has conducted more than 27,000 passengers travelled by international flights so far since January 28. Since a lot of tourists have been travelling by buses and private cabs and also by trains, the department has decided to take self-declaration from the passengers about their health and also they will be screened for Covid-19.

The 22-member Italian group had entered Rajasthan travelling by bus, which is why, they were not screened in the state. They had landed at Delhi’s airport from Italy on February 20. Two of them tested positive for Covid-19 in Jaipur, when the condition of one of those had deteriorated on February 28 in Jaipur. Taking lessons from it, the health department has decided to intensify screening by roping in other departments such as railways, roadways and transport department.


