Foreign tourists told to write ‘I am sorry’ 500 times by police for strolling near Ganga in Rishikesh during lockdown
2020-04-13
HARIDWAR: Ten foreign tourists who were seen strolling along the banks of the Ganga in Rishikesh on Saturday morning were each ordered to write ‘I am sorry’ 500 times as punishment by the police. The tourists were from the United States, Mexico, Austria, Ukraine and Israel.


Speaking about the matter, Vinod Sharma, in-charge of Tapovan police post under Muni-ki-Reti police station, told TOI, “In the past few days, we had spotted foreign tourists walking along the banks of Ganga or sitting near the river even though lockdown is in force, and people have been asked to not venture out unless it is for essential work. On Saturday, we decided to penalise transgressors and accordingly, around 10 foreign tourists who were found on the river banks were asked to write ‘I did not follow the lockdown, I am sorry’ 500 times on paper sheets as punishment.”

 


He added that they are also going to take action against the managers of hotels and ashrams where these foreign tourists are staying for allowing them to step out without local helpers. It is estimated that there are around 600 foreign tourists stuck in Rishikesh after the lockdown was enforced in the country. Most of them are staying in hotels and ashrams in Tapovan and Kailash gate region who have been asked to provide them with daily essentials.


Foreign tourists made to write ‘I am sorry’ 500 times by police for strolling near Ganga in Rishikesh during… https://t.co/5X8cCEPz4M— TOI Cities (@TOICitiesNews) 1586752835000

Meanwhile, Swami Chidanand Saraswati, president and spiritual head of Parmarth Niketan, the largest ashram in Rishikesh, where 40 foreign tourists are currently staying, told TOI that they are routinely briefing them regarding maintaining social distance and following lockdown guidelines. “We have locked our ashram gates and all the items coming from outside are being sensitised daily before use. All our inmates are following the lockdown guidelines and we have also requested other tourists staying elsewhere to stay where they are and observe lockdown modalities."


