Forest officials on toes as poachers prowl despite strict lockdown norms
2020-04-22
PANAJI: Since the lockdown and reduced human movement, cases of poaching have been reported in many parts of India. Even in neighbouring Sawantwadi in Maharashtra, a case of killing of Giant Squirrels was reported, while in Shimoga in Karnataka, poachers of Spotted Deers were caught.

In Cotigao, Canacona, during the lockdown period, two persons were caught by forest personnel recently with arms before they could go in for the kill. 

For forest officials in Goa too, it is a challenge to keep a close watch on poachers, as animals begin to wander outside forests due to the lockdown. Besides, 1,700 sq kms of protected areas, including sanctuaries, one national park and one bird sanctuary, Goa has private and reserve forests aplenty to keep a tab on.

Amrutsingh of Animal Rescue Squad said that volunteers of his organisation have reported attempts to poach barking deers, mouse deers and Sambar in pockets in Goa.

“Just before the lockdown, the code of conduct was in force for the zilla panchayat elections, and arms had been deposited by its owners with the police. This has helped in keeping hunting under control during the lockdown. But the forest department does not have enough personnel to keep a strict vigil, like killing of wild boars who walk into farms,” said one range forest official.

But wildlife conservationists state that not all arms are deposited during the code of conduct, as is demonstrated by the Cotigao case.

Also, snares and electrical wires are used to trap wild animals, who have let their guards down due to lesser human activity.

“Our volunteer had reports of wild boar, mouse deer, barking deer and Sambar poaching attempts in the Morlem, Sattari area, and we are trying to gather evidence to report the incident so raids can be conducted. The killing of wild animals has reduced in number because the meat cannot be sold on a commercial scale like earlier due to the lockdown. But wild animals are trapped for personal consumption,” said Amrutsingh. 

He said the enforcement of lockdown in interior areas is not as strict as in urban areas, which allows sufficient movement for poachers to trap wild animals.

“There is patrolling, but locals know inroads that personnel may not be aware off and therefore remain unmanned,” he said.

The ‘beat’ for each forest personnel in Goa includes an area of 18sq kms each, which is too vast to patrol round the clock. One forest official pointed to the opportunistic cutting off of the fins of a beached whale shark on Baga beach, as an example of poachers existing in Goa who understand the value of such material in the international market.

“We are currently hiring local boys and training them to assist our guards, that is how we are protecting the area. We do not have dedicated full-fledged manpower to respond quickly and dedicatedly. We have deployed camera traps in areas where we suspect that poaching may happen like pathways made through the forest by locals. Thankfully in Goa, there is no organized poaching like is seen in Maharashtra and Karnataka,” said a forest officer.

Officials said that cemented artificial waterholes made inside sanctuaries are being used by forest personnel to keep wild animals from wandering outside forest areas in search of water.


