Foreign travel plans trip on coronavirus fears
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: With the novel coronavirus cloud looming all over the world, travel plans of Indians going abroad or foreigners coming to India have been impacted severely, with most travel companies reporting last-minute changes.


Many Indians who were planning to travel to Europe and Southeast Asia are now either re-scheduling their trips or opting for domestic destinations like Goa, Kerala, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Himachal Pradesh and the Northeast. Most foreigners have also either postponed or cancelled their India trips. 


 
Aloke Bajpai, CEO and co-founder of Ixigo, reported a 30-35% drop in airfares across international routes. “The drop is mainly due to travel advisories being issued by various countries. While there is a slowdown in the impact on the travel to top countries, there is still a high demand for other areas,” said Bajpai.

“At the international front, people are now booking their vacations for places like Sri Lanka, Maldives and Bhutan. For domestic travel, we have seen an increase in search queries for Andaman & Nicobar, Goa, Pune and Guwahati. But we expect the situation to improve closer to the summer travel season,” he added.

The company has issued a full-refund policy for all flight bookings to China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Iran, Italy, Spain, Singapore, South Korea and Japan. “The policy is applicable on both one-way and return bookings for travel dates up to March 31,” said Bajpai.

Gaurav Chawla, director at Swan Tours in Delhi, said many people coming to India had cancelled their trips for the next two-three months. “People who gave us advance money have postponed indefinitely, but most have cancelled their trips to India altogether.” 

For Indians, domestic destinations have become more lucrative now, Chawla pointed out. “The Holi weekend in Goa is completely sold out and a Delhi-Goa trip is as cheap as a Delhi-Phuket trip. Other destinations like Kerala, Himachal and Uttarakhand are also doing well and hotels have become cheaper,” he said. 

Sourabh Tiwari, owner of Sushant Travels in Delhi, said 60-70% of the bookings from abroad had been postponed indefinitely, while around 20-25% had been cancelled. “We had a few Chinese travellers who booked four-five months ago, they had to obviously cancel after the outbreak. Domestically, the situation is still fine and locations like Shimla, Manali, Sikkim and Darjeeling are doing well,” said Tiwari.

Sarvjeet, of Ghum India Ghum, too, said international trips had been affected for the last two months, while domestic travels were slowly getting impacted after the report of positive cases in India this week. “A foreign group was planning to come especially for Holi; however with recent advisories, they decided not to come to India. Lots of people coming from abroad have already cancelled, while others have postponed.” Domestically, too, people are taking precautions and not travelling as much as normal, Sarvjeet added.

