Forest fires during lockdown keep officials on their toes in Goa
2020-04-19
PANAJI: For three days in a row, fire appeared to recur in patches of a cashew plantation in Shirvoi in Quepem, leading to the forest department to pursue a complaint against unknown suspects. Unable to bring the fire under control, even personnel from the forest department’s North Goa division had to be roped in. During the lockdown, instances of such fires in forested patches appear to have increased.


It has been a cause for worry for forest officials, some of whom suspects that the fires could be tactics by wood smugglers to divert the already stretched forest department personnel.

“The major problem the department is facing due to the lockdown is forest fires being mischievously lit. It being summer season, the vegetation has dried up and the fire spreads fast. The guards are also posted at fixed times. The intention is to divert the forest staff to extinguish the fire, so that they can smuggle the costly wood. The wood from a teak tree can be sold for Rs 2.5 to 3 lakh illegally,” one official said.

Such cases have occurred in forests of Quepem, Sanguem, Dharbandora, Cotigao and Sattari in recent weeks. In Cotigao, one accused was caught red-handed while lighting the fire.

Fire watchers and trackers of the forest department continue to be on duty during the lockdown, but the manpower does not seem to be enough.

Thankfully for the department, recently an app, based on information got via satellite, was made operational under the Forest Survey of India in Dehradun.

“All range forest officials get a SMS alert if there is a fire in our area. It helps when the fire is inside a dense forest and is not visible. The app helps us know the GPS location, which side the fire is heading, the extent of the fire and its current status. Accordingly, we deploy staff and make a fire line and the fire is put out when it reaches this line,” the forest official said.

Deputy conservator of forest Anil Shetgaonkar, under whose jurisdiction the Shirvoi fire was brought under control, said that the newly acquired ‘blowers’ were used to extinguish the fire. The blowers come in handy inside dense forests, where it is difficult to find even drinking water.

Officials said that fortunately Goa has only witnessed ground fires and not canopy fires, which are much more difficult to extinguish.

