Rajasthan: Four more test positive, total Covid-19 cases mount to 32
2020-03-24
JAIPUR: A day after a 39-year-old person tested positive for Covid-19 in Jodhpur, his uncle and aunty, who live in the same building were diagnosed with the disease on Monday. In Pratapgarh too, two persons were diagnosed with the disease taking the total cases to 32.

According to the health department officials, samples of 61-year-old man and his 58-year-old wife, who came in contact with their nephew, who had returned from Turkey on March 18, were taken for Covid-19 test on Sunday. The test reports were issued on Monday showing that they were infected with the disease.

In Pratapgarh, a 55-year-old man, who returned from Dubai on March 8, was diagnosed with the disease on Monday. When he came to his house in Pratapgarh, he came in contact with his 45-year-old wife. Samples of his wife were also taken and she too was diagnosed with the disease. They are undergoing treatment in isolation ward of district hospital in Pratapgarh. “He landed at Ahmedabad airport on March 8 while travelling in a flight that took off from Dubai. He travelled by bus from Ahmedabad to reach his hometown Pratapgarh,” said a health department official.

The health authorities have launched a search for the co-passengers, who travelled along with him in the bus. Also, they have informed the health authorities in Gujarat about the person, who landed at Ahmedabad airport and found infected with Covid-19. Both the persons, who travelled abroad and returned to their homes in Jodhpur and Pratapgarh did not follow the guidelines issued for isolation as they have passed on the infection to their relatives too. The 39-year-old, who had travelled by a train from Delhi to Jaipur by a train, had travelled to Turkey, from where he returned on March 18. The department is already in touch with the railway authorities to find out details about his co-passengers in the train. However, ten persons have been identified who were in direct contact with him. 

