Four-fold rise in demand for N95 masks, hand sanitisers in Pune
2020-03-05
PUNE: The demand for N95 masks and hand sanitisers soared by 200% in the city on Wednesday amid panic-buying to counter novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection, leading to a shortfall and price rise at many locations.


“Till Tuesday, I was selling 1,000 N95 masks per day in the wholesale market, the sale skyrocketed to 25,000 on Wednesday as the news of more positive cases in the country started making rounds. Similarly, I sold 6,000 bottles of hand sanitisers on Wednesday as against 600 units the previous day. If the sale continues like this, we will soon face severe shortage of personal protection equipment,” a wholesaler operating out of Sadashiv Peth said.

 
 

The city had an acute shortage of N95 masks during early January as well, following significant rise in their exports to Covid-19-affected nations. The situation was then mitigated after a ban on exports.

Sushil Shah president of the Chemists Association of Pune District confirmed the panicbuying and said, “Though not a single positive case has been reported in Maharashtra, the demand for N95 masks, sanitisers, thermometers and gloves has increased to an extent that we are encountering a sudden shortage. If the trend continues, the shortage will only become severe in the coming days.”

He said 50ml and 100ml bottles of hand sanitisers were already in short supply in the city. “We currently have hand sanitiser bottles of 400ml, which are selling for Rs 450 in the retail market,” Shah said.

Rohit Karpe, distributor of N95 mask in Pune, said, “The manufactures have also raised the price of the mask in the wholesale market from Rs 27-40 per unit to Rs 85-120. The mask is sold in retail market at Rs 200 onwards as it is not covered under drugs nor under any controlled category.”

“As per the WHO, only medical staff involved in the care of isolated travellers and immediate contacts should wear masks. Other people should not panic and rush to buy them,” eye surgeon Sanjay Patil, president of the city chapter of Indian Medical Association, said.

