Four new covid patients in Hubballi
2020-04-14
Hubballi: The total number of Covid-19 patients in the district has jumped to six with four more persons being confirmed of the virus infection on Monday.

According to sources, all the four fresh cases are the primary contacts of P-194, who tested positive for the novel infection on April 9. The four cases include three children—P 233, a five-year-old boy; P 234, a 3.6-year-old boy; P 236, a seven-year-old girl—who are nephews and niece of P-194, and a 37-year-old male, who is the brother of the patient.

This is the first time that the city witnessed four positive cases in a day. All the infected are residents of Mulla Oni in Hubballi and the entire locality and its three-kilometre radius has been announced as a containment zone with vehicle movements being restricted.

P-194 had visited Delhi and Agra on March 17 and 18. He was kept in isolation in a hotel on April 6 and he tested positive for the infection on April 9. The doctors have sent the swabs of his primary contacts of which four turned positive, said officials. 

All the infected are being treated at the isolation ward of Covid-19 hospital located on the premises of Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS).

The residents of the containment area have been asked to remain indoors and essential services are being provided at the doorsteps. The district administration has taken up sanitisation work and is keeping a strict vigil on the movement of people. Police are also not allowing the public to come out of their houses.

The containment area and a three-kilometre radius with Mulla Oni as the epicentre comprises seven zones and 35 wards with a population of more than 5.7 lakh. In the past four days, almost everyone in this restricted area has stayed indoors. The district administration is ensuring that all essential commodities are being delivered at the residents’ doorsteps. A survey in the containment area is nearing completion, said officials.

In the containment area, the health department staff have been deputed along with police who have established checkpoints. At all the checkpoints, the health staff are screening road users using infrared thermometer.


