Four men booked for breaching quarantine in Trichy
2020-03-29
TRICHY: Going tough against the violators of lockdown, Trichy district administration and the public health and preventive medicine have admitted four home quarantined people in Trichy to the government hospitals for breach of protocol of the quarantine.


Acting on a tip-off, the officials conducted enquires and found violations by four people in Thuraiyur and Musiri areas on Thursday.

A resident of Kamarajar Nagar at Thuraiyur in Trichy was home quarantined on his return from USA on March 19. Though Covid-19 quarantine sticker was fixed outside his house for restricting his movement, he ventured out on March 27.

As the 1077 helpline got complaints, the officials acted swiftly and conducted an enquiry with him and his neighbours. Inquiry revealed that he violated the norms. Issuing strict warning to him, the officials shifted the man to the government hospital in Thuraiyur. Acting on a complaint from the health department, the Thuraiyur police registered a case against him.

A medicine student of Melavadugapatti village near Musiri in Trichy who returned from the Philippines was quarantined at his house on March 24 after his return on March 14. He not only roamed outside, but also played cricket with his friends in the area. After receiving information, the public health department questioned him and he was booked by police. As a preventive measure, he was also admitted to the government hospital in Musiri.

Two brothers from Chittilarai village were working as cooks -- one in Pune in Maharashtra and the other one in Romania. Both returned back home recently and they were home quarantined on March 24. But, both came out and roamed in the area. They were also booked by Musiri police and shifted to the government hospital in Musiri on Friday night.

Eight suspects including a Covid-19 positive man were housed at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital on Saturday. On the fourth day of the curfew on Saturday, 380 arrests and 165 vehicle seizures were reported for violation of curfew till 6 pm in Trichy region comprising eight districts. Since March 25, as many as 2,816 people have been arrested 1,447 vehicles seized.

