Fourth Covid-19 positive case in Dehradun
2020-03-24
DEHRADUN: A 49-year-old foreign national tested Covid-19-positive in Dehradun on Monday taking the toll of coronavirus-positive patients in Uttarakhand to four. The man had stayed in a 4-star hotel in Dehradun, and also reportedly visited Rishikesh in six days of his travel in Uttarakhand before getting admitted at Doon Hospital on March 21, health officials said.


According to the health department, the patient, a US citizen, arrived in India from New Delhi on March 11. “On March 15, he reached Dehradun via flight and stayed in a city-based 4-star hotel which was immediately sealed by the health department after the man tested Covid-19-positive. The patient travelled to Rishikesh with his guide, who was staying with the man in the same hotel and is now quarantined. As far as we could track, he met over 16 people including hotel staff and some outsiders whom we are testing and keeping in observation,” said a health official.

He added that the man has been shifted to the isolation ward of Government Doon Medical College (GDMC). The health department has also sought action on hotel authorities who allegedly hid the details of the arrival of the foreign national from the Local Intelligence Unit (LIU). “The patient is currently in stable condition. We are trying to confirm if he had taken any public transport,” said the official.

Meanwhile, the health department sent 50 samples for testing on Monday, including those of people who came in contact with the US national. 

In another related development, an elderly woman in Mussoorie who had returned from United Kingdom recently was referred to Doon Hospital after complaining of breathlessness, fever and cough.

The woman who lives in the vicinity of Mussoorie-Hathipaon road had returned from UK on March 9 and had reached Mussoorie on March 11. According to sources, she was having cold and cough since several days but on Monday, her condition deteriorated as she developed a fever and also complained of difficulty in breathing.

(with inputs from Anmol Jain in Mussoorie)

Doon Hospital doctor puts up post about trainee forest officers’ ‘tantrums’, takes it down a day later

A doctor who is treating the three trainee forest service officers who have tested positive for Covid-19 and are currently in Doon Hospital, put up a post on Facebook on Sunday alleging that the trainee officers are throwing tantrums — asking for food to be delivered to them from outside and making other demands. The doctor’s post went viral rapidly, eliciting comments from various social media users about the patients’ behaviour. However, the post was taken off by the doctor a day later. When queried by TOI on the reason, he said that he had decided to do so since the patients are “now co-operating with the staff.”


