Coronavirus in Tamil Nadu: Four suspected cases reported
2020-03-05
The state health machinery in the districts is geared to tackle Covid-19 scare as three people, including a two-year-old boy, were admitted to Trichy government hospital late on Tuesday night with symptoms of the virus, while a youth was hospitalised in Coimbatore on Wednesday.


They have been isolated and public health authorities have sent their swab samples to The King Institute of Preventive Medicine and Research in Guindy, Chennai, for tests. Health authorities said the Coimbatore youth, a research student in Japan, flew via Singapore and landed in Chennai on February 26. He then took a train to Coimbatore. He has had symptoms of a flu including throat pain and fever since arrival and got admitted to ESI hospital on Wednesday since the symptoms did not subside. He is under strict medical supervision, health officials said.

 
 
 

Meanwhile in Trichy, three people including a twoyear-old boy who flew down from Malaysia were admitted in the government hospital on Tuesday night after they showed symptoms of Covid-19.

In Madurai and southern districts, no fresh hospitalisations were reported.

A media bulletin from the directorate of public health and preventive medicine on Wednesday said 96,729 passengers who landed at Chennai, Trichy, Madurai and Coimbatore airports have been screened for the infection so far. Of them, 1,292 passengers were put under home quarantine till Tuesday, while five people are under hospital quarantine as on date, the bulletin said. Chennai tops the number of people home quarantined so far, followed by Ramanathapuram, Coimbatore and Nagapattinam.

Government officials urged miscreants to not spread rumours about Covid-19 while assuring that enough measures are being taken to prevent the spread of the virus. Round-the-clock screening of passengers at airports has been intensified while schools have been advised to keep a close watch on students with symptoms of flu. In a review preparedness meeting in Coimbatore, district collector K Rajamani said, “If any student is found with symptoms, their parents should be informed immediately, who in turn should get the child checked at the hospital.’’

