Pune: Four more with pre-existing illness succumb to Covid-19
2020-04-15
PUNE: Four critically-ill patients diagnosed with the novel coronavirus infection succumbed to associated complications at Sassoon hospital on Tuesday, taking the death tally in the Pune Metropolitan Region to 36 so far. 


All the four deceased had pre-existing medical conditions, including hypertension, diabetes, liver disease and kidney ailment. 



Besides, 49 fresh cases of the contagion were recorded in PMR on Tuesday, which is the highest single-day positive count for PMR so far. With this, the total number of positive cases has gone up to 374 in the region. 

Of 49 fresh cases of Covid-19, maximum 43 cases were registered within the limits of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC). Rest of the cases were recorded in Pimpri Chinchwad, cantonment and rural parts of Pune. The PCMC said on Tuesday night that total number of positive cases in its limits had increased to 43.

Among the deceased, a 50-year-old woman from Kondhwa was admitted to the Sassoon hospital on Tuesday for complaints of breathlessness. “Despite being a patient of hypertension, she reported to the hospital a few days after developing the symptoms. This delay proved fatal and she succumbed to the respiratory complications on Tuesday,” a doctor from the hospital said.

He said the other deceased was a 27-year-old man of Parvati Darshan, who was admitted to the hospital on April 12 for difficulty in breathing. “He was a known patient of liver cirrhosis. He succumbed to the complications on Tuesday,” the doctor said.

A 42-year-old woman from Kondhwa was admitted to the Sassoon hospital on April 12 after she started experiencing chest congestion and breathlessness. “She also reported late to the hospital despite developing symptoms a few days ago. She was a patient of hypertension, diabetes and asthma. She succumbed to the complications on Tuesday,” the doctor said.

He said the fourth patient to succumb to Covid-19 complications was a 77-year-old woman, a resident of Ghorpadigaon. “She was admitted to the Sassoon hospital on April 2. She was also a known patient of diabetes, hypertension and hypothyroidism and acute kidney injury. She died of the complications on Tuesday,” the doctor added.

An analysis of all the cases in PCMC limits has revealed that all positive cases had come from 12 zones, of which maximum 25 had come from the nine zones that are under containment. 

Of these, 21 are being treated in PCMC-run hospitals, three in Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) limits and 12 have been discharged. One of them, a 42-year-old security guard, passed away last week. 

The civic body said its team of 160 civic officials surveyed 39,913 persons in the nine containment zones on Tuesday. 


Region death rate

The district administration on Tuesday admitted that the death rate of Covid-19 patients in the Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR) was higher than the state and the national average.

With four more deaths on Tuesday taking up the region’s toll to 36, the PMR’s Covid-19 death rate was pegged at 10.34% (36 deaths and 348 positive cases) as against the state’s 6.84% and the country’s 3.45%. The global death rate of Covid-19 is 6.24%.

