Four-tier strategy helps to contain spread of coronavirus in Ramganj
2020-06-10
JAIPUR: The Covid-19 outbreak in the low-income, densely populated locality of Ramganj in Walled City has taught many administrators the nuances of the task of containing the virus spread in the state. From facing initial resistance from community to building trust, from creating awareness to imposing curfew, from testing to saving lives, the outbreak in this socio-demographically challenging urban area was a herculean task for authorities.


As of now, only 18 Covid-19 patients are undergoing treatment in the area and the rest of them have been cured. However, in this battle, 21 persons lost their lives to Covid. In Ramganj police station jurisdiction, 645 persons have been found infected since March 26 after a 46-year-old man tested positive. 

 


In Ramganj, major challenge was to prevent Covid deaths

Out of those, 606 have been cured. Following the success, the four-tier strategy implemented in Ramganj has become popular with district collectors who are responsible for containing the virus. However, health authorities and administrators say it’s not wise to use the same strategy in each Covid hotspot. “When Covid struck initially, it took everyone by surprise. The very nature of the pandemic had no precedence. Hence, all over the world, healthcare systems struggled with strategy and implementation,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health), who is spearheading the fight against coronavirus in the state.

Before Jaipur’s Ramganj, Bhilwara had witnessed a Covid outbreak, with a private hospital being the epicentre. In the textile town, the health department imposed the ruthless containment strategy, which hogged limelight in the country. Even the Centre praised it. However, Ramganj, a socio-demographically challenging urban area, it was not wise for health authorities to implement the same strategy. “After the successful Bhilwara model that emphasises ruthless containment, we had to change our tactics in Ramganj due to the completely different ground conditions. Like in all governance, adapting to changing realities is always critical to success. This seems to have worked, for now,” said Singh.

It is now clear to administrators that different districts require different strategies. “While we provide macro guidelines, each district collector is suitably empowered to customise the implementation plan as per the local conditions. This is the big lesson we have learnt — think macro, but implement micro,” said Singh.

In Ramganj, the major challenge was to prevent deaths. Scientific evidence available, so far, indicated that early diagnosis of disease progression and complications help in averting deaths. Evidence from around the world also suggested that there were specific groups of people, like those above 60 years of age and people with comorbid conditions, are at a higher risk of developing complications and death. These helped health department to immediately roll out mission ‘Life Saving’ (LiSa) in Ramganj to identify high risk cases for early treatment.

