Four more test positive for Covid-19 infection in Pune
2020-03-30
PUNE: Four persons, including two men with no recent history of foreign travel or any proximity to infected persons or their close contacts, tested positive for the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection in the district on Sunday.


The two men without any history of foreign travel are residents of Yerawada and Baramati. With this, the number of coronavirus cases has gone up to 38 in Pune district.


 

The two others who tested positive on Sunday had returned from Dubai on March 9 and were quarantined at Naidu hospital. They developed symptoms of coronavirus two days ago. One of them is a 65-year-old man and the other one is his daughter (30). They are residents of Gultekdi.

As many as seven people have been diagnosed with the contagion in Pune between March 20 and March 29, wherein the source of infection was not linked to international travel or a traceable contact to an infected person.

“The 76-year-old man from Yerawada is undergoing treatment at a private hospital in Pune. The 40-year-old man from Baramati has developed viral pneumonia and is being treated at the intensive care unit (ICU) of Naidu hospital,” a civic health official said.

The Yerawada resident was admitted to a private hospital with cardiac complaints and shortness of breath around 3am on March 28. “We sent his throat swab sample to the National Institute of Virology (NIV). It tested positive for Covid-19,” an official from the hospital said.

“The senior citizen had on March 25 and March 27 visited a hospital close to his home, before he was brought to our hospital. He had no history of fever and travel in the last four weeks. His condition is stable,” the official.

The Baramati resident had developed breathlessness, following which he was moved to Sassoon General Hospital on March 28. “He tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday and was shifted to the Naidu hospital. He has viral pneumonia and is in the intensive care unit,” a civic health official said.

