Coronavirus: Four Wuhan students return after two weeks in isolation
2020-02-20
PATNA/GAYA: Altogether 42 students from Bihar, who had returned from Wuhan in China and were quarantined in Gurugram for two weeks, have now started returning home.


Four medical students from Madhubani, who were studying in Wuhan — the city worst-hit by the Coronavirus in China — returned home on Wednesday after completing the incubation period. Health officials said they will be monitored for another 14 days as a precautionary measure.

“The students have been given the contact number of SHO’s in their respective districts. The four Madhubani residents informed us about their condition as soon as they returned. We are keeping a track on the other students, too, who will return in a day or two,” said state surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra.

She added: “They have been advised isolation at home and our medical teams will monitor them for a period of 14 days. Thereafter, if we find any symptomatic patient, we will send their samples to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune.”

Meanwhile, two patients were admitted to the isolation ward of Anugraha Narayan Magadh Medical College and Hospital (ANMMCH) in Gaya on Friday, for possible exposure to the deadly disease.

A 20-year-old youth from Manpur locality in Gaya was admitted on Wednesday. The youth who is pursuing a course in Chinese language returned to his hometown from China on January 11.

Gaya civil surgeon Dr BK Singh said the youth evaded scanning at Gaya airport and somehow managed to go home. “He is suffering from cold, cough and fever, which are the three main symptoms of the virus that has caused havoc in China. His sample has been sent for test to NIV and he will remain in the isolation ward until we get his reports,” he said.

“Similarly, samples of a Burmese traveller with similar symptoms of the deadly disease, who was admitted in the isolation ward of ANMMCH, has also been sent to NIV,” said Mishra.

Earlier, health officials established a 20-bed isolation ward to quarantine coronavirus suspects. The civil surgeon claimed that the isolation ward has all the necessities, including biological mask for health workers and single personal protection kits. Besides, health staffs deputed at the airport and the isolation ward are under strict instruction to maintain hygiene,” he added. 


(With inputs from Abdul Qadir)

