Four more Agra residents cured of Covid-19, discharged from Delhi’s Safdarjung Hosp
2020-03-20
Agra: Four city residents who had tested positive for Covid-19 have been cured of the infection and were discharged from Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. All four returned home late in the evening on Thursday. 

They included a 44-year-old footwear exporter who had returned from Italy in the last week of February, his 16-year-old son, the 48-year-old manager of his factory and his 45-year-old wife. 

Earlier on Sunday, four members of the shoe exporter family, including the 65-year-old mother of the factory owner who had heavy viral load but did not test Covid-19 positive, were also discharged from Safdarjung Hospital. 

Talking to TOI, the shoe exporter said, “Along with five family members, I had been quarantined on March 3. Barring me and my son, four family membersincluding my wife, parents and younger brother were discharged on March 15. Mentally, it was a tough time. Doctors in both Agra and Delhi made their best efforts to help us recover. The arrangements made by the state and central government to control spread of the disease are commendable. It is a great feeling to return home, after staying away from family and friends for 17 days.”

“Doctors have asked us to avoid social gatherings for a few days and maintain a high level of hygiene and sanitation. We will follow their directions,” he added. 

The manager of the shoe factory said, “Doctors at Agra district hospital and Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital took good care of us. We were kept in separate rooms. There was no TV, but mobile phone was allowed. Isolation was a little depressing for all of us. People need not panic and strictly follow government advisory.”

Elsewhere, samples of all suspected patients sent to King George Medical University (KGMU) on Wednesday tested negative. 

Satish Verma, superintendent in-charge of district hospital, told TOI, “Ten local residents who had recently returned from Europe, the Middle East and Sri Lanka, were admitted in isolation. Eleven other suspected cases were identified by the surveillance team. Blood, nose and throat swab samples of the 21 people have been sent to KGMU for lab tests. Reports are likely to be received on Friday afternoon.”

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “Out of the eight Covid-19 positive cases, seven people have been cured of disease. One female Covid-19 positive patient is being treated at SN Medical College. In total, 1,222 people have been advised home quarantine. Health department teams are closely monitoring health of all these people. We have also constituted a traveler’s list tracking team. It will be conducting checkup of all the people arriving from other countries.”


