Four more succumb to contagion, record 104 test Covid-19 positive in Pune
2020-04-24
PUNE: Four critically ill patients diagnosed with Covid-19 contagion died, while 104 new cases, including record 99 from PMC limits alone, were recorded in Pune on Thursday, taking the casualty and patient count to 985 and 63, respectively, so far.


While district health officer reported two deaths, PMC has reported four. All patients had co-morbidity issues, a health official said, adding they were residents of Parvati Darshan, Mahatma Phule Peth, Bhavani Peth and Yerawada.

 

As for the fresh cases, a person tested positive in Pimpri Chinchwad municipal limits and four in the rural parts of Pune on Thursday.

When contacted, PMC’s health department chief Ramchandra Hankare confirmed the record rise in cases and said, “It is for the first time that the city has reported such high numbers in a single day.”

The previous highest of 85 was recorded on April 20.

Civic health officials attributed the rise in cases to increased testing. “The testing of samples has increased in the last few days. The administration has also initiated rigorous survey in the hotspots. The contact tracing has gone up and our teams on field are identifying suspected patients too,” a civic health official said.

Among the four deaths, two were reported from the Sassoon General Hospital. A 41-year-old man from Parvati Darshan diagnosed with Covid-19 contagion succumbed on the intervening night of Wednesday and Thursday. He had underlying issues like diabetics and heart disease. Besides, a 50-year-old woman from Mahatma Phule Peth, who also had pneumonia, died at Sassoon hospital on April 21. Her swab report came positive for the contagion on Thursday.

An 83-year-old man from the Bhavani Peth area was admitted to Army Institute of Cardiothoracic Sciences in Kondhwa on April 4. He had pneumonia as well as hypertension and died on Thursday. The fourth death occurred in a 56-year-old woman of Laxminagar in Yerawada. She was a patient of hypertension.

The PMC has initiated home-to-home survey, under which 1.30 lakh houses have been covered so far. The civic administration has also set up 74 flu clinics and has appealed symptomatic citizens to visit the clinics.

The PMC said besides treatment of positive cases, eight patients of Covid-19 contagion recovered and were discharged on Thursday. As many as 4,627 people are still in quarantine in PMC limits.


One more area sealed in PCMC limits

The Rupeenagar area of Talawade in Pimpri Chinchwad was sealed on Thursday midnight, Pavan Salve, additional medical officer of health, PCMC, said.

One positive patient residing in Bhosari was discharged on Thursday after his both reports came negative. As many as 37 positive patients are undergoing treatment at hospitals in PCMC limits. So far, 60 people have tested positive in Pimpri Chinchwad, while 56 in rural areas of Pune.

A total of 79 people tested negative for the contagion in areas under the PCMC limits on Thursday.

