Kolkata: Four cops attacked while enforcing lockdown in Karaya
2020-05-17
KOLKATA: A police patrol team enforcing lockdown rules at Chamru Khansame Lane, close to Eidgah Maidan in the Karaya area, came under attack by a gang of locals who was reportedly led by a local ruffian. At least four policemen and two passersby were injured in the row and had to be admitted at SSKM hospital. Till Saturday evening, eight people have been arrested for their involvement in the incident.

Karaya police sub-inspector Intekhab Alam, who is also the anti-rowdy officer of the police station, and his force (another sub-inspector, two constables and a police driver) was on night patrol when they received information of a disturbance from the spot. 

“A local criminal had threatened some traders to open shops on Wednesday. On Friday, when he tried doing the same, the cops reacted,” claimed a local source. The area has as many as 20 containment zones in a 4km radius.

When the cops arrived at the spot and asked the accused’s father to call his son, a number of youths surrounded the police team. Though Lalbazar and southeast division remained tight-lipped on the actual reason behind the clash, the main accused allegedly carried a chopper with him.

“The group that had gathered first gheraoed the cops and heckled them, injuring some of the policemen. On being informed, the Karaya police OC, the additional OC and other officers rushed to the spot and brought the situation under control. They have so far arrested eight people. They have been identified as Sk Nannu, Fardin Ahmed, Md Ali, Wakim Ahmed, Faisal, Sunny, Zafar and Sk Jamiluddin. A case under IPC sections 332, 333, 324 and 34 against the accused pertaining to voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty and voluntarily causing hurt on provocation, said DC (southeast) Debasmita Das.

Police sources said they have increased their presence in the neighbourhood, including establishing area dominance. This is the third incident of attack on cops after the lockdown was implemented in city, the first being reported at Entally and the second at Metiabruz. 


