Four women die, Tamil Nadu coronavirus count hits 6,535
2020-05-10
CHENNAI: Four women died and 526 more people from 20 districts tested positive for Covid-19 as Tamil Nadu’s tally mounted to 6,535 on Saturday. 


Five days after a 73-year-old woman with comorbidities died at the KMC hospital, the state included her name on the Covid-29 death list on Saturday. “Her first sample tested negative, but the sample that came after that was positive. We released the body as per standard protocol with disinfectants and in a body bag,” said hospital dean Dr Vasanthamani P. In the same hospital, a 58-year-old woman died on Friday.

A 67-year-old woman, who was admitted to Rajiv Gandhi GH on May 1, and a 70-year-old woman from Ramanathapuram district, who was admitted to Sivaganga Medical College Hospital, died on Saturday. The death toll due to the pandemic rose to 44, the highest single-day spike in deaths.

Chennai reported 279 cases including a 5-day-old child, and the total number of cases in the city reached 3,390. While 40% of cases reported in the city were linked to the Koyambedu cluster, Chennai, Cuddalore, Ariyalur, Villupuram, Tiruvallur and Perambalur, top six districts in infection, had 88% of their cases linked to the cluster. Of the 526 people who tested positive, 278 were a part of the Koyambedu cluster, taking the total number of people in the cluster to 1,867. 

While three people in Chennai have infected at least 735 others, the cluster lead to 317 cases in Cuddalore, 239 cases in Ariyalur, 177 in Villupuram and 124 in Tiruvallur.

On Saturday, Villupuram reported 67 cases, Ariyalur had 16 and Perambalur reported 31. Most cases in Chennai’s neighbouring districts Chengalpet (40), Kancheepuram (17) and Tiruvallur (26) continued to be from the cluster. 

 “Koyambedu is a problem that has cropped up over the last one week. But we continue to deal with the swelling clusters in crowded areas such as Royapuram, Tiru-vi-Ka Nagar and Pulianthope,” said Greater Chennai Corporation special nodal officer J Radhakrishnan. “We see people walking on the streets with masks inside their pockets, or wearing them around the neck. Today, I saw a guy sharing his mask with another man when they saw a policeman approaching them. What we need to do now is to ensure people understand that mask will prevent illness. They need topractice social distancing norms willingly,” he said.

In an attempt to improve the urban strategy for containing Covid-19, officials and public health workers at the Greater Chennai Corporation decided they will not be able to do two things—ensure stringent lockdowns with force or achieve a zero corona status. On Saturday, they spoke to more than 50 NGOs that have been working with people on TB, HIV/AIDS, nutrition, maternal and child health, and non-communicable diseases. The civic agencies will deploy NGOs to create awareness among the people. “We want people to volunteer of testing if they have symptoms of fever. In many cases people were scared we will lock them up in a quarantine centre for two weeks. When they delayed coming to the hospital they infected many others in the family and neighbourhood,” said Joint Commissioner (health) Madhusudhan Reddy. 

 A total of 1,824 patients have recovered so far. As many as 219 patients were discharged on Saturday and were still being treated at various hospitals.


