Four Covid-19 suspects discharged from quarantine turn out to be positive
2020-04-30
AGRA: In an alarming incident, four Covid-19 suspects were discharged from a quarantine centre on the National Highway-2 on Tuesday night. Later, the four were found to be Covid-19 positive. 

The four had reached home and came in contact with multiple individuals. According to officials of district administration, three were traced and brought back to the centre with the help of police. One of them is still out. 

Last week, the district administration had developed an institutional quarantine centre for suspected Covid-19 cases at a private college on NH-2. The centre has a capacity to host 600 people. So far, 117 people have been admitted there. 

Sources said, on Tuesday night around 1am, the four individuals, residents of Khattekpara under Hariparwat police station, were discharged from the quarantine centre, and they later tested positive. 

On getting information, senior officials of the district administration, swung into action. A search operation was launched. Police used mobile surveillance system to track the four. In the morning, three of them were shifted to an isolation centre, whereas one was not found at home and his mobile phone was switched off. Till evening, the police were unable to reach out to him. 

On Wednesday, additional district magistrate (protocol) Pushpraj Singh said, “The first report of the four tested negative. The result of the second round of sample testing was then awaited. The four were creating much nuisance at the centre and wanted to go home to get clothes and other items of utility. They were allowed to leave to come back after getting the required items. Later, the four were found positive. So far, three have been tracked and shifted to isolation ward. Teams are searching for the remaining one." 

Meanwhile, principal secretary Alok Kumar, who has been appointed by the state government as nodal officer for Covid-19 containment in Agra has sought an explanation from the district magistrate Prabhu N Singh within 24 hours.


