Four isolated at MGM govt hospital test negative for Covid-19
2020-03-20
Trichy: Four people, including three students from Kerala, tested negative for Covid-19 at the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial (MGM) government hospital here on Thursday. The public health and preventive medicine department has quarantined 27 foreign returnees at the makeshift quarantine facility at the central market for vegetable, fruits and flowers at Kallikudi on Thursday. 

Test results from the viral research and diagnostic laboratory at the government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur revealed they were not infected. 

The three students had got themselves admitted at the isolation ward on Tuesday after they developed Covid-19 symptoms following their visit to Kerala recently. The fourth one was a foreign returnee. 

The symptoms of the virus include fever, cough, sneezing and difficulty in breathing. 

A senior doctor at MGMGH said the decision on discharging the negative patients would be taken by the doctors after reviewing their present health condition.

Of the eight admitted at the isolation ward here, four have tested negative and one was shifted to the general ward after he recovered from the symptom. 

With three passengers under treatment, four more also joined them early on Thursday morning. By Thursday evening, seven passengers with symptoms were being observed at the isolation ward at MGM. 

The makeshift quarantine facility at the central vegetable market for vegetables, fruits and flowers has seen a sudden surge in the number of passengers returning from worst-hit countries. The passengers include 12 from Dubai, six from Malaysia, one from Germany and eight who travelled to those countries. 

The public health department has also stated that four men and three women in the quarantine facility were above 60 years. The public health department officials said that none of them had symptoms. Since they had travel history to most affected countries, they were quarantined for a period of 1-14 days. A total of 326 passengers landed at the Trichy International Airport by two flights from Sharjah and Dubai late on Wednesday night. 

Trichy district administration said the passengers will be sent home based on the report from the doctor. The passengers will be provided with food and accommodation at the centre

