FPS shop owner from Nagarwada succumbs to Covid-19
2020-04-13
VADODARA: City recorded its third Covid-19 death on Sunday evening when a 27-year-old man died at GMERS Medical College and Hospital at Gotri, hours after he tested positive.

Bhargav Patni, a resident of Navrang Road in Nagarwada area, died at around 7.30 pm. Sources said that he had other co-morbid conditions as he was also suffering from dengue.

He is the relative of two others from the area who have tested positive. Sources said that the family runs a fair price shop in Nagarwada, which has been declared as red zone since April 5.

Earlier, 52-year-old Shailen Desai of Nizampura area had died on April 2. Later, 62-year-old Rekha Sheth, a resident of Tandalja Road died on April 6. The duo was admitted at SSG Hospital and had travelled to Sri Lanka.

Meanwhile, the number of positive cases in the city has crossed the 100 mark within a month. With six more testing positive in 24 hours ending Sunday evening, the tally touched 101. Vadodara collector Shalini Agrawal said of the six samples that tested positive on Sunday, four were from Nagarwada-Saiyedpura, while two each were from Bahar Colony and Ajwa Road.

The two cases from Bahar Colony are relatives of a 66-year-old man who had tested positive on April 9. While one 50-year-old female is the man’s niece, another 24-year-old is his granddaughter.

The total number of cases from Nagarwada-Saiyedpura stretch alone has touched 88. All the cases have emerged after mass sampling of residents in this area.

Of the 101 cases, 92 are under treatment. By Sunday afternoon, of the 978 samples which were tested, 828 had come negative.

Three from Khambhat test positive

Vadodara/ Anand: Two persons in Khambhat and one in Anklav taluka of Anand district tested positive on Sunday, taking the number of those infected to eight.

In Khambhat, 33-year-old son and 62-year-old husband of a woman who tested positive on Saturday were also found infected. 

The patient in Navakhal village near Anklav is a 26-year-old woman who had visited Vadodara’s Nagarwada area. The gram panchayat area has been declared as a contaminant cluster. 

SMIMER gets ICMR nod for Covid testing 

Surat: SMIMER hospital run by the Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) got the nod from Indian Council of Medical Research’s (ICMR) to test Covid-19 samples. 

“The infrastructure for testing capacity is being set up and training of medical staff is under way. We have collected 1,428 samples from mass sampling, of which six people have tested positive. We want to increase our testing capacity to 800 per day in the coming days,” municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani said.

Meanwhile, three more tested positive in the city on Sunday. 


