Karnataka lockdown: Free WiFi puts smile on faces of migrants in camp
2020-04-24
BENGALURU: For the first time in weeks Rukmini Devi, a daily wage labourer, had a smile on her face on Sunday. Amidst the pall of gloom that surrounds the migrant labourer camp in Thanisandra, she found a silver lining – in her husband’s smartphone. For the first time in a month, Devi got to see her seven-year-old son Sushil who lives with his maternal grandparents in Gunjhalli, a village in Raichur.


Devi and her husband had moved to the city in search of work two years ago, while their son remained with her parents. Normally, she would frequently connect with her son over video chat – to a neighbour in Raichur since her parents don’t have a smartphone. But Devi’s husband Sharanappa ran out of money after the lockdown was imposed and couldn’t recharge his phone.

With the lockdown being extended to May 3, Bengaluru north east division police stepped in with a laudable initiative. They ensured two 42-inch televisions and installed eight WiFi hotspots in the camp, providing connectivity and entertainment for over 1,000 migrants housed there.

“I saw my son on Sunday and now I’m at peace, said Devi. “We always kept some money aside to recharge data, but we had to use it to buy provisions. Since then, I’ve been very worried. I spoke to him when someone from home called, but to see him was very soothing.”

The children in the camp have stopped running around the place and are now glued to the television, for which they vie with the elders, who want to tune into new channels.

“We wanted the people here to take their mind off – even if it was briefly –problems on hand. Also, entertainment for the children was another issue which was solved,” said a police source.

Now, on an average, 450 users log onto to the hotspots every day. The facility was provided by ACT Fibernet free.

Speaking about the initiative, Bala Malladi, chief executive officer, ACT Fibernet, said, “We’ve set up the facility to provide better communication and entertainment for the 1,000 people who are housed there. They can browse the internet with 20mbps speed and unlimited data. We appreciate the care and concern shown by the government and police to these less fortunate people in this situation. We are thrilled to be of service in this situation.”

