Fresh ideas: Ventilation, clean AC at offices may keep coronavirus away
2020-05-09
NEW DELHI: With the ongoing pandemic, private offices are reluctant to use central air-conditioning as circulation of stale air may increase the risk of spreading the novel coronavirus.


Experts feel that improving ventilation in buildings has become more important with the gradual increase in the number of office-goers after the lockdown. The design of buildings may also need to be changed. Offices may have to adapt fast for improving thermal comfort by improving insulation and allowing more fresh air in ACs.

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers has come up with guidelines to be followed in offices, homes and healthcare facilities to provide adequate ventilation. This includes maintaining humidity between 40% and 60%, high rate of air change, and higher temperature than normal.

 


Barun Aggarwal, CEO at BreatheEasy and a member of the committee that formed the guidelines, said working without air-conditioning is no long-term solution and the primary focus should be on improving ventilation.

“Even central ACs allow intake of fresh air. Most offices avoid it as it increases the cost of running. In the current circumstances, the need for fresh air is most important,” said Aggarwal, adding ACs need to run at a temperature of 24-27 degrees to create a balance with the fresh air. Offices will also need to keep disinfecting the vents daily.

For newer buildings, Aggarwal suggested ventilation for each room and looking at technologies like H-13 certified filters, which can process particles up to 0.003 microns.

Centre for Science and Environment (CSE), which carried out an analysis for healthy living, said trapping of stale air would increase the risk of the virus indoors. This means the focus should be on improved ventilation as well as thermal comfort.

“There is a need to design buildings for thermal comfort and minimise air-conditioned hours. A total of 34% projects under PMAY-U are being delivered by the private sector. However, the entire focus is on speed and ease of construction and material choices. It is now necessary to link subsidies and incentives with ensuring quality and livability of the houses,” said CSE.

Anumita Roy Chowdhury, CSE executive director (research and advocacy), said companies could look at passive design interventions and retrofits as options to improve the shading, insulation and ventilation. “The overall heat load on a building needs to reduce and options like green rooftops and solar panels can be put into place. Vertical gardens can also reduce the heat levels,” she added.

The average heat index in India is increasing at the rate of 0.56°C per decade and 0.32°C per decade during summer, data shows. Dr Radha Goyal, deputy director, Indian Pollution Control Association, told TOI that air-conditioners could function normally, but the intake of fresh air was crucial, alongside regularly disinfecting the vents and ducts. “The fresh air intake should not be less than 3 cubic metres per hour per person. Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation can be used in the ducts and air handling units,” she added.

