'Fresh ready reckoner rates once Maharashtra is free of Covid-19'
2020-03-27
PUNE: Revenue minister Balasaheb Thorat on Thursday said publication of this year’s Ready Reckoner (RR) rates has been postponed in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak in the state.


“Revenue department officials are busy with their health department counterparts tackling the coronavirus crisis. The Ready Reckoner rates will be published only after the state is free of Covid-19,” Thorat told TOI.

“The revenue department had almost finalised the Ready Reckoner rates. It needed a fortnight more to wrap up the procedure. The existing Ready Reckoner rates will continue till the new structure is announced,” he added. 

The Ready Reckoner rates, which are prices of a residential property, land or commercial property for a given area, are published on March 31 every year and implemented from April 1. All calculations related to real estate, such as stamp duty, registration, premiums and tax collection, are based on the Ready Reckoner rates.

Referring to the developers’ request to the government to not increase this year’s Ready Reckoner rates, the minister said the rates would be rationalized. 

“This is likely in areas with high rates,” Thorat said, though he refused to divulge more details. 

A senior official in the revenue department said though the rates have never been brought down in the past, the state government was working towards rationalization of the prices. In the last two years of the previous BJP-Shiv Sena government, there was no hike in the Ready Reckoner rates. The last time the Ready Reckoner rates were hiked in Maharashtra was in 2017-18. 

Property registrations at 27 offices in the city and Pimpri Chinchwad have already been stopped as a part of the social distancing strategy to check the spread of coronavirus. Realtors have written to the state government about the overall slump in the sector and also how the Covid-19 outbreak has affected real estate sector. 

Thorat has, in the meantime, told the district collectors to ensure that agriculture work was not affected during the lockdown period. 

“Harvesting machinery have reached the state from Punjab. There should be adequate fuel supply for the functioning of the machines. The administration has to ensure that movement of vehicles with essential goods remains hassle-free,” he said. 


