Fresh coronavirus case recorded after 8 days
2020-05-03
Coimbatore: A day after the district was re-designated as an orange zone and removed from the red zone list, a Kavundampalayam resident tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday.The patient, a 44-year-old man, was suffering from acute myeloid leukemia and had travelled to the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital in Chennai for cancer treatment on Thursday. The PCR-antigen test conducted before starting treatment found him positive for coronavirus.Since authorities deduced that he must have been infected in Coimbatore, the case was added to the district’s list.The patient, who has been suffering from leukemia since last June, was admitted to the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital last week after low blood count and had undergone test before blood transfusion. Public health department authorities have disinfected the ward where the patient was admitted and are preparing a list of the staff and patients who came in contact with him, his family members and neighbours. “We have asked the dean to give us a list of all the doctors, nurses, paramedics and conservancy staff who visited and worked in that ward. We have identified 54 contacts of the patient within CMCH and have tested 10 of them so far. All of them tested negative. 44 people will be tested on Sunday, including his family and neighbours in Kavundampalayam. Three other patients and their attenders are being traced,” said deputy director of public health Dr G Ramesh Kumar.The patient’s wife told TOI that the family could have avoided the Chennai trip if CMCH authorities had checked him before referring him to the Chennai hospital. “Though my husband has no symptoms, they’re saying his chances of dying due to it are high.”Meanwhile, the health department has isolated a family of three, a man, his wife and child, residing in K K Pudur, after Covid-19 tests were found inconclusive. The authorities are tracing their contacts and making the street and neighbouring areas a containment zone. The results of the trio are expected to be declared on Sunday.“The family had come to Coimbatore from Malappuram in Kerala on March 23 for vacations. The man runs some shops in K K Pudur. They had applied for pass to travel to Kerala at the collectorate a few days ago and were asked to produce Covid-19 negative certificates. The tests were inconclusive. None of them have any symptoms,” said an official.