Pune: Fresh civic guidelines for better services in quarantine centres
2020-05-15
PUNE: The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has issued fresh guidelines for improved management of the Covid-19 quarantine centres and care units after recent inspections revealed certain lapses in such facilities. 




The latest circular issued by additional municipal commissioner Shantanu Goel has highlighted 21-points, including provision of basic services such as masks, food, power supply and water at the centres for quarantined patients. 

The assistant municipal commissioners and zonal heads of five civic wards managing the centres in their jurisdictions have been told to ensure that all 21-points were strictly implemented in the facilities. 

Complaints have been galore by those quarantined at the centres and by their relatives about substandard services, especially mismanagement and delay in delivery of food. 

Goel said, “We have reviewed the centres and issued detailed guidelines about how to manage these facilities and minimize the hardships of people quarantined there. We have told the officials to pay attention to the quality of food served to the patients admitted at the facilities, maintain cleanliness and keep the records updated”. 

According to the circular, the authorities are expected to identify separate areas for people awaiting swab test reports and those testing negative, ensure waste segregation and maintain daily log of admissions and discharge of patients. Provision of ambulance at every facility has been mandatory, in addition to personal protection equipment (PPE) kits for those involved in distribution of food and cleaning activities. 

“The food supply contractors have been appointed at the zonal levels. We want the zonal authorities to keep a tab on the system. The administration has initiated action against one contractor for supplying substandard food. Similar action will be taken in case norms are flouted,” Goel said. 

The PMC has identified two additional facilities from each civic ward so that people could be quarantined there and did not have to be transported far. 

The civic chief had issued basic guidelines for the quarantine centres in the first week of May. The latest circular is an addition to the earlier guidelines.

Residents of around eight housing societies near Balewadi stadium have raised apprehensions over the proposed Covid-19 treatment centre in the sports facility. They have written a letter to the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation civic chief, pointing out that their residential complexes were very close to the stadium. They said the proposed centre should be shifted to some other location.


