Fresh arson at Kolkata prison over Covid-19 restriction
2020-03-23
KOLKATA: Trouble again erupted at the “battle-ravaged” Dum Dum Central Correctional Home on Sunday, when some inmates reportedly tried to attack the women’s ward, took to arson and allegedly manhandled the guards, prompting police to resort to lathi-charge. A day earlier, inmates went on the rampage, set fire to jail property, fought pitched battles with police and attempted to scale over the walls, leading cops to open fire in which one prisoner was killed; at least 28 prisoners, jail employees and cops were injured on Saturday.

Police on Sunday morning recovered two firearms and hammers in cells. “It seems to be a pre-planned attack or how could they have access to weapons on the premises,” said state correctional home minister Ujjwal Biswas. CID has started a probe into the incident.

On Saturday, trouble broke out a little after 4pm, when the inmates were being sent back to their cells from the premises. Even as the new ADG (correctional services) Piyush Pandey tried to reason with them, the inmates reportedly launched a destruction frenzy, with one group setting a gas cylinder on fire. Before the situation could spiral out of control, police chased the group inside the cells. Another section of inmates reached the women’s ward, where the woman guards stopped them. But the male prisoners allegedly manhandled the women guards. Reinforcement of police and para-military forces ook nearly two hours to bring the situation under control. 

The reasons for the trouble were the same as that on Saturday: most prisoners and undertrials were upset with the fact that the prison authorities on Friday suspended their weekly interviews with their family members till March 31 to minimise the spread of the novel coronavirus. Another section of inmates demanded parole, as the government had proposed a 15-day “break” to around lifers, reportedly to decongest the correctional home. 

“We have identified those who have been creating trouble and provoking others. They apparently even threatened some male inmates, who had refused to join in the agitation on Saturday. To garner more support, the trouble-makers on Sunday tried to intimidate the female inmates into joining the agitation,” Biswas said. 

A CID team that reached the correctional home on Sunday is looking at the possibility of a lacunae in assessing and controlling a supposed emnity between the undertrials and convicts. The agency is collecting Saturday’s video footage circulated on social media. 


