Kolkata: From jewellery to potato, shops see a Covid-19 change
2020-05-31
KOLKATA: Jugal Biswas, 55, did not have any plans of converting his business in 2020 but the lockdown dried up his income from his jewellery store, forcing him to sell groceries, potato and egg from his outlet in Bagbazaar in north Kolkata. 

Girish Vasandani, 40, had just started picking up the pieces after a fire ravaged his shop in Bagri Market when the lockdown came into effect. The businessman who had by now learnt to swim against the tide immediately shifted gears, making masks and sanitizers to keep his family afloat. 

Biswas and Vasandani are just two examples out of several thousands in Kolkata who were forced to change their vocations and take up whatever came their way to make ends meet during the prolonged lockdown and subsequent income losses.

The fortunate ones invested their reserves for switching to businesses that were in demand during the lockdown, like selling essential items and masks. Others who did not have much savings had to borrow from family and friends to start selling fish and vegetables. 

“I have a small jewellery store but who will buy them when people are struggling for even basic needs. So, I was sitting at home fearing about the future of my family when a friend approached me with the business idea of selling grocery items in my shop. Initially, I was hesitant selling grocery in my jewellery store but then I realised I will have to adapt to the changing times. Today, I am not earning much but at least I am not having to dip into my savings,” said Biswas. 

The pandemic and the shock to the economy also forced many people to learn on the job to adapt to their new vocations. Vasandani, a resident of a complex on Convent Road, did a crash course on making masks and sanitizers and got down to work the phone lines. 

“I am not making abnormal profits but at least I am not sitting idle,” said Vasandani. “The market is highly competitive, and I am new to this business, but the response has been decent. It is also keeping me busy and I have acquired a new skill.”

Lockdown also pulled many people out of their comfort zone and hurled them at the deep end of the pool. Rakesh Singh recalled his life as an app-cab driver before the lockdown when he would earn close to Rs 20,000 every month. “The vehicle was air-conditioned, and I would get a lot of rides. Life was not bad,” said Singh, a resident of Sikdar Para off Harrison Road. “But lockdown came as a rude shock, making me realise that everything is over. The business ride aggregating will also change in the wake of the pandemic. I was really tensed about my future. But I have a family to support, so I rented a van rickshaw and started selling bread in the mornings and vegetables in the evenings,” said Singh.

The testing times have also strengthened bonds within the family. For many like Bijon Ghosh of Banamali Chatterjee Street, their life partners have extended a helping hand during the lockdown and eased their anxieties. Ghosh, with the help of his wife Poly, has converted her garments shop to a grocery store. “I had no other option. I own a pool car and my wife runs this small garment store. The income from pool car dried up and the store was also shut. My wife then proposed I convert her shop into a grocery store,” said an emotional Ghosh. 


