From 23-day-old to 12-year-old, Gandhi Hospital treating 20 kids for Covid-19
2020-04-14
HYDERABAD: While social distancing is key in containing the spread of novel coronavirus, treating 20 children below 12 years in Gandhi Hospital is quite a task for doctors as maintaining social distance with them is next to impossible. 


Among the patients who tested positive for the coronavirus in the state, 20 were children. 




Ranging from a 23-day-old baby to a 12-year-old, Gandhi Hospital has a separate ward for them in the sixth floor. 

A team of 20 doctors is attending to them.

These children have been kept in a special isolation ward on the sixth floor. All these cases are being treated by the paediatric wing of the hospital. The youngest children in the Covid-19 ward is a 23-day-old baby girl who contracted the virus and the eldest is 12-year-old boy.

According to the authorities, one child has already been discharged.

 While all the kids are stable, a three-year-old boy, who was earlier admitted in Niloufer Hospital, is giving doctors a tough time. “He has some health issues. Even before he contracted the virus, he had developed some complications. But, we are hoping he will also recover soon,” said hospital sources. 

Most of the children undergoing treatment for Covid-19 are in the age group of 5-12.

Doctors are treating the children as per the treatment protocol given by ICMR, which is much different from what is followed for adults. For starters, hydroxycholoroquine is not administered to children. 

“We have different protocols and a team of 20 doctors 20 is monitoring them. A total medical staff of 60 attends to them in different shifts,” a doctor said.

They being children, mothers are allowed to be with them and attend to their needs. The mother and the child are in kept in a room and the mothers are also regularly checked for coronovirus infection. 

Sources said the children are given the food they ask and toys are also provided. “Some of them contracted the virus through their mothers and some through other relatives,” sources said.


