From Chicago to safety in quarantine facilities in Andhra Pradesh
2020-05-18
AMARAVATI: The first batch of passengers who landed at the Hyderabad international airport on Saturday from Chicago were brought to the state in special buses on Sunday. The foreign returnees were shifted to quarantine facilities of their choice. Unlike many states, which are offering only paid quarantine facility, AP is also providing free quarantine facility.


The first direct flight carrying foreign returnees will reach Visakhapatnam airport on May 19. About 2,040 people, stranded in different Gulf nations, will be returning to the state in 13 special flights over the next one week. “We will be bringing in about 2,500 people stranded in Kuwait in two special flights as the Centre has agreed to operate the flights following the chief minister’s request,” said Covid-19 taskforce chairman and principal secretary (R&B) MT Krishnababu. He said another 10,000 people would be returning to the state from different foreign countries in the next seven to10 days. The Telangana government has agreed to set up a special reception centre at the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport for the Andhrites. They will be brought back to their states in special buses. 

Speaking about the quarantine facility, he said they have readied quarantine facilities in five-star, three-star and two-star hotels along with the government’s free facility. “People can opt from any of the four quarantine facilities. No state government in the country has provided free quarantine facility,” said Krishnababu. While each person staying for two weeks in a five-star hotel, will be charged Rs 35,000, it is Rs 23,000 in three-star and Rs 20,000 in two-star hotels. The package is inclusive of food and accommodation.

Meanwhile, the state government has named senior IAS officers Baburao Naidu and Srinivas as special officers to assist the foreign returnees. “In case of emergencies, the people who test negative for Covid-19 will be allowed to be home quarantined after a field inspection officer visits their residences and check the available facilities there and submit a report,” said Krishnababu. 

