From obstruction during the Spanish Flu to Covid-19 frontline
2020-04-14
Ahmedabad: The civic body in Ahmedabad may be a frontline agency in the fight against the coronavirus pandemic today, but it showed a different, rather anti-people character under the British rule, when the Spanish Flu struck the city in 1918 killing as many as 3,527 persons, more than 1% of its population.

The Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) is now requisitioning whatever it needs to to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus and track and treat patients. It has taken over clubs, hotels, apartments to create quarantine facilities for suspected patients and for people who landed in Ahmedabad from abroad. It leads the battle by introducing new rules every day.

But its character appeared appallingly different, when it refused to provide a school building to house patients of the Spanish Flu in 1918. The fight against the flu was then led by voluntary organizations, mainly the Gujarat Sabha.

 The book ‘The Spanish Influenza Pandemic of 1918-1919: New Perspectives’ says the Gujarat Sabha and other organizations together set up the Influenza Relief Committee, and a hospital with 125 beds was opened in a building donated by a local businessman. The book describes how students of BJ Medical College and teachers volunteered for house-to-house visits in the city and surrounding villages. 

The funds came from mill owners, Maskaty Mahajan, Panch Kuva Mahajan and the Yarn Merchants Mahajan among others. Twenty-five dispensaries were established and some 3,000 patients were cared for. “In contrast to other cities, the municipality of Ahmedabad seems to have been obstructionist to relief efforts, refusing the use of one of its school buildings as a hospital. In fact, this indifference to the suffering of the people and the ‘chronic insanitary condition of the city’ were the subject of six editorials in Praja Bandhu (a weekly),” the book says about the role of the civic body then functioning under the British rule.


