From patrolling to blocking exits, RWAs ready to enforce lockdown in Delhi
2020-04-15
NEW DELHI: Following Prime Minister Narenda Modi’s call to strictly ensure the lockdown for the next one week, many residents welfare associations (RWAs) in Delhi have proposed to introduce surveillance steps such as community patrols, introduction of passes, and regulated movement by blocking entry/exit points to the societies.

The Narmada Apartments RWA in south Delhi’s Alaknanda, among the first few societies to restrict entry of outsiders in the wake of the novel coronavirus crisis, is planning to get e-passes issued for its garbage collectors. “We are trying to help unwell elderly residents meet their children living in other NCR areas with the help of our MLA,” said RWA member Sulbha Gupta.

In west Delhi’s Maya Vihar, the RWA is planning to introduce community volunteers at its entry points to prevent unnecessary movement. “Community patrolling was carried out in villages in old days and we will revive it here,” RWA president S P Mudgil said. In D block, Khajan Basti, the entry and exit points may be voluntarily sealed, said Hemant Kumar of the local RWA. 

As soon as the PM’s speech was made, the Greater Kailash II RWA circulated a message from the Chittaranjan Park SHO that warned about legal action for wilful disobedience of the lockdown norms. “The message was aimed at people who are still going for jogging. They didn’t stop even after we got the parks closed,” said RWA president Sanjay Rana. The association has started some online activities to keep people, especially the elderly, engaged at home. 

The GK I RWAs want government to install sanitisation tunnels at major entry\exit points and markets. “By and large our residents are staying inside,” E block RWA member Rajiv Kakria said. 

Jasbir Chaddha, a member of the United Residents Joint Action, said, “We have come out with a guideline of does and don’ts for RWAs, but ultimately people will have to self-regulate to defeat this virus.” 

The RWAs inside containment zones are making all efforts to help police and the local administration maintain law and order. “The entrance to our block was sealed as soon as the first case was reported in March. I have told many people calling me that police will not open the gate,” said Sanjay Bhardwaj, president of Dilshad Garden’s L block RWA. 


