From cooking to gardening: Parents in UP look for unique ways to keep kids busy during lockdown
2020-03-27
With the whole nation coming to a standstill because of the Coronavirus scare, parents are facing a tough time keeping their kids engaged within the four walls of the house. While some are giving cooking classes to their kids, others are resorting to gardening. Parents in cities across the state shared with us some unique ideas to keep the kids engrossed during this lockdown period. 

SOME HOME SCIENCE FOR MY KID
Lucknowite Ishna Agarwal Potdar, who has a son aged nine-years has made it a point to keep her son engrossed in productive activities during the time of this lockdown. She says, “It’s very difficult to engage kids these days. They can’t be allowed to watch television shows or cartoons all the time or be given other gadgets to play with. So I’m teaching Vardaan (her son) to sew buttons, ironing small clothes and do other small chores around the house. He’s also learning gardening from his grandmother and his father is teaching him how to wash the car.” Adding further Ishna says, “I’m glad that he wakes up in the morning everyday and does yoga along with his grandmother.” 
Hema Bhatia, a businesswoman from Kanpur, is teaching cooking to her 10-year-old son Prajit. “I initially started with teaching him how to make tea and some salad. Now that he has learnt to cut salad, I have taught him to make different types of sandwiches. What makes me happy is that Prajit has also shown a lot interest in cooking,” she says.

 (L) Aarav is learning meditation from his parents (R) Devaagyh is learning fireless cooking (BCCL)

DON’T UNDERESTIMATE THE POWER OF YOGA
Shubhi Tiwari from Lucknow, a homemaker in the city with a seven-year-old son Shivraj, says, “Normally we people whine about scarcity of time or the fact that we aren’t getting to spend quality time with our families. Now that we’re following the lockdown, everyone is actually getting to complete the list of things which we always wanted to do but never found the time for. I’m teaching my son origami these days. Along with this, he does aerobics and yoga with my husband and me every morning. I’m teaching him how to make tea and since the new school session will start soon, he’s also learning how to put covers on the books.” 
Even for Prayagraj’s Sameeksha Singh, a research scholar, managing her two and a half year old son Aarav is something she doesn’t have to worry about. “My son had joined a play school recently, so after the lockdown the play school has sent some very interesting assignments to be completed by the kids.The students are supposed to do basic yoga asanas like pranayam etc, for which they have sent website links and we in turn have to make a videos of the activity and send to the school. The other activity includes talking to the grandparents making a video call, colouring, etc. So it is quite fun doing all this”, she says.
 
 Hema Bhatia with her son Prajit Bhatia (BCCL)

KIDS’ WALL OF FAME
Isha Gupta, a research scholar from Banaras, says that apart from my daughter Apramiti, who is four-years-old , my sister in law‘s sons, Atharva and Aarav, both below 10-years, are currently staying with us, so to keep the kids engaged in such a scenario is tough. So I came up with a novel idea and asked them to use one of the walls of the toy room as a canvas. So the kids are painting away to glory. In just few days the wall is covered with their creativity. At the same time we are also asking the kids to help us in household chores, especially cooking. The other night when my daughter felt hungry, I told her to make a French toast and I must say, she did a splendid job. The kids are also being encouraged to tidy their room and clean around the house, with the household staff being on leave, this is also making them appreciate the contribution of the staff,” she says.

STRIKING THE RIGHT CHORDS
Kajal Gautam, a home maker from Banaras, who has twins, Saksham and Samriddh, both 10-years old, says, “I try that my kids are not glued to the TV or engaged on their phone all the time. So when their schools got closed, I dug out their guitar, which was lying unused for sometime. Now I make sure that they practice for sometime on the instrument. In case they get stuck on some note, they make a video call to their teacher to clear out things. I also join and sing along, whenever possible.”

 (L) Meenakshi Srivastava with her daughter Amaya (R) Shiv is learning yoga and meditation (BCCL)

ON A CLASSICAL NOTE
Kanpurite Meenakshi Srivastava is also making efforts to keep her four-year old daughter Amaya entertained and busy during the lockdown period. “Amaya has a lot of interest in dancing and I am utilising this time to teach her classical dance. Both Amaya and I first watch some videos of classical dance and then we try copying the dance moves. Earlier, Amaya used to mostly dance on Bollywood numbers but now she is grooming herself in classical dance and she is really enjoying this change,” shares Meenakshi.

SOME MYTHOLOGY LESSONS FOR THIS KID
Rashi Dixit Ahuja, a Lucknowite, is making use of the time by giving her kids lessons in Hindu mythology. “Kids are full of energy at this age. So for keeping them engaged not one activity is enough. So apart from giving my six-year old son some lessons in gardening and fireless cooking, every day, both my husband and I also read out lessons from the Ramayana and the Mahabharat turn by turn. I don’t think he would have otherwise got these lessons from us had it not been for the lockdown. But now after getting tired doing gardening and cooking, he relaxes hearing some good mythological stories from us,” she shares.
— With inputs from Yashi Agarwal

