From plague of 1896 to Spanish Flu two decades later, Pune has braved many pandemics and recovered
2020-04-23
“There were always just sufficient people about to save Poona from being called a city of the dead. But there was a grim stillness over everything — the hush of a great mourning — that almost chilled. Rows upon rows of empty shops, rows upon rows of deserted houses, whose shuttered doors and windowless walls gave one the impressions of coffins.” This report was published in The Times of India on August 23, 1899, with the heading, “The plague in Poona. A tour of the city”.

Pune under curfew today will easily relate to the narrative in the TOI report as it battles the coronavirus spread by shutting its shops, restaurants, multiplexes and other establishments. Still, the present situation is far better than what it was 124 years ago, when Mumbai and subsequently Pune were caught in the grip of the 1896 bubonic plague. 

“Before the plague, cholera had wiped out a third of Pune’s population in 1629. In 1720, following a drought, it was cholera again that forced the entire population of Vadhu and areas on Nagar road to flee Pune," veteran history scholar Pandurang Balkawade said, pointing out that Pune has faced many pandemics in the past.

History researcher Mandar Lawate said that though the city reported 4,500 plague-related deaths in 1896 and scores of casualties in 1918 because of influenza (Spanish Flu), it bounced back in a couple of months both times and even celebrated the annual festivals.

Lawate said, “It had become an annual ritual for many people to abandon their homes in the Peths and stay in makeshift shelters put up on Fergusson College grounds as the plague saga continued even after 1896.”

Balkawade said it was common during the years of the plague for people to leave Pune and return after the epidemic had subsided.

Another TOI report, published on August 21, 1899, corroborated Balkawade’s observations. The TOI correspondent who had arrived in Pune by train wrote: “There were scarcely any natives in the train which brought me to Poona. Everything had a gloomy look. The people who peered out through the bars of the waiting room seemed anxious for the moment to arrive when they would be borne away from the infected city.”

From the railway station, the correspondent went to the city hospital and further wrote: "People were dying like flies, and there was no one to save them. The General Plague Hospital was a death-trap, where the sick were taken to die. No food could be had at the place; the nursing was a farce. The dead were all piled in a shed one on top of the other, without regard to caste or creed, and soaked in carbolic. Husbands seeking wives, wives seeking husbands, and children their parents, had to lift down corpse after corpse, until they came upon that for which they sought.”

Balkawade’s family lost three members during the plague. “Similar was the case in most households in Pune and Mumbai. Yet, both cities came out of this worst-ever epidemic,” he said, stressing that current Covid-19 spread cannot be compared to the plague which was severe.

Yet, since Sunday, social media platforms have been drawing a comparison, especially after the authorities declared the entire city a containment zone by invoking powers under the same Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897 which was first imposed in Pune and Mumbai 123 years ago to contain the plague.

Interestingly, terms like “institutional quarantine” and “isolation centres” are not new for the two cities. “A huge institutional quarantine centre was erected by the British at Sangamwadi in 1897. While patients were shifted to this centre, their families who were not affected by the plague were shifted to temporary sheds put up at Swargate,” Lawate said.

Another topic for discussion by Netizens is the century-old murder of Walter Charles Rand, an Indian Civil Service officer and chairman of the Pune Plague Committee. Indian revolutionaries including Damodar Hari Chapekar and his brothers Balkrishna and Vasudeo had assassinated Rand on June 22, 1897, for his excesses during the plague. 

A Marathi film produced by noted director Nachiket Patwardhan and titled "22 June 1897" — the day on which Rand was assassinated — had become hugely popular in the state three decades ago. "We have shown in the film that the measures initiated by Rand did help curb the spread of the plague in Pune. But we have also explained what led to the anger against him," Patwardhan told TOI.

"No one doubts Rand's efforts to curb the plague, but he was criticized for using culturally insensitive methods and excesses," Balkawade said.

"Rand's team would enter houses to look for those affected by plague. They burned all the belongings of plague-hit people. He would also strip people,” Lawate said. The callousness hurt the people and their sensibilities. 

A decade ago, the Pune Municipal Corporation renovated the memorial of the Chapekar brothers, originally set up in 1971, along the footpath opposite the Pune Central mall on Ganeshkhind road, exactly at the spot where Rand was shot.

A little ahead of this spot, the brothers had shouted the now famous code words, "Gondya Aala Re", to alert each other that Rand’s horse carriage was approaching after a function held at Raj Bhavan to celebrate Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee. Due to a confusion, the brothers also killed Lt. Charles Egerton Ayerst who was in another horse carriage. The brothers and their friend, M V Ranade, were hanged by the British for the two assassinations.


