From ‘roohani dikkat’ to ‘meeting fiancee’, Chandigarh covidiots' funny excuses for curfew pass
2020-04-28
CHANDIGARH: If 'request' calls from VIPs aren't enough in this pandemic and lockdown, the curfew e-pass office also has to deal with some covidiots whose excuses range from ‘roohani dikkat’ (being possessed) to ‘must meet fiancee’.

The man who said he was possessed also said only his village ‘baba’ (witch doctor) in Uttar Pradesh could treat him. Asked why then his mother needed a pass, he said she too was bewitched. Whether the ghost was exorcised or not, the man was sure asked to disappear.

 

A 27-year-old pass seeker, who must have seen the trick work in some romanctic movies, said he must travel all the way to Delhi to meet his fiancee. He said the curfew had delayed his marriage and he was desperate to see the girl once. The pass clerk dismissed the request with a curt reply: "I hate love stories."

Another man who wanted the Delhi travel permit for a medical emergency almost got his way until the staff asked for hospital papers. He showed them an online note that read: "April Fool." Citing death case, a man from Uttar Pradesh tagged the body's photo with the application. No reason for doubt, except that seven more applicants had uploaded the same picture . The staff let them off with a warning. Their travel chances died with it.

A businessman from one of the upscale sectors of Chandigarh applied for a pass for his mother and self, saying she had a dialysis due in a private hospital of Mohali. Two other sons of the woman had filed the same request. After verification, only one son and the mother received the pass. A senior UT official on the e-pass team said, "Of the 79,000 applications we received, we accepted only 10,200, only 300 of which remain valid now. The pass is one-time."

Asked what action the office took against fraud applicants, he said, "We are too busy looking for genuine medical emergency cases."


UT seek pass details from states

Since being declared a hotspot district, Chandigarh has asked Punjab, Haryana, the high court, and the municipal corporation for the details of all curfew passes they have issued. The MC issues the pass to essential service providers, the high court registrar and the states to their staff, while the Mohali and Panchkula district administrations to people who must travel withing the Tricity. UT administrator V P Singh Badnore has asked neighboring Mohali and Panchkula to follow the lockdown strictly. If people keep travelling for works and shopping, it will be difficult to to contain the infection.


The procedure

Every request for curfew pass goes to the UT administration website. Along with particulars, the applicant must upload supportive documents. The applicant receives a message from the UT office that the details are being verified. After checking, the UT administration issues or rejects the e-pass and drops the applicant a message. The office is quick to issue a pass in case of medical emergency, cremation, last rites, and distribution of essential items. The facility was introduced on March 28.

