Covid-19 warriors spat at in Surat
2020-05-10
SURAT: Frontline health workers of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) were allegedly threatened with life and spat at by six persons including four women in Sanjaynagar locality on Saturday.


Officials of Puna police station said the six persons spat on the health workers saying they would kill them coronavirus infection and later even threatened to torch them if they returned to the area. According to the FIR lodged, the accused allegedly even instigated other locals saying that the team were carrying out a survey for National Register of Citizens (NRC) under the garb of health.

According to the complaint lodged by Dharmendra Joshi, a primary health worker posted at Umarwada health centre, he and along with four colleagues - Vidhya Gyaneshwar, Tauqir Lacewala, Maldev Vadhiya and Vaibhavi Patel, had gone to Sanjaynagar for door-to-door survey of people as mandated by the SMC. 

“When we entered, the six persons confronted us and asked us with whose permission did we come. They warned us to leave immediately and threatened to torch the team by dousing us with kerosene if we returned. Meanwhile few of them screamed and told others not to wait for us to return and kill them with Covid infection. Suddenly, some of them spat on us," Joshi alleged in the complaint.

A health team member somehow alerted the police which reached the spot and nabbed the six persons.

Sanjaynagar locality is Limbayat zone of SMC which accounts for 333 positive cases of the total 841 in Surat

Police detained Siraj Shaikh, Salim Shaikh, Farida Shaikh, Julekha Pathan, Shabanabi Sha and Hussainabi Shaikh and booked them under multiple sections of attempt to murder, rioting and obstructing government official in performing duty among others. They were also booked under sections of The Epidemic Disease Act and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

"The samples of six detainees have been collected and further action will be taken after the reports arrive," said a police officer at Puna police station.

