Frontline workers in the Covid-19 battle, anganwadi staff have not been paid for 2 months
2020-04-14
done.

Aurangabad: Scores of anganwadi staffers in the district have not been paid for two months. They have also not received an increment due to them for the last 10 months. Notably, the workforce concerned is among the frontline staff battling against the Covid-19 outbreak.

Social activist and leader of the All-India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) Ram Baheti said it was ironical that frontline workers had been made to wait for their monthly remuneration.

“The issue was taken up with the government authorities but they were unable to provide a concrete reason for the delay. The authorities had promised there would be relief but the workforce concerned is still waiting for their dues,” he said.

Aurangabad district has around 3,000 anganwadi workers and an equal number of helpers who receive a monthly remuneration of Rs 8,500 and Rs 3,500 respectively.

Baheti said anganwadi workers had received an increment in their monthly remuneration, but the difference had not been paid for the last 10 months. “The anganwadi sewikas (workers) had received a monthly increment of Rs 1,500, while their helpers were given a raise of Rs 1,000. The staffers, however, are yet to get the revised remuneration,” he said.

The government machinery has roped in anganwadi staff to help tackle the current pandemic. The workforce has been discharging crucial duties such as carrying out health surveys and door-to-door visits.

Run as a centrally-managed chain of childcare centres in the country, Anganwadis across the country have been in place since the 1970s as a part of the Integrated Child Development Services programme to combat malnutrition among children.

Besides raising the issue of delay in release of monthly remuneration, AITUC has demanded free supply of hand sanitisers and masks to anganwadi workers and health insurance cover.

Prasad Mirkale, deputy chief executive officer of the Aurangabad Zilla Parishad, who is the competent authority in matters related to anganwadis, said the state treasury department has cleared the dues of anganwadi staffers for February. “The staffers are expected to receive their remuneration in the next three to four days. A set of technical issues at the state level had caused the delay in payment,” he said. He said the remuneration for March would also be released shortly. On the other demands raised by AITUC, he said the demands would be conveyed to the state level authority and the state government would have to take the policy decisions.


