Fruit, veggie sellers ostracised, food delivery agents seen as virus carriers
2020-04-17
Ranchi: Aslam (name changed on request) sells fruits on a pullcart in Ranchi’s Lalpur Chowk every morning for several years now. But as the number of positive Covid-19 cases mounted steadily in Ranchi over the past week, Aslam’s regular clientele began giving his cart a miss. 

With income reduced to a trickle, Aslam recently approached a few senior functionaries of the ruling mahagathbandhan, seeking their help. But even their word wasn’t enough to convince his customers, who looked at Aslam as a possible carrier of the Covid-19 virus. 

Sajid (name changed on request) also sells vegetables in Harmu. Ever since the positive patients were reported from Hindpiri, Sajid’s business has gone for a toss. “I am going around localities in Harmu Housing Colony to sell my vegetables. Customers are asking my name and where I live. As soon as they hear my name, they are asking me to move away. My business is suffering heavily,” Sajid (45) said. 

The trend is rising. Several localities in the state capital have begun ostracising vegetable and fruit sellers based on their religion. Rakesh Sinha, a resident of Ratu Road, said: “The way cases are being reported from one locality, we have to be careful. This is for our own safety.”

Incidentally, Daily Market, one of Ranchi’s biggest vegetable and fruit markets, sits next to Hindpiri. The market has been shut since March 22. 

Besides vegetable and fruit sellers, food delivery agents came under the scanner after a pizza delivery man tested positive for Covid-19 in New Delhi on Thursday morning. While pizzerias across the city remained open, orders from customers plummeted as panic gripped the denizens. “Tired of cooking, I was planning to order a pizza for myself. But after what happened in New Delhi, I changed my mind,” Amrita Sinha, a 30-year-old resident of Ashok Nagar, said.

The Ranchi district administration said no food delivery agent has reported health symptoms resembling Covid-19 yet. “But if there is order from our seniors, we will get them tested too,” Ranchi SDO Lokesh Mishra said. Deputy commissioner Rai Mahimapat Ray did not respond when contacted. 

By estimates, there are a little over 1,600 food delivery agents working in Ranchi for various aggregators like Swiggy and Zomato. 


