Gadag locals returning from Malaysia and Singapore trip tested for Covid-19 symptoms
2020-03-12
GADAG: Returning from a sojourn in Singapore and Malaysia, 16 Gadag residents were tested at a Community Health Centre (CHC) in Laxmeshwar on Wednesday. They were subjected to a medical examination, and will continue to be on the radar of the healthcare authorities. These measures have been taken among heightening fears over the novel coronavirus, of which four people have tested positive in Karnataka so far.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Members of a local outfit in Laxmeshwar had left for Singapore and Malaysia on March 2, and returned to Bengaluru on Monday, where they underwent a test for the Covid-19 virus. They subsequently left Bengaluru by train that departed on Tuesday night, and chugged into Yalvigi station around 9.30am on Wednesday.

Gadag district health officer Dr Satish Basarigidad confirmed to TOI that the 16 people had been subjected to a thorough examination in Bengaluru. “In accordance with the instructions issued by the Gadag deputy commissioner and Laxmeshwar tahsildar we created a separate cell at the CHC. The 16 people were received at the station, and taken to the centre by ambulance, where they were tested for symptoms of Covid-19 such as cough, fever, etc., and we found that they had none of these. They were sent home after the examination, but we will keep be observing them for the next 14 days,” said Dr Basarigidad.

Medical officer at the CHC Dr Girish Maraddi said that all the medical tests, such as checking the blood pressure level, the pulse rate, et al of the 16 individuals were performed in an isolated cell at the centre. He confirmed Dr Basarigidad’s affirmation of keeping a close watch on them. “We will visit the homes of each of them every day for the next fortnight, and if we detect symptoms of the novel coronavirus, they will be referred to the district hospital,” he said.

Subash Odunavar, one of the 16 travellers who were examined on Wednesday, said that all members of their entourage had been healthy throughout the duration of the tour. “We have been tested at all the airports, and nothing wrong has been found with us,” he said.

Meanwhile, residents of Nagavi Lambani Tanda offered special pujas to their favoured deity Sri Sevalal maharaj, seeking a quick end to the novel coronavirus menace. “Many of our relatives are working as labourers in Goa and Kerala, and we are very worried about their wellbeing. It is mostly women and the elderly who live here. We sought Sri Sevalal Maharaj’s intervention to eradicate the novel coronavirus from the world,” said Sonubai and Narayan, residents of the Tanda.


