Gadchiroli health team takes Covid-19 awareness to Maoist den at Abujhmadh
2020-05-27
Nagpur: A team of health officials under District Health Officer (DHO) Dr Shashikant Shambharkar defied acute hardship and potential threat to reach the farthest corner of the state, at Binagunda in Maoist-affected south Gadchiroli, to spread awareness about Covid-19 as part of a pre-monsoon survey among Madia tribe.

The health team had to drive through forested stretches, cross riverine nullahs and also trudge kilometres to reach the villages in inhospitable terrain on hillocks. It was a five-km ordeal for the team under Dr Shambharkar and taluka health official Dr Milind Meshram. 

This area, around 250km away from Gadchiroli district headquarters, is also considered one of Asia’s most lethal belt for malaria. The tribal villages of Binagunda remain mostly cut-off during the monsoon. 

These hamlets are a part of Abujhmadh, spread across the Maharashtra-Chhattisgarh border, which is considered the Maoist headquarters. Dr Shambharkar is likely the first officer of his rank to visit these villages of Fodewada, Turaimarka and Binagunda, whose total population is less than 500.

Under collector Deepak Singla, the district health team has been visiting different remote hamlets, especially the 450 that remain disconnected for four months during the monsoon, for anti-malarial check-ups, surveys and stocking medicines. This year, creating Covid awareness was an added agenda. “Since there had been a case of Covid in Bhamragarh, we felt taking the awareness as far and as deep would be helpful,” he said. 

Considered as highly sensitive area for security forces, these areas are a threat to other government officials also, as Maoists might kidnap them to force release of their comrades from jail. So, these villages are mostly avoided by senior officials. Possibility of blasts and firing at any point of time in these localities cannot be ruled out as Maoists fiercely guard their dens, where several top cadres camp in hideouts.

Dr Shambharkar said three teams were working in different directions from Binagunda. “Three teams were formed. One went towards Kuwakori, Perimilbhatti and Pongasur while we had gone to Fodewada, Turaimarka and Beengagonda. One team was already camping there,” he said. 

Under Shambharkar, the medical check-ups were conducted of the ashramshala children, women and senior citizens. “Due to the involvement of our ASHA workers, the villagers already knew about corona. We explained more aspects of Covid to them in their language,” he said.


