Hyderabad: Gandhi Hospital Covid care hit as doctors strike work for relief, security
2020-06-11
HYDERABAD: Health services in Gandhi Hospital, Telangana’s only exclusive Covid-19 facility, was badly hit on Wednesday after a strike by 300 doctors took hold, leaving patients in the lurch.


Protesters comprising junior doctors, house surgeons and resident doctors began boycotting duties from 8 pm on Tuesday after a colleague was assaulted by a relative of a Covid-19 patient who died.

Angry doctors raised slogans against the government, demanding decentralisation of patients from the over-crowded Gandhi Hospital to other state-run centres, apart from filling up vacant posts and providing more security.

While health minister Eatala Rajender met the protesting doctors and said their principal demands would be taken up in consultation with chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, the doctors turned down the requests for resuming duties.

“In view of our demands not being met, we decided to continue our strike until there is a positive decision on decentralisation,” said Dr Lohith Reddy, president TJUDA, Gandhi Hospital. The government in turn clarified that services were not entirely paralysed as 40 professors, 45 associate professors and 120 assistant professors at the hospital have been pressed into service in the Covid-19 wards and ICU.

As the protests took hold, some 500 patients suffered with only some nurses present to look after their needs in wards.

“We have not got any food since morning, Every time we ask for tea, we are told that it is on the way. Even drinking water was not supplied throughout the night nor any doctor came to check on us,” said a patient.

Anxious relatives and attendants of some 500 patients rushed to the hospital after hearing about the strike.

“My brother is inside one of the wards. He said no one is available to fix his oxygen or help him reach the toilets. I ran here after receiving the SOS as I am afraid the strike may kill him,” said another attendant.

Tension was palpable as police tried to stop the protesting doctors from coming out of the main gate, but doctors forced their way out and sat on a dharna outside the main gate bringing traffic to a halt on the route. Traffic had to be later diverted.

”It is high time to rope in other government and private hospitals to share the burden. Hospitals can have Covid-19 section and non-Covid-19 section. We have sacrificed three months of our academic year and many of us have not seen out families too for months. All we are asking the government is to decentralise the hospital,” said Dr Nikhil, a general surgeon resident.

Doctors at the hospital have been over-burdened and under-staffed. On Tuesday night too when a doctor was assaulted with an iron rod, there were nearly 500 patients (including 150 in intensive care) at the hospital.

“There is only one ward boy for over 60 patients, while for two Covid-19 patients in the acute medical care unit at least one patient care worker is required. There is inadequate manpower of speciality doctors, nursing staff, paramedical staff, ward boys, patient care providers for the number of patients Gandhi Hospital is receiving,” said Dr Khizer Hussain, a protesting PG doctor.

An initial invitation by health minister Rajender to hold talks with representatives of the doctors were turned down by PGs, following which the minister reached Gandhi hospital around 5 pm.

“I will convey all your demands to the chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and get back to you,” the health minister was quoted by a doctor.

But the protesting doctors consulted among themselves and decided to continue with the strike.

Trouble broke out at 7.30 pm on Wednesday after a 55-year-old Covid-19 patient succumbed at the hospital, following which two attendants of the patient assaulted a PG doctor first with a plastic chair and then with an iron chair, sparking protests. Various doctors and medical associations have also come out in support of the doctors and demanded better security and protection for doctors.

“Doctors and staffers are facing verbal abuses and threats almost every other day, especially in case of patients succumbing during treatment. When a similar incident happened in April, we continued duties on the assurance of the health minister and police commissioner,” said Dr K Anvesh, president of Telangana Doctors Federation.

“We did not protest at that time considering it as a pandemic but this is the second attack and even female house surgeon and nurses were not spared,” he added.


