Gangapur cops publicly shame lockdown violators
2020-04-18
Aurangabad: The Gangapur police have come up with a unique idea of publicly shaming lockdown violators by posting their pictures on social media platforms.

The police along with the district administration have installed a flex at the town’s main square, which read ‘I am an irresponsible citizen of Gangapur’. It also has a life-size picture of a man in pajamas and hens around him. Those caught violating the lockdown orders are being made to stand behind the banner and peep out from the man’s cut-out, following which his picture is clicked and circulated on social media. 

Officials said that most of the people found violating the lockdown orders are youths and they are reminded of their mistake in a humorous way. “Registration of offence, may have adverse consequences on such youths, when they go for government or even private jobs,” said Gangapur police station inspector Machindra Surwase.

The cops said that they have to take extra precautions as Gangapur falls in the red zone, which is situated between Aurangabad and Ahmednagar city. Both cities have high number of Covid-19 patients currently.

“Our intention is not to embarrass them, however, those who are least concerned about their family members’ lives, should face the heat,” said a senior officer.

Since the implementation of lockdown, over a dozen offences have been registered against the violators. Over 100 bikes have been seized by the police for violating the lockdown orders.

However, on Friday, as the news of installing the flex at the town’s main cross-road went viral, the number of people stepping out of homes witnessed a sudden dip. While those caught unaware pleaded for forgiveness and promised not to repeat the same mistake again. 

On Friday, only a few pictures were clicked and were made viral as they became the talk of the town in Gangapur tehsil as well as other parts of the district.

Senior police officers have been asked by the local police to ensure that someone with a genuine reason or medical emergency should not face any harassment, punishment or embarrassing situation. 


