Ganga water cleaner in Haridwar, Rishikesh; lockdown does what years of efforts couldn’t
2020-04-10
HARIDWAR: A few weeks of lockdown has rendered possible what years of government efforts failed to do for the Ganga.


Its water is “sparkling clear” at Rishikesh and Haridwar, an environmental scientist and former professor at the Gurukul Kangri University BD Joshi said. He added that it is after years that “Ganga water is worth achaman (ritual drinking) in Haridwar”. 

Echoing similar sentiments, Ganga Sabha general secretary Tanmay Vashishth told TOI that he has never seen Ganga so clean. 

Speaking to TOI, state pollution control board (PCB) regional officer RK Kathait said that there is an apparent change in the water quality of the river. “This may be due to a drastically reduced human intervention as no pilgrims are visiting Haridwar and Rishikesh following the lockdown,” he said, adding that the change is not due to closure of industries as earlier, too, commercial waste was not allowed to flow into the river.”

The state PCB is closely monitoring the quality of Ganga water. A PCB team is regularly collecting samples from Devprayag, Vikasnagar, Rishikesh and Haridwar to be analysed at Dehradun and Haldwani laboratories. “The entire exercise is likely to take around five days and we expect the report by April 15,” PCB chief scientific officer SS Pal said.

Pal added that Ganga water in Haridwar can be put under ‘B’ category which means it is worth bathing in and may be worth drinking after treatment. In Rishikesh, it falls in ‘A’ category, which means it is worth drinking after disinfection.

He added that the water quality had improved because of the many sewage treatment plants (STPs) operating in the state. Dehradun has four STPs, followed by three each in Rishikesh and Haridwar, two each in Badrinath, Rudraprayag and Devprayag, and one each in Tehri, Srinagar and Karnaprayag. Pal added that the report will clear if the water has undergone further changes.

Joshi, however, added that the cleaner water can be attributed to a 500% decrease in total dissolved solid (TDS), besides industrial effluent and sewage from hotels, lodges and dharmashalas.

