Ganjam migrants booked for fleeing quarantine centres
2020-05-06
BERHAMPUR/JHARSUGUDA: Police have registered cases against the migrant workers, who had escaped from two quarantine centres in Beguniapada block in Ganjam district on Sunday by violating the Covid-19 regulations. 


“We have registered two separate cases against 12 persons in this connection in the police station at Kodala,” said SP (Ganjam) Brijesh Rai. He said the cases were registered against them under different sections of IPC, Disaster Management Act and Epidemic Disease Act. The cases were registered on the basis of complaints by the local tehsildar, police said. 

Over 200 migrant workers who were kept under quarantine at Janata high school, Beguniapada, and Odisha Adarsha Vidyalaya, Ragapur, near Beguniapada, fled the centres on Sunday morning, alleging that there were no basic facilities available in the centres. 

Almost all of them were found later with the help of locals after frantic manhunt by police and some other officers. Almost all of them were brought back to the centres, said an officer. 

Around 360 migrant labourers were kept in the two quarantine centres on Saturday after they returned from Surat. Next day morning, they created nuisance in the centres, alleging there were no basic facilities and food was inadequate. They also threatened the nodal officers in the centres when the latter tried to convince them, an official said. 

The inmates of some other quarantine centres, including Gokarnapur and Satrushol also alleged lack of facilities in the quarantine centres. Local block development officers and tehsildars rushed to the centres and tried to convince them. 

The administration rubbished the allegations. “The allegations are not true. We are trying to convince the inmates to maintain disciple while in the quarantine,” an officer said. 

Meanwhile, distict collector Vijay Amruta Kulange warned of stringent action against the persons who crate indiscipline in the quarantine centres. In Jharsuguda, police on Monday night caught a person on quarantine who fled the quarantine centre at BTM area under Jharsuguda police limits. The man was identified as Asibh, aka Asid Khan, 35, a resident of Kabristhan Para, Jharsuguda, and had returned from Nala Road, Rourkela (Covid-affected area).

