Gap in discharge and admission numbers of Covid-19 patients narrows in Mumbai
2020-06-07
MUMBAI: In what the city’s civic officials claim is a sign of “recovery,” the once-sharp gap between the number of daily hospital admissions due to Covid-19 and the number of hospital discharges is narrowing.


In May, the number of recovered patients were a fraction of the number of admissions. “But data from our three big hospitals — KEM, Sion and Nair — show the number of discharges are inching closer or are almost equal to the number of admissions,” said a BMC official.

 

A public hospital doctor, however, said the ‘equalisation’ of hospital admissions and discharges is merely a reflection of the changed discharge policy announced by the Centre on May 9; the new policy said mild-to-moderate patients could be sent home without a second test.

 

“Patients are no longer being kept for 14 days or until they get two negative tests,” the doctor said, warning that the number of admissions could increase with the lockdown being relaxed.

At the moment, however, BMC officials and doctors are savouring the “change.” Consider KEM Hospital in Parel, which has 500 beds for Covid-19 patients: it admitted 103 patients and discharged only six on May 19, for example, but on June 5, the number of admissions stood at 52 and discharges at 27.

An officer said, “Earlier we would discharge after 14 days, which was reduced to 10 days. Now, if a person doesn’t have symptoms for three consecutive days, we discharge the patient on the seventh day without testing. It helping free hospital and quarantine beds.”

In BMC-run Nair Hospital, which has 1,000 beds for Covid-19 patients, the number of admissions haven’t reduced but the discharges have grown. It admitted 51 patients and discharged 11 on May 15, while it admitted 67 patients and discharged 70 recovered patients on June 5. “We have seen this trend throughout the first week of June,” said a BMC official. On June 4, for instance, if new admissions stood at 45, the number of discharged patients was 41.

“Increasing number of discharges is a sign of recovery,” said Dr Shashank Joshi, dean of the Indian College of Physicians who is a member of the state government’s task force. “The city’s worst Covid-19 spell was in May, and we are on a plateau right now,” he added.

The discharge percentage was 26% (8,395) as on May 26, when the city had recorded 32,791 cases. But in the last 11 days, the discharge percentage has increased to 41% (18,761) when the total cases stand at 47,128.

In fact, BMC’s Covid update now has a special column on the number of admissions alongside the number of discharges. On June 3, the ward-wise breakdown of cases showed 17,447 people were discharged from various health facilities while 23,473 cases were still active.

“It’s heartening to note that admissions and discharges in our major hospitals now almost match. Earlier, hospitals were overwhelmed by new admissions and had fewer discharges,” said principal secretary Manisha Mhaiskar, who is on deputation from Mantralaya to the BMC for Covid management.

She said the change has been brought about by the steady improvement in doubling time – which stood at 20 days on June 5 but was 12 days on May 15. “The lockdown helped in bringing about an improvement, but the aftermath of easing remains to be seen,” she said, adding that BMC is preparing for the weeks ahead.

G North ward’s assistant municipal commissioner Kiran Dighavkar said, “Because of the change in discharge policy, our discharge rate has increased. We have four private Covid-19 hospitals in Dharavi and beds are now easily available in these hospitals.”

He also stated that fever clinics, isolating high-risk contacts at an early stage and providing oxygen supply and other health facilities at Covid-19 health centres in the ward to provide timely treatment to emergency patients had reduced casualties.

