Garbage of home quarantines, centres to be disposed of separately
2020-04-03
Nagpur: As a part of Covid-19 containment drive, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) will collect garbage from houses of those in home quarantines, quarantine centres and residences of positive persons separately and dispose of it scientifically.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe held a review meeting with the officials of health and medical departments in newly developed COVID-19 War Room at NMC head office on Thursday.

According to deputy municipal commissioner Dr Pradeep Dasarwar, this was as per civic chief’s directions to health department. It is necessary as this garbage contains masks and other medical waste also. There are around 1,200 people in home quarantines and 419 at MLA Hostel, Vanamati and Ravi Bhavan.

Dasarwar said he and two garbage operators AG Enviro and BVG India had chalked out a plan to process such garbage separately. Unlike other garbage that goes to Bhandewadi dumping yard, garbage collected from these houses and centres will be sent for incineration facility of NMC’s operator that disposes of medical waste, adjacent to the dumping yard.

Operator of medical waste has been asked to collect garbage from homes of positive persons and dispose it of. “This system has started from today but will be totally operational from Friday,” he said.

Meanwhile, NMC continued spraying of disinfectant in slums on Thursday. It is using 11 fire tenders for main roads and major internal roads. Dr Dasarwar said, “Spraying of sodium hypochlorite has been completed in over 55% areas. Remaining areas will be covered in next four days. There is no plan to repeat it again across the city. It will be done in areas where there are new positive cases, if any,” he said.

Dr Dasarwar added that fogging was also being carried out to reduce mosquito menace across the city.

Mundhe asked officials to immediately cover all medical and paramedical staff of the NMC under life insurance policy launched by the central government for staff working to control Covid-19. “I hope all will be fine. But as a precaution and government’s initiative, life insurance is must for all. The policy is of Rs50 lakh each,” he said.

NMC has also continued door-to-door containment drive to find suspected corona cases, patients of severe acute respiratory illness and high-risk individuals.


