Garbage generation goes down following lockdown in Dehradun
2020-04-22
DEHRADUN: The garbage generation from households and commercial establishments in the city has dipped by almost 25% following the imposition of lockdown, say officials in-charge of the Sheeshambara waste treatment plant.


“We have witnessed a sharp decline in the daily waste generated in the city,” said Rakesh Upadhyay, head of garbage collection and transportation at the waste treatment plant.

According to estimates, there are almost 20,000 commercial establishments in the state capital which generate waste in huge quantities every day but ever since the lockdown was imposed and these businesses were shut, waste generation has plummeted significantly. “With relatively less waste coming to the waste treatment plant, the garbage collected is being treated efficiently. The process of making compost from bio-degradable waste is also being undertaken,” Upadhyay told TOI.

Nitish Bartwal, a resident of Rajpur road,said that waste generated in households “The waste generation has actually went down in my house as we get less packaged food and other goods from outside now. We only have to give out garbage to sanitation workers on alternate days.”

“The senior officials are monitoring every activity at the waste treatment plant and proper attention is being given to the safety of sanitation workers. The garbage collection vehicles are being sanitised before and after the collection of garbage from across the city,” Upadhyay added.

However, residents in the area who have been protesting for the removal of the waste treatment plant said that though the waste being brought at the facility has reduced during the lockdown but the stench emanating from the plant is still the same.

Satpal Dhaniya, a local resident leading the protest against Sheeshambara waste treatment plant, told TOI “The stench can only go away only if the trash being brought here from all over the city is treated properly and regularly. We wake up to a mountain of garbage. We even have to bear the stench while eating. The quantity of garbage dumped here will shoot up the day this lockdown is lifted.”


