Kolkata: Gated communities step up fight against coronavirus
2020-03-21
KOLKATA: Alerted by back-to-back confirmed Covid-19 cases in the city and the fact that both the patients are residents of two premium housing societies, residential complexes in Kolkata have started enforcing a set of rules to fight the spread of virus. 


Coronavirus in India latest updates

At Urbana, the residents’ association have formed a covid-vigilance core committee comprising residents, advisors and doctors and a second level of committee — Covid vigilance team — comprising two representatives from each of the towers. They have been tasked to ensure any resident coming from abroad is reported to the state government and stays in home quarantine. The committees are meeting daily at 8pm to discuss the developments.

“We have a large influx of people who frequently travel abroad. If anyone comes from abroad and is without any symptom of infection, we are asking them to stay in home quarantine. Most of them are co-operating. We are reporting to the chief minister’s office if anyone is not co-operating,” said Sanjiv Ganeriwal, president of Urbana Welfare Association.

The complex has stopped all sorts of interior decoration and renovation works to limit entry of outsiders. The association has also made videos — on dos and don’ts and on personal hygiene advisory — and is sharing them on WhatsApp groups.

At Silver Spring off EM Bypass, the resident association isn’t allowing any delivery personnel inside the complex and has been asking residents to either come to the reception and pick the order by himself or to collect it later from the security personnel. The complex has also barred entry of outsiders if they have high temperature. For residents, anyone tested with temperature above 98.5°F is being asked to stay in home quarantine. 

“As a precautionary measure, we have covered all the lift buttons with plastic sheets and have been cleaning them in regular intervals. We are changing the plastics everyday. We have also engaged five housekeeping staff dedicated for timely cleaning of all common areas,” said Ashok Baid, a senior member of the association.

At South City, the apartment owners’ association has put up photos and videos citing out corona advisory in the common area and the security help desk, covered lift buttons with plastic sheets and have closed down children parks, clubs and swimming pools. “We live in a mini township with about 5,000 residents and about 2,000 support staff walking in and out throughout the day. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, we have taken some measures that include mandatory hand-washing, using sanitiziers to mop frequently touched areas, like door handles and lift buttons, and maintain self-isolation as much as possible,” said Sunil Agarwal, a senior member of the association.

Apart from ensuring all basic safety and hygiene measures that most complexes are following, residents of Power Towers in New Town have also been strongly advised to not to forward any WhatsApp content on coronavirus before checking its authenticity. “We have seen a number of fake messages in the form of audio clips, video, photos and write-ups circulating in our apartment owners’ WhatsApp groups. It will only intensify the panic. Hence, we have asked all owners to refrain from sending such messages and maintain personal and community hygiene as much as possible,” said Sovan Dutta, a senior member of the association.


