Covid-19: Gated communities in Hyderabad go all out to keep virus at bay
2020-03-20
HYDERABAD: With thousands of people living in gated communities and apartment complexes, managements are putting in stringent measures to tackle the Covid-19 outbreak. From cancelling Sri Rama Navami celebrations to thermal screening of maids and drivers, they are leaving no stone unturned.


At My Home Jewel, Miyapur, the management issued a circular about entry of visitors from outside. “If you or your family are visiting from any foreign country and arrive at my home jewel (sic), please reach out to management committee by sending email or calling help desk. You would be required to quarantine yourself for 14 days. Security might deny entry to several common locations in our premises,” read the letter by the management committee.


Coronavirus in India live updates

It further said that “All Vasantha Navarathri Celebrations for this year stand cancelled”. The driver’s cabin was off limits, and drivers were asked to instead remain in their private vehicles. 

“Maids and staff members are being screened for flu like symptoms,” said Nanda Kishore, a resident adding that these measures were necessary in tough times, especially since the community houses 2016 flats. Not just here, but in Bloomfield Ecstasy in Tellapur, too, house help were being scanned. 

Ramana Eshwaragiri, from Bloomfield Ecstasy, said, “We have decided to stop entry of all outside visitors in the community till March 31. Only maintenance staff such as house maids, drivers are being allowed, that too after thermal screening, which is done at the gate.” 

In the wake of articles on currency being a carrier of the virus, Shakuntla Hooda, resident, Aparna Lake Breeze, Chandanagar, said, “In our apartment complex, online payments have been made mandatory to avoid huge gatherings at the admin office.” The community has 943 flats and like others, common areas have been cordoned. 

MyGate app, used by several apartment complexes, to allow entry of outsiders, has also issued “Emergency Management Plan for gated communities”. Besides suggesting closure of common spaces, it suggests to “Avoid using biometrics for access till the situation is under control. This will help in reducing the spread.” It has also introduced a ‘Collect Parcel at Gate’ feature to avoid entry of delivery boys into the premises. 


