Bihar: Gaya DM orders mandatory testing of all foreign travellers
2020-03-26
GAYA: With 20 lab reports of coronavirus suspects awaited, Gaya DM Abhishek Singh on Wednesday ordered mandatory testing of all those with a foreign travel history during the last two weeks. Data available with the airport officials will be used to identify those who returned from abroad during the last two weeks.


Besides mandatory testing of all foreign returnees, the DM also ordered examination of those who returned from other states and were suffering from fever, cough and breathing problems, the symptoms associated with Covid-19.

Besides the mandatory testing of all returnees from abroad, the DM, on Wednesday reviewed the preparedness of the health and administrative machinery to deal with the crisis-like situation. The officials associated with the Covid-19 management were also briefed about the protocol to be followed in case any of the reports come positive. 

The BDOs have been tasked with escorting positive cases and suspects to the designated quarantine/treatment points. A warning has also been issued to violators of the home quarantine order that in case of violation, they would be put in quarantine centres. Sources said that the district officials have prepared a data base of ventilators available in private hospitals/nursing homes.

According to reports reaching the headquarters, scarcity of essential items, particularly flour, has been witnessed in several parts of the district. The scarcity is attributed to panic buying and hoarding of essential items. 

Excessive rush was seen at the Kedarnath market for vegetable and fruits. Retail as well as wholesale vegetable business is done in the market. Citizen groups have demanded delinking of wholesale and retail trade of vegetables and decentralisation of vegetable sale. 

Earlier, on Tuesday, district officials warned businessmen against hoarding. Price display of items has been made mandatory. Public entry has been banned in city mosques. In compliance of the lockdown guidelines, respective mosque committees have issued the ban order. 

Only regular employees of the mosques living on the premises itself would offer namaz in the mosques. “There will be no collective Friday prayer in mosques during the lockdown period,” said Wasimul Haq, secretary of the Aliganj Mosque committee. Announcement for home prayers were being made through the mosque’s public address system, said Haq.

