Gaya monasteries not to be used as quarantine centres
2020-05-20
GAYA: Monasteries will not be used as quarantine centres to house Bihar natives stranded in other countries and being evacuated under the Vande Bharat Mission, said Bhikku Pragyadeep, general secretary of Bodh Gaya-based International Buddhist Council (IBC) representing foreign monasteries, quoting deputy development commissioner (DDC) Kishori Chaudhary.

Gaya has been notified as the disembarkation point for stranded Biharis being rescued from different countries.

Earlier, Pragyadeep had written a letter to CM Nitish Kumar questioning the decision to convert monasteries into quarantine centres, which would violate the sanctity of the spiritual institutions meant for meditation and other such purposes. The IBC had also threatened ‘peaceful agitation’ near the Mahabodhi Mahavihara in the town.

Expressing satisfaction over the official stand, Pragyadeep said the issue stands resolved and now there was no need to protest.

Gaya DM Abhishek Singh also said there was no need to use monasteries as quarantine centres. “There is enough space in hotels and guesthouses to quarantine the foreign returnees,” he said.

Meanwhile, resistance of the monasteries has baffled Bodh Gaya watchers. Being spiritual centres, the monasteries should have taken it as an opportunity to serve humanity in this hour of crisis, said Rai Madan Kishore, a retired bureaucrat and former secretary of the Bodh Gaya Temple Management Committee. 

Meanwhile, businessmen in Gaya await fresh orders from district administration regarding the permissible and prohibitive activities under Lockdown 4.0 owing to Covid-19 pandemic.

Central Bihar Chamber of Commerce president Sanjay Bharadwaj said in the absence of a fresh notification, only previously permitted business activities are being conducted. Ban on the plying of all kinds of motorized vehicles, including e-rickshaws, continues. 

Earlier in the day, the DM authorized Sadar SDO to issue permits for home delivery of cooked meal from restaurants. Permit would be issued on the basis of report submitted by the food inspector in respect of applicants seeking permission for home delivery of cooked food, said an official press statement.

99 stranded Vietnamese evacuated: Altogether 99 Vietnamese stranded at different places in Bihar and West Bengal were evacuated from Gaya International Airport on Tuesday. A special IndiGo flight carried them to Delhi from where they would be taken to their country. According to Gaya airport director Dilip Kumar, the special flight (6E 9102) took off with 99 passengers and 2885kg of luggage at 11.49am.


