GB Pant removed from list of designated Covid-19 facilities
2020-04-10
NEW DELHI: Delhi Government on Thursday removed G B Pant Hospital from the Covid-19 designated list, a day after TOI highlighted how patients from Lok Nayak and G B Pant Hospital were being discharged without any alternative arrangement for beds.

An Old Delhi resident, who had suffered from kidney-related complications, died because she couldn’t get admission elsewhere after being discharged.

An order issued by the state government’s special secretary (health and family welfare) stated: “Competent authority has decided to remove G B Pant Hospital from the designated Covid-19 hospital list keeping in view difficulties faced by general patients who are receiving treatment at G B Pant Hospital in super specialty streams.”

The order also said that Lok Nayak Hospital will create an additional 500 beds capacity by utilising the OPD spaces and newly constructed block of MAIDS (Maulana Azad Institute of Dental Sciences), in lieu of beds proposed to be designated in G B Pant Hospital.

In the past two weeks, more than 800 patients were discharged or advised to go to other hospitals by Lok Nayak Hospital and G B Pant Hospital because the two facilities were being turned into Covid-19 designated centres.

On Thursday, three patients and their three attendants were spotted walking on foot to Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital in east Delhi’s Shahdara, which is more than 13 kilometre away, after they were told that Lok Nayak Hospital’s waiting area had been closed.

“My father has kidney problem and spine damage. We were staying in the waiting room at Lok Nayak because my father has to visit the OPD twice a week to get injections. But they told us to go to another hospital,” Ankit Sharma, son of one of the patient, a resident of Bihar, told TOI. 

Aam Aadmi Party MLA Dilip Pandey responded to a tweet highlighting their plight and arranged for an ambulance to take the patients to the hospital. “Ambulance took them to GTB Hospital emergency, doctor paid a visit. They will undergo check-ups, tests, etc, the day after tomorrow. Today, their stay has been arranged in a nearby DUSIB’s night shelter. Hope and wish all for them to be well (sic),” Pandey tweeted. 

The MLA from Timarpur said of the three patients, one has kidney ailment, another has psychiatric health issues while the third one has neurological problems.

Suresh Sharma, the patient, said he was thankful to the AAP MLA for helping him out. “I am a patient of cervical spondylosis for over 10 years now. Recently, I developed kidney problems and need regular dialysis,” the 42-year-old said, who was accompanied by his 16-year-old son, who suffers from epilepsy.


