Ashok Gehlot to PM: States should decide on lockdown relaxations
2020-04-28
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Monday told the Centre to leave the decision on extension and relaxation of lockdown to the states based on specific conditions in each district. 

He said the lockdown should be lifted in a calibrated manner and not in one go on May 3. He said it was not possible to lift the lockdown by the Centre and the state simultaneously.

Chief minister during his video conference with Prime Minister Narendra Modi also put forward a 15- point charter of demands. 

Gehlot while repeating his demand of Rs 1 lakh-crore grant in aid to the states said the fund was esential to overcome the revenue losses of the states. He said the amount could be calculated on the basis of the population affected by Covid -19 or any criteria decided by the GST council or interstate council.

He said in the light of the state’s finances taking a major blow due to the virus, the compensation scheme under GST to the state be extended from five to 10 years. The GST compensation and CST claim of the state had to be settled immediately, he said. 

The chief minister demanded a moratorium on the repayment of loans from central agencies, including boards and corporations for six months and also make it interest-free. 

Another demand by the chief minister pertained to agriculture procurement. The Centre currently procures only 25 % of the crop produce with minimum support price (MSP) which the chief minister said had to be increased to 50%. 

The industry and business has also suffered huge losses due to the lockdown. He said in order to bring the industry back on track, there was need for a package to the sector as announced by many other countries. He said there was a need to re-establish the interstate supply chain for the movement of raw materials and goods at the earliest. 

The chief minister said state expenditure had to be augmented to infuse income into the hands of the people. He said the Centre had to release the first installment of centrally sponsored schemes in advance to the states without any conditions with simplified procedure. 

Many of the MSMEs were not in a position to pay wages during the lockdown. He said the Centre should come out with a scheme under which a portion of the wages had to be borne by the Centre for six months. 

Gehlot demanded a specific policy from the Centre on the return of migrant labourers in a phased manner to their native places at the earliest. He said the migrant labourers were under intense emotional turmoil as they were deprived of income as well as emotional support of their homes. 

While welcoming the decision of the RBI to hike the ways and means advance to 60% from 30%, he said the advances should be made interest free and the credit limit of states be increased to 5% of GDP. He argued for centralized procurement of coronavirus test kits and additional allotment of wheat under NFSA to the deserving poor. 


