CM Ashok Gehlot wants lockdown to be lifted in phase-wise manner
2020-04-08
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Tuesday favoured a phase-wise withdrawal of the lockdown after the 21-day period, saying it cannot be done at one go.

“We cannot withdraw lockdown immediately. It has to be done in a phased manner, that is what I feel,” Gehlot said when asked about the right time to lift the countrywide lockdown.

He was addressing a press conference through video conferencing. He added, “Saving lives is important and no step should be taken that would endanger that.”

The chief minister said a decision on withdrawing the lockdown will, however, be taken after the recommendations of a task force set up in this regard are received.

The state government had made a task force to prepare a plan for lifting of the lockdown. The task force is headed by additional chief secretary (home) Rajeeva Swaroop. 

According to informed sources, with the number of corona positive cases showing a spike and many hotspots emerging in the state in the last a few days, the government has to formulate a strategy to contain the spread of the disease and at the same time slowly relaxing lockdown in other areas.

A clear picture will emerge only in a couple of days, sources added. The chief minister said Rajasthan had showed the way on how to contain the spread of the virus. He was referring to the Bhilwara model, which had contained the spread effectively. The same model will be replicated across the state, including Ramganj in Jaipur, he added.

He claimed that the state authorities reached out to 6 lakh households in Bhilwara and conducted largescale testing there.

Gehlot also said Rajasthan would start rapid testing of coronavirus within a week as his government has ordered 10 lakh testing kits from China which will reach soon. He said Rajasthan is among those states which had taken the virus threat seriously and after holding extensive consultations with various stakeholders, the state prepared itself well and has been successful in containing it so far.


