Delhi: Gems in the sky shine brightly in lockdown
2020-04-24
NEW DELHI: Heading to your rooftop, or even the balcony, at night during the lockdown period is likely to present to you a very rare sight — clear skies with many more stars shining brighter than seen over Delhi-NCR in decades. While the lockdown has clamped most people to their houses, amateur stargazers and astronomers are having their best time because of great night-sky visibility owing to dramatically improved air quality.


Stargazers say not only are they able to view many more stars, even far-away galaxies are now visible through a medium-sized telescope, something which almost seemed impossible for Delhi-NCR. Not just that, astro-photographers have been able to capture faint images of the Milky Way, despite the glare of lights in the region, due to amazing atmospheric clarity during the lockdown period.

Sneh Kesari, 35, a science communicator and amateur stargazer, said while 10-12 bright stars would normally be visible through the naked eye prior to the lockdown, around 50-55 major stars can now be seen during the lockdown period.

“Two major factors act as a hindrance for stargazing. One is air pollution and the other is the bright lights of the city, which is referred to as light pollution. Pollutant particles create an artificial layer in the atmosphere, which makes it difficult to see stars under normal circumstances. However, the lockdown has meant the city is now almost dormant and the air pollution levels are drastically down,” said Kesari, who is also a member of the Amateur Astronomers Association Delhi (AAAD), a group of more than 1,200 amateur astronomers.

Kesari, who uses a telescope to view galaxies and other celestial objects such nebulae and star clusters, said the Orion nebula and the Andromeda galaxy have both been sighted by him, quite a rare sight in Delhi-NCR. “These are visible now through the telescope. Something normally you would not see. A lot of photographers are also clicking pictures now during this period,” said Kesari.

Astro-photographer Ajay Talwar recently clicked a picture of the Milky Way from his home in Gurgaon, which would be nearly impossible in the normally polluted atmosphere over the region, as well as the high light pollution level here.

“Rare sightings bring the entire AAAD group together. In Delhi-NCR alone, we have around 1,200 amateur astronomers,” said Kesari.

Dr N Rathnasree, director at the Nehru Planetarium says there has been considerable improvement in visibility during the lockdown, allowing amateur astronomers to make the most of the situation. “Light pollution which is rampant has gone down. What has worked to make the stars more visible has been the decrease in aerosol and other pollutants, which creates an umbrella around the skies and makes stars fainter.”

Amit Sharma, another amateur stargazer from Delhi compared the night-time sky during the lockdown period with the seventies and eighties. “We would sleep on the rooftops during that period and gaze at the sky. During a power cut, the entire city would be plunged in darkness and that is when the skies were crystal clear. One could even see the Milky Way then,” said Sharma, adding that all constellations are clearly visible now. “A star cluster called Pleiades is clear as day through my street,” said Sharma.

Ankit Kumar Singh, education-incharge at Astroport India — a tourism based experience based in Delhi and part of the SPACE group of companies says not only is the sky clearer, but this lockdown period is also allowing amateurs to identify stars more easily. Singh points towards a meteor shower currently ongoing as one activity people can easily be on the lookout for. “The Lyrids meteor shower is usually active between April 16 and 25 every year. The best time to look up for these space rocks of fire would be after 10 pm and we can expect 10-15 meteors per hour, raining all across the canvas of the sky.”

He also says planets like Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn can also be seen in the night skies, with April the month of Venus. “On 27th and 28th April, Venus will reach its bright for this year, making it easily identifiable in the sky after twilight,” said Singh.


