Covid-19 in Goa: Germs aside, love is in the air for honeymooners
2020-03-19
PANAJI: Despite the rising number of Covid-19 cases in the country, newly-weds and bargain holiday hunters continue to come to Goa, attracted by cheaper room tariffs and rock-bottom flight fares. The authorities say travellers see Goa as a safe destination because the sunshine state has not recorded a single case of coronavirus so far.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Though footfalls along the coastal belt have dropped significantly, one can still spot honeymooning couples riding two-wheelers while wearing masks to protect themselves from the disease.

“Flights are still coming with 45% to 60% capacity. While many passengers are locals who are returning home, there are quite a few couples and tourists,” said a person employed at Goa International Airport.

Among the tourists visiting Goa, there are a good number of foreigners who arrived in the country before India cancelled all visas.

“Our son’s school has closed because of the virus and this was the best chance for us, as a family, to come to Goa. We took precautions. I drove to Goa instead of taking the train,” said Abhijit Gaitonde, a techie from Pune.

A few days earlier, TOI had reported that airfares have dropped drastically as passengers have started cancelling their flights due to fears of contracting Covid-19. At the same time, hotel room rates have also been slashed, with the hospitality sector witnessing as much as a 35% cut in tariffs.

“Those who are looking for a bargain are still coming to Goa. Couples are not willing to cancel their honeymoon plans,” said the proprietor of an Oyo Rooms hotel in Mala.

Goa Forward Party president Vijai Sardesai has demanded that the government shut all borders for tourists entering Goa and only permit essential supplies to cross over. 

Despite holidaymakers flying or driving in, hotels, restaurants, retail stores and 
entertainment establishments have been staring at massive losses as the peak domestic tourist season appears to be washed out. 


