West Bengal: Get doctor or hospital nod to test yourself for Covid-19
2020-04-30
KOLKATA: The state government on Wednesday said Covid-19 tests can be conducted of people who have a medical recommendation. The government has also given its nod to 15 medical college hospitals to start using TrueNat, a diagnostic machine for tuberculosis, for Covid-19 screening.


“Whether it is a private or government testing facility, one has to follow ICMR guidelines. According to ICMR norms, someone cannot go to a laboratory and get themselves tested. The person will have to go through a private or a government set-up. If s/he chooses the former, the person will have to go to a government hospital, the samples will be collected after check-up. If the person is positive, s/he would be asked to get admitted or recommended home isolation based on medical advice. If s/he is negative, s/he will be allowed to stay at home,” chief secretary Rajiva Sinha told reporters.

ICMR had recommended the use of the TrueNat beta CoV test on Truelab workstation as a screening test. A health department officer said, “TrueNat is a machine that is used for detecting drug resistant TB. It is an easy to use, small, battery-operated machine using a chip-based technology. It can be used in small set-ups like a primary healthcare centre. A test can take just about 60 minutes.” The positive samples screened in this method will have to undergo confirmatory RT-PCR tests, according to ICMR guidelines. The step, sources said, is being introduced after ICMR asked states to halt the rapid test rollout. Bengal had planned to use rapid-test screening in high-risk and also in low-prevalence zones.

Sinha said: “Bengal has a capacity to test 1,405 samples in a day. In the last 24 hours, we have tested 1,397 samples. This is nearly 100% capacity. We have been trying to work in multiple shifts to run at our full capacity. Till today, Bengal has tested 14,620 samples.” The state had earlier said it was seeking approval for 10 more testing laboratories in Bengal. Chief minister Mamata Banerjee had said, ‘Testing is now increasing everyday because we have got more testing centres. Other states have got more testing facilities, so they are testing more. The approvals are given by the Centre. There is no dearth in effort’.”


