Get ready for hefty cut in fuel prices as lockdown curbs ease gradually
2020-05-02
NEW DELHI: Get ready for a hefty cut in fuel prices as part of a larger government plan to put money in people’s pocket, reduce inflation, freight and input costs for farmers as the country eases lockdown curbs with the aim of gradually re-starting economic activity.



Sources familiar with the discussion in the government said the price cut could be as much as Rs 5-10 per litre when it comes within a “few days”, but did not specify whether petrol or diesel will see the most reduction. Others said the reduction will be “balanced”, or substantial but less than the amount quoted.

The general opinion is that the time has come for the retailers to pass on the benefit of low crude and product prices. The argument is that a hefty price cut will boost consumer sentiment and industrial activity wherever they are allowed to resume. Besides, cheaper freight will help keep consumer prices calm and lower input cost of farmers when farm activities are expected to pick up.

Technically, state-run oil companies are free to decide pump prices. Though that has generally been the norm, the government informally indicates the direction they need to take under unusual circumstances arising from high oil prices – when they are asked to hold pump prices – or at present when they have been nudged to pass on the benefit.

The broad contours of the plan indicate the oil companies will pass on their margins accruing from the fall in benchmark rates, recently pegged at Rs 13 per litre. The retailers had revised prices last by reducing prices by a few paise on March 15, a day after the government jacked up excise by Rs 3 per litre with the aim of tapping Rs 39,000 crore annually from fuel sales as prices began falling. Since that price revision, the average cost of crude bought by state-run refiners has dropped 32% during this period from $30.59 a barrel on March 16, a day after the prices were revised, to $20.66 at present but pump prices have remained unchanged.

Several states have exploited the situation by jacking up VAT by up to Rs 5 per litre with the aim of making up for revenue shortfall once sales pick up as lockdown curbs are eased. Sales have fallen by up to 60% as the lockdown restricted vehicular movement and shuttered businesses.

Industry executives said pump prices are benchmarked to international prices of products and not crude. “The crude and product markets are witnessing unprecedented situation. Crude and products have different dynamics. But this time even gasoline (petrol) and HSD (diesel) benchmarks are moving differently, though both are lower than crude. Pump prices cannot be tuned according to these unrealistic prices,” a senior executive told TOI, adding the “(price) cut has to be balanced whenever it happens.”

The reservations over passing on the benefits are understandable as the refiners are staring at an inventory loss of Rs 25,000 crore in a topsy-turvy oil market. 

