Chennai: GH matron dies, dean denies coronavirus infection
2020-05-29
CHENNAI: A 58-year-old matron of the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital here who was under treatment in one of its Covid-19 blocks died on Wednesday, but the dean said she did not have the viral infection.

John Mary Pracilla’s case sheet recorded that she was Covid-19 positive; the hospital declared that a cardio-respiratory arrest following chronic kidney failure and uncontrolled diabetes caused her death. Her name did not figure in the list of Covid-19 deaths.
Her colleagues, who paid last respects to her at the hospital, said they did not visit her in the last three days as they were told she was in the isolation block being treated for Covid-19. Hours after her death, hospital dean Dr R Jayanthi said the mention of Covid-19 on her case sheet was a mistake.

Doctors’ bodies and nurses’ associations said they were “upset” with the hospital management’s attempt to “cover up” death of their own staff, who was one of the frontline workers. Dr K Senthil, Tamil Nadu Government Doctors Association president said, “If she has had health issues, she should have been asked to stay away from ward duty.” “The duty doctors and dean should own up for wrong entries in the case sheets. If this is the standard of care in the state’s premier hospital, then it is extremely unfortunate,” he said.

Pracilla was admitted to the hospital on May 24 and treated as “dangerously ill patient” on the third floor of the rheumatology block. “That block has eight floors. Not all patients in the block are Covid-19 positive. She was anyway in an isolation room,” Dr Jayanthi said.

As soon as the matron was brought into hospital with breathlessness, the doctors suspected Covid-19, said Dr Jayanthi. “We even started her on the drugs meant for the viral infection as mentioned in the case sheet. But once the test returned negative, we did not continue with the drug,” she said. The hospital, she said, would constitute an inquiry to find why there was wrong entry in her case sheet.

“She did respond well to the first dose of Covid-19 medications. She was given a drug that costs Rs50,000. We gave her high flow oxygen and her respiratory symptoms improved. But her deteriorated very quickly this morning. Duty doctors tried but could not resuscitate her,” said one of the duty nurses. Some staff members said civic authorities visited her residence in Nanganallur for initiating containment measures, but officials at the Greater Chennai Corporation refused to confirm.

The ICMR guidelines ask doctors to declare Covid deaths and probable Covid deaths along with a list of comorbidities, but Pracilla's death declaration had neither.


