Ghats wear funereal look as Covid scare cuts short last rites
2020-03-31
Nagpur: Measures to curb coronavirus have struck everyone hard. Not only Chaitra Navratri and forthcoming Ram Navami and Easter celebrations have been affected, even traditional rituals to honour the dead and comfort the bereaved have been cut short or abandoned for fear of spreading the disease.

TOI on Monday visited some crematoria across the city and found this. A body was brought to Mankapur ghat with only 10 persons in the attendance. Mourners, who maintained social distance too, left the ghat minutes after the pyre was ignited.

Mangal Gorakhnath Raut, in his 10 years as attendant in Mankapur crematorium, has never conducted a funeral with just four persons attending. Since the outbreak in city, Raut has seen a sharp decline in number of mourners coming to the crematorium.

On an average, seven to eight bodies are cremated here daily. In almost all of them, the number of mourners has decreased drastically. Earlier, some funerals would have 200-odd people, now it is to 10 to 20, he said.

Similar is the situation in other crematoria and burial grounds in the city, said a senior official from the NMC’s health department. “The logistics, too, are changing fast. The dead are quietly being brought directly to cremation grounds from hospital in ambulances, bereft of mourners,” said zonal sanitation officer of Dharampeth zone Deendayal Tembhekar.

Tembhekar said after the coronavirus outbreak, many kin are taking bodies directly to crematorium itself. “Earlier, there was a standard practice of first taking body to their house from where they take out procession to nearby crematorium,” he said, adding which is not being followed nowadays.

A social activist, who owns a hearse van, claimed he has arranged for the body to be taken directly from the hospital to crematorium as now kin of deceased were wary of risking infection by getting the body home or holding a ceremony involving many people.

Priests have not only cut short rituals but also do not hand over flowers and other stuff to family members. The mass no longer takes place in church before burial due to lockdown.

Actually, rituals play a vital role to in helping the bereaved overcome their grief, said Vivek Joshi, a priest who performs last rites. “They allow community to come together, share grief, emotion and talk about the person,” said Manoj Sahare, who attended a funeral of his relative at Ambazari ghat.

Sajan Turke from Ambazari crematorium said that four to seven bodies were burnt there daily. Now, we see very few people with them. Even priest, who used to take at least an hour to complete the ritual, was now finishing pooja within 10 minutes. There is little time for ceremonies in most of the cases, said Tembhekar.


