Ghaziabad hospital to treat Covid-19 patients from Hapur, Bulandshahr
2020-04-07
GHAZIABAD: The 90-bed District Combined Hospital, which has been designated Covid-exclusive, will treat patients from the adjoining districts of Hapur and Bulandshahr in case of emergency, officials said.

Serious patients from Baghpat will also be admitted to the hospital, chief medical superintendent Naresh Vij said. However, no written instructions have been received from the government in this regard.

The hospital has 145 staff, including 23 doctors, 41 nurses, 56 ward boys and nine pharmacists. A team of 53 staff will remain on duty round the clock in three shifts. To ensure that there is no scarcity of doctors and nurses, the management has put up a demand of 40 staff, including 14 doctors.

Vij said other doctors from the region are also expected to join duty at the hospital. “The list of hospitals, doctors and facilities from the Meerut division has already been called in and the deployment of additional staff will soon start. We have the facility of five ventilators and the demand of five more has been put forward to the health department,” he said. 

According to protocol, all Covid-19 patients will first be admitted to the hospital in Muradnagar initially (Level 1). If they don’t respond to the treatment or face complications, they would be transferred to the District Combined Hospital (Level 2). However, patients above 60 years and having pre-existing conditions such as diabetes, hypertension and respiratory ailments will be directly admitted to the Combined Hospital. If the condition of patients at the Combined Hospital deteriorates, they will be referred to either Meerut Medical College or hospitals in Delhi (Level 3).

Apart from these, Santosh Hospital, which has been serving as an isolation centre, could also be turned into a Covid-exclusive hospital, an official said.

The staff of Combined Hospital will stay in Krishna Sagar and Red K Velvet hotels. The district administration has acquired six hotels, including Radisson Blue, Country Inn, Park Plaza, Royal Inn, Clarks Inn and Mahagun Sarovar Portico, to put up doctors and medical staff.


