Coronavirus outbreak: Protocol lapse? Ghaziabad doctor goes into quarantine
2020-03-07
GHAZIABAD: Paramedics who moved a suspected Covid-19 patient from Raj Nagar Extension in Ghaziabad to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital in Delhi on Wednesday were told he needed dialysis and were initially kept in the dark about the patient’s infection, doctors and medical staff have alleged. 


This means the paramedics did not follow the mandated safety protocols while dealing with the coronavirus patient, potentially exposing them and others they came in contact with to the infection.

Ghaziabad’s chief medical officer, however, denied any lapse in protocol and warned of departmental action against the doctors if their allegations were found to be false. The chief medical superintendents of two government hospitals in the city have been asked to prepare a report. 

Three doctors and two paramedic staff — the advanced life support (ALS) ambulance driver and the emergency medical technician (EMT) — had, at various stages, come in the chain of contact with the patient, a 57-year-old businessman who had returned from Iran. He tested positive for the novel coronavirus infection at RML.

One doctor from District Combined Hospital in Sanjay Nagar has quarantined himself after he found out that a ward boy from his hospital was in the ambulance that had carried the patient from his home in Raj Nagar Extension to MMG District Hospital in Ghaziabad. The two other doctors, both from MMG District Hospital, have written to the chief medical superintendent and the chief medical officer asking if they should also go into isolation.

The paramedics also have not been quarantined yet. Depending on how many patients they have attended to since, or people they have interacted with, several layers would have potentially got added to the chain of contact.

“No norms were followed while moving the patient, who had recently returned from Tehran and had fever. The ambulance driver and EMT were lied to and told he needed dialysis,” one of the MMG District Hospital doctors said. “They were not even provided with the prescribed safety kit,” the other doctor from the hospital added.

The driver and the EMT confirmed they had not been told what they were dealing with. “We were told the patient needed dialysis. It was only on the way that we came to know he was a suspected coronavirus patient. Barring a mask, we were not provided with personal protective equipment (PPE). If all of us get sick now, who would be held responsible?” the EMT asked.

The doctor from District Combined Hospital, the only one who is in isolation at the moment, said more people may have come in contact along the way. “As soon as I came to know a ward boy from my hospital had been in that ambulance, I quarantined myself. I am not staying with my family and have taken a room in the hospital,” he told TOI.

Chief medical officer NK Gupta, however, said PPE kits were “not needed” in this case. “The ambulance staff was provided with N-95 masks because it was a suspected coronavirus case. The driver and assistant did not sit with the patient and stayed in the driver’s cabin, so PPE kits were not needed. The ambulance was sanitised later,” he said.

Swab samples have been collected but the staff has not been quarantined. “I will ask the chief medical superintendents for a report and take departmental action against the doctors, if required,” Gupta said. 

It was, however, only on Thursday that the district health department set aside two ambulances specifically for suspected coronavirus patients. 


