GHMC helpline gets 400 calls a day over Covid-19 symptoms
2020-04-17
HYDERABAD: As many as 25 people tested positive for coronavirus in the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) limits on Thursday, even as only two people had called the Covid-19 control room to inform that they had exhibited symptoms. 


The GHMC control room has been getting around 400 calls everyday, on an average, from people who say that they were showing symptoms since the last four days. 

The two callers have been shifted to King Koti quarantine centre and the others were moved to Gandhi Hospital. On Thursday, GHMC pressed into service multi-disciplinary teams to trace the primary contacts of the 25 cases. 

“Samples will be collected for testing. Primary contacts will be shifted to government quarantine centres for observation. If the primary contacts test positive, then they will be shifted to Gandhi Hospital,” said a GHMC official. 

The localities where these 25 people reside were declared as containment zones. Roads leading to these localities were barricaded by giving one common entry and exit point. Teams were pressed into service to conduct door-to-door fever survey and sanitation has been taken up. A nodal officer has been appointed for each cluster. The residents can contact the nodal officer to receive the essentials. 

“We have selected vendors to supply essentials at the 25 spots. Disinfectant spraying will be taken up twice a day in these localities,” said a GHMC official. 

The officials are also probing to find out the travel history of the people who have tested positive and are trying to reach them. 

GHMC also received calls from people living in containment clusters asking for ambulances and the sick were moved to nearby hospitals. According to GHMC officials, the number of calls asking for essentials has also increased since the last two days. “On Thursday, we got 17 calls asking for essentials, we supplied them through nodal officers. The civic body is also taking feedback from foreign returnees and has kept 32 ambulances in stand by,” said a GHMC official. 

A total of 25 positive cases were tested on Thursday. They have been sent to Gandhi Hospital. Areas near their residences have been marked as containment zones


