Ghorpadi GP first Pune doctor to die of Covid-19 infection
2020-05-23
PUNE: A 56-year old general practitioner (GP) from Ghorpadi became the first doctor from the city to succumb to the Covid-19 infection on Friday.

The doctor was on ventilator support at Sassoon hospital for over a week. “He succumbed to Covid-19 induced respiratory complications at 4.30pm on Friday. He had no other pre-existing conditions,” said a doctor from the hospital.

The doctor was the only patient in Pune region to be put on Tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody which has emerged as an alternative treatment for Covid-19 patients with hyper-activated immune response called cytokine storms. The drug is very expensive and was sought on compassionate grounds.

The doctor from Sassoon hospital said,“The doctor’s condition worsened rapidly following the onset of illness on May 11. He got admitted to Sassoon hospital on May 13. He had been undergoing aggressive treatment on ventilator support since May 17. His throat swab sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) had tested positive for the infection,” 

The deceased doctor’s son has appealed to the state government to extend insurance and other benefits to his father as given to doctors involved in the care of Covid-19 patients at government hospitals in Maharashtra. “Responding to the state government’s call, my father kept attending to patients relentlessly ever since the lockdown was imposed in Pune. He never closed his clinic. He contracted the infection while dispensing his duties as a doctor,” he said.

Health activist Sanjay Dabhade said, “Many private medical practitioners are rendering crucial services and risking their lives every day while screening and treating patients. In many cases, they are the sole bread-winners of the family. The state government should show sensitivity towards these warriors. In the pandemic phase, every doctor should be encouraged and supported by the state government as every doctor is equally at risk.”

About 450 private medical practitioners have tested positive for Covid-19 in Maharashtra so far. “A doctor from Govandi in Mumbai was the first medical practitioner in Maharashtra to die of Covid-19 in April,” said senior family physician Avinash Bhondwe, the state president of the Indian Medical Association.

