Given the nature of the virus, there is no place for complacency We will not lower our guard against this invisible enemy
2020-06-12
Odisha’s Covid mortality rate is one of the lowest in the country

We have managed to keep the vulnerable people safe with proper planning.

Most of the positive patients are those who have returned from some of the worst-hit states. The government has established quarantine centres in 6,798 panchayats. The returnees were kept there and the suspects were tested. Those who were found positive have been shifted to dedicated Covid care centres. This has largely prevented the spread of the infection in the wider community. All these steps may have helped in checking the death rate. With nine deaths, the mortality rate is around 0.2%, far lower than the national average of 2.8%. 

What is your assessment of the situation?

Various assessments show that June is a crucial month. The return of the migrant workers has nearly stopped. Those who have already returned will complete their quarantine in the next one or two days. However, given the unpredictable nature of the virus, there is no place for complacency. We will not lower our guard against the invisible enemy.

Is the worst over?

The government is fully-prepared for the long battle ahead. Our situation is far better than other states. Chief minister Naveen Patnaik has time and again said saving each and every life was important. We have designed our strategies based on that. The government has established 34 dedicated Covid hospitals with 5,463 beds, separate from the existing healthcare infrastructure dedicated to other diseases. The treatment is also free.

While the infection rate is still high, testing has gone down 

In case of testing, the government has been following the protocol set by the ICMR. We will test more samples as and when needed.

As directed by the chief minister, the government is ramping up testing beyond 10,000 samples per day. But, this doesn’t mean 10,000 samples will be tested on a daily basis. All close contacts of a Covid patient and those with outstate travel history but with symptoms are being tested. The government will test in pockets if it feels there is a surge. 

Several doctors and frontline workers have been infected

It is very unfortunate when a service provider gets infected. However, the infection rate among covid warriors is lower than that in other states. We are strengthening our safety protocols so that not even a single doctor, nurse or paramedical worker gets infected. 

Questions have been raised on the purchase of masks and PPEs at inflated prices

There cant be a scam under the Naveen Patnaik government. The purchases have been made in a very transparent manner. We tried to have enough stock of the equipment to save lives. There were incentives for the suppliers. Once the stocks stabilized, the state stopped the provision. We are open to scrutiny at any level.


