Give paid leave to those quarantined: UP to firms
2020-03-19
Noida: The Uttar Pradesh government has directed that all people kept in quarantine or isolation because of the novel coronavirus should be given mandatory paid leave by their organisations. It has also said that the state will bear the cost of treatment of all patients who test positive for Covid-19.“All offices — government and private — will have to provide mandatory paid leave to employees in quarantine or isolation. The companies cannot avoid a state government order,” said B N Singh, district magistrate, Gautam Budh Nagar. Government spokesperson Shrikant Sharma said CM Yogi Adityanath had advised private firms to allow employees to work from home, “but in such a situation, they should be paid full salary”. The order will have maximum impact in Noida, where most private and multinational companies that operate out of UP are located. So far, there are six confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Noida, Greater Noida and Ghaziabad and more than 10 people have been kept in isolation facilities. Around 500 people, including working professionals, have been put in home quarantine so far. Officials said all these residents will receive a certificate at the end of the 14-day quarantine.Representatives from industry bodies said that while all government orders will be supported, it may be difficult to sustain companies if cases increase. “We are fully cooperating with all government directives and many companies have allowed leave as well as work-from-home option. However, entrepreneurs, especially MSMEs, are suffering economically already because of the virus scare. If it spreads to a point where we need to shut entire companies, it would be difficult to pay all staff with no output,” said Sudhir Srivastava, vice-president and spokesperson for Noida Entrepreneurs’ Association (NEA).Sec 144 extendedThe state government on Tuesday released an advisory for residents on social distancing and other steps needed to be taken by RWAs, offices, restaurants and government officials. The shutdown of all schools, colleges and universities has been extended till April 2. The imposition of Section 144 in the district, prohibiting all public gatherings, including political, cultural, religious, as well as sports programmes, was extended till April 5. In Gurgaon too, all restaurants at the popular Cyber Hub and One Horizon Center on Golf Course Road shut down on Wednesday.One metre between tablesMeanwhile, restaurants have been advised keep outdoor seating if possible or with a distance of at least one metre between tables. They have also been asked to maintain hygiene, follow hand washing protocol and regularly clean things that are often touched, such as door handles and chairs.Owners said that most restaurants are already following the guidelines. “It is not very difficult to maintain distance as restaurants are not seeing any crowd anymore. Many pubs, bars and cafes that had larger crowds have shut down since they did not have footfall or want large gatherings,” said Varun Khera, head of the National Restaurant Association of India in Noida.