‘Giving sample for Covid-19 test does not break roza’
2020-05-01
KANPUR: Three corona positive cases were reported in the district on Thursday, taking the tally to 209.

Earlier, a positive case in district was reported on Wednesday night when a cloth merchant having shop at Generalganj wholesale market in city tested positive for coronavirus.

“The trader, a resident of Lal Bangla, had got himself tested at a private lab. He was admitted to Kanshiram Trauma Centre when he confirmed positive,” said chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla.

The trader had recently visited a relative admitted to a hospital in Delhi. His family and relatives have been quarantined, while Lal Bangla area is being sanitized, he added.

CMO Dr Shukla also made an appeal to Muslims to come for test if they feel any breathing problem. “Muslims are observing ‘roza’ and they may feel that getting tested may involve medication which would break their fast, but it is not true. The sample is taken on cotton which is not medicated, so giving sample would not break roza,” he said.

Dr Shukla went on to appeal Muslim leadership to tell him an appropriate time to send team to collect samples so that apprehensions of breaking roza are removed.

“Tests are necessary as they indicate where we stand. Teams have collected samples of 80 persons from Jajmau, Cantonment, medical college campus and Chunniganj who were in contact with cases and quarantined them,” he added.

Meanwhile, nodal officer Nitin Ramesh Gokarn, who is also principal secretary PWD, and ADG Jai Narayan Singh visited hotspots in the city with DM Dr Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari and SSP/DIG Anant Deo. They first visited Anwarganj and inquired about home delivery and were told that contact numbers had been provided to residents, who said they were getting items and there was no problem.

They also visited Chamanganj and Beconganj hotspots and instructed officials to maintain social distancing strictly.

Police checked 4,049 vehicles at 146 barriers in the city and realized Rs 5,000 fine from 1,384 vehicles for violating rules and seized 6 vehicles and registered cases against 52 persons for violation.


