Glenmark starts trials for potential Covid drug
2020-05-13
Mumbai: Glenmark Pharmaceuticals said on Tuesday it has initiated human trials of Favipiravir, while Jubilant Life Sciences said it’s subsidiary has entered into a non-exclusive licensing agreement with Gilead Sciences for Remdesivir. Both drugs are antivirals and potential therapies for Covid-19, with their safety and efficacy yet to be established globally. 

Under the agreement, Jubilant Generics will hold the right to register, manufacture and sell Gilead’s investigational drug Remdesivir in 127 countries, including India. Jubilant will receive technology transfer from the US-based Gilead to enable expedited access of the medicine to Covid-19 patients, upon approvals by regulatory authorities. 

Multiple clinical trials are ongoing to generate more data on the safety and efficacy of Remdesivir as a treatment for the coronavirus. Remdesivir remains an investigational drug and has not been approved by USFDA, a company statement said.

Glenmark said Covid-19 patients from over 10 leading government and private hospitals are being enrolled for the study, with the trial completion and study results expected by July-August. Favipiravir is an antiviral drug approved in Japan for treating influenza, and has recently shown promise as a potential treatment for the latest coronavirus, leading to a spike in its demand in India and globally. 

The product is a generic version of Avigan of Fujifilm Toyama Chemical Co, a subsidiary of Fujifilm of Japan. Multiple clinical trials have been initiated on Covid-19 patients in China, Japan and the US.

Other companies including BDR Pharma, Cipla and Strides Pharma are also in the advanced stage of getting regulatory approvals for the studies, while API manufacturer Lasa Supergenerics is readying plans to manufacture the product.

Having internally developed the API and formulation for the drug, Glenmark filed the product for clinical trials with India’s Drugs Controller General, and received approval for conducting the trial on 150 mild to moderate patients. According to the approved clinical trial protocol, subjects will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio to Favipiravir with standard supportive care or standalone standard supportive care. Treatment duration is a maximum of 14 days and the total study duration will be maximum for 28 days from randomisation.

“The clinical trial will let us know the efficacy of this molecule on Covid-19 patients,” said Sushrut Kulkarni, executive VP — global R&D, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, adding, “If the clinical trials are successful, Favipiravir could become a potential treatment for Covid-19 patients.”


