Glimpses of normal life in city as Lockdown 4 begins
2020-05-19
Nagpur: Monday morning offered a glimpse of life coming back on city streets. With lockdown restrictions relaxed according to latest norms, a surge in movement of people and vehicles could be seen on the roads and a number of market places were bustling with customers.TOI found that apart from grocery shops, medical stores and essential services, several other businesses also began working. All government departments too started functioning though visitors here were scarce.As regular public transport is yet to resume, office-goers commuted in own vehicles and that explained the sudden increase in vehicular traffic. Taking advantage of the relaxation, several motorists ventured outdoors o get pending works done.Traffic police too were active at many busy junctions and those violating rules were penalised. Two-wheelers with pillion riders and cars with more than two occupants or with both front seats occupied were stopped, questioned, and a few were forced to pay fine.Though banks were continuing operations, Monday saw a sudden increase in their footfall too. Long queues were witnessed outside banks and other financial institutions. City’s commercial areas like Itwari, Mahal and Jaripatka too witnessed huge footfalls after shops started opening.Standing committee chairman Vijay Zalke said, “Many shops in Sakkardara, Nandanwan witnessed a buzz of activities.”Hardware, electrical, plywood, footwear and stationery stores opened as lockdown curbs were eased by the district administration. As the shops had remained closed for nearly two months, many shopkeepers could be seen cleaning the stores. Many customers were seen taking gadgets, appliances and even coolers for repairs.As construction works were allowed with minimal workers, many were seen rushing to hardware shops for purchases. The number of people visiting automobile workshops to repair their vehicles too witnessed a steep increase.Shopkeepers heaved a sigh of relief as they feel now they can hope for revival of economy. Mohan Kale, who runs a mobile shop, said he felt happy as he was allowed to open the shop.Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe said only mobile repair shops were allowed and the crowd on the city roads and markets was not expected. “We are starting economic life in a phased manner so it is expected that everybody follows the rules,” he said.“The lockdown is a rule and these are relaxations and citizens have to understand that the city is still in red zone with new positive coronavirus cases being reported daily. If people are going outside without reason, we will have no option but to roll back the relaxation,” Mundhe said and appealed to citizens not to venture out without any work. “If going out, please ensure you are following all norms including wearing masks and following Covid distancing etc,” he said.