Global lockdown: What’s in store for applicants to foreign varsities?
2020-03-31
Vijayawada: The Covid-19 outbreak has added to the worriers of people who were gearing up to study abroad and were waiting for the admissions processes to begin. With countries imposing restrictions on immigration, travel and foreign universities suspending academic work, aspirants are anxious.

With the situation as it stands, foreign universities are expected to alter admission guidelines and set new deadlines. Some prominent B-schools in USA have already announced that if students can’t make it to USA due to visa issues then their academic programme will be deferred to spring 2020 or fall 2021 cycle from the fall 2020 semester.

Speaking to TOI, Prof VSRK Prasad, director of Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) tried to allay fears of aspirants. “I am very confident that the pandemic may end sooner or later. Meanwhile, it has brought the education sector to a standstill. Foreign institutions may also change the admission process,” he said. 

“So it is just going to be a delay, not a permanent lockdown situation,” Prof Prasad added. 

M Siddharth, a representative of an overseas education consultancy based out of Vijayawada said that the consequences of the pandemic on education are yet to be fully ascertained. “The pandemic has brought several European countries and the US to their knees. These countries are struggling a lot.”

“While some countries have declared national emergencies till May 1, other countries have completely suspended academic activities. Admission results or acceptance letters of this cycle were supposed to be released or issued within March to May. But in the current situation, it may take a few more months to know what’s in store,” Siddharth added. 

KNS Pranav, who has applied to several universities in USA, Canada and Europe said, “Even if I were to secure admission in an university, I am not sure how restrictions in the respective country of the varsity or in India would allow me to reach campus.” 


