GMC expert: Test Covid-19 suspects twice to rule out false nagatives
2020-04-23
PANAJI: A symptomatic Covid-19 patient can test ‘false negative’ and baffle doctors, if the viral load in the individual is low, making its presence difficult for the test to detect. In such cases, it is advisable to repeat the test preferably after two 48 hours, said a virologist at Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital, Bambolim. 


Two of the seven Covid-19 patients detected in Goa had tested negative in their first tests. “Tests were repeated in both patients as they had the symptoms of Covid-19. Both tested positive in the repeat tests,” said GMC dean S M Bandekar.

The virologist said as an individual’s symptoms intensify, it is likely the test will report positive, and so re-tests are a must to remove all doubts. 

He said there are very slim chances of patients re-contracting Covid-19 two or three months after they have recovered, but they cannot be sure.

“There is little chance of that happening because of his built-up immunity. Still, we will not able to say this with finality until there is adequate study. This is an entirely new strain which has been known to us only for the last three months. More research is needed,” he said.

Goa has detected seven Covid-19 cases and all of them have recovered. 

Over 500 real time RT-PCR tests have been conducted in the virology laboratory set up in GMC less than month ago, even as few have raised doubts about the efficacy of the new testing facility.

Bandekar said the testing facility at GMC is on par with the National Virology Centre, (NIV) Pune, and it is validated by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). “I’m clarifying since people have been raising doubts about our facility,” he said. 


Over 3,000 testing kits at GMC

The Standard operating procedures (SOP) followed in GMC are also in conformity with ICMR, he said.

The WHO guidelines and those issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare are also followed in toto,the dean said.

GMC has more than 3,000 testing kits, 3 lakh masks, and adequate stock of personnel protection equipment (PPE kits), and more have been ordered, he said.


