Aurangabad: GMCH’s building being turned into virus management centre
2020-03-09
AURANGABAD: In preparation for possible coronavirus cases in the city, the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) has emptied its cardiovascular and thoracic surgery (CVTS) building for the setting up of a coronavirus management centre.


Over the past week, the government health authorities and private hospital administrations had held several meetings. In a meeting called by the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) on Wednesday, mayor Nandkumar Ghodele, municipal health officer Nita Padalkar, deputy director of health services Swapnil Lale, district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni, head of GMCH’s medicine department Meenakshi Bhattacharya, World Health Organisation’s consultant doctor Shaikh Mujeeb and Indian Medical Association’s Kuldeepsing Raul and Satyanarayan participated.

It was decided that the responsibility of preliminary screening and diagnosis of Covid-19 lies with the district civil hospital, while training and tertiary care management is the GMCH’s responsibility.

The GMCH has, subsequently, dedicated its two-floor CVTS building for setting up of a coronavirus tertiary care management centre. According to GMCH medical superintendent Suresh Harbade, “The guidelines state that there should be an isolated compartment for each patient with oxygen support. We are raising compartments for isolation of each bed.”

The GMCH has maintained that no suspected or positive coronavirus patient has been identified in Aurangabad so far. However, the centre is being developed in case an emergency arises, the hospital said.

The cath lab at the CVTS building went out of function around 2 years ago. Since then, the hospital had stopped performing heart-related surgeries and diagnostic procedures. Harbade said the staff of the CVTS building will be equipped to manage the coronavirus cases. “The GMCH has started the training of its doctors, nurses and class IV staff for the management of Covid-19. If municipal or district health authorities approach us, we can train their staff too,” he said.

The hospital has called for masks (N-95) from the district public health department and the Directorate for Medical Education and Research (DMER). The hospital will be using its HIV personal protective equipment (PPE) for coronavirus management.


