GMCH, Mayo conduct mock drills to handle spike in Covid-19 patients
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: The reduced number of visitors during the Janta Curfew provided much-needed break to the hospitals on Sunday. Both the government hospitals, where novel coronavirus (Covid-19) patients/ suspects are being treated, used the opportunity to conduct mock drills to be prepared to handle increased number of patients if there is sudden spike in infected/suspect cases. 


Doctors and paramedical staff at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) and Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) participated in the mock drills held at 10am on Sunday. Deans of both the hospitals claimed the drills were successful.

“The exercise was conducted to check our preparedness for any situation. We are already in the fourth week of the Covid-19 outbreak and as per the trends worldwide, we can see a spike in number of cases in these few days. Mock drill showed that every department of the hospital is prepared to handle this crisis,” said Dr Sajal Mitra, dean of GMCH.

GMCH medical superintendent Dr Avinash Gawande informed that drill began with patients reporting at special Covid-19 casualty ward. “Fully equipped ambulance with medical staff was available to bring patients to the hospital. All medical and paramedical staff was ready with PPE Kit, mask, gloves at medicine casualty ward,” he said.

Separate sanitizers, soaps and tissue papers were ready at entrance of Covid-19 ward for every suspect/patient. ENT specialist collected samples for testing from suspects. As part of the drills, management team arranged facilities like LED TV in Covid-19 ward for suspects awaiting their test results. To treat a serious patient, a separate team was especially managing ventilators. All confirmed cases of Covid-19 were admitted in separate rooms having attached toilet and bathrooms.

At IGGMCH, the drill was conducted under the supervision of dean Dr Ajay Keoliya. The hospital houses the only lab where Covid-19 testing facility is available in the region. Coordination of lab was an added factor in the IGGMCH drill.

The action

Large number of Covid-19 suspects reported at hospital

All medical and paramedical staff was ready with PPE Kits, masks, gloves

Thermal screening of all visitors was done by medical officers at casualty

Security guards were managing entry of patients at the entrance of Covid-19 ward

Attendants completed spraying and mopping to maintain sanitation and disinfection

Medical staff disposed off used kits as per biomedical waste management guidelines


