Go away Covid: Churches stream online messages on Palm Sunday
2020-04-06
KOLKATA: Both the Church of North India (CNI) and the Roman Catholic Church sent out Covid-19-related messages on the occasion of the Palm Sunday. While Bishop Paritosh Canning asked parishioners to light the lamp among chanting of the Biblical Hosanna (help), Archbishop Thomas D Souza stressed on the importance of helping the poor and the vulnerable during these difficult times. Both the services were streamed online and had nearly one and a half lakh Christians of the city and many abroad watching it live.

Palm Sunday signifies the return of Jesus to Jerusalem, where he is welcomed as the king who would overthrow the Romans. He was welcomed with palm leaves. The day signifies the beginning of the Holy Week for the Christians all over the world. The Corona scare has locked down all parish churches and the two heads of the diocese and archdiocese of Kolkata have been holding online mass in order to connect with church-goers.

Lauding Prime Minister Modi’s initiative of bringing people of the country together through the act of lamp lighting, Bishop Canning said that it was God who was guiding the PM. “I urge you to chant Hosanna while lighting the candle. It means, ‘help us…save us, God’ and I am sure Jesus will hear. Like he said, ‘Go away Satan!’, he will also say, ‘Go away, Corona! We will soon find ourselves rid of the virus…” he said in his online mass from Bishop’s House.

The Palm Sunday mass started at 8am at the Archbishop House as archbishop Thomas D Souza spoke to parishioners about the significance of Palm Sunday. “While we need to be careful about washing our hands and social distancing, we have to remember the plight of the poor and we need to stand by them now…” he advised. Those watching the mass online saw the archbishop flanked by two of his clergy, maintaining the distancing norm. “We have laid out plans for similar online services for Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Easter,” said vicar general, Dominic Gomes.


