Goa wants lockdown till April 30, but will wait for Centre’s nod
2020-04-09
PANAJI: The state cabinet on Wednesday arrived at a consensus to extend the lockdown in the state till April 30 to restrain the spread of Covid-19 virus, but left it to the Centre to take the final decision on it. The cabinet also suggested that section 144 should not be withdrawn till there normalcy returns.


“Cabinet members are of the view that the lockdown should continue, but the decision will be taken on April 13. As the chief minister of the state, I have to first convey this suggestion to Centre. On April 11, Prime Minister Narendra Modi will hold a video conference with all the chief ministers on the Covid-19 issue,” CM Pramod Sawant told reporters.

But health minister Vishwajit Rane, who had told TOI on Tuesday that he was in favour of lifting of lockdown in phases and had strongly made a case for section 144 to continue, said he conveyed it to the cabinet on Wednesday.

“We are all firm that the lockdown should continue,” he said.

The 21-day national lockdown ends on April 14 and Modi has sought suggestions from all states before taking any decision on future steps to battle the pandemic.

Sawant said most states have conveyed their suggestions to the Prime Minister. “I cannot tell you right now what we will keep open and what we will keep closed in the state. It will be decided on April 13,” he said. Chief ministers have been given authority to take a decision in the interest of the state, Sawant said.

“Ministers have said that they will agree with whatever decision is taken in the interest of the state in consultation with the PM,” Sawant said.

Science and technology minister Michael Lobo said the Prime Minister would take a decision looking at the national scenario. “Our cabinet is of the opinion that the lockdown should be extended till April 30, but let the PM announce it. We will have to maintain social distancing for another six months even after the lockdown is lifted,” he said.

Lobo said after the Prime Minister lifts the lockdown, the tourism industry will have to put in suitable protocol before opening.

“My view was very clear — extend the lockdown to April 30. It is not that Goa is 100% out of the woods, the situation can change any time. It is because we are consistent and continuing with strong measures that we have not reached any collapsible stage like other states. Section 144 CrPC should continue,” panchayat minister Mauvin Godinho said.


