Goa to conduct door-to-door survey to fight coronavirus
2020-04-07
PANAJI: The state government is set to conduct a community survey across the state from April 13 to 15 in order to identify people who have Covid-19 symptoms. 


CM Pramod Sawant told reporters on Monday that the survey would cover every house in the state including industrial estate colonies, shacks and migrant camps. He said that the survey would be conducted along the lines of the one conducted at Bhilwara in Rajasthan. “We will do it in the entire state,” he said.

The survey, according to the CM, is set to be completed by April 15, but has kept a day reserved in case it isn’t. Around 8,000 government employees will be engaged in it, including health workers, anganwadi workers, booth level officers (BLOs) and education department teachers. 

There are 1,560 polling booths in the state, and this survey will be conducted booth-wise. “In each booth, three teams will be constituted of two persons each, and one person will monitor the process,” Sawant said.

Sawant appealed to the people to cooperate with the survey team, and requested them to provide all details, including of people living in rented accomodation. “We have prepared a community survey questionnaire on Covid-19,” he said. 

“If a family member has travelled outside the state and/or country, details of that person from February 15 till date must be provided,” he said.

The government team will conduct the survey after taking all precautions. Orientation training for surveyors commence on Tuesday. “We will also check if anyone in the family has Covid-19 symptoms including cold, fever, cough or breathing problems,” he said

After the survey reports are filed, booths will prepare a history sheet and send it to the primary health centre (PHC) concerned. The CM said the government wants the detailed report by April 16. 

Earlier in the evening, Sawant had said that the survey would be conducted from April 10-12. Following a demand by Congress and some BJP MLAs to reschedule it on the grounds that it was coinciding with Good Friday and Easter, the chief minister announced the new dates – April 13-15.


