Goa is leading fight against Covid-19 with tech: Vishwajit Rane
2020-04-09
Keen on staving off community transmission, health minister Vishwajit Rane tells Bindiya Chari he is working round the clock to ramp up quarantine facilities, prepare medicos to fight Covid-19 and bring in technology solutions to limit doctor-patient interactions


What were your initial challenges in fighting Covid-19?

Our challenge began from the time when coronavirus came into China and cases started getting reported from there. Thereafter, cases were detected in Italy and Spain but still they were restricted to few European countries. As the disease moved globally, we started getting our act together. We took the right steps and assessed what type of facilities we have, what situation we were in and what needed to be done.


But then, nothing concrete was done by the state.

Not really. We realised Covid-19 was something very serious. We are working in a concentrated manner and trying to see how best our staff is readied to fight the disease. We are starting online training for our nursing staff. Personnel posted in isolation wards have already been trained. Our focus is on how best our staff — whether they are teachers, anganwadi workers or GMC personnel — can be trained online to fight Covid-19. It is an eight-hour training module. We are starting with nursing staff and the rest will follow.


What was your actual challenge then?

We had started getting cases in other parts of the country, but we thought the curve was not increasing. Today, however, we are on the edge. It is only because of PM Narendra Modi that we have been able to build our capacities and fight Covid-19.

Every state’s preparedness is being checked through video conferencing. There is thorough monitoring. I had never experienced this type of micro- management before. The central officers are prompt in assessing requirements of the state. Few days ago, we were dependent on other states to conduct our tests. The Centre gave us a naval aircraft to take our staff for training to Pune. Also, an additional 2,000 testing kits have been given to us. We have our plan in place to ensure community transmission does not take place.


What challenges do you foresee in fighting Covid-19?

To not allow community transmission to happen. We are creating quarantine facilities and have taken over hotels to provide such facilities. We have used latest technology to reduce interaction between doctors and patients. Goa was the first state to launch Chatbot. Then we have the CallDoc app, a video conferencing facility and tele-consultation. Tele-consultation is doing extremely well, and it costs us Rs 10 lakh a month, but it is run through an excellent CSR activity. We have top consultants on board and 300 doctors available for tele-consultations.

The experience of fighting Covid-19 will change our way of thinking in future. Lot of tasks will be done with artificial intelligence. People will visit hospital only if it can’t be avoided and it will bring down the level of infections. Goa is leading the way in fighting Covid -19 by using technology.


Does Goa have enough stock of personal protection equipment (PPE)?

We do, but we need more. We are in the process of procuring more PPEs and more ventilators. We have adequate stock of hydroxychloroquine.


Are you prepared to handle the situation if 7,000 Goans working abroad are evacuated? CM Pramod Sawant said he wants to bring them home.

I have told the CM that we need to set a protocol in place for seafarers. Once he takes a decision, I will have to do everything possible to see that the necessary protocol is in place. I have already asked him to give us a 21-day notice from the time the decision is taken, as we need to set up facilities. All these people can’t be brought in at one time. They will need to come in in batches and they will need to be quarantined. For this, we need to have logistics in place. We need to ensure adequate testing facilities as each person will need to be tested.


Your proposal to requisition top hospitals has not been approved. Comment.

Apollo Victor Hospital has been requisitioned. I want either Manipal Hospital or Healthway Hospital to be taken up for this purpose. I had moved a file to the district collector, but some officers were not in favour of it. Now, I have moved a file to the CM again. International Centre Goa has been taken over to accommodate frontline staff. I have suggested that Nanutel (Margao) and The Fern (Kadamba Plateau) be requisitioned. There is no point in making requisitions later. We must keep facilities ready.

I want three-star hotels for quarantining so that people have basic facilities and a TV for some entertainment when they are confined to a room for days together. We have also started a mental well-being helpline in association with Potdar Foundation.


Why not expand testing facilities to cover the whole state?

We have tied-up with Molbio Diagnostis for rapid testing. All those who have undergone home and facility quarantine will be tested. Goa is very vigilant. If anybody comes from outside, an intimation is received immediately. We stamp people who are in quarantine and posters are put outside the houses of those who are quarantined. Covering the state’s entire population is not required at this stage, though we should encourage more testing. A private laboratory, SRL, has been given permission to conduct tests.


In another two months, the monsoon will be here. Nobody has noted the trajectory of Covid-19 in the rains. Don’t you think mass-testing is advisable?

All those with symptoms of cold and cough will have to be tested first for Covid-19. The government of India is importing reagents and PCR from China. We can always increase PCR machines for rapid testing. In a worst case scenario, we will have them installed in at least 10 health centres.

In Goa, not all public places have been disinfected yet. Schools, bus stands, colleges and markets places still need to be disinfected.

I have started fumigating public places in my constituency, but at my own cost. The government must do it. There is a task force in place.


What is your advice to the people of Goa as health minister?

People must understand that these are trying times and must move out only if required. Social distancing is a must. The lockdown, when lifted, needs to be done meticulously.


