Goa first to launch self-assessment tool for Covid-19
2020-03-21
Panaji: After introducing the country’s first chatbot for information on corona virus, Goa has now launched the nation’s first digital initiative to tackle the novel corona virus (Covid-19) by helping patients to identify if they are infected by the virus, or at risk for infection.

The digital interface, which was launched in Goa by health minister Vishwajit Rane on Saturday, is part of the state’s efforts to prevent the spread of the virus and to identify at-risk patients. 

Globally, more than 2 lakh people have been infected.

Through the online portal, citizens can check from their homes if they have any of the symptoms of the virus. Individuals who feel that they might have been exposed to corona virus patients can also check if they are at risk and if they need to be self-quarantined by answering six questions, about the individual’s symptoms, travel history, history of contact with a Covid-19 suspect, and medical history, based on which their risk will be assessed. 

The government has partnered with a US firm, Innovaccer Inc, to launch this tool.

“The partnership with Innovaccer is one of the critical elements in our government’s strategy to address the COVID-19 pandemic in Goa and the nation. We are proud to be the first state in India to adopt technology solutions to tackle coronavirus and launch the first app to enable patients to self-assess their vulnerability to the Covid-19 virus,” Rane said.

Innovaccer is a San Francisco-based healthcare technology company that works with global healthcare providers. The firm has developed the digital platform to help reduce the load on medical professionals so that doctors can focus on the critical corona virus cases.

“With our patient-focused mobile and web self-assessment, we help with initial triaging and screening, so that caregivers can focus on the highest risk individuals and more effectively deal with the increased request for services,” said Innovaccer chief executive officer Abhinav Shashank.

Rane said the self-assessment tool is available in English, Konkani and Hindi and also works on mobile devices. “The steps which we have taken in Goa over the past few days, and after the video conference with the Prime Minister, we feel that the proactive steps that Goa has taken are in line with the directions of the Prime Minister,” Rane said.


