Goa Covid count hits half-century mark, set to rise further
2020-05-21
Panaji: Goa’s active Covid-19 tally rose to 43 on Wednesday after four persons — all with travel history — were detected with the novel coronavirus. While one of these came from Delhi by train, the other three, all from Maharashtra, came by road, train, and sea. With this, Goa’s cumulative Covid count hit the half-century mark — 50 — and looked set to rise further. Seven of the 50 have been cured and discharged.

By late evening, two more persons — a seafarer who arrived on Wednesday, and a rail passener — also tested positive for Covid-19 via the screening test. However, their confirmatory test results were awaited on Wednesday night. Director of health services Dr Jose D’Sa said that all those who tested positive are under treatment at the Covid hospital in Margao, and their condition is stable. Apart from Tuesday’s four positives, the day saw 539 persons test negative, with 52 reports still awaited. 

Meanwhile, health secretary Nila Mohanan told reporters that the state has stepped up its efforts to screen people entering its borders by any mode of transport. She also said that no rapid tests are being conducted. “We are not using rapid kits, as directed by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). We haven’t used a single kit since the beginning of the crisis.” 

People who enter the state in North Goa are taken for the screening test to Asilo hospital, Mapusa, and those who come in from the South Goa borders are taken to sub-district hospital, Ponda, or Hospicio, Margao. “Their swabs are taken and they’re immediately moved to a quarantine centre. If they test positive on TrueNat (the screening test), a fresh sample is taken for the confirmatory RT-PCR test,” she said.

The state follows the testing protocol issued by the ICMR. Explaining how it works, she said, “The screening test is the TrueNat test, and the confirmatory one is the RT-PCT test”. While TrueNat tests are done at in the laboratories of two district and two sub-district hospitals, the confirmatory test is done at the Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital’s virology laboratory. “Only if the RT-PCR test is positive is a patient declared a Covid-19 patient,” she said, adding that all labs function 24x7. 

The state government has ordered 500 face shields to protect its staff posted as border checkposts, railway stations, and at Goa International Airport, Dabolim, she said. 


