Goa’s Covid count drops as 9 recover, 2 more positive
2020-05-23
PANAJI: Goa’s tally of active Covid-19 cases dropped to 38 on Friday even as two more patients — who arrived from Maharashtra by road — tested positive. While confirmatory tests of three more persons who tested positive on the TrueNat screenting test were awaited, as many as nine patients, including a family of five, recovered fully from the disease and were discharged. 

“Two individuals who travelled by road from Mumbai have reported positive for coronavirus,” health secretary Nila Mohanan told reporters on Friday. “Out of the first lot of Covid patients, nine patients have recovered. Their tests were repeated twice, and today, they have been discharged.” The nine will be kept in facility quarantine for seven days, and then in home quarantine for another seven.

“The same protocol that was followed the last time will be applied now,” she said. In April, after the first seven Covid-19 patients were recovered and discharged, they were placed in quarantine for 14 days, the first seven in a facility, and the remainder at home. 

Out of 542 samples sent for testing on Friday, 513 came negative, and 16 reports were awaited. Seven suspects were placed in isolation wards. In total, 873 persons were placed in facility quarantine.

Mohanan said that work was underway to bring private laboratories on board for testing. On Thursday, the health department cancelled the permission granted to a private laboratory to collect swabs after it was revealed that three cases it reported positive tested negative when tested at the virology laboratory of Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital, Bambolim. 

Meanwhile, while domestic airlines are set to resume operations from Monday, the state still awaits the standard operating procedure (SOPs) and guidelines from the Centre.

“We are expecting to receive them very soon, and accordingly, we will move forward,” Mohanan said, replying to a question on whether every air passenger would be tested as is being done for those travelling to Goa either by road and rail, and whether they will be quarantined on arrival.

Also, as questions are being raised on whether those entering the state are indeed Goans, Mohanan said that those wishing to enter must upload their documents online, and that there is an e-pass system managed by district collectors. “The applicant must have proof of residence and only then does the application get processed,” she added.

Revenue secretary Sanjay Kumar said that for rail and air passengers, the state government can’t ask for proof of residence as those are Central subjects. “The list of passengers is shared with the state,” he said.

