Goa’s Covid tally continues to rise, 8 more takes it to 39
2020-05-20
Panaji: Goa’s Covid-19 tally shot up to 39 on Tuesday as the state detected eight new cases, all of whom had travel history. While seven of them came by train — four from Delhi and three from Maharashtra — one came by road from West Bengal last week. 

The positive case from Bengal was one of seven men who went there last month to deliver barges. On their return, two tested positive last week, and the other five were placed in facility quarantine. 

“All patients have been shifted to the Covid hospital in Margao, and their condition is stable,” said director of health services Dr Jose D’Sa. 

Of the 39 patients currently at the Covid hospital, only one is over 60. On Tuesday, 316 samples tested negativ,e, and eight reports were awaited. 

On Tuesday, nine suspects were admitted to hospital isolation wards, and 581 persons were placed in quarantine at various facilities in the state.

Meanwhile, there is growing consensus in the government that since most of the cases came to Goa by train, there needs to be more stringent checking of passengers. “All (passengers) need to be made to pay for the Covid test and be charged for the quarantine facility,” an official said, reacting to passengers coming to Goa for holidays and honeymoons.

Similarly, he said that border checking needs to be made more stringent, as there have been attempts by some without proper documents to enter Goa using their connections.

He said that while the government has intimated to the Centre that the Rajdhani Express should be cancelled, “the damage has already been done”, he said. “Our cases have shot up during few days.” 

Meanwhile, as the state prepares to receive flights of stranded Goans, health minister Vishwajit Rane said that four smart kiosks have been installed at Goa International Airport, Dabolim. “We are all set to receive our citizens. All passengers will be tested and kept under facility quarantine till the results are out,” he said.

He also said that his ministry’s team is working round-the-clock to scale up testing facilities in the state and to ensure that all passengers are thoroughly tested before being discharged.

Six couples on honeymoon roll into Goa by train

Asenior official said on Tuesday that six couples on their honeymoon arrived in Goa by train over the past few days, reports Bindiya Chari. Since some passengers in their neighbouring coach tested positive, all of them (couples) are under observation and thus being accommodated for free. The official said that things are unlikely to change till the state government makes it explicitly clear that only Goans who are stranded outside the state will be allowed to return home. “Else, the influx of persons heading to Goa for holidays will not stop,” he said. They must understand this is not holiday time.” tnn


