Goa’s Covid-19 tally hits 31 as 9 new cases detected in a day
2020-05-19
PANAJI: Goa’s rapidly-rising Covid-19 tally touched 31 on Monday, as the state detected nine more cases, all of whom had travel history. While four each entered Goa by train from Maharashtra and Delhi, one came by road. All 31 positive cases are currently being treated at the Covid hospital in Margao.


The tally is set to rise further, with several confirmatory tests pending. Late on Monday night, health minister Vishwajit Rane said that four passengers who arrived on the train from Nizamuddin tested positive on TrueNat, and that their confirmatory tests are awaited. 

Monday saw the state send a further 503 samples for testing, and it received 888 test results, 879 of which were negative. Nine Covid-19 suspects are being treated at isolation wards of various government hospitals. 

Chief minister Pramod Sawant said on Monday that of the 700 passengers who arrived in Goa by rail over the past couple of days, 150-odd have been placed in facility quarantine. As most of the recent cases arrived in Goa by rail, Sawant said, “The first and second contacts have been established and they have also been quarantined”. 

Sawant brushed aside criticism that train services to Goa were started to bring in outsiders to the “Green Zone”. He said all active cases are “imported”, and added that it’s the responsibility of the government to bring in Goans stuck outside the state, whether seafarers or others. “Except for four patients, all the others (positive cases) are Goans who have valid documents, Aadhaar/voting cards and residential addresses in Goa,” he said. 

“Trains were not started to bring in people from other states.”

Currently, rail passengers arriving in Goa are tested for Covid-19 via the TrueNet test. If they test negative, they’re allowed to go home. However, if they test positive, a confirmatory test is required from Goa Medical College’s (GMC) virology lab. Sawant said that rail passengers often have to wait a while, since confirmatory tests take around six hours to produce a result. A similar strategy is followed for road entrants too. All those who enter through checkposts (apart from goods carrier drivers and accompanying men) are tested and quarantined. 

With the sharp spike in cases due to people with travel history, locals have been demanding that the Goa government again seal its borders completely, and that trains should not be allowed to stop in Goa.


