Goa’s Covid count shoots up to 13 as five new cases found
2020-05-17
Panaji: The number of active coronavirus cases in Goa shot up to 13 on Saturday as five new cases — all of whom have travel history — were detected.

Two of the five were part of a group of seven professionals who returned from Gangapur, West Bengal, where they had gone to deliver barges. They were tested at the Mollem check post in South Goa. “They were taken to Hospicio, Margao, with police escort,” said health minister Vishwajit Rane. “The swab samples of the seven were tested through TrueNat.”

The initial test showed three samples as positive. “The confirmatory test conducted at Goa Medical College (GMC) state that out of the three samples, two have been reported positive and one is negative. Their samples will be tested again in the next 72 hours,” Rane tweeted.

While the two who tested positive for the novel coronavirus have been transferred to the Covid hospital in Margao, the remaining five have been lodged in facility quarantine.

The third Covid positive case on Saturday was a 28-year-old cleaner from Haridwar, who had come to Goa to deliver pharma goods to a unit at Kundaim industrial estate. He was admitted to the subdistrict hospital, Ponda, after he got a fever on Friday. While his swab sample tested positive for Covid-19, the driver accompanying him did not. The cleaner’s confirmatory test too came positive. The two had entered Goa through the Patradevi border.

At the state’s border checkposts, health officials measure the temperature of truck drivers, however, cleaners and others working on the trucks are not; they remain seated in the vehicle.

The fourth positive case also entered Goa through the Patradevi border, in a goods carrier. The 46-year-old, who came from Mumbai, had a fever, cough and other Covid-19 symptoms, while two others accompanying him didn’t. When the three went to the Panaji bus stand to meet a supplier, he advised them to take their sick colleague to GMC, where he tested positive.

Late on Saturday night, a health department bulletin revealed that yet another Covid-19 suspect tested positive, taking the day's tally up to five. The patient, an industrial worker from Ratnagiri, was in quarantine and had earlier tested positive on the TrueNat test.

Earlier on Saturday evening, 35 passengers who arrived in Goa by train from Thiruvananthapuram tested negative for Covid. Another lot of 100 (of of 288) who arrived on Saturday by train from New Delhi are being tested. “The swabs have been taken and testing is underway,” Rane said. “They will be sent to Fatorda stadium for quarantine till results are out.”

Meanwhile, health officials said that eight other Covid patients, including a one-year-old child (all asymptomatic) are doing fine. The one patient who had symptoms is also responding well, an official said. The hospital, which has 100 beds, currently has 13 patients. 


