God’s act? Theories in time of coronavirus
2020-03-15
KOCHI: There is no dearth of superstition or conspiracy theories when a pandemic like Covid-19 strikes. Some Christians believe that the coronavirus is a forerunner to the first of the seven plagues mentioned in the Book of Revelations in the Bible.

On Saturday, a sermon titled ‘Corona in the light of Bible’ was delivered by Pastor J Tito Arattukulam at the Seventh-day Adventist Church at Poonthopp, Alappuzha. Nearly 100 persons were in attendance as he delivered the hour-and-a-half-long speech, in which the pastor compared the Covid-19 outbreak to the seven plagues described in Chapter 16 of Revelations. Also, he drew parallels to the 10 plagues of the Old Testament sent down on Egypt. 

He said the world is being hit by the pandemic as it indulges in pagan worship, instead of believing in Jesus. 

“There are so many sinners in the world. There is idol worship all around, including in Christianity. Sunday, a special day in paganism, is followed by even Christians instead of the seventh holy day. Only Christ can redeem the world and we must pray and repent. Repentance and prayer should be given primary importance,” said Arattukulam. 

Interestingly, the pastor also advocates medical precautions and treatments even as they say that prayer and repentance is the primary solution. “Doctors, who have learned the physiology of the body, would be able to help us but only with the help of god. So, primarily we need to pray and repent,” he said.

The first plague is described in Revelations as follows: “Then I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go, pour out the seven bowls of God’s wrath on the earth.” The first angel went and poured out his bowl on the land, and ugly, festering sores broke out on the people who had the mark of the beast and worshipped its image.”

Even as the pastor associated the virus to be a prophetic warning from god, all those who attended the sermon on Saturday used precautions. Soap and water were provided at the church for attendees. Sanitary wipes used by members were later buried on the premises.

