Covid-19 outbreak in Chennai: 'Going door-to-door to make sure all is well'
2020-03-20
CHENNAI: Armed with just a mask on his face, a green vest over his shirt and a register in his hands, 30-year-old M Venkatesan set off through the narrow alleys of Arumbakkam in Central Chennai, ringing doorbells and watching out for dogs before opening gates to apartment complexes and gather data on residents suffering from fever or any other communicable diseases.


A domestic breeding checker (DBC) with Greater Chennai Corporation, Anna Nagar zone, he has been doing it for eight years. But on Thursday morning, his job assumed greater significance. Venkatesan is visiting residents living around a 100m radius of the house in which Tamil Nadu’s second Covid-19 positive case stayed.

The 20-year-old patient, a hairdresser, was working in a local salon which has now been shut. TOI visited the spot on Thursday morning and found that the man hails from Rampur district of Uttar Pradesh and had come to Chennai on March 12 from Delhi on a train. Seven of his roommates have been quarantined at a facility in Poonamalee.

Another resident living in the same complex is likely to be sent to the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital and swab-tested for the virus. So far, the others have not shown any symptoms, the official said.

From Wednesday evening, the entire area has been fogged and disinfected extensively. Health officials left the area at midnight and returned at 8am to take stock.

Keenly observed by his superior, senior entomologist Thenmozhi, Venkatesan entered an apartment complex in ward 105. As he rung the door bell and announced that he had come from the corporation, a man in a vest and lungi rushed out.

“How many families live here? Does anyone have fever? Has anyone visited a foreign country recently?” These were the standard questions posed to the house owner. An additional question was about whether anyone had a haircut in the nearby salon or its branch on the neighbouring street.

“We have started collecting details of travel to Delhi,” said Thenmozhi. Every ward in each of the 15 zones has 80 DBCs who have to visit 80 homes from 7am to 2pm, rush back to the ward office and submit the compiled data to the sanitary inspector. “This is then sent to the zonal health officer and the headquarters,” Thenmozhi said. Every DBC has to file data regarding the number of houses visited, members, the travel list, how many doors were locked and how many rejected.

Meanwhile, the man in the vest, 52-year-old Sivakumar, took Venkatesan to a house on the first floor. A youngster had returned from Germany last week. Although he did not show any symptoms of Covid-19, Venkatesan and Rajendran Prasad, a field assistant, took down his travel details.

“He will be called up every day and asked about his health status. He has our contact details and has to inform if he catches a cold or has fever,” said Dr Priyadarshini, zonal health officer.

While sincerity and tenacity are important skills for a DBC, the effectiveness of data collection also depends on how residents respond, Thenmozhi said. “Some people don’t share particulars. Some tell us to leave and that they would get themselves treated at a private hospital,” she said.

Next stops were a general store and a grocery shop. Shopkeepers got the same advice and a pamphlet was stuck on a wall. 

Venkatesan spotted a small room beside the shop and found that some migrants lived on the first floor. He asked a boy from Rajasthan about his recent visits. “Nobody has returned from foreign. Nobody has fever,” the boy said.

The zonal level officials held a health camp in the area on Thursday, but found that there wasn’t any alarming number of fever cases. People living in and around the area have been asked to quarantine themselves and maintain social distancing, avoid going out and maintain high levels of personal hygiene. The zonal level officials have also stepped up surveillance of fever cases in the area, the official added.

