Good news first: Two Covid patients cured, discharged
2020-03-30
Ahmedabad/ Surat: Amid corona gloom, a ray of hope — Gujarat saw two women patients, one from Surat and another from Ahmedabad, getting discharged on Sunday after recovering from Covid-19 infection which has put the country in a lockdown. 

Surat-based 21-year-old woman, who was one of state’s first Covid patients, was hospitalized on March 16. She has travel history to London. 

Dr Ashish Naik, Surat’s deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospital), told TOI, “Her third sample also tested negative on Sunday. She has recovered fully after 14 days of care and management.”

In Ahmedabad, a 34-year-old city-based entrepreneur also walked out of the hospital hale and hearty after her two samples tested negative post 10 days of hospitalization.

“.. 24 hours, Two tests: -Ve & -Ve. I'm coming home, I'm coming home; Tell the world I'm coming home. See you on the other side. You have been beyond wonderful,” the happy woman told the world on her social media post. 

Life had gone topsy-turvy some 11 days ago for this entrepreneur when her dream trip to Finland ended up in Covid nightmare. In her own admission, she ended up with the viral infection despite going great lengths – including changing her flight route – to escape the virus.

“If I have to summarize my experience, I would say, ‘Keep Calm and Trust your Doctor.’ In my case, the symptoms started manifesting about a week after my return. But I was aware about my travel history and when I started feeling the problem in breathing, I immediately sought medical help,” said the survivor, adding that it’s not a linear progression and symptoms surely scares a person.

Talking about her time at the SVP Hospital, she said that she was well cared for. “While I could not meet my family members, I was allowed to use my phone and I made most of it, calling my friends and family and keeping updated. I was among the nine patients recovering from the Covid-19 infection and I pray for their quick recovery,” she said.

She did get nervous when her first report came negative as she described the following 24 hours as anxious in anticipation.

Both the survivors would have to spend 14 days in home quarantine. None of their contacts are tested positive.


