Good Samaritans, social organisations come forward to help those hit by lockdown
2020-03-31
Dehradun/Rudrapur: Several non-government organisations (NGOs), social outfits, and good samaritans across the state have come forward to help those who are worst hit due to the ongoing Covid-19 lockdown.

In Dehradun, National Association for Parents and Students’ Rights (NAPSR) is providing free food to more than 500 people in need on a daily basis. The association told TOI that this drive will continue till the timne there is a lockdown in the city.

“We are providing free food at various locations of Dehradun. There is a large section of the population that is struggling to get a daily meal due to the Covid-19 lockdown. We are catering to more than 500 people daily and now, we have started with providing evening tea to police personnel on duty. Since the drive has started, we have covered several areas of Dehradun like Ajabpur Kalan, ISBT, Azad Colony, DL Road, and Sahastradhara Road,” said Arif Khan, NAPSR president. 

Many residents have also taken it upon themselves to feed stray animals during the lockdown. A group called ‘Save The Stray During Lockdown’ was created a few days back on Facebook in order to provide a common platform to those who are willing to help the stray animals.

“The stray animals are completely dependent on the leftovers at markets, groceries, restaurants and others. As these establishments have been shut, stray animals are going without food. Thus, ‘Save The Stray During Lockdown’ was created. Fortunately, we have witnessed an overwhelming response as more than 200 people have joined our group in such a short time. Many people are providing us with food supplies for the stray animals. Anyone can join the group by giving us a call at 8920367282. Also, we follow the social distancing norm while feeding the stray animals,” said Anupma Khanna, founder of the group. 

In Rudrapur, too, social organisations and residents are helping daily wagers and migrant workers who have gone out of work due to the Covid-19 lockdown.

“We are providing food and milk packets to people in need and are sanitising homes. We focus on providing relief to daily wagers, beggars, domestic helpers, and the likes,” said Karamjeet Singh Channa, president of social organisation ‘Zindagi Jindabad’. Another social organisation Tulsi Foundation has initiated a ‘Sabko Bhojan’ (food to everyone) programme to provide comprehensive kits of essential commodities to those in need. Similarly, locals of Bigbara village have raised funds to provide people with soaps, sanitisers, and masks. 

Rudrapur SDM Mukta Mishra told TOI, “The social organisations keep us in loop while reaching out to those in need.” SP (crime) Devendra Peencha added, "Police personnel collect food packets from these social organisations and distribute them to the needy. If we come across any person in need, we are arranging food for them on our own as well.”


