Good Samaritans feed birds, stray animals during lockdown
2020-03-29
Varanasi: A number of individuals, government and non-governmental organisations have come forward to take care of food problem of the needy persons during the lockdown period, while some even arranged food for the stray animals like monkeys, bulls, cows and dogs. 

Though feeding monkeys, bulls/cows and stray dogs has been in general practice for long in this temple town, the lockdown caused by the threat of coronavirus has definitely posed a serious problem.

Taking note of it, former minister and BJP leader Maneka Gandhi had also appealed to the people to feed these animals. She had also asked the animal welfare workers to take care of animals during the lockdown. The Animal Welfare Board of India had also issued an advisory for the care of animals in lockdown.

In Kashi, the people associated with a local group of ‘Ghat Walkers’ feed these animals every day believing that all the creatures in this world have right to food. “We arrange roti (bread) and grains for these animals and birds,” said a ghat walker Dr. Vijay Nath Mishra. Like morning walkers these people, who love to be called ‘Ghat Walkers’, too take regular round of the majestic riverfront of Ganga not only to have a free walk but also take care of the things all around. 

“There are scores of dogs, birds and also few sheep on the ghats. Out team regularly feed them with our own resources,” said Mishra, a neurologist at the Banaras Hindu University. The team members like Abhay Tiwari, Rajan Upadhyaya, Pramod Kumar and many others have become familiar with these stray animals. Besides the stray animals and birds, they also take care of fishes in the Ganga by arranging atta balls, said Mishra. Groups of monkeys are very common sight at the temples, particularly the Sankat Mochan Temple and Kashi Vishwanath Temple. Since all the temples have been closed for the devotees, these creatures might be in trouble in getting food. The temple devout and management are arranging food for them during the lockdown. Besides, a number of individuals put breads and other edibles on their gates so that the cows roaming in the lanes can get them. 


