Good news: 4 defeat coronavirus in Chandigarh, say isolation fight not easy
2020-04-05
CHANDIGARH: Positivity was the common thread that connected four Covid-19 patients discharged from hospitals after treatment in the city on Saturday, battling the highly infectious virus in isolation for more than two weeks. 

"I felt homesick. I used to listen to devotional songs to keep calm," said the 48-year-old mother of the city's first novel coronavirus patient. She was discharged from Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, after 15-day stay in a small private room with her daughter. 




"It has not been easy. I used to play online games on my mobile with friends," said the 21-year-old youth who had travelled to Dubai and had tested positive for the virus 15 days after he had returned. His mother is fighting the virus in PGI's Covid hospital. She was his primary contact. "So, he cannot have food cooked by me until I join him," she said. 

A 42-year-old Mohali resident was the other patient to be discharged from Government Multi-specialty Hospital, Sector 16, after two of his tests came negative, said a doctor. The man, who had a travel history to the UK, was admitted on March 19. His three family members are in isolation wards in various hospitals

The UK-based 27-year-old doctor who was the first to be discharged from PGI said she was suffering psychological effects of being in isolation for 14 days and not being able to see her family.

The homecoming was not of warm hugs, but cheerful smiles, as all have to stay in quarantine for 14 days as a prevention. 

"On arrival, I kept my stuff in a separate room (which was later sanitised) and took a hot water bath. We are still keeping a distance from each other in the house (sitting farther way from each other in a room whenever we wish to be together) and practicing strict hand hygiene," she said. 

Some of these patients had high fever for few days, dry cough, while some lost their smell sensation for a while. "I had mild fever and dry cough in the hospital. But I recovered well. The first thing I did was took a shower and cleaned up the mess in my room," said the 48-year-old woman. 


