Covid-19: Good Samaritans set an example in Kozhikode
2020-03-26
KOZHIKODE: After Covid-19 cases were confirmed in Kozhikode, the city is witnessing kind gestures from volunteers, NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and individuals who are distributing free food parcels to the needy on the streets amid the shutdown. Thanks to the district administration, social welfare department received an overwhelming response from NGOs and individual sponsors for its free food supply initiative.

Collector S Sambasiva Rao had asked the district social welfare officer to ensure free food supply to people living on the streets and social welfare wing started distributing food after lockdown was imposed.

The department, with the help of volunteers, are distributing food parcels at Palayam, Mofussil bus stand, railway station and Link Road. It has created a dedicated WhatsApp group to ensure sufficient supply of food to poor people. The required food is prepared at a centralized kitchen in Mathottam. 

Social justice officer CK Sheeba Mumtaz said the response from voluntary groups and individual sponsors, once the collector put up a post on his official page, was heartening.

"We commenced distributing food through a centralized system and distributed over 500 parcels. Already over 10 NGOs and individuals enrolled their names to supply raw materials, vehicles and volunteers. We have created a dedicated WhatsApp group including all sponsors and volunteers," she said, adding that only two volunteers are deployed at each point to supply food kits after ensuring their safety.

On the other hand, revenue department has also commenced distribution of breakfast, lunch and dinner to migrant workers who are staying indoors. Ward-level rapid response team within corporation limits have also commenced supply of food kits to those among the needy under home quarantine. Over 9,000 persons, who arrived in Kozhikode from Covid-19-hit countries, are under home quarantine. Food is given to those stuck in the district after lockdown was imposed.

