Government tells hotels to put in place preventive measures for coronavirus
2020-03-05
JAIPUR: A health department order on Wednesday wanted the hotel industry to avoid large gatherings of people in view of the holi festivities and share information about tourists coming from sensitive countries who carry risks of spreading coronavirus. 

According to the order, the hotels are also required to inform the chief medical and health officer about the tourists coming from China, Hong Kong, South Korea, Japan, Italy, Iran, and Nepal so that screening for coronavirus can be done immediately.

Hotel industry at the forefront of Covid-19's impact on businesses has already started taking preventive measures after the Italian tourists tested positive in a city hotel.

"We have provided sanitizers at every service area of the hotel and made sure that staff are using masks. We have also informed the staff to report any guest showing signs of illness," said a senior official of a star hotel.

A general manager of a hotel said that they are screening every vendor who are entering, by checking their temperature, cough and cold. "We cannot do that with every guest as it looks odd. But we have a dedicated to team who are keeping a watch on the guests for visible illness," he said.

Meanwhile, hotel Ramada where the infected Italian couple stayed has been disinfected twice said the five staff who were quarantined have tested negative in the first report

"Immediately after receiving the information and as advised by the concerned government authorities the hotel has at once implemented the due diligence and precautionary steps strictly as per the directive from the Chief Medical & Health officer and as per the guidelines from the government of India," said Atal Saran Bhargava, general manager of hotel Ramada, adding that the five staff who have been quarantined have tested negative in the first report.

When TOI spoke to hotel Marriott, it said in a statement that the chain will continue to follow recommended procedures and protocols issued by the Ministry of Health and World Health Organization's statements and follow guidelines on hygiene practices from these agencies and the local health departments.


