Govind Nagar complete lockdown Day 2: Residents resolute
2020-04-09
Nashik: The residents of the 3km-radius sealed area in Govind Nagar are determined to observe the complete lockdown. Though grocery and vegetable shops were closed on the second day on Wednesday, residents seemed mentally prepared.

On Tuesday, the Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) has sealed a 3km area around the Sumangal housing society in Manohar Nagar, which is a part of Govind Nagar, after a resident of the housing society tested positive for Covid-19. The prohibited area includes more than half of Ward 24 of the municipal corporation.

Though the streets had been locked down, residents of the containment areas put up additional barriers blocking approaches to their housing societies. One resident said that people were not even coming out on their balconies.

Prakash Vaishampayan, a gas dealer, said, “Our delivery men could not deliver the cylinders due to the barriers. Even when they managed to drive past the barriers, the customers did not want to come out to take the deliveries.” He said the delivery men were taking a risk too by visiting the containment zone, and they needed a little co-operation.

Prakash Patil, who lives in Sadguru Nagar, said, “Residents of our apartment decided that no one will leave the building or allow anyone inside. We have stopped our milkmen’s services. Grocery articles are purchased as and when the need arises, or the police allow us to venture out.”

Residents who have urgent work and need to go out, are making calls to their friends for help. A pathologist made phone calls to her friends and acquaintances when she realized that she too was not allowed to step out the society. “I have my lab and am attached to a private hospital. While I could keep my lab closed, it was important for me to go to the hospital. The officials, however, did not permit me or my husband, who too is a doctor, to leave,” said Pritika Chaudhary.

Many apartment residents have formed WhatsApp groups. On these groups they discuss whether to allow vegetable vendors, milkmen inside; the proper way to use the elevator; informing everyone if there is an urgent need to go out of the building etc.

Police officials said the bandobast would be lifted only after they get instructions from their senior officials. They added that 14 days from Tuesday could be the minimum period.

Corporators on phone to co-ordinate form home

Three corporators from the prohibited areas — Kalpana Pande, Pravin Tidme and Kalpana Chumbhle — are co-coordinating with the civic administration from their respective homes. They are ensuring that spraying and sanitation activities continue and people have access to essential goods and services.

Residents from the sealed areas are calling the corporators with various issues and the corporators are trying to address their concerns.

“I am continuously in touch with the health officials and the police administration after Govind Nagar and surrounding areas were sealed,” said Kalpana Pande. “I am ensuring that the areas in my ward are sanitised. Five-six residents, who came in contact with the confirmed patient, are isolated in the Zakir Hussain Hospital. Two of them are not in good health as they have blood pressure and sugar problems. I am continuously pursuing the matter with the authority,” she said. Pande is also trying to resolve other issues. “I got a call from one resident, whose relative passed away in Mumbai. She wanted to go there. I told her not to go to Mumbai and instead take care of her family,” Pande said.

Pravin Tidme too is resolving issues over the phone. “There are also two slums in my area. These people are contacting me for foods and other essentials. Some calls are related to spraying and sanitation activities,” Tidme said.

10 tested negative, swabs reports of 7 awaited

Meanwhile, the throat swab samples of 10 of 17 people from Govind Nagar areas have been tested negative. The reports of the remaining seven people are awaited.

NMC officials said that 17 people, who had come in close contact with the Covid-19 positive patient from Sumangal housing society, were isolated in NMC’s Zakir Hussain Hospital and their swabs were sent to the for testing.

The NMC continued its door-to-door survey on the second consecutive day on Wednesday in the core area around Sumangal housing society. A total of 22 teams, with three members each, have been deployed to conduct the survey. The NMC has conducted a survey of total 2,220 houses in past two days covering a total population of around 7,800.


