Government to bolster Covid-19 containment in Kurnool, Guntur, Krishna and Nellore
2020-04-20
AMARAVATI: Chief minister Y S Jaganmohan Reddy has directed the administration to focus on Kurnool, Guntur, Krishna and Nellore districts which have reported a high number of Covid-19 positive cases.

The CM asked the officials to take effective containment measures to bring down the positive cases. He also instructed the officials to bring all the frontline services including village and ward secretariat employees and volunteers into Covid life insurance scheme.

The chief minister took stock of the Covid-19 situation with the senior officials at the camp office on Sunday. He asked the officials to conduct more tests on the suspected cases to determine the spread of Covid-19 and take measures to contain the disease.

He said that rapid tests should be conducted in four districts which continue to report high number of positive cases. “Focus on four districts including Kurnool, Guntur, Krishna and Nellore as these areas are reporting high number of positive cases. Going for aggressive testing in these districts on a war-footing basis will help contain the spread,” said the chief minister.

He directed the officials to take up special drive of sanitation operations in the hospitals which were housing Covid-19 positive cases. He said that keeping the hospitals clean is very important to contain the disease. The CM asked the officials to immediately include the staff from frontline services including village and ward secretariat staffers, volunteers, sanitation workers, Asha workers in the corona health insurance scheme.

He asked them to identify if more services were needed to be brought into this category. Already, doctors, paramedical staff and police were covered under the newly announced health insurance scheme.

Special chief secretary (health) Dr KS Jawahar Reddy explained that AP stood second in conducting more tests in the country after Rajasthan and they would surpass all the states once the rapid tests were launched. He said that AP was conducting 539 tests per each 10 lakh population while Rajasthan was conducting 685 tests per each ten lakh population.

He said that the state screened 5,400 suspected cases on Saturday and the numbers would go up to 17,500 in a few days. He said all the 32,000 suspected cases identified under the family survey would be screened in the first phase.

The CM released face masks stitched by women members of self-help groups in urban areas. He asked the officials to distribute 3 masks to each person in the family in the red zones in the first phase. Mempa mission director GS Navin Kumar said that they were readying at least 1 lakh masks per day and hand over to the health department.


