Govt replies sought to PIL over lockdown
2020-06-03
Ahmedabad: The Gujarat high court on Tuesday sought a report from the central and state governments, in response to a PIL challenging the legal validity of the nationwide lockdown that has been imposed since March to curb the spread of Covid-19.

The high court asked the advocates representing the governments to take instructions and submit a report to the bench, which will take up a hearing on the suo motu PIL on Covid-19 and the lockdown on June 19, said the petitioner’s advocate, K R Koshti.

The PIL claims that the central government did not make any preparations before going into the lockdown and put the people of India in misery. Had proper safeguards been used, as were by many other countries across the world, the difficulties could have been avoided. Sections 12 and 13 of the Disaster Management Act prescribe that the government take proper measure for relief to the people. “The lockdown has not been imposed constitutionally nor has it been implemented legally, logically and scientifically,” the petition reads.

The petitioner submitted that the lockdown has been imposed by invoking the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 and the Disaster Management Act. But these laws do not have provisions for imposing curfew and house arrest. The restrictions on movements of senior citizens and children below 10 is in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.

The PIL also claimed that police have registered thousand of FIRs for lockdown violations, but when the lockdown itself is not constitutionally valid, the cases mean harassment for those who refused to follow illegal orders. It further contended that the lockdown, under the guise of measures to limit the spread of Covid-19, exposed the vulnerable and those with low levels of immunity. The aftermath of the lockdown was evidenced by the poor condition of migrant workers. 

The PIL questioned the interpretation and use of Section 144 of the CrPC, which prohibits the assembly of four or more persons in public spaces.


