Lockdown 5.0 in Rajasthan: Dos and don'ts from today
2020-06-01
JAIPUR: The Rajasthan government on Sunday issued guidelines for Lockdown 5.0 for the June 1-30 period, with no relaxations in the containment areas of hotspots and clusters. While all religious places, shopping malls and hotels will remain closed for the public till further orders, all government offices will function with full strength.


Private offices can also operate with full strength, but should encourage ‘work from home’ to the extent possible, the guidelines stated. On Saturday, the ministry of home affairs (MHA) had issued an order stating that religious places/places of worship, shopping malls, hotel and restaurants will be allowed to open for public from June 8.

 

Except in containment zones, buses will continue to ply interstate and within the state on approved routes, but city buses shall not operate. The bus operators will be held accountable for ensuring safety measures. 

Barber shops, salons and beauty parlours have also been allowed to open with complete safety precautions.

The government has also done away with coloured zones and, now, only demarcates containment and non-containment zones. “The state governments can take a decision on this (opening of religious places and shopping malls). We will examine the situation in the state and take a decision at the appropriate time,” said ACS (home) Rajeeva Swarup.

“The movement of individuals for all non-essential activities is strictly prohibited between 9pm and 5am across the state,” it added. “All commercial passenger transport vehicles — buses, taxis, cab aggregators (Ola/ Uber, etc.) autorickshaws, cyclerickshaws — are also permitted to ply subject to ensuring proper sanitisation of the seat and touch points before and after each journey and other safety precautions prescribed,” the order further stated.

“Passengers travelling in any vehicle (personal or commercial) shall not exceed the permitted seating capacity of the registered vehicle,” it said. “Selling of food items through shops, stalls, thelas, kiosks, including juice, tea and chaat, is allowed. But they have to maintain the required standards of cleanliness, hygiene and garbage disposal and ensure that social distancing is maintained.”

“Municipal authorities will ensure the compliance of safety standards and precautionary measures adopted by them,” it stated.

There shall be no restriction on interstate and within the state movement of persons and goods. No separate permission or pass will be required for such movement.

District magistrates and other authorized officers have been empowered to enforce the common safety prescriptions through fines and penal action as prescribed in the Disaster Management Act, 2005/The Rajasthan Epidemic Diseases Ordinance, 2020.

“Any unit/shops found not observing the safety conditions shall be shut down and penal action taken. Strict legal action will be taken against any unit that is in the prohibited category and found to be open,” it read-.The government will launch a massive community awareness drive at state and district level to educate people on essential precautionary measures.

