Tamil Nadu government divided over intense lockdown in Chennai
2020-06-13
CHENNAI: Some in the government, including top bureaucrats, want a lockdown within a lockdown enforced strictly in Chennai and its suburbs in view of the Covid surge. Others want the curbs eased. The chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami will meet the government’s panel of medical experts on Monday to discuss the way forward.

The government is studying the ground realities and garnering the views of all sections. Traders have offered support for a 15-day lockdown. The CM would take a call after meeting the health experts, said a source in government. Palaniswami, who is in Salem and expected in Chennai on Sunday night, on Friday told reporters the government had no plans as of now for a complete lockdown.

His last meeting with the government’s panel of health experts was on May 30 ahead of the fifth extension, where it was decided not to open up Chennai and three neighbouring districts.

Now, with the city’s case tally nearing 30,000 a section of top bureaucrats is pushing for an intense lockdown. The city recorded 13,720 cases in May, and 13,154 cases in the first 12 days of June.

"Despite stringent measures to contain the spread, the lack of support from the people is costing us very dearly. Lots of free movement to districts as resulted in new cases emerging from Vellore, Ranipet, Villupuram, Trichy, Thanjavur and Thiruvarur districts. The spread is due to Chennai’s porous borders," said another official.

Officials rue that even home quarantined persons, especially in the core areas, step out ignoring the danger of the virus spreading. They say local AIADMK partymen too have requested the administration to go in for complete lockdown to bring down the cases.

However, health experts differ. "Lockdown is a failure in Chennai. All along the health expert team only suggested a phased exit, with strong containment strategies and enhanced testing and screening. Maintaining social distancing norms, personal hygiene and wearing masks alone will prevent the spread," said an epidemiologist, who is part of the government’s panel of medical experts.


