Rajasthan government’s cluster containment strategy to curb coronavirus
2020-03-04
JAIPUR: The state government has chalked out a strategy to contain coronavirus after Rajasthan reported its first case on Monday. It has formulated a cluster containment plan to ward off risk of spreading of Covid-19. The objective of cluster containment is to stop transmission, morbidity and mortality due to the virus.


The cluster containment strategy would be to contain the disease with in a defined geographic area by early detection, breaking the chain of transmission and thus preventing its spread to new areas. This would include geographic quarantine, social distancing measures, enhanced active surveillance, testing all suspected cases, isolation of cases, home quarantine of contacts, social mobilization to follow preventive public health measures.

“If an area reports a Covid-19 case, then the containment will be the radius of three kilometre. If more cases are reported from the area, then it will be expanded to 5km,” said DB Gupta, chief secretary, state government after holding a meeting with health department officials on Tuesday.

The health department will conduct active surveillance in containment zone with contact tracing within and outside the containment zone. Apart from implementing social distancing measures, the health department will establish surge capacities for isolating all suspects/confirmed cases for medical care.

Moreover, there will be a check on outward movement of population from the containment zone except for maintaining essential services (including medical emergencies) and government business continuity. It will also limit unchecked influx of population into the containment zone, said a health department official.

The authorities at these entry points will be required to inform the people entering about precautions to be taken and will also provide them with an information pamphlet and mask.

Health workers posted at the exit point will perform screening, measure temperature, record the place and duration of intended visit and keep complete record of intended place of stay).


