Odisha government draws up plans to keep returnees engaged in quarantine
2020-04-29
BHUBANESWAR: To make the two-week stay pleasant at the state-sponsored quarantine facilities for those returning to Odisha after May 3, the government has decided to engage them in yoga, painting, “antakshari”, “purana patha” or mythological discussions. 


They will also be put through psycho-social counselling and exposed to motivational talks, story-telling and healthcare awareness programmes with the help of NGOs and trained personnel. They will be provided with personal hygiene kit that will have two double-layer face masks. Women and girls will get sanitary napkins as per their requirement during their stay with the help of ASHA and women self-help groups. 

 

On Tuesday, the revenue and disaster management department issued a detailed guideline for management of temporary medical camps or quarantine facility. More than 7,000 such facilities have already been developed with over 2.3 lakh beds. More quarantine facilities are being set up as the state expects a massive flow of people, including migrant labourers, students, professionals, stranded pilgrims, etc, after completion of the lockdown. It is mandatory for everyone to stay in the quarantine facilities for 14 days before going home. 

“Separate rooms, bathrooms and toilets must be arranged for men and women. In case there are people from the LGBT community, separate provisions should be made. Special needs of differently-abled people must also be looked into,” stated special relief commissioner P K Jena, in the guidelines. 

Jena stressed on safety of women and children and dignity of individuals. “Their religion, caste, faith and beliefs must be respected. No discrimination of any kind should be practised, promoted or tolerated,” he emphasised. Authorities have been asked to inform local police about the location of the camp and number of people staying in it.

Common spaces like toilets and floors will be cleaned thrice a day while spitting, smoking and chewing of tobacco are strictly prohibited. Wearing masks is a must for everyone. 

Disposable plates will be be used and used plates disposed off in a pit at a safe distance and covered with soil. Also, the place is to be disinfected with bleaching powder from time to time. 

Jena said potable and safe drinking water should be provided. It should be preferably boiled, filtered and if required, treated with halazone tablets. 

He said people coming to the quarantine centres with fever and cold symptoms will be segregated from others and their condition brought to the notice of the local medical officer. People suspected with SARI (Severe Acute Respiratory Infection) and ILI (Influenza Like Infection) symptoms will be shifted to the designated health facility. 

The state government has sanctioned food expenditure of Rs 120 per adult/day and Rs 100 per child (below 14 years) per day. Also, Rs 300 has been sanctioned per person for personal hygiene kit, said Jena. Similarly, Rs 2,000 per day has been sanctioned for cleaning, sanitation and security at the facility. 

