Govt sets up six teams for Covid-19 contingencies
2020-03-26
Bhopal: Six teams comprising 19 IAS officers and 20 officers of other services have been tasked with ensuring supply of essential goods and meeting with any contingencies during the 21-day nationwide lockdown across the country.

The teams will coordinate with hospitals and create awareness on several platforms. To ensure proper coordination among all groups, principal secretary of health department Pallavi Jain Govil has been appointed as the chief coordinator. The groups will look after medicine supplies; equipment and logistics; medical treatment and hospital management; mobility services; ambulance services and 104 call centre; essential services and state-level coordination; information, contact and communication group, and human resource management.

Principal secretary Faiz Ahmed Kidwai; S Dhanaraju, director health; Vijay Kumar J and joint controller, D K Nagendra have been tasked with medicine and logistics.

Principal secretary Sanjay Shukla; commissioner health, Prateek Hajela; commissioner medical education, Nishant Warwade; additional mission director, Sonali Sadana; IAS Chhavi Bhardwaj, BDA CEO, Anju Pawan Bhadoria; director medical education Alka Shrivastava; additional director health, Veena Sinha and technical advisor Dr Lokendra Dave will monoitor medical treatment and hospital management.

Mobility services, ambulance and 104 call centre will be managed by secretary State government B Chandrashekhar; MD MPSIDC, Nandkumaram; managing director Swati Meena Naik and director, CM Helpline, Bhupendra Singh Paraste.

Essential services and state-level coordination will be managed by additional chief secretary, ICP Keshari; principal secretary industries, Rajesh Rajora; principal secretary, MSME, Manu Shrivastava; principal secretary, urban administration and housing, Sanjay Dubey; principal secretary, Shiv Shekhar Shukla; principal secretary, Pallavi Jain Govil; deputy secretary, Sudhir Kumar Kochar and tehsildar Akash Shrivastava.

Commissioner public relations, P Narhari; and Sapna M Lovanshi, additional director health will look after information, contact and communication.

Ruhi Khan, OSD, RCVP Noronha Academy of Administration; additional director, Lata Sharnagat, Dr Archana Mishra and B D Khare will oversee human resource management.


