Govts lean on Tablighi Jamaat to get its members screened
2020-04-01
NEW DELHI: The Centre and state governments are leaning on Tablighi Jamaat to get its members to report to the authorities for Covid-19 screening. A source said central and state agencies had asked members of the Islamic evangelical outfit to ensure that all those who came into contact with its foreign members go for virus scan immediately.

A home ministry source on Tuesday said while the priority right was to locate/trace, screen, quarantine and, where needed, hospitalise the 824 identified foreign Tablighi Jamaat members who were on religious preaching duties across the country as well as Indian members who came in contact with them, the foreign preachers could subsequently be deported as and when international flights resume, and blacklisted for indulging in missionary activities while on tourist visa. Blacklisting debars a foreigner from future travel to India.

TOI had on Tuesday exclusively reported that the foreign Tablighi preachers would face blacklisting for violating their tourist visa conditions.

The home ministry on Tuesday said it had shared a list of 824 foreigners engaged in Tablighi Jamaat’s “religious preaching” activities across the country with state police forces as early as March 21 for identifying the individuals, getting them screened for Covid-19 and quarantining them. This was after some Tablighi members, who were on a tour of the country, tested positive in Erode in Tamil Nadu and Hyderabad.

Some of the 824 foreign Tablighi preachers have already been located by respective states and are currently under quarantine or hospitalisation. According to the ministry, as on March 21, 1,746 people were staying at Nizamuddin. These included 216 foreigners and 1,530 Indians.

In all, some 2,100 Tablighis arrived since January 1. These were largely from Bangladesh (493), Indonesia (472), Malaysia (150) and Thailand (143). Of these, 824 were sent across the country — to UP (132), Tamil Nadu (125), Maharashtra (115), Haryana (115), Telangana (82), West Bengal (70), Karnataka (50), MP (49), Andhra Pradesh (24), Rajasthan (13) and Odisha (11) preaching. “Those who only attended the Tablighi conferences are not facing any violation of tourist visa condition,” said an officer.

All Tablighi Jamaat workers staying at Nizamuddin are being medically screened since March 26. “Since March 23, lockdown has been strictly imposed, including in and around Nizamuddin, and Tablighi work came to a halt,” said a release. Two conferences took place at its headquarters, one on March 15-17 and another on March 21-23. Both, a source said, were south India-centric. 

The Centre had on March 28 advised the state police to also collect names of Indian Tablighi Jamaat workers from local coordinators, locate them, get them screened and quarantined. This was after it learnt that some Indians were at a Tablighi congregation in Kuala Lumpur from February 27 to March 1, and subsequent “open source” reports indicated that many attendees had tested positive for Covid-19. 

About 2,137 Indian members have been identified in different states and are being medically examined and quarantined. 

The Bureau of Immigration had been sharing (since February 1) with states, details of all international arrivals from affected countries. Since March 6, it has been sharing details of all international arrivals.


