Lockdown 2.0: Supply chain of essentials freed from most curbs
2020-04-16
NEW DELHI: Two drivers and one helper will be allowed in each truck and other carriers including vehicle carriers post April 20 so that more drivers can reach the stranded trucks.



Coronavirus outbreak: Live updates
Currently, only one driver and a helper are allowed in a loaded or empty truck. This relaxation is crucial to ensure adequate supply of essential commodities considering that trucks and other goods carriers bring the supply up to the stores. Government reiterating on Wednesday to allow empty trucks to ply is expected to bring more reliefs to truckers.

The revised home ministry guideline said all facilities in the supply chain of essential goods whether involved in manufacturing, wholesale or retail of such goods through local stores, large brick and mortar stores or e-commerce companies should be allowed to operate “without any restrictions on their timing of opening and closure”. 

However, this will be subject to strict social distancing.

It said shops, including kirana and single shop selling essential goods, hygiene items should be allowed to operate. The ministry also said carts used for selling essential items and ration shops should be allowed. 

Similarly, sale of fruits and vegetables, opening of dairy and milk booth, sale of poultry meat and fish, animal feed and fodder should be allowed ensuring strict social distancing.

“District authorities may encourage and facilitate home deliveries to minimize the movement of individuals outside their home,” the guideline said.


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
 How to quarantine yourself at home
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news

While government sources said some concerns of truckers have been addressed by allowing more drivers to move in trucks, truckers said the government has not yet resolved how drivers can come from home until there is transport facility for their movement.

Meanwhile, the truckers organizations, which had claimed nearly three lakh trucks are held up at factory gates, outside warehouses or are abandoned at dhabas, have so far collected details of about 15,000 such trucks.

Sources said they have not yet provided the details of the stranded trucks as compilation is a complicated process and many truckers are slowing responding. The road transport ministry had sought the details quickly so that the issues could be resolved expeditiously.

“When the all economic activities including manufacturing have stopped, how can trucks keep running? Only a small share of the trucks are now operating to carry essential items,” said an industry insider.

