Govt mulls new strategy as eight die across Tamil Nadu, Chennai records 510 Covid-19 cases
2020-05-13
CHENNAI: Public health authorities sat down to revise their urban containment plan on Tuesday after Chennai recorded more than 500 new cases for the third day running and the state’s Covid-19 count rose to 8,718 with 716 more people infected. Eight deaths were also reported taking the toll to 61.

Chennai’s 510 new cases pushed its total to 4,882, forcing senior officials and members of the expert committee to brainstorm for a plan to ensure compliance inside containment zones in north Chennai and improve contact tracing and testing in emerging zones in south Chennai.

For instance, the team decided to recommend cutting down the quarantine period for those testing positive from 28 days to 14 days as per international protocol. “It is easier to convince people to stay inside their homes and follow stringent quarantine measures when it is for two weeks,” said Greater Chennai Corporation special nodal officer J Radhakrishnan. They are also mulling whether to declare an area as containment zone only when at least five family (about 25 people) test positive. At present, the civic body paints the area red even if one person tests positive. While the residence of the positive person will remain the epicentre, the area will not be declared a “no-go” zone. “If there are many cases on the same street or area, people may feel the need to follow rules. Else violations will be rampant. It is a burden on the civic agency and police, besides putting people at risk,” he said.

On Monday, the Chennai map spread out by officials at the Greater Chennai Corporation showed new cases in the southern parts of the city such as Maduvankarai, Adambakkam, Nanganallur and Velachery. “Many people who have adequate facilities have been allowed home quarantine but we have told patients to take utmost care to ensure it doesn’t spread within the family or the neighbourhood. They should be ambassadors for a social movement,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh, after the discussions at the state secretariat.

Tamil Nadu continues to see an increase in the TJ and Koyambedu clusters. On Sunday, there were 1,350 people in the TJ cluster, which rose to 1,365 on Monday. The cases in Koyambedu cluster numbered 2,553 on Monday. Cases outside these two clusters went up from 3,558 to 4,084. The break-up for Tuesday was still being worked out, officials said. On Tuesday, the case list has a doctor from the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital, a staff nurse from Omandurar Multispecialty Hospital, policemen, and journalists.

All eight deaths announced on Tuesday, occurred in the last two days in three government medical college hospitals in Chennai. While four deaths were in Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital, three were in Kilpauk Medical College Hospital and one was recorded at the Stanley Medical College Hospital. “All of them had serious co-morbidities. They were patients with advanced stages of blood cancer, lung or brain disease. Others had diabetes and hypertension,” said the health secretary.

The state has received protocol for clinical trial using the antiviral drug Remdesivir. “We have collected plasma from volunteers. The trial for plasma therapy will be done by three government hospitals,” said a senior doctor.

On Tuesday, the number of people who were tested for the viral infection came down to 11,632 from 13,833 on May 8, after the state revised the testing strategy. “This was expected because the testing is focused now . But we are quarantining suspected patients at home or facility quarantine centres,” he said.

Of the 22 districts that recorded new cases on Tuesday, Chennai's neighbours Chengalpattu recorded 35, Kancheepuram 24 and Tirvallur had 27 cases. Among others, Ariyalur recorded 36, Perambalur 27 and Tiruvanamalai had 13. The other districts registered a single digit increase.

