Govt to rope in NSS, NCC cadets to fight Covid-19 in villages
2020-04-21
Lakshmikantha.BK@timesgroup.com

Mysuru: The department of rural development and panchayat raj is roping in present and former National Cadet Corps (NCC) and National Service Scheme (NSS) cadets to fight the Covid-19 pandemic. They will work as foot soldiers to ensure that the programmes initiated by the government reach the public. 

Uma Mahadevan, principal secretary, RDPR department on Thursday decided to appoint NCC and NSS cadets to work as ‘Grama Corona Sainika’ (Village Corona Soldier) to support the government in fighting and controlling the spread of coronavirus in the state. 

“Every village should have two youths, a male and a female, as soldiers who should be between the age group of 18 to 35 years. The youths must have smart phones and those who have NCC and NSS background should be preferred,” she said. 

The RDPR department, which has already set up Gram Panchayat Task Force (GPTF) and Village Task Force (VTF) in 27,000 villages in the state, has directed GPTF to select two youths in each village to serve as corona soldiers.

An RDPR officer said that the selected youths will be the eyes and ears of GPTF at the village level. They will work as the foot soldiers to fight against the coronavirus in their respective villages and report to the task force everyday regarding the government programmes initiated to contain the pandemic. 

Santhosh, a former NCC cadet from Srirangapatna taluk who runs a cyber center in Mandya told TOI that the initiative to make use of the experience of the youths must be lauded. “During my NCC days, we were given training to handle emergency situations. NCC and NSS students are disciplined and are ready to serve for the society,” he added. 

*****

Box

Online training programme for NSS officers 

NSS at University of Mysore is set to launch an online training programme on Covid-19 awareness for NSS programme Officers through Zoom app.

NSS programme coordinator B Chandrashekar said the online training programme will be attended by 180 NSS officers from Mysuru, Mandya, Hassan and Chamarajanagar districts. The programme will be attended by university vice chancellor G Hemantha Kumar, state NSS officer Gananatha Shetty Ekkar, state NSS implementation officer Poornima Jogi, chief medical officer M S Basavaraj and registrar R Shivappa on Saturday. 


