Kerala government seeks help of private hospitals to ensure quarantine care
2020-06-13
KOCHI: With the number of persons in quarantine increasing, government reached out private hospitals seeking their help in the management of persons in quarantine (HQ & IQ) along with their close contacts. As on June 11, 2,17,027 persons are in quarantine of which 1,87,359 are in home quarantine and 24,157 are in IQ.

Many returnees and their contacts need medical care for non-Covid ailments that is mostly managed at the PHC-level. But now, with government being taxed due to increase in patient load at its hospitals amid fear of communicable diseases during monsoon, health department sought the help of private hospitals. Recently, the health minister discussed the same with private hospital managements. Government hospitals will continue to take care of Covid patients.

The minister sought help of private hospitals to offer specialist doctor/nursing care from hospitals for those in HQ and observation. Also, private hospitals will have to give telemedicine and counselling services to patients in HQ. 

Also, if they have other illness (not Covid) then private hospital doctor would check on them and collect blood samples if needed. However, swab for Covid tests will only be collected by a trained government staff. Private hospitals have also been asked to start mobile clinics.

Confirming the development, Kerala Private Hospital Association president Hussain Koya Thangal said, “We have been asked to provide home care, medical treatment to those in quarantine and will soon be submitting a proposal to the government on what kind of assistance private sector can give to persons under surveillance.”

Government’s medical advisory panel on Covid management had recently discussed the issue of how private hospitals can help. There was consensus that people, who now have an option of free and paid IQ, should also be given the option of treatment in government or private hospitals. Therefore, along with government hospitals, a few private hospitals should be declared as Covid treatment centres.

The general view of the committee was that in eventuality of more cases, government health system will be overburdened. Therefore, if private hospitals are roped in now, then when a crisis comes, then it can absorb many cases. CM, in his press briefing, suggested the same on Thursday.

However, private hospitals are unwilling to become Covid treatment centres. “We are not encouraging admission of Covid patients as government still has capacity. If there is major community breakout, then private hospitals will also have to be declared as Covid hospitals,” said KIMS healthcare group chairman Dr MI Sahadulla. At present, only in special cases, a Covid patient is treated by some private hospitals with government permission.

Hospital managements admit that there is stigma attached to Covid and admitting Covid patients would affect the inflow of other patients. “Private hospitals have no role in Covid treatment now. Covid infection risk is high among healthcare workers at a Covid care centre. But if the situation worsens, we have 30% beds ready to admit Covid patients,” said medical superintendent, Rajagiri Hospital, Dr Sunny P Orathel.


