Covid-19 in Odisha: Government  ready with over 4 lakh beds to tackle crisis
2020-03-20
BHUBANESWAR: The state government on Thursday said it has created facilities for more than 4.22 lakh temporary hospital beds across the state to tackle a possible spurt in Covid-19 patients in case it spreads to the community even as all the 14 samples tested negative for the virus on Wednesday.


The district headquarters hospitals, medical colleges and private hospitals together have 3,183 isolation beds ready at present. 

“The government has identified 450 buildings as treatment facilities in urban areas to accommodate 51,160 patients. Similarly, it has created 7,176 temporary medical camps across 6,798 panchayats with a capacity of 50 to 100 beds, making the total availability of space for 4,22,426 beds,” said Subroto Bagchi, government spokesperson for Covid-19.

The government has given Rs 5 lakh to each panchayat for the temporary facility. A training session for 2.37 lakh panchayat representatives was held across state on Thursday to reach out to people owing to social distancing now and for treatment at the panchayat camps in case the need arises. The government has decided to supply paracetemol tablets and personal protective equipment such as masks to ASHAs and health workers who may become the first responders to patients in case of mass transmission.

Of the 61 samples tested in the state so far, only one has tested positive. Twenty-three people have been kept in isolation in different hospitals for coming in close contact with the lone COVID-19 positive patient, a Bhubaneswar native who returned from Italy and who has been stable at Capital Hospital here.

In a fresh advisory, the government asked people needing non-essential, non-urgent outpatient care with mild illness or needing avoidable follow up, elective procedures including dental care not to visit the hospitals, either government-run or private for the time-being to avoid possible transmission. Patient needing emergency care only may visit the hospitals, the advisory by P K Mohapatra, head, social distancing committee, Covid-19 Response, of the state government.

Health secretary Nikunja Dhal said keeping in mind the evolving situation, the government’s current focus is on prevention of transmission so that health system is not overburdened. 


