Government medical college in Ernakulam leads battle against Covid-19
2020-03-26
KOCHI: Government Medical College, Ernakulam, has become the go-to place when it comes to fighting communicable diseases and situations arising out of disasters. The hospital accommodated patients from many of the hospitals including renowned private hospitals in the district during floods, and could provide better healthcare for treating patients infected by Nipah virus. Now, the medical college has become an exclusive Covid-19 treatment centre.

Authorities are arranging around 500 beds for Covid-19 treatment. “As of now, we are using only 30 rooms for isolation facilities and 17 Covid-19 positive cases are admitted here. We have made arrangements for accommodating many more patients in the event of an emergency,” said medical college deputy superintendent Dr Geetha Nair. 

According to district health department officials, a dedicated team of doctors and other staff take care of the patients at the medical college. “We are giving maximum clinical care to each patient. A few days ago, we closed the entire hospital for facilitating some diagnostic tests of a UK national admitted here. The UK national had to undergo several diagnostic tests. We took the effort considering the safety of the British national as well as that of other patients admitted here. We can’t provide bathrooms with facilities similar to those in top private hospitals. But clinical care we provide is on par with developed countries. We are giving separate room for each patient in isolation. Four teams of doctors, all specialists, take care of those in isolation wards,” said National Health Mission district manager Dr Mathews Numbeli, who is one of the doctors leading the operations of corona care in the district.

While the food for all the patients and hospital staff comes from District Jail, Kakkanad, the food for the foreigners admitted here are being made by MBBS students themselves. For the foreigners, we prepare the menu of their choice,” said Dr Fathauddeen, nodal officer, Covid-19 care, Medical College, Ernakulam. “When a British national complained that he ran out of tissue papers, one of the doctors himself walked up to the next floor, took some tissue papers and handed it over to the patient,” he said. 

A media report had claimed that the British citizens admitted to the medical college were given poor facilities.

“We cater to all people free of cost whether it is local people or foreign citizens,” he said. “Many Malayali doctors residing in UK are requesting us to send some medicines as it is not available there and we are planning to send it,” Fathauddeen said. The overall isolation activities are supervised by principal Dr Thomas Mathew and all the infrastructure and logistics of isolation ward of Covid-19 are being ensured by resident medical officer Dr Ganesh Mohan.

