Govt procures 1L Korean kits to quicken testing process
2020-04-18
Amaravati: Bolstering the testing process to track the spread of Covid-19, the state government has imported rapid anti-body kits from South Korea. The new kits will help get test results in 10 minutes. The government received nearly 1 lakh kits from South Korea which will be dispatched to district labs in the next few days.

Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy formally received the kits and examined their performance in the camp office on Friday. Special chief secretary (health) Dr KS Jawahar Reddy explained to the chief minister that the testing capacity would be increased to nearly 16,000 per day once the testing with new kits is started.

The state government had placed an order with MedTech Zone for manufacturing of nearly 2 lakh test kits only last week. While the kits made in MedTech zone in Visakhapatnam would take 30 minutes to determine the result, the South Korean kit will take only 10 minutes.

Taking stock of the covid-19 situation at a review, the chief minister directed the officials to make use of the family survey carried out in the state to conduct rapid tests. He said that elimination of the suspected cases should begin based on the survey report.

The CM asked the officials to focus on patient care as many undergoing quarantines are found to be struggling with comorbidities. He said that their health should be given priority even before getting their test reports.

The chief minister asked the officials to launch emergency services in hospitals along with handling Covid-19 crisis. He said that people should not complain that no other health emergency is being attended to in the name of the fight against Covid-19. He said that extending services to other emergencies was also important.

Senior officials said they had roped in specialist doctors to handle critical care management. They said that the experts would provide requisite inputs to the professionals extending services to Covid-19 patients in isolation wards. They told the CM that a control room was set up with the experts to support the doctors and paramedical staff. They said that the experts would monitor the vitals of the patients and put the doctors on high alert.

“The services of the experts in the control room would reduce the stress on the professionals serving the patients inside,” said Dr Jawahar Reddy. 


