Govt will increase testing capacity to 10,000 samples per day soon, says Sriram
2020-05-09
Dharwad: In the wake of many erstwhile ‘Green Zone’ districts in Karnataka reporting Covid-19 cases in the past week, and more so following the easing of restrictions, health minister B Sriramulu on Friday said that the government would increase the operational capacity of laboratories to cope with the rise in the number of individuals suspected of having the infection. 

Sriramulu, in Dharwad to review the situation in the district, pointed out that the state government had commenced random sampling in hotspots. “We will soon have extraction kiosks up and running at the hotspots,” he added. 

He said that the state had already procured one lakh rapid testing kits, and an order for 50,000 more had been placed. “As of now, there are 32 laboratories testing samples for Covid-19 across the state, and there is a growing demand for having one in each district,” said Sriramulu, adding that chief minister BS Yediyurappa had indicated his willingness to earmark funds for the laboratories. 

The minister said that, across 32 laboratories, nearly 7,000 samples were being tested per day. “The goal is to increase that number to 10,000 in a week’s time,” said Sriramulu. 

He said that the number of fever clinics would be doubled to serve those with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) and influenza like illnesses (ILI). On measures being adopted to secure those returning to the state from abroad, Sriramulu said, “Around 6,500 Kannadigas will arrive in Bengaluru between May 11 and May 15, and the government has issued fresh guidelines, which will mandate 14-day institutional quarantine for all those returning home.” 

Sriramulu said that there were only five Covid-19 active cases in Dharwad district. “Across the district, 4,009 individuals have been asked to stay quarantined at home, while seven continue to stay isolated at a hospital. We are still waiting for the results of 169 throat swab samples,” said Sriramulu, who inspected the facilities at the Dharwad District Civil Hospital, where he interacted with nurses and other staff members. 


