Delhi govt details procedure on handling virus deaths
2020-04-08
NEW DELHI: Delhi health secretary, Padmini Singla, has issued the standard operating procedure (SOP) to be followed if a death due to novel coronavirus infection occurs outside a medical facility. The guidelines, which will be adopted in case of advanced stage of the coronavirus spread, fix agency-wise roles and responsibilities.

A senior public health official said that they are hoping that the situation will be contained and Delhi will not see a community spread at mass level. However, these guidelines have been issued for the local agencies to be ready to tackle any eventuality.

The guidelines which were sent on Friday last week stated that relatives of the family of suspected corona death case would have to contact the district magistrate who would be the nodal officer in anti-corona efforts.

“The district magistrate will immediately inform the designated Covid-19 hospital,” the SOP added.

The designated hospitals in the city include Lok Nayak Hospital, GB Pant Hospital, Rajiv Gandhi Super Specialty Hospital, Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital and Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital.

The designated authority in case of unclaimed bodies on the streets will be Delhi Police which will have to take proper precautions so that people coming in contact with it do not get infected.

“Delhi Police will handle the body in accordance with the guidelines issued by the GOI and bring it to nearest designated hospital,” the order states. 

The government official added that police will have to use full body personal protective equipment and disinfectants while dealing with such bodies from now onwards.

Once the body reaches the hospital, the trained healthcare workers will handle and pack it in body bags after disinfecting them. “The hospital shall provide hearse van to carry the body for cremation and burial to ensure no further infection is caused. The van must be brought back to the hospital and disinfected,” the SOP adds.

The corporations have been asked to sensitise and train the staff for handling of such bodies at the cremation grounds. “Neither crowding by relatives will be allowed, nor any ritual involving touching of the body,” the corporation official added.


