Govt launches mega cash transfer to fight Covid-19
2020-04-04
NEW DELHI/MUMBAI: The government on Friday launched one of the largest-ever cash transfer schemes, including the deposit of over Rs 30,000 crore into the account of woman Jan Dhan account holders as well as Rs 5,000 crore into the linked accounts of eight crore poor households with LPG connections provided under ‘Ujjwala’.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

On Day 1 of the PM Jan Dhan transfer scheme, Rs 500 was deposited into the accounts of 4 crore women, with the government ordering banks to ensure that the dormant accounts were reactivated to ensure that no beneficiary was left out. The mega exercise, which will see deposits based on the last digit of the account number, saw several thousand account holders visit their bank branches and nearest ATMs, although business correspondents have been pressed into service to ensure door-step delivery of benefits. All accounts are to get the funds by April 9.



More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

While banks said they had made all the arrangements for orderly withdrawal, there were instances of overcrowding. Some branches also faced pressure because it coincided with pensioners coming to collect their monthly pension.

Similarly, the transfer of funds for purchase of three free cooking gas cylinders for April has begun. State-run fuel retailers will transfer funds by the fourth of May and June as advance so that beneficiaries can buy LPG cylinders under a Rs 1.7 lakh-crore relief package for the poor, which includes free cooking gas cylinder for three months. The Ujjwala consumers will have the option of getting three regular refills of 14.2kg or up to eight cylinders of 5kg, commonly known as ‘Chhotua’.

Ujjwala has established itself as a major vehicle of social change and will again emerge as a key player in India’s fight against coronavirus, oil minister Dharmendra Pradhan told the ground leaders implementing the scheme as he started a series of interactive sessions through video-conference with over 700 ‘district nodal officers (DNOs)’.

In case a Ujjwala consumer does not take all the three cylinders by June, she can use the money to buy a refill anytime till March 2021.

Pradhan told officers of IndianOil, HPCL and BPCL to ensure delivery of the ‘free’ LPG cylinders to Ujjwala consumers without affecting the overall supply rate. The three government fuel retailers are delivering 60 lakh cylinders daily, or 15% more than usual.

