Government doesn’t believe Covid-19 killed all victims
2020-05-11
CHENNAI: Two of the three Covid-19 patients who died in TN on Sunday had co-morbidities – a 59-year-old man with diabetes and cardiac disease and a 55-year-old with renal failure, diabetes and hypertension. 

"Most people who died of the viral infection in Tamil Nadu had severe co-morbidities. We don’t know what killed them," said health secretary Beela Rajesh. Last week, during a meeting with Union health minister Harsh Vardhan, the state asked for reclassification of some deaths. "Some of our patients had additional risk factors. They were above 80 years of age or were obese," she said. The state, which on Sunday received a revised format for death declaration asking for details on co-morbidities, hopes protocols will be revised. 

Among the 47 who died of Covid-19 until Sunday, 17 of the 2,450 women who tested positive died and 30 of the 4,752 men died. Twenty of the 503 patients admitted above the age of 60 died including one at 96 and one at 98. A 27-year-old woman who died on the labour table in Government Kasturba Gandhi Hospital for Women was the youngest Covid-19 patient.

A 54-year-old Madurai businessman with lung disease, hypertension and diabetes was the first Covid death in TN, on March 25 when passed away at the Rajaji Government General Hospital. "Since May 1, we have seen 20 deaths. And at least 50% of the patients have been in hospital for less than 48 hours. That is because they had severe co-morbidities," said a senior directorate of medical education doctor. "Health department records show 20 of the 47 died within two days of admission."

"If the cause of hospital admission for the heart failure patient is Covid-19 and his heart or kidney failure worsens the outcome, the cause of death is Covid-19," said infectious diseases expert Dr Subramanian Swaminathan. 

"The mode of death could be respiratory failure or cardio-respiratory arrest. Heart or kidney diseases are incidental."

Others say it may not always be the same, adding that if a patient with hip fracture develops sepsis, cause of death will be sepsis and not fracture. "What we need now is some integrity. Doctors should be judicious in including or excluding Covid as cause of death. If we don’t get this right now, we may never know the seriousness of this viral infection. It may affect policies and research as well," said Dr George Thomas, former editor of the Indian Journal of Medical Ethics.

