Goverment to offer dedicated treatment for coronavirus at four hospitals
2020-03-27
VIJAYAWADA: In a move towards strengthening the infrastructure in its fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, the state government has decided to convert a few teaching hospitals in Andhra Pradesh as dedicated Covid-19 treatment facilities besides augmenting the quarantine facilities across the state. The four colleges/hospitals identified for these facilities are Siddhartha Medical College, Vijayawada (located in the premises of government general hospital); government general hospital, Nellore; Visakha Institute of Medical Sciences, Visakhapatnam; and Sri Venkateswara Medical College (Ruia Hosptial), Tirupati. The state government has already identified nearly 18,000 beds at district and constituency headquarters for quarantine facility.


Regular patients receiving medical care at these four hospitals/colleges will be diverted to nearby hospitals. The dedicated Covid-19 medical facilities will work 24x7 besides suspending all the regular outpatient, emergency and inpatient services. About 3,000 beds in these four facilities, including 470 ICU beds with ventilators and 2,500 beds for advanced critical care, will be used only for the treatment of Covid-19.


 
As per the discharge policy of the ministry of health and family welfare, the persons tested positive for Covid-19 should be hospitalised till two successive samples test negative..

Special chief secretary, health, medical and family welfare department, KS Jawahar Reddy requested all retired professors, associate professors, assistant professors, medical officers, staff nurses and paramedical staff to voluntarily come forward to work in a facility closest to them. “They can choose the teaching hospitals, the state-level Covid-19 hospitals being set up in Visakhapatnam, Nellore, Vijayawada and Tirupati, or the district level Covid-19 hospital-attached private medical colleges. Salary will be compensated as per GO No 27 released in 2018. Those interested may contact the district collectors of the convened district,” he said.

