UP government to focus on 10 districts with high Covid cases
2020-06-12
LUCKNOW: Having increased the testing capacity to 15,000 per day on Thursday, the state government is now set to shift focus on 10 districts which have thrown up most Covid-19 cases.

Chief minister Yogi Adityanath has directed health and administration officials in Agra, Meerut, Aligarh, Moradabad, Kanpur, Firozabad, Ghaziabad, Bulandshahr, Gautam Buddh Nagar and Basti to spruce up health services in their respective districts. Agra has reported most number of cases in the state (over 900) followed by Noida and Meerut.

Additional chief secretary (home) Awanish Awasthi said, “As almost all the migrant workers have reached their respective districts and those having symptoms are under quarantine, it is important to focus on areas where cases are still rising.”

“Through intensive testing, including pool testing, we have identified migrants who showed signs of Covid-19 infection and put them under quarantine either at home or in hospitals. Local ‘nigrani committees’ are monitoring their progress. The CM, therefore, believes that focus should be shifted to cities where cases are high,” he said.

Health officials have been asked to continuously monitor availability of hospital beds, food, medicines and sanitation in their respective districts and review the condition of Covid-19 patients undergoing treatment in hospitals.

In other districts where health services are unsatisfactory, the chief medical officer and the DM concerned have been asked to provide details so that facilities can be improved on priority.

“The CM has directed officials to ensure that social distancing is followed strictly and people wear masks in public places. Police should continue patrolling in public places and on highways and check crowding,” Awasthi said.

Meanwhile, all divisional commissioners have been asked to review development schemes in their areas and prepare a plan for their implementation. They have also been asked to submit proposals for employment generation.

“While reviewing development, commissioners should focus on how much work has been carried out and the projects which have been completed before the implementation of lockdown. On the basis of the report, a plan of action for completion of remaining work can be drawn up. The CM has asked commissioners to maintain dialogue with the DMs of all districts under their area so that a comprehensive strategy can be drawn up,” an official said.


