Govt taps 92,000 NGOs to help feed and shelter lockdown-hit migrants
2020-04-01
NEW DELHI: The Centre has roped in civil society organisations to assist state governments and district administration in taking care of food, shelter and other needs of migrant workers who have been affected by the 21-day lockdown announced by the government to combat the spread of Covid-19 virus.


In a letter to over 92,000 NGOs on the NGO darpan portal, the government has asked them to work with district administration in setting up community kitchens and provide shelter for migrants and the homeless in the cities.

As the country ramps up its efforts to mount greater awareness, the government urged civil society organisations to join efforts in raising awareness about prevention, hygiene, social distancing, isolation and combating stigma. The government also sought their support for distribution of personal protective equipment (PPE) kits and items such as sanitisers, soaps, masks and gloves among community workers and volunteers.

“The government has taken several measures so that their livelihoods are protected. At this juncture, I request you to coordinate your efforts and work closely with district administration and state governments so that measures of care, shelter, food and social distancing go hand in hand and they are fully taken care of in their present location. It is our responsibility that no one goes without shelter and food,” NITI Aayog CEO Amitabh Kant said in a letter to civil society entities. Kant also heads the empowered group set up by the government to coordinate with private sectors, NGOs and international organisations for response-related activities to check spread of Covid-19.

The NGOs have also been urged to assist the local administration in identifying hotspots and deputing volunteers and care-givers to delivers services to the elderly, persons with disabilities, children, transgender persons and other vulnerable groups.

They have been tasked to partner with state and local governments in enlisting volunteers from among individuals and communities and develop communication strategies in different languages to create awareness at the community level so that Covid-19 spread is tightly checked and false information fully countered.

The government wants civil society organisations to work with state and local governments in promoting behavioural change to ensure that there is no stigma and discrimination against Covid-19 patients.

