Odisha govt eases lockdown norms, allows work on projects
2020-04-19
BHUBANESWAR: The state government on Saturday relaxed the lockdown norms by allowing construction of roads, buildings, irrigation and industrial projects in rural areas to facilitate livelihood opportunities for people from April 20. Movement of trucks have also been allowed.

In a fresh order based on the Union ministry of home affairs (MHA) April 15 guidelines, the state government allowed NH projects like roads, bridges and flyovers in rural areas. Rural road and bridge construction works under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, Mukhya Mantri Sadak Yojana, Biju Setu Yojana and other schemes will also be resumed besides construction and maintenance of multi-purpose cyclone shelters and other buildings.

The state government has also allowed construction of all ongoing irrigation projects, community lift irrigation projects, implementation of deep bore wells and shallow tubewell projects. Repair and maintenance of river embankments, canal service roads, all ongoing and new drainage works and dredging of river mouths. Development of renewable energy projects and construction of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) units have been exempted from lockdown restrictions.

Continuation of construction activities in non-hotspot urban areas have also been allowed but with certain conditions. “No worker can be brought from outside,” said a senior government officer. Water supply projects, including household connection works, can be executed.

Special relief commissioner P K Jena also issued the standard operating procedure (SOP) for the construction sites to prevent spread of Covid-19. “Social distancing parameters are to be strictly enforced at the worksite among the labourers, technicians, supervisors and others involved. Face masks are also mandatory,” said the SOP.

He said there should be provision of sufficient water and soap for frequent hand wash, proper display of do’s and don’ts at the worksite. Also, workers above 60 years of age, sick and with flu-like symptoms should not be allowed at the worksite. “There shall be complete prohibition on tobacco, gutkha and spitting at the worksites. Also anybody detected with severe acute respiratory indications (SARI) and influenza-like symptoms should be reported to the nearest healthcare centre,” stated the SOP.

Among other relaxations, the state government allowed movement of all trucks and other goods and carrier vehicles with two drivers and one helper. “Though transportation of goods was allowed during the lockdown, only 5% to 10% of trucks are on roads due to several reasons,” said Rabi Narayan Satapaty, general secretary of Odisha State Truck Owners Federation.

Service providers like electricians, IT repairs, plumbers, motor mechanics and carpenters can operate. Similarly, shops that repair and service electrical and electronics appliances and deal with construction equipment and supplies such as cement, iron rods and chips are allowed to operate. Manufacturing of IT hardware have also been exempted from lockdown restrictions.

The state government’s decision to allow construction activities has been welcomed by economists. “There should always be a two-way strategy to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic. While we need strict measures to contain spread of the disease, we should also think about securing the livelihood of daily wagers, who work in the unorganised sector. By allowing construction, people in rural areas will be able to earn,” said Samson Maharana, a former commerce professor of Utkal University.

Earlier, the state government relaxed the agriculture and allied sectors and allowed MGNREGS works. However, despite the relaxation more than 20 people will not be allowed at the funerals.

