Hospitals to blame for untimely updates on Covid-19 deaths: Delhi government
2020-05-11
NEW DELHI: Facing criticism for allegedly under-reporting Covid-19 deaths, Delhi government on Sunday issued a standard operating procedure for designated hospitals to ensure that all casualties due to novel coronavirus are communicated to the government by 5pm every day.

Blaming hospitals for the delay in informing about the deaths and not providing case summaries of deceased patients, resulting in “incorrect” reports being submitted to the government, Delhi chief secretary Vijay Dev warned health facilities of strict action if they failed to “scrupulously” follow the SOP.

 


“It has come to notice that both public and private hospitals (dedicated Covid and non-Covid hospitals) are not reporting deaths of positive cases occurring in their hospitals in a timely and regular manner,” the chief secretary, who also heads the state executive committee of Delhi Disaster Management Authority, said in his order.

“… it has further been observed that despite repeated reminders, death summaries of deceased patients are not being provided to the death audit committee, resulting in incorrect/ delayed reports,” it stated.

Delhi government has come under criticism following a difference in the number of Covid-19 deaths between the data provided in the daily health bulletin and shared individually by various hospitals in the capital.

The government had formed the death audit committee on April 20 to scrutinise each case, in which the patient was tested Covid-19 positive, on a daily basis in all hospitals before releasing the data.

Seeking more “transparency,” opposition parties had on Saturday said the people had a right to know about the severity of the outbreak with correct number of deaths due to the coronavirus.

There are six Centre and Delhi government-run hospitals, four private, three dedicated health centres and 11 care centres for Covid-19 patients in the city. Dev, in Sunday’s order, asked all health facilities — government and private — to provide the death data strictly as per the SOP.

As per the new guidelines, hospitals will have to appoint a nodal officer to send a daily report to the government, along with scanned copies of death summary, medical files and other relevant data by email to district and state surveillance unit by 5pm every day.

Even if there is no death reported in a particular hospital, it will have to send an email clearly stating the same to the surveillance agencies. The death audit committee will meet at 5.30pm every day to examine the reports and declare “death due to Covid-19 or otherwise” after due diligence, the SOP stated.

In case a hospital fails to send the communication by 5pm, the officer concerned at of the surveillance teams will take up the matter with senior officials of the health facility. An explanation will have to be submitted by the hospital to the secretary (health and family welfare) by 11am next day in case the report is not sent by 6pm.


