West Bengal government starts testing for lockdown-exit strategy
2020-05-17
KOLKATA: In preparation for the lockdown exit, Bengal government has decided to launch a district-wise sentinel survey to analyze the trend of Covid transmission so that the authorities can prepare preventive strategies, based on the report.


The healthcare facility-based examination will focus on three categories of people —pregnant women, OPD as well as hospitalized patients and healthcare workers, divided into low-risk and high-risk groups—across 23 districts in the state. “We need to have strong post- lockdown preventive strategy to contain rapid spread of the novel coronavirus. This testing before exiting the lockdown is aimed at collecting specific data on the trends of transmission, based on real-time evidence. We will analyze the data and study the trend, based on which a post-lockdown preventive strategy will be prepared,” said a health department official. 





Swasthya Bhawan sources said the surveillance would throw up information, like the presence of infection, if any, among low-risk population in districts that have not reported any Covid case. While for districts that already have Covid cases, the survey report will help analyze the trend of infection on weekly basis. “Such data will help decide whether to lift the lockdown in specific districts or not. If the restrictions are eased, we have to figure out a method for it,” said the health department official.

Among low-risk categories, swab samples will be tested for asymptomatic pregnant women reporting to antenatal clinics or undergoing institutional delivery and asymptomatic OPD patients as well hospitalized patients. From every district, 50 samples of pregnant women and 50 of asymptomatic OPD and admitted patients will be tested over a week. “Examining people belonging to the low-risk category is important as it serves as a marker for general community prevalence of the infection,” said the official.

Healthcare wokers will fall in the high-risk category. Samples of 100 such health workers, including doctors, nurses, Group D staff, Asha workers and ANMs, will be tested in every district. 

A nodal officer has been assigned for each district for the purpose. Collections and testing of swab samples in many districts already started on Friday. Each district is expected to collect and test 200 samples by Sunday. A team of health officials at Swasthya Bhawan will start analysing the interim data by Wednesday next week. Details of the second round of surveillance will be worked out after this. 


