Govt to initiate procurement of pulses during lockdown period, 13 states on board to help farmers
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: Ensuring procurement of gram and lentil during lockdown period, the Centre on Sunday approved a decision to procure these pulses from farmers on minimum support price (MSP) under its flagship ‘price support scheme’ in 13 states.


The move to procure these pulses by public sector food procurement agencies will help farmers in getting money in hands and maintaining the crucial supply chain of these farm produce during the lockdown period.

Under this approval, 25% of total produce of gram and lentil, amounting to Rs 1,250 crore, can be procured from 13 states including Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, West Bengal, Odisha, Jharkhand, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. The Centre had in October last year fixed the MSP of gram and lentil at Rs 4,875 per quintal and Rs 4,800 per quintal, respectively for the 2020-21 Rabi marketing season.

“This crucial decision of procuring gram and lentil has been taken under price support scheme (PSS) without waiting for any formal proposal from these states,” said Union agriculture minister, Narendra Singh Tomar.

In normal situations, the Centre takes a call on procurement of pulses only after getting formal proposals from states.

Pulses are procured under the PSS by central nodal agencies with the proactive role of state governments. The procurement agencies include National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation (NAFED) and Food Corporation of India (FCI). The expenditure and losses due to procurement is borne by the central government.

The Centre’s move on procurement of pulses is part of other measures which are being taken to ensure that the farmers can harvest their Rabi (winter sown) crops such as wheat, mustard, maize, millers and pulses and get money by selling it. The state-backed procurement at MSP will help farmers get remunerative prices of their produce when the normal functioning of agri markets got disrupted in many parts of the country during the lockdown period.

The home ministry had last week kept farming and procurement operations, and functioning of agri markets under exempted categories to allow farmers to continue with their agricultural operations during the lockdown period. Subsequently, it sent reminders to states this week, asking local authorities to allow these operations while maintaining social distancing.


