Delhi government to give Covid-19 info via chatbot
2020-04-04
NEW DELHI: Delhi government on Friday launched a Covid-19 chatbot to provide information about the virus to the general public. “WhatsApp number 8800007722 will provide you all information related to novel coronavirus. When you send a “Hi” on this number, a nine-point menu will appear. Information on signs and symptoms, measures taken by Delhi government to deal with the pandemic, among others, will be provided,” said CM Arvind Kejriwal.


The other information on the number includes how to keep the infection away, screening and testing facilities, helpline numbers, hunger relief, e-pass and frequently asked questions, besides an option to donate to CM Relief Fund.

Meanwhile, the CM interacted with all AAP MLAs and the eight BJP legislators through video conferencing on Friday to find out the situation in their respective areas. 

The MLAs have been instructed to ensure that people in their constituencies get benefits of all government schemes during the lockdown.

Kejriwal said that the situation is under control and if there is an outbreak, the government is prepared to handle it. “The increase in figures has been because of local contact and transmission. A patient who was brought from Alami Markaz in Nizamuddin died in the last 24 hours, taking the figure of deaths to five in Delhi,” he added.

“In the time of extreme crisis, all parties are working as a team,” Kejriwal tweeted. He told the MLAs to inspect the ration and food distribution regularly. If they see any irregularity or problem, they must inform the government so that prompt action can be taken. He also asked the BJP MLAs to give suggestions to make the fight against novel coronavirus stronger and appealed to them to support the government.

Food minister Imran Hussain reviewed the transportation of enhanced quantities of ration to fair price shops for distribution among the beneficiaries. He appealed to all transporters to increase the frequency of trips of trucks for delivery of foodgrains. He warned that stern action will be taken in case of diversion of foodgrains, deliberate delay in transportation, etc.

At 3pm on Saturday, Kejriwal, deputy CM Manish Sisodia and experts will hold a digital interaction with around 44 lakh students of government and private school and their parents. The session has been named “parenting in the time of corona”.n a review meeting on Friday, Baijal instructed officials that testing, tracing, isolation and quarantine should remain key focus areas in the Covid-19 fight. Sisodia also participated at the meeting. Officials were instructed to ensure strict vigil of all home-quarantine cases and take deterrent action against violators. The health department was directed to procure essentials, ramp up infrastructure and ensure availability of PPEfor front line health workers.


