UP government sets up cell for revival of industries after lockdown
2020-04-18
LUCKNOW: UP government has set up a revival and facilitation cell to provide assistance to industrialists and exporters once the lockdown is lifted. The commissioner (industries) will head the cell while two joint commissioners and an assistant commissioner have been appointed for its operations.

Principal secretary (MSME) Navneet Sehgal said, “Lockdown has made a huge impact on industry. Once it is lifted, the cell will provide necessary assistance in GST refunds, clearances and no-objection certificates, among other issues.”

The decision came after Sehgal met industry representatives on Friday evening to discuss issues facing MSMEs in the state. In a video conference organised by FICCI, several industrialists raised the issue of salaries to their employees and said most MSME units would not be able to pay salaries in April due to cash flow problem. They said to start industries again, it was crucial that labourers were brought back from villages. CMD, GINNI International Ltd, Sharad Jaipuria said: “There are more than 2 crore manufacturing units with a 14% share in UP’s GDP. We hope the Centre will help with package for marginalized sector, trade and MSMEs by 15-20%. ”

Laghu Udhyog Bharti president Janak Bhatia said while salaries had been paid for March, payments would be difficult in April.

“Workers should be considered to be under medical leave under ESIC registration. Units should also be charged only minimum electricity bill as no units functioned in April,” he said. President, Indian Industries Association, Pankaj Kumar said in a survey done with IIA members, it was found that 90% of MSME units had already closed while 72% did not receive any assistance from banks.

“MSMEs are facing liquidity crisis.Without government support, only 30% of the wages can be given to workers in April. After Covid-19 crisis is over, it will take at least a year for MSMEs to revive. It will help us if PSUs clear their dues,” he said. Sehgal said the issue of cash flow had been already considered and the government was working on a plan to address the problems.

“We have already suggested to the Centre that bank limits should be extended to ensure cash flow. ” he said.


