Govt sets up high-level taskforce to monitor battle against Covid-19
2020-03-28
Amaravati: The state government on Friday constituted a high-level taskforce to monitor measures taken to contain the spread of Covid-19.

Chief minister Y S Jaganmohan Reddy directed the officials to constitute the taskforce with five ministers, 10 senior IAS officers and four senior officials from the CMO.

Ministers Alla Nani (health), Buggana Rajendranath Reddy (finance), Botcha Satyanarayana (municipal administration), Mekathoti Sucharitha (home) and Kurasala Kannababu (agriculture) will be part of the taskforce.

The cabinet chaired by the chief minister met here in the secretariat on Friday and discussed the measures initiated by the government to contain the spread of the coronavirus in detail. Interestingly, the seating of the ministers and senior officials in the cabinet meeting hall was arranged in such a way that it maintained the social distance of two metres.

Giving details of the cabinet discussions to the media, information and public relations minister Perni Venkataramaiah (Nani) said that the chief minister directed the officials to strengthen the medical infrastructure and fully gear up the administration to tackle the crisis.

He said that the government has kept a close vigil on all the 28,000 foreign returnees in the state. “The state has so far reported 12 Covid-19 positive cases. All are undergoing treatment. All the suspects have been moved to quarantine homes,” said Nani.

He said that four hospitals--one each at Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam, Tirupati and Nellore--have already been converted into dedicated super specialty hospitals to battle Covid-19. He said that 100-bed isolation centres are in place at constituency-level and 200-bed isolation centres at district-level.

He said about 400 ventilators have been kept ready with PPEs (Personal Protection Equipment) such as Hazmath suits for the medical professionals. He said that they have also procured over 10 lakh surgical masks for patient attendants along with over 52,000 N-95 masks. He said that they have placed orders for more equipment which is likely to be reached in a couple of days.

The minister expressed serious displeasure with the students and software engineers trying to rush back to their native places. “It is very sad to see that students and others from our state are stranded at other places but the situation prompts us to say no to their entry. They are all educated and they should understand the situation better,” said Nani.

He, however, said that the government is ready to allow people into the state if they were willing to go to quarantine homes instead of their own homes. He advised students and techies to stay back in the places of their work and study till the completion of the lockdown period.

The minister said that the chief minister has directed the collectors to immediately convert all function halls into shelter homes to provide food to the homeless and orphans. The cabinet appealed to philanthropists to come forward to feed the homeless during the hour of crisis.


