Govt moves PCR equipment of univs to testing centres
2020-04-16
Trichy/Chennai: As the number of samples being drawn for testing Covid-19 has been going up, the state health department has moved PCR equipment from agriculture, veterinary and state universities to its testing centres. It has also deputed microbiologists and lab technicians from several districts to these labs.At least Two RT-PCR equipment from Bharathidasan University have been made operational from Wednesday. Earlier, machines from Agriculture University and Madurai Kamaraj University were taken to testing centres. The state has 26 labs including 16 in the government sector. “Each state lab has staff working in three shifts and they can test 230 samples a day. Together with private labs, we have a testing capacity of 5,320 samples every day,” health minister C Vijayabaskar said.Labs, however, are not there in all districts. While cities like Chennai have more than four government laboratories, many districts are forced to transport samples to the neighbouring districts. The sample size in some labs is very high because they cater to a larger population.To strengthen manpower, K A P Viswanathan government medical college in Trichy has roped in five lab technicians from other departments. Besides this, a microbiologist who was working as medical officer from neighbouring district has also been deputed, said S Dhanapal, head, microbiology department. “The government has given equipment but there was no communication on the technicians and microbiologist. We made internal arrangements. We can also take help from academia if the government allows us,” he said. Academicians from different colleges said they are now willing to volunteer for testing, training and research. Some senior academicians are now pushing the state government to give an open call in this regard inviting those involved in PCR-based process in molecular biology, said National College Trichy head of biotechnology and microbiology department M S Mohamed Jaabir. “It is a purely a molecular biology technique which involves a lot of skill. It may harm the person involved in testing if not handled carefully,” he said.The state does not have trained personnel in handling PCR and other molecular biology tools. “This is an unprecedented situation. So far, there was no demand for this sort of skill sets for our paramedic team, but now the situation demands it,” said S Senthil Kumar, Botany department faculty who is into sub surface micro-organism research.