Covid-19 in Delhi: Sanitisation paper must for interstate buses, says government
2020-03-16
NEW DELHI: Delhi government has further intensified its measures against the spread of the novel coronavirus through public transport in the city. It is now mandatory for buses from neighbouring states arriving at the Delhi’s interstate bus terminals (ISBT) to produce certificates confirming that the vehicles were disinfected at the originating points. The government is planning to soon start disinfecting autorickshaws, Grameen sewa and other paratransit vehicles at the bus depots.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“The government has already issued an advisory for drivers of autorickshaws, Grameen sewa vehicles, mini-buses, etc. to create awareness about the necessity to keep their vehicles clean and disinfected. They have been advised to thoroughly clean the vehicles before hitting the roads and also follow general dos and don’ts regarding the coronavirus outbreak,” a Delhi government official said.

“This is not only important for safety of their passengers, but also their own,” the official said.

“While mini-bus owners can disinfect their vehicles on their own, the government is planning to help owners of smaller vehicles who might not have the resources to disinfect their vehicles daily,” he added.

“Though no official announcement has been made yet, we have already started disinfecting a few autorickshaws and taxis near the bus depots of Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC),” the official claimed.

“There are around one lakh autos in Delhi, apart from thousands of other paratransit vehicles. The government plans to disinfect these vehicles for free at DTC and Cluster bus depots where buses are already being disinfected daily. However, since the number of such vehicles is high, proper arrangements have to be made before an official announcement is made,” he said.

While all DTC and Cluster scheme buses are being disinfected daily and Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has also intensified the cleaning of its trains and stations, inter-state buses coming from neighbouring states are also being thoroughly disinfected at the three ISBTs– Kashmere Gate, Anand Vihar and Sarai Kale Khan. All ISBTs are also being disinfected daily, particularly the platforms and common surfaces.

Total 3,467 buses from other states arrive in Delhi every day. Most of the inter-state buses arrive from Uttar Pradesh (1,519), followed by Haryana (757) and Uttarakhand (313).


