Tamil Nadu government locates participants of Tablighi Jamaat conference, put them under observation
2020-04-01
KARUR: A 42-year old man of Karur who tested positive for Covid-19 was one among the 29 people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat conference in Delhi’s Nizamuddin. Trichy and Pudukottai also have a total of 30 attendees of the conference who have been isolated at government hospitals besides the Indonesians quarantined in Thanjavur. Participants of the conference are also home quarantined in Perambalur district.



“As many as 29 people, including a Kulithalai-based man who was tested positive for Covid-19, from the area had attended the Delhi conference. All of them have been admitted to the Government Medical College Hospital in Karur and blood samples taken for testing,” state transport minister M R Vijaya Baskar said. He said that the details about their residences, family members, the places they visited etc were collected by the officials.

After attending the conference, he returned to Kulithalai after landing at Trichy by flight from Chennai on March 26. As he developed Covid-19 symptoms, he approached the hospital and was admitted. The minister said two of his co-passengers have been kept under observation at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) and another one has been admitted to IRT Government Hospital in Perundurai.

Vijaya Baskar said that 5-km radius around the residence of the man is brought under surveillance. “Spraying of disinfectants and health check-up are being conducted in the area,” he said.

In Trichy, 20 people who attended the Tablighi conference have been isolated at MGMGH. Samples of 13 of them have been taken for testing.

In Pudukottai, the district administration and public health and preventive medicine department have identified 10 people who had attended the Delhi conference. “All of them have been isolated at the government hospital at Aranthangi and blood samples taken for testing. Ten more people from Pudukottai area are in Delhi,” Pudukottai collector P Uma Maheswari told ToI.

One man from Aranthangi had attended the Malaysian Tablighi conference. However, the collector said that he has completed 28 days of home quarantine.

The case of Thanjavur is different. The district administration has identified 12 Indonesians at Adhirampattinam and Patttukottai areas. An official said that they had not attended the Delhi conference. All of them would be shifted to the Government Medical College Hospital in Thanjavur, the official said.

A resident of V Kalathur in Perambalur district had also attended the Delhi conference. On his arrival at Trichy airport, he was sent to home quarantine. “My blood sample was taken and I have been advised to be in quarantine. I am feeling well,” he said.

(With inputs from D Vincent Arockiaraj and S Deepak Karthik)


