Govt puts admin on high alert to tackle Covid-19
2020-03-23
Amaravati: The state government is readying a plan to tackle Covid-19 situation. 

The government has directed district collectors to put the administration on high alert.

Although the government is confident of handling the situation, it wants to avoid any slip up at this stage. With the Centre declaring that the nation is witnessing the stage 2 of Covid-19, health experts think it might be very difficult to contain the virus if it goes to stage 3.

In stage 1, persons travelled to Covid-19 hit countries and test positive, in stage-2, people get infected after coming to contact with foreign returnees who were tested positive for Covid-19. 

With several people with no foreign travel history getting tested positive, Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) had declared that the virus entered the stage-II. The government is leaving no stone unturned to see that no patient goes out of its hands as it would make the situation complicate to handle.

AP has reported very less number of positive cases for Covid-19 thanks to extensive surveys carried out by the health department much in advance. 

The department had tracked down nearly 13,000 foreign returnees since February and directed them to remain in home isolation. Besides, the health department had deputed staff to residences of the foreign returnees to keep a tab on their movements. With the government not allowing any foreign returnee to go out of its watch and home isolation, the situation is said to be largely under control.

The district collectors have started giving training to municipal commissioners, tehsildars and police officials along with the health department officials as per the containment plan readied by the state government. Sources said that the areas in which a Covid-19 positive case is identified will be sealed for about 3km radius and make people in the entire colony to stay at home till further instructions. 

The cluster mapping management plans are ready for every village and ward secretariat. All the households were tagged to the secretariat portal and police would be deployed in the area to prevent the people contained area to move out.

Emergency response teams would reach the area and area marking would be done for effective implementation of containment measures as per WHO guidelines. “We will conduct a mock drill regarding cluster containment on Monday in the city and take corrective measures depending on the feedback,” said Guntur district collector I Samuel Anand Kumar.


