Govt moves to enforce strict quarantine
2020-03-19
All the 820 randomly collected samples have tested negative and do not indicate any community transmission. However, we will ramp up our sample numbers and continue to do surveillance to check if there is any further spread,” a senior official and scientist at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) told TOI.

The results are crucial because they are part of a scientific assessment to evaluate whether the virus has spread through community transmission. “We are not exactly ruling out community transmission but the fact that these samples have tested negative is reassuring that at the moment there is no evidence to indicate community outbreak,” the official added. 

The government has decided to allow select private labs to test even as officials said WHO’s call for more testing was not country-specific and pointed out a close watch was being maintained on any spike in Covid-19 cases (within current testing criteria) and in general admissions of patients with serious respiratory illnesses, signs that might indicate a wider spread. 

While the random tests are being evaluated, health minister Harsh Vardhan held a review on Wednesday on containment and management of the novel coronavirus, directing teams be deputed to regularly inspect and monitor quarantine facilities for ensuring necessary amenities are being provided. The move came after reports of Indian nationals returning home complaining ab- out the poor state of facilities. 

ICMR had earlier said that around 1,040 samples through its 52 labs (each collecting 20 random samples) of patients admitted in ICUs at various hospitals, including private, due to influenza-like illness have been collected between March 1 and 15 to assess if the virus infected those without a history of travelling abroad or having come in contact with persons who have.

“Some of our labs informed us that referrals were not enough to do all the samples. Hence, some of them collected less than 20 samples. So, we could test only 820 in this batch,” the official said.

As part of continued surveillance, ICMR will collect random samples of people wi- th SARI but without any travel history on a weekly basis. A total of 121 labs will be functional soon for the purpose. Each lab, in medical colleges across the country, has a capacity to test 90 samples per day.

The ICMR’s random testing to check community transmission is running parallel to the testing and tracing of symptomatic travellers and their contacts. At present, the total capacity for over 70 functioning labs along with National Institute of Virology, Pune, is 8,000 samples per day. However, these labs are doing around 500 samples every day.

Health ministry officials maintained India is still in stage II with limited localised transmission and there is no need for community testing. 

The government, however, has already started ramping up its preparations for the risk of community transmission and the community testing that it might require by ordering one million additional testing kits, besides extending the network of testing laboratories.

There are four stages in a disease outbreak: Stage I is usually when cases are imported and not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission of cases reported, which means a section of people that is testing positive is due to having come in contact with a laboratory positive person who had a travel history. There can be a single case or local clusters of positive cases in stage II.

Stage III is community transmission, wherein the scientists working to contain the outbreak are not able to pinpoint the source of infection. A person tests positive without any travel history or any contact history with a laboratory positive case.

The last stage-IV is when the outbreak is declared an epidemic, where it has spread to the entire country and cases return positive one after another in large numbers without any information on source of infection. India currently is at Stage II of the outbreak, which experts say can be contained locally.


