Govt bldgs earmarkedfor Covid contingencies
2020-04-02
Mysuru: Within hours of a worker at Jubilant Life Sciences testing positive last week, the district administration wanted to shift all the 1300+ workers into quarantine facilities instead of self-isolation. When experts argued against it, saying it would spread the virus faster and asked them to follow the protocol which prescribes that people who had come in contact with positive cases should be home quarantined, officials dropped the plan.

Though some employees asked to be moved to such a facility, it was not allowed. Now they have zeroed in on a few government buildings to shift the quarantined persons in case of emergency while hostels and school buildings are marked to be used to house family members of positive cases to isolate them from the community.

The district administration has readied three private hospitals in Mysuru to quarantine suspected cases should the need arise.

DC Abhiram G Sankar said all primary contacts will be kept in a separate quarantine. "We plan to increase the testing of primary contacts. Health teams will visit all households for heath check-ups," he told TOI.

The local municipal body launched a drive to spray disinfectant across the town, mainly in pockets where home-isolated cases are located as part of sanitisation efforts to contain the spread of the disease. Private lodges and schools are reserved for home quarantine of Covid-19 patient’s primary contacts.

According to the sources, the local administration wanted to shift all the primary contacts of the Covid 19 positive patients to private lodges and schools on Monday itself. But there was resistance by localities. Still, it’s being carried out, they said.

Nanjangud tahsildar K Mahesh said officers distributed vegetables to residents and from Wednesday foodgrains will be distributed to residents at the doorstep. The groceries for two months will be distributed to ensure they stay back indoors for a longer time, he said.

Nanjangud MLA B Harshavardhan inspected the town and interacted with senior officials on initiatives taken to contain the disease. IPG (Southern Range) Vipul Kumar visited the town on Tuesday and met officials. He instructed authorities to implement the lockdown strictly to ensure the disease is contained.


