Kerala government says no to sari for staff in Covid care
2020-04-09
KOCHI: The Kerala health department is of the view that the sari is a dangerous and impractical garment for hospital staff in the time of a highly infectious pandemic and wants them to adopt either pants or straight leg kurta suits. 

A key reason is that the Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) supplied for Covid-19 protection includes a zip-up overall that is almost impossible to wear over a sari. The leg protection sleeves of the PPE kit are also not suitable for the six-yard wrap. 

A letter sent by the principal secretary, health, to directors of medical education and the department of health services said the dress code of hospital staff needs to change as there is a chance of such garments getting impurities and germs which would be dangerous to wearer and patients. 

While private hospitals in the state had long back made a dress code shift towards solid scrub tops and long pants for nurses, the state health department waited till 2012 to allow female nurses in government hospitals to wear churidhar. But the supporting staff still have sari in different shades as uniform. 

“I think even in most government hospitals 90% of nursing staff have shifted to churidhar. But support staff, including women attendants and cleaners, have sari as uniform,” said Dr Joseph Chacko, president, Kerala Government Medical Officers Association (KGMOA). Senior lady doctors also prefer wearing sari to work, he said. 

“For those engaged in Covid-19 critical care, PPE suits are mandatory. Sari is not suitable for healthcare workers engaged in corona care,” said Dr Chacko said. 

Thrissur Medical College, which is designated as a specialised centre for Covid-19, is implementing the dress code for staff in critical care areas. 

“We have stitched uniforms - operation theatre-style tunics - for all those who are part of Covid care. Anyone entering critical care rooms like ICU and swab collection centres would have to wear this,” said Andrew M A, principal, Government Medical College, Thrissur. Hospital staff deployed for Covid-19 care duty are first asked to take a bath and then shift into the uniform. The same procedure is followed when the duty ends. 

A circular was issued by directorate of medical education to procure and issue uniforms or scrubs to all women healthcare workers who request them. The material should be one that permits daily washing at high heat and disinfection with chemicals. Hussain Koya Thangal, president, Kerala Private Hospital Association, said since an order has not been issued they have not implemented it.

