Karnataka govt seeks to get pvt hospitals Covid-19 ready, discusses cost
2020-06-03
BENGALURU: Anticipating a huge spike in Covid-19 cases in the near future, the Karnataka health and family welfare department is discussing with private hospitals the possibility of treating the infected in their set-ups. 

Close to 400 private hospitals empanelled with Suvarna Arogya Suraksha Trust were consulted a week ago on including Covid-19 under the government’s co-branded Ayushman Bharat-Arogya Karnataka (AB-ArK) scheme. A meeting held in the last week of May in Bengaluru also discussed the price matrix for Covid-19 treatment in private empanelled hospitals under AB-ArK scheme. 

The government and private hospitals are yet to come to an agreement on the price matrix. “It differs based on whether a patient is symptomatic or asymptomatic, treatment requirement, ICU charges, ventilators and such other factors. The cost will be different for Below Poverty Line (priority households) and Above Poverty Line patients. It’s being discussed,” said sources in the know about the development. 

Thirty-five private hospitals in Bengaluru have already been identified as first-responder hospitals for treating Covid-19 patients. However, government hospitals are currently taking the lead in treating the infected. At least 25 patients in Benglauru have opted to get treated in private hospitals.

Confirming the consultations, Pankaj Kumar Pandey, health commissioner of Karnataka, said private participation in treating Covid-19 cases has to be encouraged in the long run. “We want the participation of private hospitals in the days to come. A meeting was held to discuss the treatment. The number of cases will increase. Unless a magic vaccine comes, there seems to be no chance of a decline in Covid-19 cases for now,” he said. 

On April 1, Karnataka had 110 Covid-19 positive cases and the number swelled to 589 on May 1. A month later, the state reported 3,408 cases, close to five times the number a month earlier.

The state currently has 28,686 beds in government hospitals, of which, as on June 1, only 2,026 beds were occupied or just 7 % utilised. 

Have to be future-ready

“At Victoria Hospital in Bengaluru we have 550 beds ready for Covid-19 patients. But close to 400 beds are vacant. Even in the districts, very few Covid-19-designated hospitals are seeing full occupancy. One instance being Yadgir. But those who have insurance and are from high-income groups might prefer to get treated in private hospitals. All corporate and private hospitals have to be ready with isolation wards in future,” said Dr MK Sudarshan, chairperson, Covid-19 taskorce of Karnataka. 


