Govt to fly home Indian crew on board quarantined ship
2020-02-18
MADURAI: The Indian embassy in Tokyo has informed Indian crew on board cruise ship Diamond Princess that those interested in leaving the ship before the end of their mandatory 14-day quarantine period can opt for the same by filling the form sent to them by email on Monday afternoon (Japan time). They are likely to be flown back home in a chartered flight. This has given a sigh of relief for the crew on board the ship that has been quarantined off the Yokohama port in Japan since the beginning of this month.


Around 3 pm (Japanese time), a few of the Indian crew received mails titled ‘Urgent’ from the embassy stating that it was a message to all the Indian crew members and that it was to facilitate their travel to India. Asking for their willingness to leave the ship before the expiry of the mandatory quarantine requirements, they were also asked whether they would like to avail travel by a chartered flight.

It stated that boarding the proposed chartered flight will be subject to the body temperature of the individual being normal at the time of disembarkation/boarding. The form made it clear that those who opt to leave the ship will be put under ‘mandatory quarantine of 14 days’ at government designated place(s). On refusing to the above, they will remain under quarantine on board Diamond Princess in accordance with Japanese regulations.

Nearly 150 Indian crew members, including five from Tamil Nadu are on board the ship. They have been identified as Anbalagan from Madurai, Muthu from Trichy, Daniel from Chengalpattu, Dhamodharan from Tuticorin district and Jayaraj from Coimbatore. Jayaraj is with the security department and the four others are chefs. It is learnt that all the five are not infected till Monday.

“At least four Tamils have expressed their willingness to prematurely end the quarantine and fly back to India. We thought that the passengers as well as the crew have a simultaneous quarantine. But we were wrong. Now we have understood that February 19 is the end of the quarantine period for the passengers and that the 14-days quarantine for crew will begin only after that,” Anbalagan said.

The form asked the crew members to reply not later than 12 pm (Japan time) on Tuesday (February 18). Thanking the government for taking efforts to bring them back, the crew also said that the letter was not sent to all the Indian crew members. They suggested that the authorities could have made an announcement in the ship and circulated the forms to all the crew members.

The crew members did not waste time as they filled the forms with details such as their passport numbers and sent it back to the embassy, after which the embassy officials got in touch with them over phone for a confirmation. The main reason for opting for the same is that the ship is still infected and it is unsafe to stay further.

Decision on the mode of transportation of the crew to India would be taken based on the number of applications they receive till Tuesday.


