Bihar govt plans to assess impact of lockdown on informal sector
2020-03-25
PATNA: The industries department has planned to make an impact assessment of the lockdown on the informal sector of the economy as this sector is the major provider of job opportunities through self-employment in the state.

“The impact assessment will be a prelude to the most likely announcement of incentives for the people involved in the informal sector,” a highly placed source in the department said.

While CM Nitish Kumar on Monday announced incentives for the families of the poor and agricultural workers as well as pensioners, it was also felt that the impact of the lockdown on the informal sector should be assessed for the ameliorative measures to be taken in the future.

The impact assessment and announcement of ameliorative measures would also require holding discussions with the representatives of industry and trade bodies, like Bihar Chamber of Commerce and Industries and Bihar Industries Association.

While Bihar is basically a non-manufacturing state as the share of its manufacturing sector in the state’s GSDP was 8.2% in 2018-19, the volume of the informal economy is second biggest after the agriculture and allied activities (forestry and fishing) whose share in the state’s economy is 21.3%.

In tune with the same, the volume of the informal economy comprising employers as self-employed persons and workers involved is large. It includes small scale labour intensive work, like trade, repair, tailoring, food preparation, loading, shoe repairing, helper in household and roadside vendors (cheap clothes, fruits, vegetables and popular food items).

The impact of the lockdown due to coronavirus on these activities has been glaringly visible. The Maurya Lok shopping complex here wears a deserted look, and so are the sites in other localities and along all major and minor roads. The sellers of handloom clothes and tailors accompanying them have become jobless, as was visible on Beerchand Patel Marg, off the Income-Tax roundabout here.

Most of the handloom cloth dealers and tailors were from distant Darbhanga, Madhubani and Jehanabad districts. One of them, Khalid, said, “Yes, today we are jobless. Around 100 others were given licences by Patna Municipal Corporation last year, but their fate hangs in balance now.”

Shekhar, who is from Mohaddinagar in Samastipur district, had been selling fruits worth Rs 5,000 per day near the branch of State Bank of India (SBI) in Sri Krishnanagar locality, but has now been sitting idle. Tuntun Sah from Buddha Colony, who was selling fruit juice near the same bank branch, has also been left lamenting the big hit that his daily earning has suffered due to the pandemic coronavirus.


