Coronavirus scare: Madhya Pradesh govt to revoke suspension of doctors, appoint 1700 new ones
2020-02-12
BHOPAL: Union government has given Madhya Pradesh a list of 151 people from the state with a travel history to China for monitoring of Coronavirus. As of Monday, health department was awaiting test reports of 13 of 17 samples of suspected Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) from NIV Pune.


There has been no confirmed case of the deadly contagion in the state. Health department officials said they have alerted district officials for tracking these 151 people with a travel history to China. It was not clear how many have been screened or tested for the infection that has infected over 42,000 people and lead to more 1,000 across the globe.

On Tuesday, health minister Tulsi Silawat instructed his department to advertise for recruitment of 1,700 doctors in Madhya Pradesh. Also, doctors who have been suspended in the last six months, be reinstated in ‘public interest’, said Silawat. Around three dozen doctors are expected to benefit from the move.

More 5,000 nurses and paramedical staff will also be appointed to strengthen medical services in Madhya Pradesh. MP is well short of specialised doctors and other essential staff for medical services.

State health department services are yet to comply with best practices related to Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV).

Dealing with other influenza contagions like H1N1 for over a decade, health department nor DME run tertiary care hospitals are relying on infrared temperature guns. “Why do we need infrared temperature guns at Hamidia hospital. There has been no case of 2019-nCoV. For patients with acute respiratory infections there are isolation wards and we use separate conventional body temperature meters,” said a senior consultant at Gandhi medical college (GMC) when asked about the use of infrared meters. Territory care and district hospitals and many private hospitals follow the same method.

Union government issued guidelines clearly state standard precautions to be followed at all patient care areas. It includes ‘avoid sharing of equipment’. Other instructions are on hand hygiene, gloves and use of personal protective equipment (PPE) to avoid direct contact with patient’s blood, body fluids, secretions and non-intact skin, prevention of needle stick/sharp injury and cleaning and disinfection of the environment and equipment.

Widespread screening of people with deadly virus, except at some airports, is taking place without prescribed temperature guns, a device with ability to measure temperature from a distance.

Earlier on Jan 30, MP integrated disease surveillance project (IDSP) had directed hospitals to purchase digital infrared meters. IDSP main function includes IT enabled disease surveillance system for epidemic prone diseases to monitor disease trends and to detect and respond to outbreaks in early rising phase through trained Rapid Response Team (RRTs).


11-placed under ‘home quarantine’ in Gwalior

11-people with a travel history to China were first let to go out of hospital and placed under ‘home quarantine’ within incubation period, a time when they could infect others.

“Doctors and medical staff has been deployed for their regular check-up. Their samples were not sent to NIV Pune,” said CMHO Gwalior, Dr SK Verma. Most are students with a travel history to China. They were first reported on Feb 1.

NCDC does not have a policy on home quarantine. However, patients who are suspected are kept in isolation and will be given a telephone or other method of communication in the isolation room/area to enable patients or family members/visitors to communicate with nurses inside the facility, as per NCDC guidelines. 


