Delhi government may cap Covid-19 prices at private hospitals
2020-06-14
NEW DELHI: Delhi government is likely to cap treatment cost for Covid-19 in private hospitals. It may also fix a ceiling on private ambulance charges and reduce prices for Covid tests conducted by private labs. In some private hospitals, the one-day charge for a bed with ICU and ventilator is as high as Rs 72,000.

Fixing price ceiling for treatment by private hospitals is one of the key agenda points for the Delhi Disaster Management Authority meeting scheduled for Tuesday. The meeting will be chaired by lieutenant governor Anil Baijal and CM Arvind Kejriwal will attend it.

Recently, the Tamil Nadu government had capped the Covid treatment costs in private hospitals. It had fixed a ceiling of Rs 7,500 for treatment in general wards and Rs 15,000 for treatment in ICUs.

Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain on Saturday hinted at the possibility of price capping in the capital. “All the hospitals have been asked to share the rates that they are charging for Covid treatment. We will decide on what to do after observing every hospital’s details,” the minister stated during a media interaction.

In the wake of reports that some private hospitals were asking the patients to pay arbitrary Covid-19 treatment charges, Delhi government earlier this week asked all private hospitals treating Covid patients to display the rate list of all services, including various lab tests, isolation beds and beds with ventilators, at prominent places on their premises. Apart from it, the director general of health services also asked the hospitals to provide a list of the schedule of charges for treatment of Covid patients.

A government official said that a few private hospitals in the city are charging Rs 15,000 to 25,000 for general ward, Rs 18,000 to Rs 27,000 for twin sharing ward and Rs 20,000 to Rs 30,000 for private room with isolation per day for Covid management.

BJP and Congress have supported the demand for price capping. Delhi BJP spokesperson Praveen Shankar Kapoor in a letter to lieutenant governor Anil Baijal on Saturday stated that it was shocking to learn that medical bills of Covid patients with history of some other disease were usually not less than Rs 7 lakh and ran up to Rs 15 lakh. Kapoor demanded price capping in private hospitals. Delhi Congress vice-president Abhishek Dutt said that exorbitant treatment cost causes unnecessary stress to the families battling the Covid infection.

The high treatment charges are keeping many middle-class families with serious Covid-19 patients away from the private hospitals and the burden on the government hospitals is growing.


