Govt considering another package to minimize lockdown impact: Sources
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: The government has started working out the possible post-lockdown scenarios and is considering another booster shot to minimize the impact of coronavirus and revive the economy but nothing has been finalised yet, senior officials said on Sunday.


The focus is on issues that may come up after the lockdown is lifted on April 15, an official said.

There have been discussions about a package but nothing has been finalised yet, the official said, adding that the idea is to revive consumption, "so some measures might be needed."


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 
If a package is announced, it would be the third major initiative by the government to tackle the challenges thrown up by the rapid spread of coronavirus.

On March 24, hours before Prime Minister Narendra Modi declared a countrywide lockdown, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced a slew of relief measures for taxpayers and businesses.

Two days later, Sitharaman announced a Rs 1.7-lakh-crore for those hit hardest.


 
Nirmala Sitharaman announces Rs 1.7 lakh crore relief package: Key pointsUnion finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Thursday announced a comprehensive economic package to deal with the impact of deadly coronavirus outbreak. Several financial benefits have been announced under various schemes. The purpose of the Rs 1.7 lakh crore package is for those who are in "immediate need" and aims to get the money in their hands.

On Sunday, the officials said they are also looking at the possibility of redesigning some welfare and other government schemes to suit the post-lockdown situation.

Various options are on the table — such as scholarships and fellowships given by ministries, harvesting of rabi crops and the government has started to address them one by one, they said.

Out of the 10 empowered groups of senior bureaucrats constituted by the prime minister to prepare India's response to COVID-19, one group is tasked to suggest economic measures.

An informal group of ministers, chaired by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, is also looking into various aspects of the lockdown. 


