Telangana government to HC: Doing enough to push back virus, protect poor
2020-04-17
HYDERABAD: The government on Thursday informed the high court steps it is taking adequate steps to fight Covid-19, ensuring supply of medical equipment, essential commodities and punishing lockdown violators. Chief secretary Somesh Kumar informed a bench, comprising Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice T Amarnath Goud, hearing PILs related to Covid-19 on the steps being taken.

According to affidavit filed by CS, the state recorded over 33,000 violations, police registered 4,900 FIRs and arrested 17,000 persons. Transport department slapped cases against owners of 75,800 vehicles and imposed Rs 3.8 crore penalties. Police have set up 230 check posts across the state and 43 on inter-state borders. They were ensuring free movement of essential goods and police were booking assault cases on those obstructing implementation of lockdown norms. Criminal cases were booked against 90 persons between March 25 and April 10, CS said.

Till April 12, the state received 317 complaints from migrant workers about non-availability of food and non-payment of wages. Authorities asked the employers to provide food and pay wages to the workers. These complaints were forwarded to district authorities for providing rice and cash benefit. “In Hyderabad, GHMC is operating 24 temporary shelters for migrants. The state identified 3.35 lakh stranded migrants and the authorities were asked to provide them 12-kg rice and Rs 500 cash each,” the CS informed.

As people were confined to their houses during lockdown period, the state was ensuring that essentials like rice, atta, vegetables, milk and medicines were not hoarded by black marketers. “This is in addition to ongoing supply of rice free of cost to 87 lakh white ration card holders at 12-kg per person,” affidavit said. To prevent further spread of virus, 206 clusters have been identified and containment operations were being done. As a part of containment, house-to-house survey was being done by 2,579 teams to identify symptomatic cases, the CS added.


