Delhi lockdown: Over 500 hunger relief centres set up for 4 lakh people
2020-03-28
NEW DELHI: With lakhs of casual workers losing their jobs due to the lockdown and having no means to feed their families, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal has set up over 500 hunger relief centres in Delhi to ensure four lakh such people get free lunch and dinner from Saturday.

 

Kejriwal said his government had opened hunger relief centres in government schools across the city with a capacity to provide food packets to 500 people at each meal time. 

 
#21dayslockdown | Delhi government is providing free food to all the needy people.  Updated map with 500+… https://t.co/OTHUJ1AGvr— TOI Delhi (@TOIDelhi) 1585367078000 
This was in addition to several locations identified by all district magistrates in their respective areas where food was being distributed at the doorsteps of the needy.


 
 
Officials said the government mapped the demand and supply with the help of district officials, RWAs and NGOs to arrive at the figure of four lakh. The district teams carried out an elaborate exercise and identified pockets where causal labourers and their families lived to start distributing food.

South district on Friday provided cooked meals to almost 17,000 people at over 400 locations twice. Similarly, Southwest district provided hot lunch to 11,000 and dinner to 13,000 people at about 60 locations with the help of social organisations. The district also delivered dry ration packets and toiletries for 21 days to 70 extremely poor families.

Senior officials said at least 13 organisations, including some prominent religious-socio groups and not-for-profit organisations like Iskcon, Radha Soami Satsang Beas and gurdwaras, had joined hands with the government to provide relief to the poor in the time of “humanitarian crisis”. The government has also appealed to individuals and groups willing to volunteer in contributing and distributing meals and food packets to fill up a form and get associated in the mammoth task.

The government has also formed an advisory panel, led by deputy CM Manish Sisodia, to coordinate the relief efforts.

With all commercial establishments, except those dealing in essential items, closed till April 14 to prevent community transmission of novel coronavirus, daily wagers have been facing the challenge to feed themselves and their families. While Delhi government initially started providing free lunch and dinner at its night shelters, it has now made massive arrangements to ensure lakhs of poor families living in the capital do not go hungry.

The CM said his government was providing free ration to 72 lakh beneficiaries. He added that the government was feeding nearly 20,000 people per day at its night shelters, but the number has been rising.

“I noticed some videos on social media of people who could not get meals. Considering this, Delhi government has decided to provide lunch and dinner at 325 schools across the city. Every school shall be able to feed around 500 beneficiaries. The strength of people being fed shall increase from 20,000 per day to two lakh, which will further increase to four lakh from tomorrow (Saturday),” Kejriwal said in his digital press conference, adding that MLAs had been told to ensure that no one in their constituency suffered from hunger.

DM (South) BM Mishra said Radha Soami Satsang Beas had agreed to provide more than 50,000 meals twice a day to a large population in his district. Similarly, Akshaya Patra Foundation, which provides mid-day meals, said it was prepared to feed about 70,000 through its four kitchens in the next few days. Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee is sending langar for about 20,000 people daily.

With several reports emerging of migrant workers walking long distances to their native towns in the neighbouring states, Kejriwal said Delhi government had the capacity to provide food to them and urged them to stay back in Delhi.

“People migrate to Delhi in search of a better life. I want to assure the chief ministers of other states that we will try to ease the difficulties of all the people living in Delhi,” Kejriwal said.

