MP govt cancels leave of health staff to battle Covid-19
2020-03-08
BHOPAL: The Madhya Pradesh health department has cancelled all leaves in a pre-emptive measure to contain spread of Covid-19 in the state. As of Saturday, around 40 people across the state were under hospital quarantine and another 150 in ‘community surveillance’ at home, say health department sources. No one has tested positive for the virus so far.


“The situation is being monitored closely. There has been no positive case of COVID-19 in Madhya Pradesh,” said a senior health department official. Around 36 districts of MP are monitoring suspected patients as they remain in home or hospital for 14-28 days of quarantine.

State government officials said they could follow through on the Centre’s directive to suspend biometric attendance in view of the coronavirus threat. Almost all government departments use the Aadhaar-based system. It is learnt that the most common method of transmission of the virus seems to be through infected surfaces. Therefore, it is desirable to avoid touching surfaces that might have been touched by someone infected, said a Union government directive on Friday. 

Apprehensions over medicine supply

A recent LANCET report estimates Indian pharmaceutical companies procure almost 70% of the active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) for their medicines from China, the world's leading producer and exporter of APIs by volume. As factories in China are closed to try to stem the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak, pharmaceutical companies and the Indian Government are becoming concerned over the vulnerability of the Indian pharmaceutical supply chain.

MP medical suppliers association, representative, Lalit Jain said, “We are appealed to all the sellers and retailers not to hoard and keep the supply lines open so inflated cost can be avoided.”

India supplies low-cost generic drugs to millions of people, both within and outside the country. “There is a spurt in demand of masks. However, it is not like Delhi where things like hand sanitizers have run off,” said Adtiya, a pharmacist. “Medical supplies for now is maintained. There are rumours about short supply of essentials salts and reagents, but we have not seen any shortage.”

Homeopathy clinic dispenses free ‘med’

In a bid to sensitize people over COVID-19 and ‘improve immunity’, a homeopathy outlet in Budwara area will distribute free ‘medication’. “Union ministry of Ayush is proposing the preventive and prophylactic simple remedies, that may be useful for improving immunity,” said Mohammed Zaki, owner of a pharmacy. The three-day free medicine distribution for COVID-19 began on Saturday. Around 100 people went to the store to get Arsenicum album 30 — a three-day dose to improve immunity.

