GPS enrolls students amid lockdown, private schools cry foul
2020-05-05
LUDHIANA: Amid the ongoing lockdown and curfew, Government Primary School at Jawaddi here on Monday called students for enrolment for the new session. The school has allegedly been opening and making new admissions, violating the curfew orders of the district administration, though teachers said they were doing so after getting directions from higher authorities in this regard.


Harpreet Kaur, head teacher and principal of GPS, Jawaddi said, “We have received verbal orders from higher authorities, including district education officer (primary) Rajinder Kaur and deputy district education officer Kuldeep Saini. All teachers have been instructed through teleconferencing to increase enrolments.”

Harpreet Kaur, who stays almost a kilometre away from the school, said “On Monday, we enrolled two students, one in pre-primary class and the other in Class I. I have come today (Monday) to the school for enrolment…I am not aware about any other school.”

However, deputy district education officer Kuldeep Saini said, “This is clear-cut violation of the district education department’s orders. The teacher said she had visited the school to check seepage as it had rained a day before. She visited to check the school infrastructure and the wheat kept in the school. We never asked to visit the school and enroll students, though we have a target to increase enrollments by around 20% over the last year.”

Meanwhile, private school owners have reacted sharply to the government school’s attempts to push enrolments. They said at a time, when the whole world is suffering from Covid-19 pandemic, government teachers are busy increasing their student strength.

“They are moving in cities and villages surreptitiously filling admission forms. This is shocking. It seems they are a privileged lot. It has also come to our notice that they have been provided names and phone numbers of private school students, whom they are making calls to get enrolled in their schools,” said a member of the private school owners’ union, alleging that government teachers got the data of private schools from e-Punjab portal.

The school owners pointed out that when a private school had opened after March 19, an FIR was registered against them.

J P Bhatt of the Associated Schools Joint Action Front, Punjab, said, “If education department is itself violating the law, how can they ask private schools to follow rules? We strongly condemn such activities and will definitely expose these methods of the department and challenge them in the court. They are bursting the curfew rules taking advantage of being government teachers.”

“If a government school can make admissions, why not private schools? I feel by indulging in such acts, the education department is taking Covid-19 very lightly. We want deputy commissioner Pradeep Kumar Agarawal to take action against errant officers. There should be no partiality between government and private schools,” said Thakur Anand, president, Associated Schools Joint Action Front, Punjab.

Rajinder Kaur, district education officer (primary) said, “We will seek the reason why she opened the school and admitted students as this is violation of rules. We never asked anyone to enroll students by breaking the administration rules.” 

