Telangana: Granite business hits coronavirus bump, down by Rs 100 crore
2020-02-11
HYDERABAD: The latest to be hit by the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019 n-CoV) in China is Telangana’s thriving granite industry. Industry sources said sales of at least 15,000 cubic metres of granite had been put on hold. This has resulted in a loss of around Rs 100 crore.


With Chinese businessmen who othewise frequent granite quarrying units in Karimnagar, Warangal and Khammam in January and February confined in their country, trading took a beating. “Chinese traders come to these districts every month. In March, China conducts a big international exhibition where their businessmen buy more granite from us in January and February alone. We sold 15,000 cubic metres of granite for which they paid up to Rs 20,000 per cubic metre this season. The loss is estimated to be around Rs 100 crore,” Telangana Smallscale Granite Industries’ Association president R Nageswara Rao told TOI. 

 
 
Industry sources said Telangana along with Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka exports quality granite to several countries, including China and Taiwan. A major chunk of exports from Telangana go to China, while Rajasthan, Mumbai and Delhi are leading importers of granite. “Around 20% of our business depends on exports to China. We can manage with (revenues) through the domestic market for some time but our main profits accrue from exports to China,” said a trader from Karimnagar. 

Adding to traders’ woes, the Centre has also prohibited Chinese traders from coming to Bengaluru where an international exhibition took place recently. 

With granite quarry owners losing business, the industry is also suffering from lack of movement between the two countries with import of many tools used in the granite making stopped as a result of the coronavirus outbreak. This is likely to hit several small-scale industries in the state. 

“There won’t be any improvement in the situation for at least a year. If this persists, only 10% of the industry will survive. This is a big threat as the granite industry survices on exports. There is a possibility that many of them may become non-performing assets (NPAs),” said Yerram Raju of the Telangana Industrial Health Clinic Limited. 

“For instance, the Hyderabad international airport has been built using furnished granite from China but the raw stone had gone from here,” he added.


