Grassroots work checked Covid-19 in Theni
2020-04-29
Madurai: Theni district has become a leader among the southern districts in containing Covid-19, as not a single case was reported in the past 11 days. The district also witnessed the recovery of 36 Covid-19 positive people from the 43 cases.

As soon as the lockdown was announced, many markets in the districts saw overcrowding throwing social distancing norms to the winds. Many of the major markets were shifted to makeshift places, which could ensure more social distancing. By the end of March, the Theni district administration came up with the idea of assorted vegetable bags to be delivered at doorsteps, preventing people from coming out. They also closed the markets except the one in Andipatti block where no positive case was reported.

Theni district collector Pallavi M Baldev says that its biggest success was containing people within the zones. “Most of our positive cases were family members of the first positive cases, and except for one case where a woman who was the friend of the wife of a positive case, all others were primary contacts in the district,” she said.

Meat shops witnessed huge crowds, and the district administration even decided to distribute meat at doorsteps by distributing the numbers of meat stalls through Whatsapp. “This was a big relief as we are a meat eating family, and we were just surviving on eggs,” said Banu of Bodi. The district was also the first to introduce grocery kits worth Rs 2,000, which would suffice a four-member family for a month, and also a lucky draw where winners could win gold coins. “We decided to do all this in the beginning of April, when everyone would have received their salaries,” said the collector. The district also launched the Thenisandhai app, which helped people to buy goods.

As many as 43 nodal officers were appointed and various containment activities were spread out among them. They were in charge of the disinfection, the contact tracing, delivery of goods, etc. The district also locked down its borders before the official lockdown was announced. Thirty six people have been discharged in the district so far. Tuticorin district has tested the highest number of samples, 2,700, a reason for its effective containing of the disease. District collector Sandeep Nanduri says that intensified contact tracing by police, heath workers and local body staff helped them contain the disease within the containment zones. It has gone without positive cases for nine days.

Sivaganga has kept its numbers low at 12 for the past eight days. This too was an example of the disease being contained within the containment zones. Ten of them have been discharged till date. Kanyakumari is moving towards becoming green zone with no cases being reported for the past 13 days. But, ten out of the 16 Covid-19 patients are still in hospitals. Health officials in Kanyakumari have put in place stringent lockdown rules. Regular surveys have helped them contain the disease.


