Graves lead to grave fear of Covid
2020-05-04
Vadodara: Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) is in a Catch-22 situation with Covid — both from positive cases as well as those who died from the virus infection. On one hand, the civic body is running out of space for newer burials at the existing site, while, on the other it is meeting stiff resistance from residents around the new site it has identified at Karelibaug.

VMC had begun burials in the Matariya Kabrashtan, while residents of nearby societies opposed the move vehemently expressing their grave fear of the disease spreading from the graveyard. 

However, the civic body along with local leaders somehow managed to convince them that the deep graves sealed all risks of the virus spreading from the site. 

VMC corporator Farid Lakhajiwala said that the misconception and fear among the people are leading to the protests. 

When the first Covid deaths were reported in the city, VMC earmarked Matariya Kabrastan and Khaswadi crematorium for last rites of the Covid victims. These two sites were even earlier used during the swine flu infection.

“The graveyard has been in use for decades now and no society in its proximity ever objected to anything. But the recent fears of Covid-19 spreading from infected bodies have propelled them to agitate. However, they later relented and allowed burials to take place there,” said Lakhajiwala.

But after it ran out of space there, VMC then decided to conduct burials at the Tajgira Kabrasthan, another site owned by the Matariya Kabrastan trust. 

“The Matariya Kabrasthan has space for four five more burials only. The trust suggested us an alternative land for the burial. According to the trust, the land is owned by it and is earmarked for a graveyard. If this is okayed, we will use the land,” said VMC’s medical officer (health) Dr Devesh Patel.

Alarm bells were again pressed here when the VMC started work to clear the land of vegetation and dig some graves on the Tajgira graveyard. Residents of nearby areas raised objections and even made representations to the administration against its use for Covid victims. They held demonstrations and even claimed that the land was privately held. 

A VMC functionary said that the objections were being raised by people staying across a rivulet that flows along the boundary of the graveyard land. “There are no settlements adjoining the graveyard,” he said.

Dr Patel was adamant that if the land has been reserved for a graveyard, the VMC will go ahead with burials there. “If needed, we will use provisions of the Epidemic Act against those creating trouble,” he warned.

Activist Zuber Gopalani said he was trying to resolve the issue without any confrontations. “If we are asked to arrange for another space, we will do so. We just need to ensure the dignity of those who died,” he said.


