‘Green Zone’ Goa one test away from seven new Covid cases
2020-05-14
PANAJI: Seven persons, including a family of five from Mumbai and their driver, tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. The seventh, a goods truck driver who had come from Gujarat, tested positive when he approached the sub-district hospital at Ponda complaining of breathlessness.

 


The Mumbai family and their driver were asymptomatic at the time of testing and were detected when they underwent the mandatory check at the border after entering Goa, a Green Zone, health officials said. They said the swab samples of the six persons came out positive when it was subjected to Truenat Beta Cov tests at Ponda sub-district hospital.

All seven samples have been sent to Goa Medical College’s virology lab for confirmatory test and till the time of going to the press, the test results had not been declared.

Wednesday’s seven positive cases are the first in the state after April 3, when Goa had got a Covid-19 positive patient. Till Tuesday, Goa only had seven positive cases, all of whom have recovered and discharged.

Chief minister Pramod Sawant said the six persons from Mumbai were Goans and had not come in contact with any person after they entered the state. “There is no fear of community transmission,” he said.

Sawant said all those who had come in contact with the truck driver had been quarantined and they would also undergo a Covid-19 test.

“Goans have nothing to worry, as these are imported cases. Goans have to be alert and inform us (the state government) about people coming from outside,” he said.

As per the protocol, Truenat Beta Cov test result needs a confirmatory test in the event the sample tests positive for the virus, a health official said.

Goa initially detected seven cases, including six persons with a foreign travel history, in March. Since no case was detected after April 3, Goa was classified as Green Zone.

Since May 1, after the Centre permitted movement of stranded people, Goa has seen increased flow of persons entering the state.

Over 2,500 persons have entered Goa since then and all have undergone Truenat Beta Cov test.

Goans entering the state are placed in 14-day home quarantine, if their test shows negative for Covid-19, while non-Goans have to compulsorily undergo facility quarantine for two weeks. Goans are also placed in a facility quarantine till their test results are declared.

Those travelling from abroad are required to undergo mandatory facility quarantine for 14 days.

On Wednesday itself, 274 travellers were placed in facility quarantine and 248 domestic travellers were home quarantined.

Truenat beta Cov testing machines have been installed at two district hospitals and three sub district hospitals. Attached teams go and collect swab samples of suspects. Anticipating increased movement of people from across the border, walk-in smart kiosks have been set up at border checks posts for collecting swab samples.


