Group of intellectuals suggest 7-point action plan to come out of Covid crisis
2020-05-23
NEW DELHI: A group of intellectuals have come together to propose a 7-point plan of action— “Mission Jai Hind”— to respond to the present economic, health and humanitarian crisis in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. They have proposed an alternative approach, listing some urgent steps that the Centre and state governments must take to rebuild lives and livelihood.

The plan calls for measures, including help to migrants go back home within 10 days; universal and free healthcare for all Covid patients; universal access to expanded ration for six months. It also calls for enhanced job guarantee in rural and urban India, cash compensation for loss of job or livelihood and a three - month interest waiver for farmers, small business and home loans. They have also demanded a national revival mission not to be constrained by lack of resources.

In a statement, they claim that the “stimulus package” announced by the central government “virtually ignores the urgent need for economic support to ordinary citizens whose lives and livelihoods have been shattered by the Covid-19 crisis and lockdown”. 

The plan proposes the principle of “whatever it takes” to raise resources for ‘Mission Jain Hind’. All the resources (cash, real estate, property, bonds, etc) with the citizens or within the nation must be treated as national resources available during this crisis. Given the critical role of the state governments, it recommends that Central government must share at least 50% of the additional revenue raised for this purpose with the state governments.

It has been endorsed by prominent economists, including Professors Pranab Bardhan, Deepak Nayyar, Jean Dreze, Abhijit Sen, Maitreesh Ghatak, Jayati Ghosh, Debraj Ray, R Nagaraj, Ashok Kotwal, Santosh Mehrotra, Amit Basole and Himanshu. The statement said Nobel laureate Prof Amartya Sen has expressed “broad sympathy” with this action plan. Others to endorse it include historian Ramachandra Guha and actvists Harsh Mander, Nikhil De and Bezwada Wilson among others. 

