Lockdown: Growing or greying, tresses add to stress
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: Prancing peacocks and dancing dolphins are all very well, but one of the less palatable things that nature has brought home thanks to the lockdown is-hair. While men are desperately seeking barbers and finally risking their wives to trim their locks, women are waking up in the mornings not recognising their grey selves. 

 "There's no silver lining in silver hair," says a homemaker, adding her husband was not even aware of how grey she had gone. "Women are going mental without access to the parlour -the big issues are grey hair and bushy eyebrows," adds hairstylist Aneesha Virani. 

Hair and beauty expert Kanta Motwani of Kromakay Salons says she gets an average of one call a day from women in distress. "One of my clients called to say this (visiting the parlour) is the only thing that keeps her sane. You see, for many women, going to salons is therapy. When a client sits on a hairdresser's chair, its also about the conversation. We are like their caregivers-many don't even have the products they need to shampoo and condition their hair."

 Men don't worry much about the grey. Some have grown their hair to make a ponytail. "Or they can just go bald, the hair will grow back," Motwani adds. "But if women really have a problem with the grey showing, I tell them, wear a scarf or tie it up, or cover it with a bandana, if it bothers them. But at least give it a little TLC by giving yourself a massage." 


Some give their hair a break from colouring, blow-drying

One south Mumbai school teacher says, “I’m actually letting my hair recover from all the colour and blow-drying... oiling it twice a week and letting it dry naturally. It’s quite liberating actually.” South Mumbai-based hair stylist Jehanbux Mogal says a few clients still ask if they can come over. “But I refuse because it’s not safe,” he says.

While some rebellious teenagers are threatening to go bald, children are complaining about the heat and their overflowing sweaty strands. Recently, Jay Patel, a Malad-based education consultant, got so tired of his five-year-old son complaining crankily about his itching scalp, “I found a pair of clippers and decided to do it myself. I saved a thousand bucks and Trishaan was extremely happy.”

Suresh Naik, a media professional, has been miserably searching for a barber since the lockdown. He found one outside Ghatkopar station.

“When I besieged him, he told me he wouldn’t do it even if I paid him Rs 10,000,” says Naik with a groan.

Social media has been buzzing with jokes and memes about home haircuts. One branded salon posted a ‘how to’ on cutting your own hair, and just as the viewer starts paying attention, the stylist stops and says, “Don’t even think about doing it on your own. Just wait until the lockdown is over.”

In one post, actor Anushka Sharma can be seen giving her cricketer husband Virat Kohli a haircut.

Meanwhile, actor Neena Gupta gave her fans a tip on dealing with the grey showing up. With no irony whatsoever, she whispered conspirationally to them on her Instagram handle: “Use your mascara to touch it up. It really works!”

There is some concern that with men growing hair and women growing moustaches, gender parity may get a whole new look.


