GST waiver sought on equipment bought to combat Covid-19 using MPLADS
2020-03-31
Madurai: More than Rs 10 lakh is the GST paid by Rajya Sabha MP A Vijayakumar for the purchase of emergency health care equipment for the Kanyakumari government medical college hospital using his Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) fund. Last week the MP had allotted Rs 1 crore from his fund to strengthen preparedness to combat Covid-19.The MP circulated a copy of the purchase order on social media to improve transparency. While the people of Kanyakumari have appreciated his contribution, the GST is attracting criticism as the amount is huge. Some said it is the price of three ventilators in the order.“GST is applicable on all the sanctions using MPLADS. Effectively, around Rs 50 to Rs 75 lakh is deducted as GST from Rs 5 crore allotted annually under MPLADS. I am not against GST, but the government could consider waiving GST on emergency healthcare equipment bought to combat Covid-19. It will ensure that more money is spent on buying equipment,” Vijayakumar told TOI.Vijayakumar said he will allot a sizeable share of his MPLADS for 2020-21 too for this cause and hopes the government will waive the 12% GST for this cause from April 1.Madurai MP Su Venkatesan who has made a first instalment allotted Rs 56.17 lakh from MPLADS for lifesaving medical equipment and protective gear for health care professionals at the Madurai medical college hospital. “When the availability of ventilators is hit, why should GST be charged on it? The government should make lifesaving equipment GST free,” he said. Tirunelveli MP S Gnanathiraviam who has allotted Rs 86 lakh from MPLADS said that the government should consider waiving GST for purchase of lifesaving equipment.Vijayakumar got the equipment including nine ventilators installed at the Kanyakumari hospital by making multiple calls to people concerned and through highly influential persons in the health ministry as they talked of difficulty in getting the equipment delivered due to political pressure and tough competition from private hospitals pan India on the companies that have limited resources.“I am planning to share difficulties I faced in getting the equipment in the social media,” Venkatesan said. Tuticorin MP Kanimozhi Karunanidhi has also allotted Rs 1 crore from MPLADS for purchase of testing, screening and personal protection equipment for healthcare professionals and for the purchase of other facilities in connection with combating Covid-19.