Goa University choir goes international to help WHO Covid fund
2020-06-03
PANAJI: The Goa University (GU) choir was recently invited to represent the Asian segment to be a part of a virtual rendition of Amazing Grace with legendary American singer-songwriter Judy Collins. The soulful version was released on May 29 on various e-music platforms.

This collaboration has put GU on the global map in terms of music.

“The song has been released worldwide by Warner Music. In this production, we are collaborating with some of the best foreign choirs, which gives us a global exposure that will definitely help us in the future in terms of sharing our music with the world. Also, famous international artists, such as Ringo Starr of The Beatles, are involved in supporting this initiative,” chair professor for Western music at GU, Santiago Lusardi Girelli said.

Launched by Collins toraise money with a charity single in aid of the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) solidarity response fund, the global virtual choir is a collaboration by hundreds of professional and amateur singers performing in their living rooms all over the world.

“This initiative, started by Warner Music, which is one of the biggest record labels in the world, is for a vital cause — supporting all those who are suffering this pandemic crisis. All proceeds raised from this single will be going to the fund https://covid19responsefund.org/,” Girelli said.

Judy Collins’ iconic rendition of Amazing Grace was released on Whales and Nightingales, an album that turns 50 in August this year.

A few weeks ago, the GU choir received an invitation from Collins to join her project and sing together with a few other choirs from the around world, which include The Sixteen from the UK, Soweto Gospel Choir from South Africa, and the New York Choral Society from the USA. For this project they learnt a choral version in different voices to support Judy’s voice harmonically and melodically.

Each of the 35 GU choir singers recorded their own voices and videos online at their homes following which the rendition was prepared.

“Singing from home on a virtual choir is a new experience for all of us. It gives us the rare opportunity to connect with singers and musicians from all around the world. In this project, our choir is the only Indian choir to be chosen, and one of the two coming from Asia,” Girelli said.

The video and the recording are available on iTunes, Amazon and all the online streaming platforms such as Spotify, Google Music, etc, as well as the social media platforms, Facebook and Instagram.

The GU choir is now preparing three more virtual choirs in collaboration with different artists from India and Europe.


