Guj CM under a week’s home quarantine; Cases tally is 766
2020-04-16
Ahmedabad: Gujarat chief minister Vijay Rupani was put under a week of home quarantine on Wednesday, a day which saw a record high 127 people testing positive for coronavirus in the state. Gujarat recorded five more deaths with death toll climbing to 33 even as the total coronvirus cases tally shot to 766.

The CM’s quarantine was mandated after he underwent a detailed medical check-up by top infectious diseases doctors following his much-debated exposure to Congress MLA from Jamalpur-Khadia Imran Khedawala who tested positive merely hours after his meeting with the CM, DyCM Nitin Patel and MoS home Pradipsinh Jadeja. 

Khedawala was joined by another senior Congress corporator, Badruddin Shaikh, and his wife who have tested positive on Wednesday. Two nurses tasked with taking samples of Covid suspect tested positive in Bharuch Civil Hospital. Of the 127 cases, 88 were reported from Ahmedabad. The last time the state saw over 100 test positive in a day was on April 10 when 116 people were detected with the virus. 

“During the CM's meeting with Congress MLAs to discuss imposition of curfew in walled city and Danilimda that are Covid-19 hotspots with maximum cases, Khedawala was sitting at least 15-20 feet away from the chief minister,” said Dr Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary – health and family welfare, government of Gujarat.

“Khedawala suffered from low-grade fever and cold due to which his sample was collected on Monday. Till the reports arrive, he should have avoided meeting anyone, but by not doing so, he has made a mistake,” Ravi further added.

The chief minister conducted the cabinet meeting through video conferencing from home itself. The top leadership discussed the detection of a high number of 88 cases from Ahmedabad alone.

“Most cases in Ahmedabad have been reported from areas such as Dudheshwar, Panch Kuwa, Kalupur, Behrampura, Odhav, Shah-e-Alam, Naroda, Raikhad, Dariyapur and Danilimda. While one case was reported was that of a paramedic affiliated with 108 Emergency services who hails from Kheda, he was on duty in Kathwada of Ahmedabad,” confirmed Ravi.

Five people including a 14-year-old girl from Vadodara and a 45-year-old woman from Surat succumbed to the infection. According to the state health department, both patients had co-morbidities. Three more deaths from Ahmedabad were also reported, one of a 45-year-old woman at Civil Hospital along with a 65-year-old woman at UN Mehta Hospital and a 55-year-old woman at SVP Hospital. This takes the total Covid-related deaths in the state to 33.


