Gujarat to expand scope of Covid-19 tests with more labs, new method
2020-04-14
AHMEDABAD: Facing criticism for comparatively fewer number of tests for identifying Covid-19 suspect cases, state officials on Monday evening said that they are expanding the scope of testing further with an increase in coverage of geographic area and persons tested.


On Monday, Gujarat registered 56 fresh Covid-19 positive cases taking the total tally to 572 cases. Death toll in the state climbed to 26 deaths after two more deaths — one each from Ahmedabad and Vadodara – were recorded on Monday.

 


Vadodara saw the death of a youth. “A 27-year-old man has died at Gotri Hospital on Sunday night. He was already under treatment for dengue and his father and uncle were identified positive cases.” 

A 76-year-old man, admitted in SVP Hospital in Ahmedabad, succumbed to the infection on Monday. He had co-morbidity in form of heart and lung disease including pulmonary fibrosis, said senior health officials. 

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), said that apart from the current testing labs approved by ICMR for the Covid-19 tests, they are also ramping up facilities at GMERS Sola, GCRI, NIOH, SMIMER, etc. which would soon get permission. “With the new labs, we would have capacity of 5,000 tests and we would also be able to run the lab round the clock,” she said.

Ravi said that in terms of tests per million (10 lakh) population, Gujarat is third in country with 219 tests. Only Kerala with 448 tests and Maharashtra with 317 tests lead Gujarat in testing. “In fact, in past 24 hours, Gujarat processed about 16% of India’s total samples. Our positive case rate (positive cases per 100 tests) is at 4.1%,” she said.

Due to random testing introduced in the districts where no cases have been registered so far, two positive cases from Banaskantha were found on Monday. The testing would also be conducted in areas apart from identified hotspots, said health department officials.

Ahmedabad city and district recorded 38 of 56 cases on Monday with survey intensified in various identified hotspots, said health department officials.


State labs will have capacity of conducting 5,000 tests

Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health & family welfare), said that apart from the current testing labs approved by ICMR for the Covid-19 tests, they are also ramping up facilities at GMERS Sola, GCRI, NIOH, SMIMER, etc. which would soon get permission. “With the new labs, we would have capacity of 5,000 tests and we would also be able to run the lab round the clock,” she said. Ravi said that in terms of tests per million (10 lakh) population, Gujarat is third in country with 219 tests. Only Kerala with 448 tests and Maharashtra with 317 tests lead Gujarat in testing. “In fact, in past 24 hours, Gujarat processed about 16% of India’s total samples. Our positive case rate (positive cases per 100 tests) is at 4.1%,” she said.

Ahmedabad city and district recorded 38 of 56 cases on Monday with survey intensified in various identified hotspots, said health department officials.

