Covid-19 threat: Gujarat Sports Club makes room for flyers
2020-03-18
AHMEDABAD: Gujarat Sports Club near Sardar Patel Stadium has closed for all activities for members and guests. The club management took this decision around noon on Tuesday, and notified all members of it, following a request from municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra.


“We got a request from the municipal commissioner to shut the club, so rooms could be used as observation wards for international passengers arriving at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International (SVPI) airport,” said N K Patel, president, Gujarat Sports Club.

“The club has been closed for all activities from 6pm on Tuesday. Some 26 rooms at the club will be used to monitor patient health by state health department officials,” he further added.


 

Club sources said that there was no resistance from members as the decision comes in extraordinary circumstances, in the interest of public health.

Other clubs in Ahmedabad took similar decisions as part of precautions against the COVID-19 outbreak. The Karnavati Club management has decided to suspend all sports coaching activities.

“Taking into consideration the safety of our members, all coaching for sports such as table tennis, billiards, tennis, chess, karate, badminton, swimming, among others will remain closed from March 17-29. Fees paid by members will be carried forward,” read a message sent to members of Karnavati Club.

After state health authorities imposed a shutdown on schools, colleges, cinema halls and even swimming pools, clubs have already shut down their health centres, card rooms and swimming pools till further notice.

Rajpath Club has taken similar measures. “We have completely barred the entry of members’ guests. Members will be the only ones allowed in. The card room, health club and the swimming pool has already been shut and we have also suspended coaching for all sports till March 29. A decision on resuming these activities will be taken after reviewing the situation later.”


