Gujarat police to form special control room for lockdown
2020-03-25
GANDHINAGAR: Gujarat DGP Shivanand Jha announced formation of a state control room for effective implementation of lockdown and address issues faced by the citizens.


Jha said that the lockdown of the state from March 23 midnight is successful so far and appealed to citizens to adhere to the rules to make fight against COVID-19 effective. 

Jha told media at Gandhinagar that in past 24 hours, the state police have registered 238 cases for violation of CrPC Section 144 (prohibition on assembly of more than four persons at a spot) whereas 127 cases have been registered for violation of home quarantine rules. A total of 426 persons were detained and were later released during the lockdown.

“A few complaints about the problems faced by the citizens have come to our notice and we are trying to resolve it. I want to appeal to the people of Gujarat to avoid going out unnecessarily and adhere to the social distancing even when you are out to get essential goods and services. Societies should form groups to ensure that there is no crowding,” said Jha.

The DGP announced formation of a special control room to keep an eye on the lockdown conditions and redress any issues arising during its implementation. “The entire initiative would be supervised by two ADGP-level officers. If the citizens face any unnecessary issue, they can contact respective police stations or police control room numbers,” said Jha.

Jha said that there were a few reports of stopping media and a few trucks of essential supplies in Ahmedabad. “We will discuss the issues with city police commissioners and district SPs during our video conference today,” he said.

He said that police on duty are also taking adequate precautions including wearing masks and washing hands frequently. From midnight of Monday, multiple check posts have been created at police station levels across Gujarat as except essential staff for running a police station, the entire staff is put on state roads to ensure effective lockdown.

