Gujarat records third Covid-19 death, five new positive cases
2020-03-27
AHMEDABAD: Gujarat recorded the third death due to coronavirus as a 70-year-old man from Bhavnagar succumbed to the viral infection on Thursday. Five more positive cases were recorded, taking the total number of cases to 44. In all, Covid-19 has claimed three lives in the state.


The state health & family welfare department said that the elderly man had recently travelled to Delhi. After multiple symptoms, he was hospitalized a couple of days ago. His report arrived on Thursday morning. Officials said the man was suffering from major co-morbidities like cancer, diabetes and heart disease. 

Amid exodus of thousands of workers from various parts of the state, DGP Shivanand Jha on Thursday announced that movement on roads would not be allowed henceforth. The state government has assured to provide migrants food and stay facility through district collectors. 

CM Vijay Rupani appealed to the migrants to stay put in the state. "I appeal to the laborers from Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and other states not to rush for their native states. State government is making arrangements to provide ration and other facilities for them". 

The state government also announced setting up of a new control room to oversee the distribution of essential goods and services in Gandhinagar. From Friday onwards, the state police have allowed movement of home delivery services to encourage citizens from staying indoors. The state government also announced delivery of food and essential services to the elderly living in six districts most affected by the Covid-19 infection.

Rupani conducted a high-level discussion with various departments on Thursday evening and said that the state would soon procure 156 ventilators for the newly-formed hospitals for Covid-19 patients. In a video conferencing with Union health minister Dr Harsh Vardhan, the state government reiterated demand to allow two new testing labs in Ahmedabad and one at Rajkot.

