Coronavirus scare: Gujaratis among 50-odd Indians stranded in UK
2020-03-22
VADODARA: More than 50 Indians including a few from the state are stranded in London as they were unable to leave the United Kingdom despite having booked their tickets. 


While the group that includes mostly students believed that they would be able to leave as flights to India would stop on March 22, they had to return from the airport after being told that they could not fly to India due to restrictions.

The group had bought tickets after India made the announcement that passengers of international flights could not disembark in the country after 1.31am on March 23. While this was true, another advisory issued by the Indian High Commission in London on March 19 had stated that the travel of Indian citizens including Indian students in the UK would remain restricted till March 31. It posted the information on its website and also tweeted it.

Believing that they would be able to fly to India till March 22, a group of students booked their tickets and even reached the airport. They were to travel to Dubai and then to India. But on reaching the airport, they were asked to return citing restrictions on travel for Indian citizens.

The students and a few others then reached the Indian embassy seeking help. “We booked tickets after the announcement of restrictions on fights after March 22. When we reached the airport, we were told that we could not fly. We are now stranded. We booked costly tickets and will get refunds only after two weeks. Till then we do not know how to survive as many do not have enough money. The situation here is serious,” said Itishree Yashesh Pradhan from Godhra who is staying there on a dependent visa.

Dhruv Patel, a resident of Vadodara, said that there were several Gujaratis amongst the group of 54. “Some people have shifted to a hotel arranged for them by the embassy. We booked the tickets on March 20. We did so fearing that we may not be able to leave later,” he said.

The high commission has been trying to convince the students to move to hotels. It has also tweeted steps taken to help Indians in the UK. But till Saturday evening, students were in no mood to leave the embassy and had even spent a night there.

