Gujarat’s unemployment rate spikes in lockdown
2020-05-12
GANDHINAGAR: Figures released by an independent research agency, the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE), suggest that Gujarat’s unemployment rate has jumped three times over the past month because of the lockdown.

According to CMIE, there is more bad news on the employment front as the unemployment rate is expected to rise even further because of the ongoing lockdown. The only solace for Gujarat is that its figure is better than the national unemployment rate and that of some peer group states.

The CMIE, in its “Unemployment Rate in India” report, noted that Gujarat’s unemployment rate which was 6.7% in March, increased to a whopping 18.7% in April. In its all India report, CMIE has noted that the unemployment rate is expected to increase even further in May.

The agency reported that the national unemployment rate was 8.7% in April which jumped to 23.5% in April. With the unemployment rate of 18.7%, Gujarat’s number fares slightly better than the national average.

Maharashtra’s unemployment rate, which was 5.8% in March, jumped to 20.9% in April. Karnataka’s unemployment rate, which was 3.5% in March jumped to 29.8% in April.

“Data for the first week of May indicates that the unemployment rate could climb further. This worsening should be expected as the lockdown continues to get prolonged,” the agency noted. “Initially, a lockdown only hurts the most vulnerable labour, that is informally employed in unorganized sectors. Gradually, it starts hitting the more secure jobs. Startups have announced lay-offs and industry associations have warned of job losses.”

The report further states, “It is not surprising that small traders and wage labourers account for most of these losses. They have been the most severely hit during the lockdown.” The category of hawkers and daily wage-earning labourers whose livelihood depends every day on a functioning economy also are worst affected, the report says. “They eke out a living out from their daily earnings and are therefore the most vulnerable to the economy shutting down,” it says. “A prolonged shutdown is their worst nightmare. 91 million of these lost their employment in April 2020.”

Despite several attempts, deputy chief minister Nitin Patel and Dilip Thakor, minister labour & employment, were not available for comment.

