Coronavirus outbreak in Gulbai Tekra: Babu bastion in panic
2020-04-19
AHMEDABAD/GANDHINAGAR: After the Gulbai Tekra slums, aka ‘Hollywood’, were placed under cluster quarantine, anxiety has been sweeping through the nearby Samarpan government flats. Samarpan is home to top bureaucrats, police officers, and judges. Seven Covid-19 positive cases have been detected at the slums.


On Saturday, a battery of municipal health workers disinfected the Samarpan complex. Some officials had disinfectants sprayed within their private premises. The health officials also contacted the seven people with Covid-19 at Gulbai Tekra, and their family members, to determine whether someone they knew had visited or worked at Samarpan. People from the Gulbai Tekra area serve as domestic help at many Samarpan flats, sources said. 

Moreover, the road between Samarpan and Gulbai Tekra is regularly used by senior IAS and IPS officers and their family members.

On Monday, a single person from the slums had tested positive for Covid-19. Over the next 24 hours, the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) launched one of the largest health surveillance drives involving close to 10,000 residents of the slums. The corporation fished out 206 cases with apparent symptoms, tested 200 people, and then isolated the positive cases by Wednesday morning. 

A senior officer who lives in the Samarpan complex said, “Our domestic help come from the Gulbai Tekra area. But we had asked them not to report for duty after the first case of Covid-19 emerged in the city.” The officer went on to say: “Many had stopped work earlier. However, a few members of the society had their domestic help come over as recently as two days ago. So there certainly is panic in the society.” The officer said that fortunately no case has been registered at Samarpan.

“We have locked all gates of the society and police officers have ensured that no outsider enters,” another senior officer said. “Only those officers who have to report to duty venture out of the society and they take all precautions while returning home.” 

Other major high-profile localities, especially Judges Bungalows —where high court judges and senior IAS and IPS officers live — are also in a state of panic. One judge’s private staff member has reportedly tested positive for coronavirus, so the members of the colony are now being doubly cautious.

