Gurugram shuts down till March 31 in bid to stop coronavirus march
2020-03-23
GURUGRAM: Just as the ‘janata curfew’ ended at 9pm on Sunday, a lockdown kicked in across Gurugram to contain the spread of Covid-19. Gurugram is among seven districts in Haryana — the others being Faridabad, Sonipat, Rohtak, Jhajjar, Panipat and Panchkula — and 75 across India where a lockdown has been announced.


Coronavirus in India live updates

From 9pm on March 22 to midnight on March 31, public transport has been shut down, gatherings of more than five banned and shops that don’t provide essential services closed. Essential services – amenities, food production and delivery, health and medicine, communication, government offices, banking, supply chain and manufacturing of essential items – will not be shut down. “We have a list of exemptions in place to ensure residents are not inconvenienced. Our teams will conduct regular checks to see essential commodities are available to all residents,” said deputy commissioner Amit Khatri.


 
In its order, the state health and family welfare department said the presence of two international airports – the IGI Airport in Delhi and Chandigarh International Airport – and the 6,600 people being monitored in the state made it “imperative to adopt strict social distancing and isolation measures”. Most of those who have are back after travelling abroad are from the seven districts it has placed under lockdown, the order added.

The decision was taken at a meeting of the principal secretary to the Prime Minister with the chief secretaries of all states.

Public transport shut

Railways have been shut down country-wide and metro services stopped (both in Delhi and Gurugram). Later in the day, chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar declared a blanket ban on all public transport – autos, cabs, e-rickshaws and buses. “Anybody found violating this will be punishable under Section 188 of the IPC (disobedience of an order promulgated by a public servant),” said Haryana transport minister Moolchand Sharma.

Those returning to Gurugram after taking a flight will be screened at the airport and asked to self-quarantine. “There will be separate arrangements to get them back home, which the airport authority will decide on. Only transportation of essentials like food, groceries and pharmaceuticals will be allowed,” Sharma added.

Health experts welcomed the move, saying the chances of the virus spreading are at least six times higher on public transport than in malls and markets. “Metros and local trains are packed in peak hours, with people standing very close to each other. This is very risky,” said a doctor from the state health department.

No disruption in food and grocery supply

The district administration said that while fear of an impending lockdown had led to panic buying, all commodities will be in supply. “Our teams will check that essential commodities are not overpriced anywhere during the lockdown. They will also check hoarding and black market sale of goods. On Friday, residents had started stocking up on things but we are trying to generate awareness. All essential commodities will be available during the lockdown,” said Faridabad deputy commissioner Yashpal Yadav.

Food delivery, likewise, will continue. While restaurants have been shut, delivery services have not. “We will continue to operate with curtailed partner network (restaurants and delivery) for those in need of food delivery,” a Zomato spokesperson said. Swiggy, too, said it would continue operations. “We urge all customers to only order in if they must. As an essential service, Swiggy will try and remain operational across most cities for customers in need. The entire revenue generated by Swiggy during this period will be used for the welfare of delivery partners,” a Swiggy spokesperson said.

On Sunday, right after the ‘janata curfew’, Gurugram had ample food delivery options. When TOI checked a food delivery app between 9pm and 10pm, 55 restaurants were delivering in Udyog Vihar, 37 in Sector 29 and 22 in Kendriya Vihar. Options in its NCR counterpart in Uttar Pradesh, Noida, were limited – two restaurants in the commercial hub of Sector 18, and none in Sector 16 and Sector 76.


(With inputs from Shubhra Pant)


