Gurugram has three Covid-19 hospitals, but none handling patients due for delivery
2020-05-27
GURUGRAM: The death of a two-day-old girl from Gurugram at ESIC Hospital in Faridabad, the youngest Covid-19 patient in Haryana to succumb to the infection, has raised serious concerns about the lack of healthcare facilities in the city for Covid-19 positive pregnant women. The state of affairs is such that the health department is referring such patients to nearby cities for delivery.


There are three designated Covid-19 hospitals in the city – the government-run 126-bed ESIC Hospital in Sector 9, the 150-bed Medeor hospital in Manesar, which is a non-profit venture by CEOs, and the 100-bed SGT Medical College in Chandu Budhera.

None of the three facilities is taking cases of pregnant women who have tested positive for Covid.

“Our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and operation theatre for deliveries of babies are not functional at present as we are dealing with Covid-19 patients. We are referring pregnant women to other hospitals,” said a doctor at ESIC hospital.

While the health department is aware that the city lacks any facility for pregnant Covid patients, it has not yet referred any them to the Medeor hospital.

When contacted by TOI, Gurugram chief medical officer JS Punia did not give any reason for this. Instead, he said the city already has a dedicated maternity care unit to deal with Covid-19 positive pregnant women.

“We are sending all pregnant Covid-19 patients to our Sector 31 polyclinic,” said Punia. The polyclinic, however, lacks a labour room and an ultrasound facility. 

The ESIC hospital, which has 55 Covid-19 patients, has sent only one pregnant Covid-19 patient to the polyclinic. Four other pregnant women in the city who had contracted the infection were referred to Faridabad’s ESIC hospital.

Medeor Hospital told TOI that so far it has not received any cases of pregnant Covid-19 patients from the other hospitals. If it does, it added, a gynaecology ward is in place along with a team of doctors for treating Covid-19 cases. At present, the hospital has 50 Covid-19 patients.

Meanwhile, for expectant mothers, the lack of facilities for such cases has been worrying.

A resident of Sushant Lok-1, who is due to deliver sometime around the end of this month, said her usually easy-going nature had been overtaken by anxiety as she tries to figure out the hospital best suited for her.

“There are no clear guidelines for pregnant Covid-19 patients. What are they supposed to do? Why are private hospitals denying them medical help? A private hospital has said that all pregnant women must go for Covid-19 testing before delivery,” the woman claimed.

She added that she was told by the private hospital that if she tested positive, she would have to be admitted to the Sector 31 polyclinic. But she is wary of what could be in store there. “I don’t know what kind of facilities they have at the polyclinic,” she said.

Another woman, who lives in South City-1, expressed concern. She, too, claimed that private hospitals had denied admission to such cases.

“A pregnant woman was referred to Faridabad after she was tested positive for Covid. We are living in a city like Gurugram, and it does not have any centre to deal with pregnant women who have the virus? Why can’t the government provide proper facilities for the residents?” she asked.

