Gurgaon dentist’s harrowing experience to get tested for Covid points at the acute anxiety among those showing symptoms
2020-03-30
Gurgaon: Countries across the globe have started random testing to avoid true cases of Covid-19 from going undetected. But a 39-year-old city-based dentist’s ordeal to find out if she is infected or not shows that Gurgaon, like many other parts of the country, is turning back patients with symptoms of the disease, causing them extreme anxiety, and increasing the chances of community transmission. 

The dentist, who was discharged from Medanta hospital on Saturday, shared on Facebook how she was pushed to a delirious state by extremely strong antibiotics after she developed Covid-like symptoms, while the only government testing centre in the district refused to analyse her sample. 

“On March 18, I got high fever, dry cough, headache and fatigue. I might have come in contact with international patients,” she began her post. 

When the fever did not subside in three days, she was asked to get a chest X-ray done. All through this period, she had isolated herself from her family and shut down her practice because the doctors she was in touch with about her condition had not ruled out a coronavirus infection. 

Getting an appointment for the X-ray was the beginning of her agony as the emergency ward of Artemis hospital turned her down when she called them. “They said I sound like a Covid suspect and hence, should go to Civil hospital or RML for my X-ray,” she wrote. 

The next day was the nationwide ‘janata curfew’, and panic-stricken, she drove alone in the middle of the night to ensure the chest scan is done before that. Two hours and a trip to Fortis hospital later, she managed to get hold of the chest X-ray results. 

Before going to bed that night, she feverishly sent screenshots of the report to her friends in the medical fraternity. The morning of the curfew, she opened her eyes to responses from two of the doctors saying the X-ray plates clearly show she has pneumonia. “While I was contemplating what to do next, I got a call from one of them saying that she spoke to a chest specialist and a radiologist. Both of them had the same thing to say: The symptoms are suggestive of Covid,” she recalled. She was asked to get herself admitted to a hospital immediately. 

Later that day, she got a bed at Medanta and was one of their first local Covid suspects with no travel history. “The protocols to treat Covid suspects were being established as I entered,” she observed before being taken to an isolation room. The hospital ran several tests and her throat swab was sent to the government facility in Rohtak the following morning, since the city doesn’t have a testing centre. 

While they waited for the result, the hospital started treating her for coronavirus infection, swine flu and bacterial pneumonia with the strongest of antibiotics, and that night, she experienced painful side-effects of the stiff concoction. “I thought I could die from nausea and headache rather than Covid. I threw up several times, and begged the nurses to give me anti-emetics and paracetamol,” she remembers vividly. 

She felt better the next day but the long night’s exhaustion had taken a toll. “The intravenous lines ended up getting blocked and new veins had to be found to inject more,” she shared. 

To add to her suffering, two days into this experiment, she was told that the Rohtak lab had rejected her sample as she did not fulfil the criteria for conducting the Covid-19 test. She broke down on hearing the news and implored to find an alternative. 

The doctors decided to send her sample to the private lab, Dr Lal Pathlabs, which has been authorised to run Covid-19 tests. 

“She is not Covid-19 positive,” said Dr Sushila Kataria, an intensive care expert, Medanta, confirming that she was admitted. 

Talking about the stigma associated with this disease, the dentist said, “Nobody wants to visit this floor.” 

Her conclusion from her experience was that, “The government doesn’t give a damn about its doctors.” Although in her first post, she called out the Centre for not providing enough testing kits to the labs she claims are ready to handle the tests, a toned-down follow-up piece explained that her post was not political. 

“If I, as a doctor, could not ascertain that mine was a case of bacterial pneumonia and not Covid 19, how will the common man be able to do this?” she said, urging the government to do something about the shortage of kits and to ensure those experiencing complications like herself at least be tested.


