Gurugram doctor among seven new Covid-19 patients in Delhi-NCR
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: The number of patients in Delhi’s hospitals with Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, touched 30 on Sunday with three more confirmed cases. Two new cases in Noida and two more in Gurugram the same day pushed the number of patients with the same disease in both neighbouring cities to 8 each.


Two of those who tested positive in the capital have travel history to nations affected by the pandemic while one is a contact of a 38-year-old woman who had tested positive on March 17, after returning from Saudi Arabia a week before that. Health officials said she is a resident of Dilshad Garden, and not Shahdara, as reported earlier.

A woman and her son, residents of Sector 2 in Greater Noida, tested positive. Though the son (37) returned from Denmark on March 9, it was his 62-year-old mother who first reported symptoms. Both were tested and quarantined on March 19 and are now admitted to Government Institute of Medical Sciences. Three other family members are in isolation at home.

A team of 150 personnel from the health department and local administration carried out a sanitisation exercise in Sector Alpha 1 of Greater Noida where a 30-year-old man had tested positive late on Saturday. The sector has been sealed till 7am on March 24.

“We are alert for the purpose of protecting and containing the novel coronavirus from spreading among residents. Keeping this in view, the administration started immediate action after a person was found infected with coronavirus in B block of Alpha 1,” said district magistrate BN Singh.

A similar drive was carried out in the Sector 74 society where a resident had tested positive earlier this week. “Following the detection of one person who tested positive for Covid-19, we have put 23 families under home quarantine and their homes have been marked with a poster,” said the DM who urged residents to cooperate with the health department team that went door-to-door to initiate home isolation and quarantine measures even as the police personnel ensured no movement to and from the sector. This will also continue till March 24. 

In Gurugram , a 35-year-old doctor at the Sector 10 government hospital has tested positive. She is a resident of Sector 9A. Test reports of a 22-year-old man who had returned from London and is admitted at a hospital also confirmed Covid-19.

A total of 17 samples were collected in the city on Sunday for testing. The numbers of positive cases are likely to rise in the coming days, health department officials said. So far, 4,455 people have been screened for Covid-19 in Gurugram . 

“The 22-year-old man is from Palam Vihar. The patient had travelled to London in January and returned recently. We have collected samples from the area,” said JS Puniya, chief medical officer, Gurugram . The health department said an MCG team was conducting active surveillance and sanitisation of the Palam Vihar area.

In Ghaziabad, the doctor screening coronavirus patients at the nodal MMG Hospital is down with fever, cold and cough. His samples have been collected and sent for examination. The doctor has been asked to quarantine himself at home till the reports come.


