Coronavirus threat: Gyms, yoga centres in Patna witness fall in footfalls
2020-03-17
PATNA: The city residents are avoiding public spaces, including fitness and yoga centres, as they are taking all precautionary measures against coronavirus. 

Executives at fitness centres said majority of their members and others are not coming for workout. “There has been 30-40% decline in the number of fitness enthusiasts at my gym even though I get it sanitized on a regular basis,” Pankaj Kumar, owner of a gym at Jagdeo Path said.

Several fitness centres in the city are taking precautionary measures in order to limit group gatherings. “We get the gym sanitized at least three times in a day. Besides, we have asked people to wear masks while coming to the centre,” said Rakesh Rawat, sales executive of a gym in Raja Bazaar area.

A similar situation is at yoga centres too. “We have advised people to maintain hygiene and wear masks and gloves. We have also asked them to continue doing yoga as asanas, including Surya Namaskar, Pranayam and Kapal Bhati can increase the capacity of lungs. Besides, they play a vital role in increasing the immunity of people,” said Omkar Nath, owner of a yoga centre in Kankarbagh.

Meanwhile, state health department officials said residents must refrain from going to closed public spaces like yoga centres and gyms. “People should avoid exercising in closed spaces as the equipment can get contaminated by touch of people. Besides, people with cold or flu symptoms should keep themselves at home and wear masks while interacting with public,” she said.

Patnaites are themselves concerned about their safety and hygiene. Boring Road resident Ankush Kumar said he has skipped the gym for last one week. “People at my gym use the same rowers, cardiovascular machines, treadmill and other equipment. Keeping the current situation in mind, I preferred avoiding gym and advised the same to others,” he said.

Several other residents said they are finding alternative ways to exercise at home. “Exercising is very important, especially when the situation is like this. Hence, I have started doing cardio at home. Apart from that, I have also started doing yoga to stay fit both physically and mentally,” said Nancy Jain, a resident of Jagdeo Path.


