Ghaziabad’s Covid-19 hospital has 8 ventilators, none functional
2020-06-12
GHAZIABAD: None of the eight ventilators at District Combined Hospital, Ghaziabad’s main Covid hospital, is functional. Patients who need ventilator support are being referred to Santosh Hospital, sources said. 


The state-appointed observer for Ghaziabad has apprised the state government of this. For any hospital to be designated an L2 facility, ventilators are a must.

 

Sources said the district administration swung into action and ordered inspection after two patients were referred to Santosh Hospital, an L3 facility when they needed ventilator support a couple of days back. 

On Thursday, observer Dr DK Sonkar and chief development officer Asmita Lal inspected the hospital. And the inspection revealed that none of the eight ventilators was operating.

Surprisingly, the hospital's chief medical superintendent Dr Naresh Vij said that ventilators have not been installed due to some missing parts. “The engineers had given us three days’ time to rectify the shortcomings, but that time elapsed on Thursday, and we have apprised the government of this,” he said.

Combined Hospital in Sanjay Nagar was made a 100-bed Covid L-2 facility two months ago and at that time, five ventilators were already with the hospital, while three more machines were later sent by the government.

Dr Sonkar said this was the fifth inspection conducted by him at the hospital. “The last four inspections found some flaws, which were told to be corrected, but the hospital management had not once reported the ventilator malfunction. It is sheer negligence and its report will be sent to the government,” he added. 

There are three anaesthetists posted at the hospital and have been trained by the government as master trainers. 

As per the government directives, L-2 hospitals should have oxygen per bed and one ventilator per 10 beds. But the hospital management kept the information about ventilator malfunction hidden for two months.

Currently, there are 39 patients admitted to the hospital and three of them patients need oxygen therapy. Dr Sonkar, however, said that the oxygen system in the hospital is working well.


