Covid-19: Haj House in Karipur to be turned into isolation centre
2020-03-20
MALAPPURAM: State Haj House in Karipur would be converted into Covid care centre to provide shelter for people who want to be self-monitored.

The decision to set up the facility in Haj House was taken a few days ago after the state haj committee responded positively to the request of district collector Jafar Malik. Committee chairman C Muhammed Faizi said the Haj House would be officially handed over to the district administration on Friday for the purpose. Revenue authorities said the centre would start functioning in a few days.

Faizi said all facilities, including rooms and beds, in the haj house can be used for the Covid centre. The centre is being opened with an aim to provide shelter to foreign travelers and people from other states who want to be quarantined. Special medical squads and volunteers would be deputed at the centres for those who are under observation. 

The district will open two more centres apart from the Haj House.

Meanwhile, the authorities in Malappuram managed to track down 3,317 people who were in contact with the two women who were tested positive for Covid-19. According to officials, 200 people directly contacted the Vaniyambalam-based woman, while another 121 had contacted the Areekode native. 

Following reports that upcoming weeks would be crucial, the grassroots-level intervention by the rapid response teams (RRTs) have been strengthened in Malappuram, aiming to avoid the community spread of Covid 19 among the rural people in the district. The RRTs, which were formed in each ward across the district, have been active in the prevention activities for last four days. A senior medical official in Malappuram said that the RRTs can play a major role in preventing community spread and the team will also monitor the persons arriving from Covid affected areas of neighboruing states.

The district disaster management authority will open hand wash points in 1,500 locations in the district as part of prevention activities. 


