Covid-19: Halt in foreign arrivals to hit Goa where it hurts
2020-03-13
PANAJI: International tourist flow has come to a grinding halt after India suspended all tourist visas and e-visas on Wednesday evening. 

The decision has hastened the charter seasons which normally ends by the first week of May. Though the news came as a relief to many, tour operators, hoteliers and taxi drivers had a tough time coming to terms with reality on Thursday.

Abida Kumar, vice-president at Minar Travels (India) Pvt Ltd, said that since the news broke out, she attended to endless calls from hotels and agents. Foreign travellers in Goa have called her to find out if their stay would be shortened. 

“It is a terrible scenario. The season has ended. For us, the last chartered flight arrives from Russia on Friday morning,” she said. Travellers who are already in the state, she said, will return as per their scheduled departure. 

Amar Dhumatkar, president of the Goa chapter at Caper Travel India Pvt Ltd, said that since the chartered flight slated for Friday morning is landing as per schedule, they assume tourists will not shorten their stay. “We haven’t received anything in black and white. Foreign operators are still locked in discussion,” he said. 

Flights will come empty and leave with passengers. “It entails a huge cost to operators,” he added. 

Savio Messias, president of Travel and Tourism Association of Goa (TTAG), said it will not be easy to quantify the losses at this stage, but the impact will be “huge”. 

The cancellation of visas is being perceived as the final nail in the coffin by some with hotels being hit the worst. Francisco de Braganca, a hotelier, said, “The good thing is that the major part of the season is nearly over. We need to concentrate on domestic tourists,” he said. Messias said domestic tourists are likely to benefit from the drop in room tariffs and travel cost. 

John Lobo, secretary of the Goa Shack Owners’ Welfare Society said shacks that depend on foreign footfalls will close early. “In Baga and some parts of Calangute, shacks will not shut shop early. Travellers from neighbouring states will visit,” he said. President Cruz Cardozo is not as optimistic. “We in South Goa will wait a week before taking a call. I don’t think people will take the risk of travelling, ” he said. 


