Coronavirus pandemic: Hand sanitizers fly off the shelves
2020-03-21
PATNA: The mounting demand for hand sanitizers and face masks owing to the global outbreak of coronavirus has led to black marketing and astronomical surge in prices of these products. Even the prices of Dettol solutions have gone up in the local market.


Several people bought hand sanitizers in bulk, leading to shortage of the product in the market. Owners of medical shops and supermarkets said they were running out of the stock of hand sanitizers and face masks. Some supermarkets have started providing only two hand sanitizers and two packets of hand wash per person in a bid to deal with the shortage.

Rohit Singhania, sales executive of a supermarket at Sri Krishnapuri, said the salesgirls and cashiers are ensuring that people buy not more than two sanitizers. “We sanitize the hands of customers before allowing them to enter the shop. Sanitary staff disinfect the shop wearing gloves and masks,” he added.

Medical shops are also witnessing sudden surge in demand for hand sanitizer, Dettol solution and face masks. “Face mask is already out of stock. We are giving only one sanitizer, hand wash and Dettol solution per person,” said Ankit Keshri, owner of a retail drugstore on Govind Mitra Road.

Several shops are facing problem in restocking hand sanitizers. Animesh, owner of a medical store on S P Verma Road, said most local shops and medical stores are already out of stock of sanitizers.

Shops and online platforms have increased the prices of hand sanitizers and face masks. Suranjana, a resident of Rajendra Nagar, said most online platforms are charging thrice the actual price of hand sanitizers and face masks. “Branded sanitizers are out of stock,” he added.

Meanwhile, vendors at local markets are making brisk business by selling net-based face masks, though they are not considered effective in containing spread of Covid-19.

Gajendra, a local shopkeeper, said more than 60 people visit his shop daily to buy face masks. “We have increased the prices of mask from Rs 20 to Rs 50 per piece,” he added. 

