Covid-19 scare: Hand sanitizers arrive, but many substandard
2020-03-11
MADURAI: The Covid-19 scare has brought hand sanitizers, which were not available in pharmacies and departmental stores early this week, back to the shelves of even small shops in plenty now. While they sell at twice the normal rate, indications are that they could be substandard duplicate products.


Parvathy, a homemaker in Anna Nagar, said she found that none of the shops in her area had hand sanitizers when she looked to purchase it in bulk for her entire family. ``So I bought two bottles of dettol handwash and gave my number to the pharmacist to call me as soon as he got a fresh stock of sanitizers,’’ she said. Many others too could not find sanitizers in any store. A shop in Anna Nagar called her up on Monday to inform her of stock arrival but told her that she would have to hurry as they were selling like hot cakes. 

The price of a 55 ml bottle of sanitizer from company called PSK stated that it contained 95% ethyl alcohol, but there was no price tag on it. ``It is usually Rs 100, but now we are giving it for Rs 55 to our regular customers,’’ said the shopkeeper adding that he had kept aside bottles to supply only to known customers. However, there was no evidence that it contained alcohol, as it did not have that cooling effect that a high alcohol-containing sanitizer usually has, she said.

Many such unbranded products claiming to have alcohol content flew off the shelves on Tuesday also. Some cottage industries are now exploring ways of making sanitizers, ``It is just aloe vera, alcohol, a perfume, and two other ingredients, and I know how to do it,’’ said Satish of Thirupalai. ``If you want branded products, you can purchase online, but as of now hand sanitizers are not available even on Amazon. If you order a bottle, it takes it to the wishlist,’’ said S Suresh of Vilangudi.

Assistant director of drugs control, Madurai, N C Ravichandran said they were monitoring the availability of sanitizers and masks in Madurai, but there were sufficient stocks now. If any complaints of duplicate products were brought to their notice they would act on it. He said the general public should take precautions like washing hands regularly with soap and water. “It is the vulnerable population including medical staff and practitioners who have to use alcohol-based sanitizers,’’ he said.


