‘Happy hypoxia’ makes Covid-19 cases tricky
2020-04-14
MUMBAI: Here is one of the reasons Covid-19 has emerged as a major killer: patients deteriorate quickly and collapse. 


After attending to over 2,000 patients and witnessing 160 deaths, the state’s experts have prepared a dossier of sorts on the virus and its ‘novel’ manifestations and attacks. It is by now well accepted that 85% to 90% of corona patients have mild to non - existent symptoms (fever, cough or breathlessness). The public health department is worried not only because the virus is new and little is known about it, but the case fatality rate here is highest in the country at 6.85%.

The dossier is an effort to list all the novel symptoms. If the virus behaves benignly in 85-90% patients, it’s tricky in the rest. The change in their health parameters could be rapid. At first, they seem to have ‘happy hypoxia’— a state where body’s oxygen concentration gets lower (to about 60%) but not so low that patients feel uncomfortable. They can behave normally till they deteriorate rapidly and collapse.Maharashtra’s recovery rate, too, is far behind other states. Compared to Kerala’s recovery rate of 53% or Karnataka’s 24.6%, Maharashtra’s current rate oscillates between 10% and 11%.

“Several cases have been seen in Pune where the patient is laughing and talking just before deteriorating and dying in the next few hours,” said Dr Subhash Salunkhe, technical advisor to the state chief secretary. 

On Monday, deaths and treatment outcomes were a point of discussion in a videoconferencing meet between CM Uddhav Thackeray, the chief secretary, medical heads and several doctors. “Some concerns around classification of hospitals, treatment and diagnostics were discussed. Over the next few days, broad uniform treatment guidelines will be distributed in the state,” he said. 

Another senior official said, “The need for the meeting was felt because we have to firm up our treatment plans. The fact is that a stable patient with oxygen saturation of more than 90% de-saturates rapidly and collapses.” It is felt Covid-19 patients behave differently than routine ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) patients who need ventilator support. ARDS or respiratory failure can be caused by many bacteria or viruses, while here it is caused by just one virus. This subset of Covid-19 patients needs ventilator support.

The doctors have also noticed weakened heart and kidney function among this group. An autopsy of six patients showed inflamed heart tissues, said the document. Infectious disease expert Dr Om Srivastava said the involvement of the heart needs to be studied in detail. “It also needs to be seen whether it is something typical to patients in Maharashtra,” he said, adding environmental conditions of the state too must be taken into consideration. 

Patients are given immunity boosters and drugs to reduce viral build-up. These medicines include antimalarial medication hydroxychloroquine (HCQS), antibiotic azithromycin and antiviral lopinavir/ritonavir. Many are also given zinc supplementation along with vitamin C, A and D. “As drugs such as HCQS, azithromycin and lopinavir can lead to disturbances in heart rhythms, patients may need daily ECG monitoring,” said a senior government official.

The state has noted than antiviral drugs used for HIV such as lopinavir and ritonavir have not shown any “statistically significant mortality benefit”, hence they may be used only when HCQS cannot be given.

