Haridwar residents unhappy with lockdown restrictions that ignore citizen’s problems
2020-04-28
HARIDWAR: Discontent on the way the Haridwar administration is implementing the lockdown is rising among locals. Residents are pointing fingers, saying those quarantined at Gurukul Ayurvedic College and Rishikul Ayurvedic College in the city are facing a number of issues which need to be addressed urgently.


Former MLA Ram Yash Singh also pointed out that “many residents are being put through avoidable difficulties in getting permission to leave the city or state, even in emergencies”. 

A physician on condition of anonymity told TOI that he had received complaints from many people quarantined at the two Ayurvedic colleges, saying “they are not being properly looked after”. Superintendent of the hospital at Rishikul Ayurvedic College, O P Singh, denied the charge. “There are 56 people in the hospital’s isolation ward. Their samples have been sent for examination. The contractor for the district hospital supplies them food, while we provide medicines as prescribed by doctors. There has been no complaint of any kind from any patient so far,” he said. Chief medical superintendent of Mela Hospital, Rajesh Gupta, who is in charge of the isolation ward, also said he hadn’t received any complaint. 

Ram Yash Singh’s complaint was based on personal experience. Some days ago, he and his son were urgently required to go to a city in Uttar Pradesh after the death of a relative. “After running from pillar to post, when I finally got the permission, it was of no use as it was only for one person, besides the driver,” he said.

In Gandikhata, restrictions on movement of Van Gujjars were imposed on April 3, and 98 of them were quarantined at Peeran Kaliyar, after they disclosed they had taken part in the Tabligi Jamaat event at Nizamuddin in Delhi. The restrictions were lifted on Thursday, but only after their domestic animals were reported to be starving and thousands of litres of milk was wasted, in the absence of any arrangement made either for their fodder or collection of milk from them,” Singh added. 

Another former MLA Ambarish Kumar said, “There are hundreds of labourers in the city with no income following the lockdown. As they have no ration cards, they can’t avail of the free ration being distributed by the state.” He demanded that temporary ration cards be issued to them to ensure they have something to eat. “There should be a touch of humanity in the enforcement of the lockdown,” he said.

Pointing at the desperation of labourers, senior retired BHEL officer Khalid Zaheer quoted some of them as saying, “We are not so much afraid of Covid-19 as of starvation.” Rajesh Shivpuri, a priest, drew attention to the plight of over a hundred members of the community “who are on the verge of starvation, as their source of income has dried up since the lockdown as pilgrims are not visiting Haridwar.” 

Other residents, however, agreed that strict adherence of the lockdown protocol must be ensured in the city, even if some people end up facing difficulties in the process. “The number of coronavirus infection cases in the district has risen sharply. Parts of Jwalapur have been sealed and their adjoining areas declared containment zones. The administration has to act keeping these facts in mind,” said professor Shrawan Kumar of Gurukul Kangri University. 


