Covid-19 in Kolkata: Harrowing time for suspect seeking a bed in government hospital
2020-03-21
KOLKATA: With the number of suspected Covid-19 cases rising in the city, people are going through harrowing times to get admission in government hospitals due to lack of beds. For Mrinmay Ghosh (name changed), a suspected coronavirus patient, it took more than 24 hours and a number of visits to city hospitals to finally get a bed at an isolation ward in Beliaghata ID Hospital.


The 58-year-old, along with his family members, had been on a vacation to Egypt. They returned on March 15 and were asked by the airport staff to go on self-quarantine as a preventive measure. Ghosh felt feverish and visited a doctor the next day. He was given antibiotics and asked to keep a watch on his health condition. While his wife and daughter did not feel any complication, Ghosh developed cold and chest congestion as well. As his health condition did not improve, he went to a nursing home off EM Bypass, where he was asked to visit the Beliaghata ID Hospital.

“We stood in a queue for long and finally managed to consult a doctor. He mentioned him as a highly suspected case and advised immediate hospitalization,” said Ghosh’s daughter Ilina (name changed). Since Beliaghata ID Hospital did not have any bed left, he was referred to R G Kar Hospital.

“At RG Kar, we were asked to wait along with other patients. We were hesitating a bit as we are aware of community transmission of the disease. But there was no way out. After waiting for hours, the doctors told us that he could not be admitted as there was no bed left. As there were a few beds left in the female section, I requested them to get him admitted on a priority basis. But that was not possible and we had to return,” she added. Ghosh’s family members, who were supposed to be on quarantine, had to take him to Beliaghata ID Hospital again on Friday morning. They waited there for four hours before he could be allotted a bed. 

A doctor at the Beliaghata ID Hospital admitted that there is a crisis of beds and they had to refer some patients a few days ago. The hospital has 12 beds allotted for confirmed Covid-19 cases and 20 more for suspects. 


