Harvest & trade in elusive high-altitude caterpillar fungus collapses due to lockdown
2020-05-05
Pithoragarh: Every summer, residents of high altitude villages in the Himalayan valleys of Munsyari and Dharchula hunt for the elusive caterpillar fungus, also known as Himalayan Viagra (also known as Keeda Jadi or Yartsa Gunbu in traditional Chinese medicine), in the alpine bugyals (meadows).

The parasitic fungi grows on bodies of a particular type of moth larva that is found only in these bugyals in early summer, just when the snow melts — and eventually kills and mummifies the caterpillar — which then becomes the commodity. For many of these migrant high altitude villagers, Keeda Jadi is their sole source of income.

This year, lockdown and poor weather has disturbed the annual Keeda Jadi harvest, which normally begins in mid-April.

“Every year, residents of villages Bona, Tomik, Golfa, Balthi, Mirtoli, Rapti, Chulkot, Bothi, Bui, Panto and Namik of Munsiari sub-division trek to Panchchuli, Ralam, Nagnidhura, Rajrambha and Heeramani bugyals for the precious harvest, while villagers of Darma, Byas and Chaudas under Dharchula tehsil trek to Chipala and Kedar bugyals,” said a resident, Anand Gusai.

“Around 5,000 people from Munsyari and Dharchula, mostly in the age group 14-50 years, are engaged in this activity between May and June,” said Narendra Singh, research fellow at GB Pant National Environment Institute, Almora. 

Gusai added, “Most harvesters migrate from their villages to the bugyals in mid- April, often with family, rations and tents. Others follow by mid-May, after snow has melted.”

Kedar Singh, van panchayat sarpanch of Lawan village, said that unlike previous years, when villagers approached the van panchayat for permits to harvest Keeda Jadi, no one yet had sought the permit this year. 

He added, “Most of these people spend winters in their second homes in the lower valleys. This year, their return to their high altitude villages has been delayed by the Covid-19 lockdown, so they haven’t managed to collect the two months’ ration they need to migrate to the bugyals.”


