Haryana cops claim they tracked Tablighi workers within 48 hours
2020-04-04
CHANDIGARH: The Haryana police claimed to have tracked down more than 1,300 Tablighi Jamaat workers in 15 districts of Haryana within 48 hours of receiving information from central agencies.


Most were immediately placed under quarantine in various centres established across the state. Of these, around 500 admitted to having visited “Banglewali Masjid” in Nizamuddin area of Delhi, also known as “Markaz.” After testing, eight persons, three each from Palwal and Nuh and two from Ambala, have tested positive for Covid -19 so far.

Around half of the Tablighi workers tracked throughout Haryana were found in Nuh. In fact, 636 Jamaat workers, including 57 foreigners and 528 from other states were tracked in Nuh district alone.

Haryana DGP Manoj Yadava said that Haryana police were alerted on March 31 by central agencies about the Nizamuddin situation. A detailed plan was prepared and all the district police units were pressed into action to track down the jamaats linked to the Tablighi Jamaat in different parts of Haryana. Clear directions were given that these Jamaat workers constituted a high risk group and should be handled carefully as per protocol. As a result, the Haryana Police have so far been able to track 1,305 workers of Tablighi Jamaat from 15 different districts of Haryana, Yadava claimed.

Of these, 106 workers are foreign nationals who have been tracked from five Haryana districts — Faridabad, Ambala, Panipat, Palwal and Nuh. These foreigners belong mostly to Indonesia, the Philippines, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Thailand. All of them have been placed under quarantine and their passports have been seized.

Five separate FIRs have been registered under the relevant provisions of IPC and Foreigners' Act in these five districts. 

Of some 1,300 Tablighi Jamaat workers in Haryana, 933 belong to different states like Maharashra, Tamil Nadu, Assam, Bihar. The ones who were in Haryana for Tabligh-related work have also been tracked down and all of them have been placed in quarantine centres or mosques where they were found. Their samples have been collected and sent to concerned laboratories for examination.

The remaining 266 Tablighi Jamaat workers belong to Gurgaon, Panchkula, Yamunanagar, Panipat, Nuh, Sonipat, Jind and Palwal in Haryana. They had visited different states for Tabligh-related work and had returned home during last 10 days. As they also could be carriers of coronavirus, they have been placed under quarantine.


