Haryana: 32 shops fined for not following lockdown guidelines in Yamunanagar
2020-05-11
YAMUNANAGAR: In a surprise inspection, the teams of Yamunanagar municipal corporation (MC) teams have fined 32 shops and also sealed one bakery shop for failing to follow Covid-19 lockdown related guidelines issued by the district administration on Saturday.

In Yamunanagar, the shops are allowed to open from 8am to 4pm as per odd-even formula and the MC officials were receiving complaints that a number of shopkeepers are flouting the norms laid by the administration.

However, the liquor vends are allowed to open from 7am to 7pm.

On Saturday morning, the MC teams accompanied by the district police under the leadership of chief sanitary inspector (CSI) Anil Nain started checking whether the shopkeepers in different market areas are following the odd-even formula or not.

As per the information, most of these fines have been issued for not following the odd-even formula and some other violations of the district administration orders.

The teams sealed Shankar Bakery on Railway Road, and also fined wholesalers of salt and rice on Radaur Road for failing to follow the odd-even formula.

The chief sanitary inspector said, 32 shopkeepers have been fined Rs 15,500 and this checking will continue in the coming days.

Officials told when the teams raided the shops, shopkeepers were also found without masks, not keeping hand sanitisers, working with more manpower than allowed, not marking social distancing circles, and flouting social distancing in their workplaces.

As per officials, the checking was conducted in the areas including Railway Road, Workshop Road, Model Town, Aajad Nagar, Rampura, Farakpur, Jagadhri Camp, Buria Chowk, Khera Bazaar, Indira Market, and many other market places of Yamunanagar MC.

The chief sanitary inspector told, “One Shankar Bakery has been sealed on Railway Road, as it was found open on an even day, whereas the shop falls on an odd day. When the teams entered the bakery, a worker was making a burger without a mask. Moreover, a senior citizen, aged more than 60 years, was also working in this bakery. Several warnings were issued to this bakery but it did not obey rules, therefore, we had to seal it.”

