Haryana records 18 fresh Covid-19 cases, one death
2020-05-02
CHANDIGARH: NCR districts of Haryana continue to dominate the Covid-19 positive case tally with 18 more cases and a death reported in the state. This takes the number of Covid-19 positive cases in Haryana to 357 with four deaths till Friday evening.

Six persons have been discharged from hospitals, taking the number of discharged persons to 241. Now, there are 112 active cases in various state hospitals. Faridabad recorded eight positive cases and one death while Jhajjar, Gurugram and Sonipat recorded four, three and one case respectively.

Sources said, an elderly man died in a private hospital of Faridabad on Wednesday evening. His last rites were conducted in line with Covid-19 protocol on Thursday. Deaths were also reported in Ambala, Karnal and Rohtak.

Sources said, all the eight fresh positive cases are first contacts of positive cases reported in the city over the last four days. With Friday’s count, Faridabad tops the tally with 61 cases, followed by 58 from Nuh and 67 from Gurugram.

Those found Covid-19 positive in Gurugram and Sonipat are also said to be close contacts of Covid-19 positive cases reported since Monday. In Jhajjar, Covid-19 postive patients are vegetable suppliers and vendors from Jhajjar city and Bahadurgarh.

In Sirsa, the two Covid-19 positive cases are pilgrims who returned from Nanded in Maharashtra. They are being treated.

More testing facilities have been set up and more persons have completed quarantine. Besides, more people have been booked for violating lockdown.

Till Friday, 20,379 out of 35,887 persons completed quarantine at their houses or quarantine centres. Till Friday, health officials had drawn samples from 30,191 persons of whom 27,784 tested negative. Results of the rest are awaited.


Scribes, deputy CM test negative

All journalists and deputy chief minister Dushyant Chautala, who took the Covid-19 test on Wednesday tested negative. The samples were collected by a team of health workers from MLA Hostel dispensary and civil hospital, Panchkula. The samples were examined at a laboratory in Kalpana Chawla Medical College and Hospital, Karnal. Health minister Anil Vij confirmed the details.


