Hassled cops reeling under 12-14hr duty, confusions over lockdown
2020-05-05
Nagpur: The city police seem close to buckling under the pressure of working around 12-14 hours every day in the rising temperature to enforce various lockdown norms. From enforcement to social work, cops have been doing almost everything in the city. The latest responsibility which has been thrust upon the cops is to ensure safe passage of migrant labourers from shelter homes in the city to their native places.If a senior officer is to be believed, their work begins at 5.30am with the bandobast at makeshift markets. Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has started these in various open places across the city for citizens after closing down of Kalamna and Cotton Market.Apart from long duty hours, the confusion over norms and decisions taken by the government seems to be adding to their fatigue. “There are so many ambiguous orders that we cannot satisfy citizens asking us various queries at checkpoints, and some of them end up in confrontations with us. We are tired of these confusions,” said a cop on condition of anonymity.On Monday, the zonal DCPs and their office staffers were left picking out applicants from the city willing to travel out back to their hometowns, from among the thousands of such pleas statewide, as there is no citywide classification available in the software.The DCPs remained busy in scrutinizing the applications and processing them. “I have got at least 100 local citizens and hordes of migrant persons and others waiting outside my office for passes to go back to their native places,” said a DCP. On Monday, city police chief BK Upadhyay also reminded the force under him that the lockdown enforcement cannot be lackadaisical, despite the exemptions given in services and commodities. It’s learnt that the top cop, over the broadcast channel, made it clear to his officers and the rest of the force that they need to ensure checking is not relaxed at the nakabandi points. Following the instructions from the CP, cops remained on toes the entire day, barring a couple of hours in the afternoon when the outside temperature soared. “Even at high noon, cops may not be visible standing, but they be spotted on the roadside under some shade,” said a cop.“As soon as the temperature begins to fall, senior officers also return to the checkpoints, following which momentum of checking picks up again,” he said.