Hathras police books cancer patient, son for hiding Covid information, kin refute charge
2020-05-13
AGRA: Hathras health department has lodged an FIR against a 62-year-old cancer patient, who tested Covid positive, and his son for allegedly hiding his medical status from officials. However, the family members have refuted the charge and claimed that they had provided the information immediately to the Covid cell after they received the report from a private hospital in Noida that was treating him. 


The cancer patient and his son were booked under section 269 

(negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) of IPC along with section 51 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and section 3 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 at Hathras Kotwali police station. 

Talking to TOI, the cancer patient’s nephew, who also tested positive, said, “We are being harassed mentally by the Hathras administration. Our 10 family members have been infected due to the delay in isolating us in time. I had sent the Covid report, given by the Noida hospital to epidemiologist Dr Pawan Kumar, who looks after the District Covid Cell and now they are accusing us of hiding this information.”

The family members told TOI that they had gone to Noida’s private hospital on April 21 for chemotherapy of the cancer patient, but the doctor refused to do it until he was tested for Covid-19.

“We came back to Hathras and got the Covid test done at district hospital on April 23. Four days later, the report came negative. We immediately rushed to the Noida hospital for further treatment but the doctors there did not accept that report and asked us to get a second Covid test done from there.”

“A day later, on April 29, we received another report on WhatsApp, which showed him positive. Immediately, the health officials were informed about it and they asked us to visit them again with the patient. After taking the sample for Covid, the health officials did not isolate him and they sent him back to our house,” the cancer patient’s nephew said, adding that now 10 members of the family have also been infected.

When contacted, Hathras chief medical officer Brijesh Rathore said that all allegations are part of the investigation and whether the patient’s relatives informed Dr Pawan or not will be probed.

