'Have to live with Covid & sustain ourselves'
2020-05-31
Goa has been successful in containing Covid-19 cases and has maintained itself in the Green Zone. In an exclusive interview, chief minister Pramod Sawant speaks to Vijay Desouza and Murari Shetye of his plans to take the state ahead through difficult times. Excerpts:


What are the challenges before the government in the post-Covid scenario? 
We need to have a gradual exit plan. We cannot open everything, but we will have to move step by step. Goa is one state that has supported economic activities all through the lockdown. Even in the first phase, we had allowed pharma and food industries. We are proud to say that one consignment of HCQ medicines for the US went from Goa. We have taken one step at a time and have slowly started most of the economic activities in the state.


How do you see the state managing the pandemic and the economy? 
Going by what the experts say, I think coronavirus is going to be there for at least another two years. We have to live with corona and also economically sustain ourselves. And for that we need to develop immunity within ourselves.


There has been lot of confusion about the SOP. What we have seen is that every second day there is a new SOP. Will we see another SOP now? 
This is a new virus and we are all experiencing it for the first time. No one has an experience of dealing with it. There are no standard protocols to follow in the fight against Covid. We look at the prevailing situation and decide. We discuss with various experts and take a considered decision. The other day, we got information that 4,000 people will enter Goa and we felt it will be difficult to test all of them as our testing capacity is limited to 1,000. So, we made a last-minute change to the SOP. Now, we have kept it simple: Either come with a negative certificate from an ICMR-approved lab or undergo a test. We are thinking of continuing with the current SOP. If more than 1,000 people enter the state on a single day, then the test results will get delayed.


When do you plan to start the new academic year? 
We will assess the situation in the state, discuss it with educationists and then take a decision. We will also wait for the HRD ministry’s decision before we decide when to start the academic year. As you know, we set an example by conducting the SSC exams and we are proud of it. SSC exams are going on smoothly without any problems.


Considering that restaurants and malls are going to open in another week, are you also looking at starting casino activities anytime soon? 
No, not at all. We want to allow restaurants to open so that people who go to work and depend on them for tea and snacks are not deprived of it. Besides, it will also help these restaurants and small eateries to get some business.


The state had asked the Centre for a Rs 2,000 crore financial package. What is its status? 
We have asked for the package but are yet to hear from them.


Considering the states have been given the option to additionally borrow 5% of its GSDP, is the state planning to go for additional borrowing? 
We will borrow additionally only if required. Currently, our borrowing capacity is around Rs 2,600-odd crore and it will now go up to Rs 3,200 crore. I am hopeful that the financial condition of the state will improve after another six months. These are very difficult times for us. There is hardly 20% revenue collection and it has been showing slight improvement. We are seeing a 5% increase in revenue collection every month and in the next six months, the revenue collection is expected to go up to 75%. That is the reason we will manage the show within the limit. It is a tough time for us to carry out development and sustain the state.


Do you plan to cut down on any of the social welfare schemes or put infrastructural projects on hold? 
No. Not at all (on plans to scrap social welfare schemes). And we are not coming out with any big projects. We may have to cut down on some other works to manage the finances.


So, how do you propose to reduce the government expenditure?
We have to look at our subsidy bill and see what is actually needed and how much is needed. We will have to cut down on unnecessary subsidies. We are still to take a look at the subsidy bill. But we will soon review all the subsidies and then take a decision.

 


There has been a freeze in hiring by the government. Will it continue, or do you see any recruitment possibilities soon? 
We are not looking at recruiting people for now. We have given permissions to recruit people on contract basis where there is a need. But three months from now, we will have to start recruiting people. There are several vacancies in many of the government deparments and they need to be filled. I am hoping we will be able to do it. But we will take a decision to recruit depending on the financial condition of the state.


Considering the unemployment rate of Goa is high, how do you plan to generate jobs in the state? 
Only the private sector can help the state in generating jobs. The MSMEs, IT and pharma industries can help the state in creating new jobs in the state. We are already in discussion with them and we are hopeful of a positive outcome.


You had said Goa would welcome those companies that want to move out of China. Has any company shown interest in shifting base to Goa? 
We are in touch with the central government and they have provided us with the data on the number of companies that are interested in investing in India. We have put forth our case and I am hopeful that the Centre will help us in identifying the companies that are interested in setting up in Goa. We are thinking of giving some concessions in various forms to those companies that prefer Goa. We have not yet finalised what concessions we would want to give them, but we will definitely come out with a plan shortly to attract these industries.


You must be aware that industrialists find it difficult to set up shop in the state. Even with an investment promotion board, there is no single window clearance which industrialists want. How do you intend to change for ease of doing business?
 We are coming with an amendment to the investment promotion act and more powers will be given to the board. This will ensure a one-stop solution for the industrialists.


There is a perception that the state executive committee, a body consisting of senior bureaucrats, is taking the decision and you go by it. Do you agree with the view? 
That is not true at all. First, the decision is taken at my level, then it is discussed at SEC. Before going to SEC, the chief secretary, the health secretary and the revenue secretary discuss the issues with me. I discuss those issues with the ministers, including health minister Vishwajit Rane, over phone and only then it is presented at the SEC. After the SEC discusses it, it again come back to me for the final approval and only then is it announced. I have changed the SEC decisions two to three times.


