Haveri district reports its first Covid-19 Case
2020-05-05
HAVERI: Close on the heels of Davanagere district losing its tag as a ‘Green Zone’ district, yet another district in North Karnataka is now staring at the possibility of losing its claim to this label. Unlike Davanagere, which had lapsed into a lull for three weeks after three cases were reported initially, Haveri had managed to keep the novel coronavirus from its borders for almost two months. But a 32-year-old man who came to the district on April 28 from Mumbai has tested positive, bringing to an end Haveri’s clean record. 


The Haveri district administration, which had received a deserved pat on its back from the government and residents for effectively preventing an outbreak, has suffered a jolt. However, led by deputy commissioner Krishna Bajpai, the district administration appears to be prepared to tackle this challenge. The 32-year-old man, the 639th in Karnataka to test positive for the novel coronavirus, arrived in Savanur in Haveri along with his brother and nephew. 

The district administration wasted no time in getting him admitted to the Haveri district hospital, and subsequently cordoning off areas within a five-kilometre radius of the patient’s house. While those localities falling within a three-kilometre radius will be classified as ‘containment area’, the area extending beyond that has been designated buffer zone. 

“We have sent the throat swab samples of the patient’s brother, nephew and some of the other primary contacts that we have confirmed he was in touch with. We are awaiting the results of these tests,” Bajpai said. 

The DC said that the district administration was going through the patient’s travel history, and would identify all his primary contacts in the district. “So far, we have identified 21 of his primary contacts, all of whom we have placed in quarantine. We have also managed to trace secondary contacts, who have been told to quarantine themselves at home. Police have been directed to file an FIR against the owner of the truck, and the driver, who ferried the patient and his relatives to Haveri from Mumbai in violation of the lockdown,” Bajpai added. 

