HC: Ensure PPEs for docs, nurses at hosps, quarantine wards
2020-04-11
Nagpur: The Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court directed the collector and municipal commissioner to ensure personal protection equipment (PPE) was made available to all health workers in sufficient numbers. Many of them were reluctant to treat Covid-19 patients apprehending getting infected while others were doing duty risking their own lives.

“PPEs or hazmat (hazardous materials) kit should be made available to the doctors, nursing staff and sanitation workers wherever necessary, especially at the quarantine centres at MLA Hostel and Vanamati,” Justice Atul Chandurkar said.

The court’s directives came after amicus curiae Anup Gilda pointed out the PPEs should be supplied to the healthcare workers not only at the quarantine facilities but also at the private medical colleges where such patients are being treated.

Earlier, the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) filed an affidavit through National Institute of Research in Reproductive Health director stating it had granted approval to 51 private laboratories to conduct Covid-19 testing and interested parties can apply by filing requisite pro forma.

The HC then asked ICMR whether it would now be necessary to approve VRDL facility at Government Medical Colleges and Hospitals (GMCHs) in the region. “ICMR is granted time to take an expeditious decision on approving VRDL at Yavatmal and Chandrapur. In view of present situation, it should consider granting approval expeditiously,” the judge said.

The government also informed that various steps had been taken at public undertakings by ensuring thermostat checking of staff members and deployment of medical teams. “Regarding migrant workers stranded at various places, directives were issued to ensure that food is provided through ‘Shivbhojan Thali Yojna’ in the state. Its rate has been reduced to Rs5 for three months to facilitate provision of meals to workers, migrants and homeless persons,” the HC said quoting government affidavit.

In reply to HC’s directives on taking care of migrants and poor, the collector informed that 41 shelter homes having a capacity to accommodate 4,990 persons were set up. “About 475 migrant workers have been accommodated at 12 places. The district administration has isolated about thirty people, who reported about their travel history and visit to Nijamuddin Markaz,” the HC noted.


