HC: Explore testing for med, police staff
2020-05-20
Nagpur: Equating medical and police personnel with “brave hearts in the armed forces”, the Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court on Tuesday asked the collector and police commissioner to explore conducting Covid-19 testing on a pilot basis on those discharging duties in containment areas of Mominpura and Satranjipura. 

While directing them to reply within 48 hours, justice Rohit Deo stated that the citizens appear to be broadly appreciative of the bureaucracy’s role in handling the extraordinary situation. “The only anxiety is that both should come with a structured response to the suggestion of a pilot project and take a decision either way,” said Deo.

Observing that medical and police personnel are answering the call of duty at the risk of falling prey to the deadly virus, the judge clarified that HC’s order is in no way a reflection on the sincerity of the intent or efforts of the government machinery. “The society in general and the state in particular owes it to the frontline warriors to take all possible measures to minimize if not obliterate the threat of infection, assuming that the ICMR’s advisory or guidelines don’t cover them till the symptoms are manifested.”

While adjourning the hearing till May 22, the judge stated that the government is expected to take additional measures, going beyond the guidelines, if those ensure minimization of risk to medical and police personnel. “Ordinarily, the courts ought to refrain from treading in the territory and domain reserved for the policymakers. The restrain is not self-imposed. The doctrine of separation of power envisages that the judiciary shall ordinarily not venture into the executive’s domain. It’s expected that respondents’ decision shall be taken uninfluenced by any observation by the HC.”

Hearing a PIL by the Citizen Forum for Equality through counsel Tushar Mandlekar praying for conducting Covid-19 testing on all frontline workers, including doctors, police, pharmacists and para-medical staff, justice Deo further clarified that a Covid-19 patient may exhibit symptoms only after 10 to 12 days. “The medical and police personnel, who discharge duty in the containment zones, would expose themselves to infection through asymptomatic persons. The question which the authorities will have to address is whether the guidelines be read narrowly or pedantically or whether the government owes it to the frontline warriors to take additional steps or measures, assuming that the guidelines do not envisage such testing.”


