Coronavirus: Telangana high court fumes over hoarding of masks, sanitisers
2020-03-13
HYDERABAD: The Telangana high court on Thursday directed the state government and drug control mechanism to keep pharmaceutical shops under check and ensure that masks and sanitisers are available at affordable rates.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“The state must ensure that these stocks are not hoarded by the pharmacy shops. It should explore possibilities of distributing them for free through public distribution system,” said a bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice A Abhishek Reddy, while hearing PILs that sought adequate state measures to protect people from coronavirus, swine flu and other fevers. The bench, while appreciating the awareness programmes taken up by the state at the slums, wanted the authorities to educate the children going to schools and colleges situated near the slums. It also found fault with the authorities for not mentioning anything in their counter about the number of raids conducted by the drug controllers on illegal hoarders of masks and sanitisers. 

 
 
Advocate general BS Prasad informed the bench that they have set up five centres to conduct tests to ascertain whether patients are infected by coronavirus.

 “We will start the first testing centre at Osmania hospital on Friday. A testing centre will be set up by Fever hospital and another centre at the Warangal MGM hospital will start functioning from March 20. These testing centres will have the capacity to test and determine 100 cases daily,” the AG said. 

“Our medical team toured Kerala and studied their methods. We will follow suit here. In tune with the suggestions of amicus curiae S Niranjan Reddy, we are forming district level medical teams in addition to the state level rapid action teams,” he added.

Assistant solicitor general N Rajeswara Rao informed the court that the Centre is taking all steps to ensure that the virus does not enter our country easily by imposing restrictions on inbound passengers. 

The bench posted the case to March 24. 

