Telangana high court: Focus on slums to check coronavirus spread
2020-03-06
HYDERABAD: The Telangana high court told the state government to take a leaf out of Kerala’s book by distributing masks and disinfectants through PDS to dwellers in slums and increasing potable water supply to tackle the coronavirus. It also wants medical screening of in-bound passengers at all major railway and bus stations to check the spread of the virus.


A bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice A Abhishek Reddy, while hearing four PILs on coronavirus and other viral diseases, gave these directions to the government. When advocate general BS Prasad informed the court that the government had already initiated several steps to arrest the spread of the virus, the bench said: “Follow the Kerala model where the primary health care systems are strong. Show more concern on slums by increasing water supply and distributing masks.”

To this, Prasad informed the court, “We are sending a 10-member team to Kerala to study their model of tackling the situation.” The bench also heard K Shankar, director of Institute of Preventive Medicine (IPM), and amicus curiae S Niranjan Reddy, before posting the case to March 12 for further hearing.

Shankar made it clear that the virus would not spread through air. “It infects through droplets that come out of sneezing and coughing of affected persons. The best way to stay safe is to clean our hands frequently whenever we touch a new object,” he said. 

The IPM director said they were supplying preventive equipment like glouses, shoe covers, spectacles, etc., to doctors and medical staff at all the hospitals where patients were being tested. “Nine hospitals in various districts have been identified and testing facilities are being extended to them,” he added. 

Reddy said any laboratory to test the virus could be established only under the aegis of National Institute of Virology, Pune, and the Indian Council of Medical Research. “One such authorised lab has been established in Gandhi Hospital, which has capacity to test and analyse 100 to 200 samples every day,” he informed the court. 

