Jailed Maharashtra doctor pledges to serve Covid-19 patients, gets bail
2020-04-02
AURANGABAD: The Aurangabad bench of the Bombay high court has granted temporary bail to senior doctor after he submitted before the court that he would serve needy persons during the coronavirus outbreak.

Lawyers S S Khivansara and S G Ladda, who represent the doctor, submitted before the court that the “applicant undertakes to serve needy persons as per the directions of the government.”

Granting conditional bail, Justice T V Nalawade on Monday ruled: ‘In view of the circumstances, this court is granting temporary bail to the applicant… The applicant is not to tamper with prosecution witnesses and not commit any similar offence and he is to approach the dean, Government Medical College and Hospital, Aurangabad, immediately, after coming out of jail. He is to submit an undertaking that he is ready to discharge services as per the directions of the dean.’

A case was registered against the doctor in August 2019. Inspector Ghanshyam Sonawne of the Pundaliknagar police station said the doctor runs a hospital at Ranjangaon. A doctor from Beed district had referred a 29-year-old, who was then seven-month pregnant, to this doctor to terminate the pregnancy.

While carrying out the abortion, there were some medical complications and the woman fell unconscious. The doctor then rushed her to another facility near the Beed bypass. She was kept on ventilator and declared dead the next morning.

Sonawne said: “The autopsy performed on the woman revealed that she had died after a failed attempt to abort a seven-month-old foetus. It is also a suspected case of female foeticide.”

An offence was registered under sections of IPC 314 (Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act which causes the death of such woman), 201 (causing disappearance of evidence), 203 (giving false information) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) with Pundaliknagar police station of Aurangabad city on August 6, 2019. 

In all, seven suspects — including this doctor, another doctor and the woman’s husband — were put behind the bars. The doctor has been in custody since August 2019, said Sonawne.


