HC: Govt reply on virus spread via papers ‘general statement’
2020-04-29
Aurangabad: The Aurangabad bench of the Bombay high court on Monday took exception to the reply filed by the government expressing apprehension about the spread of the coronavirus through newspapers.While posting the next date of hearing on the suo motu petition to June 11, Justice Prasanna Varale of the bench observed, “It seems that this is only a general and sweeping statement made in the affidavit in reply. There is no reference to any comment of the experts in the field or any opinion formed by anybody working in the health area.”On April 20, the bench had questioned the state government for prohibiting the delivery of newspapers and magazines to homes. It had asked the government to file its reply.Justice Varale said, “On the contrary, the statements of certain experts published in the newspapers are to the effect that there is no need to carry an impression that the newspaper is a medium for spreading of coronavirus. ‘’He said, “At the cost of repetition, I may state that in the order dated April 20, 2020, this court specifically observed that the state government, having regard to the spread of coronavirus, can certainly consider restricting door-to-door delivery of newspapers in particular areas. No reason or data is coming forth to provide a logical explanation to the addendum order dated April 18, 2020, whereby blanket ban was imposed on door-to-door delivery.’’Justice Varale also pointed to newspaper reports that suggested “that in the lockdown period, not only the readership of newspapers has increased but the average time spent on reading newspapers has also increased. The general public is interested in knowing latest updates and information through newspapers.”The court conducted its hearing through video conferencing.Para 9 of the affidavit filed by Aurangabad district collector Uday Chaudhary on behalf the state government stated, “According to experts, the Covid-19 virus can stay on various surfaces for a considerable amount of time and the newspaper is something that will be passed on hand to hand by various people, which can increase the chances of infection spreading to more people.”The affidavit stated that “newspaper cannot be considered an essential need unlike food items. Hence the comparison between food and newspaper cannot be considered as fair. I further say that citizens can still get e-papers through the Internet for daily reading. Hence the non-circulation of the newspaper by no means infringes upon the right of freedom of press.’’However, the court said, “On the backdrop of the above referred facts, one fails to understand the logic behind the statement that the newspaper is something that will be passed on hand to hand by various people which can increase the chances of infection spreading to more people.’’Satyajit Bora, amicus curiae appointed by the court, and D R Kale, additional government pleader, drew the attention of the court to the Nagpur bench order on a similar petition. The Nagpur bench has posted the next hearing for June 15. Bora also pointed to a Madras high court verdict which had dismissed a petition seeking a ban on distribution of newspapers.On April 20, the bench had taken suo motu cognisance of news reports regarding the state government prohibiting the door-to-door distribution of newspapers. Justice Varale had asked Bora to submit a PIL on or before April 22. The court had also issued a notice to the principal secretary of the state government’s general administration department and others, asking them to file an affidavit in reply by April 27.The bench had then said that it failed to understand why door-to-door delivery of newspapers was prohibited when the government was permitting their sale at stalls.On April 21, state chief secretary Ajoy Mehta had issued amended guidelines to an earlier order prohibiting delivery of newspapers and magazines to homes. He allowed door-to-door delivery of newspapers and magazines in the state, except in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region and Pune Municipal Corporation limits as well as in all containment zones “as may be desired by the district magistrate”.