Coronavirus scare: Allahabad high court halts all recovery work till April 6
2020-03-19
ALLAHABAD: The Allahabad high court on Wednesday directed that all the recovery proceedings of the district administration, financial institutions and other administrative bodies/authorities/agencies and otherwise by the instrumentalities of the state shall be deferred for a period of two weeks till April 6. The direction has been issued in order to discourage people from approaching courts in view of coronavirus threat.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The court further directed that all the auction proceedings, and if any pending or initiated in the meanwhile, shall remain deferred for a period of two weeks, i.e., till April 6.

Hearing a writ petition filed by one Darpan Sahu, who had challenged the recovery proceedings against him, a division bench comprising Justice Ramesh Sinha and Justice Ajit Kumar observed, “There is an extraordinary situation in the country due to pandemic Corona Virus and therefore, it calls for an extraordinary measure to be taken to contain COVID-19. It is a situation where ‘self quarantine’ should be encouraged amongst people in the society in particular and the country in general. Accordingly, in our considered opinion all the concerned competent authorities, both administrative and non-administrative, under the state government be issued directions restraining them from taking any coercive measures against any person or body of persons in the society so as to force him/them to approach the court for the redressal of grievance.”

The court further restrained the district magistrates and the administrative authorities across the state from issuing any directions for presence of any person or persons in connection with any pending or any other proceeding for a period of two weeks, i.e., till April 6.

Further, the court directed that no demolition exercise shall be carried out at the instance of district administration or any authorities under the state government/local bodies for a period of two weeks, i.e., till April 6.

Besides, no eviction or dispossession exercise against anyone be undertaken for a period of two weeks, i.e., till April 6, the court further directed.

The court directed the registrar general to forward a copy of this order to the UP chief secretary immediately to ensure its compliance by issuing necessary directions/circulars to all the concerned authorities in the matter throughout the state within 48 hours. Besides, the court directed that a copy of this order shall also be sent to the advocate general of the state for necessary compliance.

