Coronavirus: Patna high court introduces alternate day work for judges
2020-03-18
PATNA: The Patna high court on Tuesday introduced roster system for its judges, who will function on alternate days in order to avoid lawyers’ congregation in the backdrop of coronavirus threat. Orders were also issued to keep gate number four of the high court closed from 11am to 2pm to check public gathering.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Chief Justice Sanjay Karol himself inspected the premises and the hospital located there to assess the preparedness.

The Tuesday cause list had the names of only 15 judges, including the Chief Justice. Only bail and urgent matters were listed for hearing, which were completed in less than three hours. Only few advocates, whose matters were listed for hearing, had reached the high court. Advocate clerks or munshis also did not come to the court.

A notification was issue on Sunday only that only bail and urgent matters would be taken up for hearing from Monday till March 31.

In addition, another notification was issued by the high court administration on Tuesday, announcing commencement of summer schedule in subordinate courts across the state from Wednesday. Their working hours would be from 7am to 1pm. The step is also taken to avoid gathering at the lower courts. Normally, the summer schedule starts from first Monday of April.

Public prosecutor Vijay Kumar Sinha of Patna civil court told TOI over phone that no regular hearing in trial of cases was being taken up in the subordinate courts. “Only urgent criminal and civil matters were being taken up for hearing. Only the court handling excise cases is witnessing gathering,” he said, adding such conditions in court would prevail till March 31.

Meanwhile, the high court has also emphasized recording of evidence of undertrial prisoners through videoconferencing from jail, instead of their physical production in courts. The district and sessions judges across the state have been asked to consult prisons department to ensure that there is no crowding of prisoners in lockups.


