HC quashes FIR against people booked for protesting in front PS
2020-03-15
Aurangabad: The Aurangabad bench of the Bombay high court quashed an FIR registered by the Jalgaon police against members of the Bhilla community stating that it was not right on the part of the police to file a case just because some people staged a sit-in agitation outside the station demanding justice. 

Manish Razzak Tadvi and seven other people from the Bhilla community had approached the high court through lawyer C V Dharurkar seeking to quash the FIR filed against them under various sections of the IPC by Adawad police in Pachora taluka of Jalgaon district.

In February 2018, members of the Bhilla community had staged a protest in the premises of Jalgaon police station demanding action and inquiry into the death of one of their relatives. 

The court noted, “Arman Tadvi was called to the police station on February 27, 2018. He did not return home after leaving the police station and committed suicide the same day.” Arman’s parents went to the police station on February 28, 2018, and raised their grievance that one Bebabai and one Sunil Wagh had registered a false complaint against Arman. 

His parents further alleged that Gopal Patil, a constable attached with Jalgaon police, were in connivance with the duo in preparing the false report against Arman. According to his parents, the false report, coupled with the threats from the police, led Arman to commit suicide. 

Following the incident, an association of the Bhilla community—Adwasi Tadvi Bhilla Ekta Manch, Yaval district Jalgaon—decided to launch an agitation to propel Arman’s parents cause for justice for their son and gathered in front of the police station. 

While quashing the FIR, the bench comprising Justices T V Nalawade and M G Sewlikar observed that there was no evidence to show that anybody had created trouble for anyone. “It is a fact that they had raised their grievance as Arman had committed suicide following the registration of a non-cognisable offence and the circumstances under which he was called to the police station for enquiry,’’ the bench noted. 

“There is no allegation against them (applicants) that they had caused disturbance or had damaged any property. The police station is required to be kept open for 24 hours. Persons like the applicants have the right to raise their grievance even against police officers if they feel that the officers are not acting fairly. Only because they gathered and sat for agitation feeling that justice had not been meted out to them, it is not proper on the part of the police to file a case against them of the aforesaid nature,” observed the bench. 

The bench added that the police needed to take a human approach. “This court holds that it will be abuse of process of law if the applicants are directed to face the trial for aforesaid offences,’’ said the bench. 


