HC raps Telangana govt over low Covid-19 tests, says it’ll give a wrong picture
2020-05-09
HYDERABAD: Taking a serious view of the government’s decision to conduct fewer Covid-19 tests, the Telangana high court on Friday wondered how it would get a true picture of the spread of the virus in the state. The court was also upset with the government for directing doctors not to collect blood samples from dead persons and not conduct Covid-19 tests on them.


Directing the government to explain the logic behind its decisions, a bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice B Vijaysen Reddy drew parallels with how Covid-19 testing is being done in a powerful nation such as the United States. The CJ recalled that when one of the Navy personnel in the US President’s security team was diagnosed with novel coronavirus, President (Donald) Trump himself was subjected to Covid-19 tests twice.

“When health experts all over the world are calling for more Covid-19 tests, why are we restricting them here,” he wondered. “This under-testing will give us a wrong picture of the status of the disease and its spread,” the CJ said while hearing a PIL filed by professor PL Vishweshwar Rao of Telangana Jana Samithi. The bench will hear the case again on May 14.

Questioning the government for conducting diagnostic tests only on those displaying symptoms of Covid-19, the CJ said: “If a person is diagnosed with Covid-19, his family members too should undergo the tests. It is not appropriate to say that the tests will be conducted only on those who display symptoms of Covid-19.” Taking umbrage at the government’s thinking, the CJ said: “If we do not do enough tests, then we are only fooling ourselves.”

The bench made it clear in a video-conference hearing that it was raising these doubts after going through news reports. “Same is the case with tests on bodies. If we do not know the reason for the death, then the chances of (our) containment efforts succeeding will become less,” the bench said.

It further sought to know, “Why are the health authorities directing the doctors to not collect blood samples from the dead and not conduct Covid-19 tests on them.” It pointed out that WHO had nowhere said that only those with symptoms should be tested. “Mere quarantine of family members is of no use if you do not test them at all.”

To this, advocate General BS Prasad told the bench that the government was following all the norms prescribed by the Union health ministry and ICMR.

However, Chikkudu Prabhakar, counsel for the petitioner, argued that the government was not conducting enough tests despite declaring several areas as red zones and 32 containment areas in Hyderabad alone.

Quoting the guidelines of WHO, he said that Covid-19 tests should be conducted on all the people residing in such zones. “This should be done in a massive way to prevent the spread of Covid-19,” he contended.

It was at this point, the bench directed the AG to furnish to the court details of containment zones along with population particulars in each zone. “Under-testing coupled with no tests on the bodies will only result in juggling of statistics pertaining to the number of Covid-19 patients in the state,” the bench said and posted the case to May 14.

