HC refuses to interfere in quarantine debate
2020-05-09
KOCHI: The Kerala High Court on Friday refused to interfere in the difference of opinion between the central and state governments on the duration of quarantine required for returning expatriates.

A division bench comprising justices Shaji P Chaly and MR Anitha considered petitions seeking steps to repatriate non-resident Keralites (NRKs).

At the hearing, central government counsel Suvin R Menon submitted that the 14-day quarantine is non-negotiable as per the instruction received from the centre.

However, additional advocate general Ranjith Thampan submitted that the state government had proposed a quarantine for seven days initially, supplemented by a further quarantine of seven days if required. The state government has approached the central government to relax the 14-day quarantine rule and has highlighted the better conditions prevailing in the state regarding curtailing COVID-19, the additional AG submitted.

Advocate Haris Beeran, who represented one of the petitioners, argued that the state government acting against the central government’s advisory will affect the repatriation as those who are still abroad might not be allowed to return if the situation here worsens due to not following the stipulated quarantine.

Responding to the submission, justice Shaji P Chaly said, “Now a mission has been undertaken by the central government. These people have been brought. You cannot stand in the way by interfering with that. You want the expatriates to be in the mother country. They have taken steps and a plan is clearly drawn up.”

The counsel further submitted that if the state government fails to follow the plan of the central government, the latter may restrict the travel of expatriates to Kerala. Another counsel submitted that medical experts should be made parties in the case.

However, the court did not agree to such submission. Justice Chaly said, “That is what the additional advocate general said. They have addressed the central government with respect to all these matters. These are all matters in which decisions are to be taken by the central as well as the state governments in tandem so that courts need not interfere at this stage. At this stage, they have a clear plan. Let them take appropriate action according to that.” The court then postponed the case for hearing to May 15th.


