Coronavirus outbreak: Kerala HC stays all revenue recoveries
2020-03-20
Kochi: The high court on Thursday issued a stay on all revenue recovery proceedings and tax recovery in the state until April 6 in view of Covid-19 outbreak. Justice Amit Rawal issued a stay after considering a total of 81 cases seeking a stay on coercive proceedings following outstanding loans and taxes. 

The stay also includes income tax and value added tax in addition to sales tax, motor vehicle tax, land tax, building tax, and taxes collected by municipalities and corporations. 

When the cases came up for admission hearing, counsels brought the deteriorating financial situation due to Covid-19 outbreak and argued that interference of the court is warranted on an urgent basis. Following this, the court ordered that all coercive action for outstanding loans and taxes will be stayed.

Pointing out that the chief justice has allowed each judge to decide about the precautions to be taken in view of the pandemic, the judge said in the order, “I am of the view that this present scenario of outburst of deadly coronavirus is very precarious and sensitive, as the lawyers and the staff rendering assistance to this court and the judges are vulnerable. Thus, to prevent such rampant spread by taking preventive measures, I deem it appropriate to issue general directions to the departments concerned like the banks, financial institutions, income tax authorities, authorities dealing with the erstwhile KVAT, GST, recovery of tax on motor vehicles and building tax to defer the recovery proceedings or coercive measures till April 6.”

The court also clarified that its order issuing a stay will not be an impediment for defaulters to make use of any amnesty scheme or similar options nor to pay off their dues. Departments can approach the court in a particular case if modification of the order is warranted but such action should be backed by reasonable justification, the court ordered.

The court has ordered that its order should be conveyed to the chief judicial magistrates, who consider the coercive proceedings under Sarfaesi Act.


