Coronavirus lockdown: Delhi high court, six lower courts closed till April 4
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: Delhi high court and six district court complexes in the capital went into complete lockdown from Monday till April 4, in line with governments efforts to stop spread of infection the novel coronavirus.


Limiting physical entry of litigants and lawyers, the court administration also shut down lawyers’ chambers even as it plans to roll out video-conferencing facilities in three court rooms from Tuesday where judges will conduct virtual hearings in cases of extreme urgency.

After a meeting of eight top judges led by Chief Justice D N Patel, the court decided to suspend its functioning. Only urgent cases can be taken up that too once they are mentioned before the registrar or joint registrar telephonically and the official is convinced. Court officials will then inform the roster judge and prepare one of three courtrooms for video conferencing-based hearings.

In its notification, the court also said that the limitation period for any court proceeding would not be considered from March 23 till April 4 (as happens during court vacations). This means the time period under which a suit, appeal or application has to be filed after which it gets barred.

It noted that the bar leaders have assured full cooperation in this regard including closure of chambers. Spelling out directions for the working of subordinate courts, the high court asked all district and sessions judges to prepare a roaster of judicial officers for dealing with remand proceedings related to fresh arrests.

“For fresh matters of extreme urgency, one administrative officer (judicial) be nominated in each district who can be contacted telephonically by the advocate/ party," it said, adding that the matters which are already fixed up to April 4 be adjourned to subsequent dates and the information uploaded on the courts’ websites.

Similar orders were issued for the Delhi Judicial Academy which too shall suspend all its training programmes and court attachments till April 4.

The notification also clarified that “lockdown/suspension of work'” of courts shall be treated as “closure” within the meaning of the Limitation Act, 1963.


