Jh​arkhand high court takes cognizance of Hindipiri lockdown violations
2020-04-16
RANCHI: The Jharkhand high court on Wednesday took cognizance of a TOI photograph showing rampant violation of the nationwide lockdown in Hindpiri area, the epicentre of the Covid-19 outbreak in the city. On April 15, TOI carried a photograph of Md Irfan, a caretaker of RJD president Lalu Prasad, moving around freely on a two-wheeler in the locality, which has 13 coronavirus cases. Lalu, who is serving time in various fodder scam cases, is admitted at Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims) for various ailments.


Justice Sanjay Kumar Dwiwedi observed that the photograph suggests that it is a matter of concern for the court that people are wandering around in the area despite clear-cut instructions issued by the Union home ministry. “It seems from the publication that the state as well as the district administration is not handling the situation properly to restrict the spread of the virus to other parts of the city,” he said.

Justice Dwiwedi added, “The court takes suo moto cognizance of the reports and directs the registrar general to place the matter before a division bench.” He also asked the registrar general to communicate the order to Ranchi deputy commissioner Rai Mahimapat Ray, SSP Anish Gupta and advocate general Rajiv Ranjan.

Meanwhile, the state government is considering whether to shift the former Bihar CM to a separate block in the state-run hospital to ensure he is not infected. Notably, an isolation ward has been set up in the building where the paying ward is situated. Lalu is housed at the first floor of same building.

Talking to TOI, IG (prisons) Shashi Ranjan said: “We have taken cognizance of the reports and I have written to the superintendent of the Birsa Munda Central Prison asking him to examine all aspects on shifting Lalu Prasad to any other block. A decision will be taken as per the norms.”

Irfan has been taking care of Lalu’s need since September 2018, when he was admitted to Rims. On Tuesday, he was spotted at Hindpiri meeting a local resident. Talking to TOI, Irfan on Wednesday confirmed he had visited the locality meet a relative in and went to Rims from there.

On being inquired about Irfan’s continuous visit to paying ward of RIMS, Ranjan said, “There is a blanket ban on visitors for Lalu since the outbreak of Covid-19.” Sources said state health secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni has already spoken to Rims authorities and asked them to take necessary precaution at the paying ward.

Doctors treating Lalu also raised concerns about the threat of infection at paying ward. “Health workers, including doctors, nursing staff, paramedics and cleanliness staff, who visit the isolation ward also have access to the first floor of the paying ward. We cannot rule out possibility of infection for Lalu or any other person visiting the building. In my opinion, it will be better if he is shifted to a secluded area,” said a senior doctor at Rims.


