Explain steps taken to help the disabled amid lockdown: High court to Telangana
2020-04-19
HYDERABAD: The Telangana high court has directed the state to inform it by April 22 steps it is taking to assist the disabled people during the lockdown in tune with guidelines issued by the central government.


A bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice T Amarnath Goud gave this direction while hearing a PIL filed by advocate Ganesh Karnati from Uppal, who charged the state with ignoring the Centre’s guidelines and leaving the disabled to fend for themselves in an insensitive manner amid the lockdown.

Kowturi Pavan Kumar, the counsel for the petitioner, told the court that though the state was claiming to be prepared to face the Covid-19 pandemic with the required quarantine centres, isolation wards, and hospitals, the administration was yet to make them disabled-friendly. 

The bench told him to give details of NGOs which could be entrusted with the task for the time being.

“In fact, the disabled people are more susceptible to viruses like Covid-19 compared to others on account of their physical, sensory and cognitive limitations. For example, persons with visual disabilities rely on “touch functions for their mobility and day-to-day activities, thus, increasing their risk of infection,” the counsel said. They also face serious limitations in following hand washing norms and social distance norms as they are dependent on their caregivers due to their physiological constraints. 

Moreover, persons with intellectual impairment cannot be expected to practice self-isolation and presently many professional caregivers are reluctant to provide their services as the coronavirus is highly contagious. There is total apathy on the part of the government towards the suffering of the disabled during the lockdown,” the advocate informed the court.

The Centre issued comprehensive disability-inclusive guidelines on March 26 and the state has not yet notified them in order to make them operational in the state, he said.

Supermarkets could earmark specific hours for persons with disabilities, he said, citing one of the guidelines. Or, groceries and medicines should be delivered at their doorsteps apart from allowing technical personnel to reach them to repair their devices. 

Special passes should be given to the disabled and their caregivers, he added. He sought directions to the state to immediately implement these guidelines.

