HDBRTS control room turns Covid war room
2020-05-12
HUBBALLI: Hubballi-Dharwad Bus Rapid Transit System (HDBRTS) control room, meant to keep an eye on unauthorised movement of vehicles on the dedicated corridor, and keep vigil on passenger movement at all its stations, has now turned into a war room to contain the spread of coronavirus. 

Hubballi-Dharwad Municipal Corporation commissioner Suresh Itnal, in charge of the control room, told TOI that its work has been effective during the lockdown hours. “We have managed to keep an eye on sealed down areas. People movement was monitored continuously, especially in Mulla Oni and Karadi Oni, which had maximum cases,” he said.

The control room was connected to CCTV cameras put up at the seven police station limits. In essence, areas coming under the surveillance of 380 cameras are “visible” from the control room. A separate team monitors the areas round the clock, and alerts field staff on spotting people’s movement. “Such monitoring made us to increase patrolling where people repeatedly stepped out of their houses. Effective monitoring has made people to stay indoors,” Itnal added.

This apart, other teams at the control room are involved in the generation of reports on primary and secondary contacts of Covid-19 patients. Analytical reports on their age group and other factors are being generated as part of a data base for future references. A team at the DC’s office is also involved in chalking out strategies to contain the pandemic, the commissioner said.

Itnal added that the 24x7 operations at the control room was helpful even when the lockdown was eased. “We can easily monitor people and see if they are crowding or are not maintaining social distance. In case of violations, police are alerted,” he said.

Another officer who is involved with the operation said many more cameras are being installed in the wards, and they will also be connected. “Such a network will help keep track of new cases in different areas,” the officer added.


