He did what the kin denied: Last rites of 1st COVID-19 victim
2020-03-31
SURAT: He had just finished his routine work of cremating an unclaimed body of a beggar at Jehangirpura crematorium when he received a call from a health officer of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) for disposing of the body of a 67-year-old man, the first COVID-19 fatality in Gujarat on March 22. 

Without giving a second thought of getting infected with the deadly virus, he reached Mahavir Hospital in Athwalines where the COVID-19 positive man had breathed his last. 

Abdul Rehman Malbari, 51, is president of Ekta Trust, an NGO which has been providing funeral service for abandoned and unclaimed bodies for the last three decades. He performed the last rites of the COVID-19 victim with his three team members at Umara crematorium. The loved ones of the victim were too scared to go near the body out of fear of getting infected. 

“I don’t remember putting on masks or gloves in my 32 years of service. But this case was very different. I was made to cover my entire body with four pairs of protective clothes. We lifted the body, kept in our ambulance and drove towards the crematorium at Umara. There we were asked to put our protective clothes at the crematorium too. All four of us and our vehicle were disinfected. After 30 minutes of exercise and standing under the sunlight, we left the crematorium with prayers that there should be no more deaths due to COVID-19,” he said. 

As the news spread that he had cremated a COVID-19 dead, people began to keep distance while talking to him. “For a few days, I had to face social distancing from even people close to me. Only my family members were not scared. When the people saw that I was healthy, they started coming closer to me without any fear,” said Malbari, father of four children and a loving husband.

Lockdown or no lockdown, Malbari’s voluntary funeral service never stops. He is single point contact for the administration for the disposal of unclaimed bodies. “Even during lockdown, my work has not stop. Apart from spreading awareness on COVID-19, we dispose of about three unclaimed bodies with dignity at crematoriums and graveyards every day,” says Malbari, who has disposed of more than 70,000 unclaimed bodies in the last three decades. 

Malbari’s Ekta Trust has won accolades from the state government and the local administration for rendering its services during natural disasters, be it devastating floods in Uttarkhand in 2013, Tsunami in Chennai, earthquake in Kutch in 2001 and floods in Surat in 2006. 

Dr Ashish Naik, deputy municipal commissioner), said, “Malbari is the only contact in the city for disposing of unclaimed bodies. Since Malbari has wide experience in handling decomposed bodies, we asked him to dispose of the body of COVID-19 victim.” 


