Pune: Head nurse at forefront of H1N1 fight battles Covid-19
2020-03-30
PUNE: From sleepless nights at home after completing the day’s duty to watching out for her own health with blood pressure and sugar issues, Saroj Pillai, head nurse of the Naidu hospital’s out-patient department, is fighting battles on two fronts.


Pillai was also at the forefront of operations tackling cases of H1N1 in 2009 at the infectious diseases section in Naidu hospital, and with her vast experience, she is once again at the current situation with Covid-19 cases.

“I have two daughters. Both are married. But, one daughter has sacrificed her own family, and come to help me at home knowing I spend several hours at the hospital. They know that I must take care of myself. So my daughter has been staying with me since January. She cooks for me and takes care of the house while I am away,” Pillai said.

Pillai said Naidu hospital began getting ready to fight the coronavirus ever since the outbreak in China. The staff had undergone several training sessions on precautions, treatment, handling patients, maintaining their own health, wearing the safety kit to other aspects of the disease.

“We have also experienced H1N1 in 2009. I was head of the OPD even then so although there was a lot of panic outside when the first couple in Pune was diagnosed with Covid-19, we at the hospital were calm as we know exactly how to handle the situation. We do not have any fear in us any more,” she said.

In the initial days, when the first patients were admitted to Naidu hospital, the staff would spend over 12 hours at the hospital getting things right. Now, that it is more streamlined, Pillai said she is able to return home after the eight-hour duty.

“When I come home, I first go to the washroom, take a bath, wash all my clothes then I move around the house. That’s the protocol we must follow. This disease is more dangerous than H1N1. It is spreading like wild fire and all the steps put down by WHO must be followed judiciously,” she added.

At home, Pillai, said she is unable to sleep. “I get constant thoughts of hospital, patients and I keep hoping everything is alright there. Even the eight-hour duty is highly stressful, both mentally and physically.”

Her neighbours and people in the locality are cooperative and check with her about her health and the situation at the hospital. The hospital has provided vehicles to pick and drop the nursing staff so she does not have to worry about commuting, she added.

