Health workers on Covid-19 duty face resistance from some residents
2020-04-03
Aurangabad: Health workers and teaching staff of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) are engaged in the very important work of screening symptomatic or asymptomatic persons with travel history or those who had come in contact with confirmed Covid-19 patients by conduction door-to-door visits. However, residents in certain localities are video graphing these health works and accusing them of moving around the city in violation of the lockdown orders. 

The residents also said they will not answer any questions asked until they (the health workers and teachers) bring an authorised letter from the civic body.

The AMC had roped in the teaching staff from its schools to join the health workers in conducting the doorstep visits for coronavirus-related inquiry. The visits started on Wednesday. In two separate cases, the staff faced opposition for residents.

On Wednesday, when the health workers went to the Mominpura area of the city, a resident questioned how and why they (the health workers) were exempted from the lockdown. The man did not budge even after the workers, all women, showed him their identity cards and informed that they were on official duty to screen people for prevention of Covid-19 spread.

In another incident at Indiranagar Baijipura, a man told the health workers that they will have to bring police protection and a letter of authority from the civic body.

Subsequently, the Shikshak Sena, a teachers’ union, sought police protection for their members engaged in the activity.

When asked, municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey told TOI that the AMC teams were not doing any survey, but were carrying out screening as part of the coronavirus preventive measures. “Divisional commissioner Sunil Kendrekar, district collector Uday Choudhari, municipal officer of health Nita Padalkar, city engineer Sakharam Panzade, deputy commissioners of police Meena Makwana, Rahul Khade and Nikesh Khatmode and I held a meeting. Subsequently, instructions have been given for the safety of our teams. They will be given police protection as they carry out their job,” Pandey said.


