Healthcare costs will spike significantly post-lockdown
2020-05-08
Nagpur: Covid-19 pandemic has changed our way of life. Lockdown or no lockdown, it is not going to be the same, said veteran physician and director of Dande Hospitals Dr Pinak Dande. He spoke to TOI on the future of healthcare industry post-Covid and how common patients should be ready for costly medical care afterwards. 

Q: When and how our life will come back to normal after Covid-19?

A: Instead of normal, we should get accustomed to ‘new normal’. Instead of life after corona, we should start using the term ‘life with corona’. Even World Health Organization (WHO) has said the same thing. The new normal may start as soon as lockdown gets lifted or it may take some weeks, or months. But, we must be ready for it. 

Q: What major change you can see in healthcare field in this new normal? 

A: Healthcare will be completely changed. Visiting hospitals or clinics is not going to be an easy affair like it was. New diagnostic parameters, mandatory use of protective gear both by doctors and patients, anti-infection protocol, avoiding crowd at hospitals and many more regulations will come. Heavy sanitization will become need of the hour. Together, this will increase healthcare costs. Doctors and patients both must be ready for higher cost of healthcare. 

Q: How will this affect patients?

A: Doctors will use advanced PPE kits, N95 masks even during normal check-up and physiological processes like delivery too. In surgery, at least five people are there in operation theatre including surgeon, his assistant, an anaesthetist, and nurses. All these will have to wear disposable protective gear. This cost will be added to surgery bills. Most TPAs don’t refund disposables. So, patients will have to face more burden. Secondly, avoiding crowd at hospitals will be a major challenge. Visiting a doctor without prior appointment will not be possible. 

Q: Do you fear this will reduce patients’ footfall to hospitals?

A: Patient footfalls have already fallen drastically. After Covid, many won’t visit hospital for normal check-ups due to fear and stigma. Low occupancy in private hospitals will further adversely affect healthcare economics. Doctors as well as patients will be at receiving end. Government should bring some policy to revive healthcare industry post Covid-19. 

Q: What will be your advice to common people? 

A: Prepare yourself for new normal. Concentrate on maintaining health and keeping fit. But don’t avoid check-up in case of illness. Government should come up with policy to make healthcare affordable.


