317 kin of Covid-19 patients tested in Coimbatore
2020-04-10
COIMBATORE: More than a week after 58 attendees of Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) conference in Delhi from the district tested positive for Covid-19, the public health department has begun screening their family members for coronavirus infection.


The move comes after wife of one of the TJ meet attendees died of the virus attack in the Theni medical college hospital and four other attendees from Villupuram who tested negative initially tested positive for the contagion. 

The district is all set to receive its first consignment of rapid card test kits for the virus on Saturday. 

Based on the state health department’s instruction on Wednesday, public health officials had collected nasal swabs from 93 family members of the 21 Covid-19 patients from Mettupalayam and five other patients from Annur the same evening. Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said, “We have taken 71 samples from Mettupalayam and 22 from Annur.” 

On Thursday, officials began collecting nasal swabs from 194 family members of the 24 people, who tested positive for the virus in the city corporation limits. The official said they would also collect nasal swabs from 30 relatives of the six Covid-19 patients from Annamalai and Pollachi. “The sample collection process is going on,” he said. 

The family of the railway engineer in Podanur is also likely to be screened for the virus attack. The Spain returnee’s family has already tested negative for the virus. 

The health department had initially refused to test the Covid-19 patient’s family members, who were not having symptoms, citing the WHO guidelines that said to test only symptomatic people. They were, however, advised to remain in home quarantine. But the spike in deaths seems to have brought about a change in testing protocols. 

While all the collected nasal swab (from 317 people) would be put through the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test, which would detect the presence of nucleic acid from the SARS-CoV2 virus, the district health department is bracing up to conduct rapid card tests in low-risk clusters. 

The first set of rapid car test kits, which could be used to screen a person for the presence of antibodies to the virus in their blood, is expected to arrive on Saturday, Dr Ramesh Kumar said. “We are expecting around 500 kits in the first installment. They will be used to screen people, who tested negative for the virus but have had contact with the people who tested positive, and their family members. We are exploring ways to use them most efficiently,” he said. 

Meanwhile, the ESI Hospital has installed a walk-in sample collection kiosk (Covid WISK), where one could submit nasal swab or blood sample to be tested. The doctor or nurse at the kiosk won’t be exposed to the one who is providing the sample and as such they don’t have to use a personal protection equipment kit. The Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital is also in the process of installing the kiosk. 

