Coronavirus in Jaipur: Health department intensifies screening
2020-03-13
JAIPUR: The health department authorities have started disinfecting temples, government offices and tourist places in Jaipur following three cases of coronavirus being detected here. The officials are conducting screening of residential and commercial areas in a 3-km area of the house of an 85-year-old person who tested positive for coronavirus early this week.

“A three-layer screening system is in place. First a team of ANMs, then deputy chief medical officers and finally RRTs are conducting surveys in these areas. They are collecting history if anyone in the family who went abroad recently or anyone suffering from influenza-like illness,” said Dr Narrottam Sharma, chief medical health officer (CMHO), Jaipur (I).


TimesViewApart from the door-to-door survey done in city's Adarsh Nagar area, which reported the first case of a Jaipur resident contracting the coronavirus, the health department has to take some bold decisions to discourage mass gatherings in the city. In Delhi, cinema halls, schools & colleges have been closed. The district collector should take precautionary measures and issue directions to shut schools and cinema halls for a restricted period. Also, it is the responsibility of citizens not to go out of their homes without reason and avoid public gatherings. Prevention is better than cure. 

Moreover, the health department has conducted screening of persons who came in contact with the person returned from Dubai and tested positive for Covid-19 on March 10 at SMS Hospital. Samples of four persons were taken and they were tested negative for the disease.

As of now, there are 25 persons who are kept in isolation wards in different parts of the state. Out of those, 15 are admitted to SMS Hospital, RUHS Medical College and Mahatma Gandhi Hospital. Four are kept in isolation in Kota, three in Jhunjhunu, two in Udaipur and one in Bharatpur.

Moreover, 576 persons have been advised to remain inside their homes for isolating them as they were found suffering from influenza-like illness. They are kept under observation.

So far, 331 teams have conducted screening of three lakh people of the state. The nursing students are helping the health authorities in conducting screening in the state. There are 8,600 nursing students conducting door-to-door survey.

A doctor, who was posted at corona control room has been suspended for alleged carelessness in disposing her duty.


