Health dept calls for personal hygiene to fight coronavirus
2020-02-04
Trichy: The public health department has insisted the public, especially those arriving from China, Thailand, Hong Kong, Singapore at the Trichy International Airport, to maintain personal hygiene and treatment to prevent any symptoms of coronavirus. 

“About 45 passengers (not patients) are being closely monitored by the health inspectors in Trichy. Besides, our department has sent the list of passengers from other districts and neighbouring states like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Puducherry. None of them have the symptom but they are home quarantined,” deputy director of health services (DDHS), Trichy Dr A Subramani told ToI on Monday. Health inspectors of the respective areas have been assigned the task of getting in touch with the quarantined passengers at their house to check if they have any symptoms like fever, sneezing and breathing difficulties. “They are advised to inform the health inspectors if they are running fever which is one of the main symptoms. As soon as we get the information, the passenger will be masked and brought to the isolation ward where the patient will be treated as per protocol,” said Subramani. 

“The common advice from the health department is to maintain personal hygiene like hand washing. If someone feels they are having fever, he or she should stay back at home. In case of breathing difficulty, the person should be admitted to the isolation ward,” he said adding that he/she will be given oxygen and administered IV fluids and tested for lung infection. 

DDHS also said that fatalities could be completely avoided if the person is treated early.

As far as Trichy district is concerned, the Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) is equipped with a 12-bedded isolation ward for treating patients with coronavirus. Reiterating that no one has been diagnosed with symptoms of coronavirus, Subramani said that a 27-year-old passenger from Madurai was running fever when he landed from Singapore on Sunday night. 

“His health condition is stable. Since he had fever, we admitted him at MGMGH. The blood samples have been sent to the King Institute in Chennai for testing,” said the DDHS. 


