Health staff of four districts to work in shifts at Covid level hosp in Bareilly
2020-04-24
Bareilly: Corona warriors in UP are constantly on the ground at health facilities waging a battle against Covid-19 - working away from home. So, when the community health centre (CHC) in Bithri Chainpur was designated as Covid-19 level one hospital, the health department on Thursday said that after the current 25-member team completes the shift, they will be placed under quarantine, and another team of corona warriors from Pilibhit will take its place. It has been, in fact, decided that health staff, including doctors and nurses, from all four districts of Bareilly division will work here in shifts. At present, 13 patients from Budaun are under treatment here. A Thailand national, who was tested positive for novel coronavirus in Shahjahanpur district, was discharged from here after recovery.According to officials, the state government had earlier directed to create Covid-19 level one hospital in each district for treatment of positive cases. However, the state government later directed the officials that patients from Bareilly division, including Bareilly, Budaun, Pilibhit and Shahjahanpur districts, will be treated at Covid-19 level one hospital in Bareilly district.Director (health) of Bareilly division, Dr Rakesh Dubey, said, “At present, two teams with 25 members each are working at Covid-19 level one hospital. Once the shift of one team is completed, in a day, they go to active quarantine [living in a hotel instead of their home as a precaution]. And once their 15-day shift is over on May 3, a new health team from Pilibhit will join here to take care of Covid-19 patients.”Dr Dubey added, “Patients from four districts of Bareilly division are being treated at one hospital in Bareilly to save human resources. The CHC in Bithri Chainpur has 30 beds. And if we need more beds in future, we will designate CHC in Ujhani in Budaun district as Covid-19 level one hospital.”Meanwhile, after six members of a family, who had earlier tested positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly district, recovered and were discharged, Bareilly has been left with no active positive case. District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “On Thursday, 22 reports for Covid-19 were found negative. Even five reports of pool samples tested negative. We have now started random pool sampling in crowded localities of Bareilly for tests by sending mobile medical units.”