Health department wary of equipment at private hospital testing facilities
2020-05-11
KOLKATA: Even though the health department has asked private hospitals to scale up Covid tests and equip their laboratories for the purpose, it is wary of the instruments at their disposal and are worried whether the staff are adequately trained. Two private laboratories with a national presence have been asked to enhance their Kolkata facilities and conduct Covid tests, according to health department sources. An inspection of laboratories across the city’s private hospitals has begun.

Laboratory equipment needed to conduct RT-PCR tests may not be up to the mark, felt a senior health official. “First, they need to get a clearance from the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL), for which they must apply and satisfy the conditions. It has to be followed by an inspection. But, more importantly, they need to calibrate their instruments rightly or get new ones, which would be difficult for most,” he said.

The official added that two private facilities had the right set-up for RT-PCR and have been approached. “They had initially told us that they were ready to conduct the tests in other cities But we have insisted on creating facilities in Kolkata, which will ensure that the tests can be quickly done,” added the official. 

Meanwhile, the NABL has started inspecting laboratories in other private hospital. On Friday, an NABL team visited the Salt Lake unit of AMRI Hospitals and inspected the Dhakuria centre — which has applied for setting up a Covid lab — on Sunday. AMRI has applied for an approval of Truenat — a rapid screening system which has to be confirmed by RT-PCR — at its Dhakuria unit. “While our Salt Lake unit will continue RT-PCR tests, Trunat test will be introduced at Dhakuria, which will allow faster screening of suspects,” said CEO Rupak Barua. He added that though patients testing positive in a Truenat test will have to undergo an RT-PCR, the negatives will not require a confirmation,

While three-four of the leading private hospitals, including AMRI, Apollo Gleneagles and Peerless, have labs adequate for RT-PCR test, the other off-shore private labs were below the mark, felt a private hospital consultant. “Many of these are not NABL-accredited,” he said, adding that the NABL system was unlikely to certify the ones which seemed doubtful. 

Fortis Hospital has a tie-up with private laboratory SRL, which has an NABL clearance for Covid tests. “Fortunately, we have access to a good laboratory and are in the process of scaling up our hospital lab,” said Fortis pulmonologist Raja Dhar.

Peerless Hospital, too, has applied for an NABL accreditation for its Covid testing facility. “Our systems are being upgraded,” said medical superintendent Sudipto Mitra.

RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences, too, has applied for an accreditation and is in the process of setting up an RT-PCR lab.


