Health teams collect samples of 305 quarantined migrants
2020-05-04
Prayagraj: Health department officials on Sunday collected samples of 305 migrants who had arrived from different states including Maharashtra, Gujarat and Haryana in the city after April 22.

With this exercise, the department claimed to have completed samples of all migrants who had arrived in Prayagraj. These migrants have been quarantined at different centres.

Additional chief medical officer and nodal officer Dr Rishi Sahai said, “The health department teams collected 95 and 205 samples from different quarantine centres in Meja and Soraon respectively. The remaining samples were from other parts of the city.”

“Samples of 305 migrants who have been quarantined at trans-Ganga and trans-Yamuna pockets were collected on Sunday. They had arrived from different parts of the country including Mumbai, Hyderabad, Ahamdabad and other region,” he said.

With this, the health department has completed the sample collection exercise of migrants and results of samples would be coming in a day or two, added Dr. Sahai. 

Currently, the city has a total 10 Covid-19 positive patients. Of these, one patient has recovered while rest nine of them are undergoing treatment at the Covid-19 Level One hospital in Kotwa and SRN hospital.

On Saturday night, the wife of a Lukerganj-based Covid-19 patient also tested positive for the infection. 

However, the sample of infected couple’s son tested negative on Sunday.

Meanwhile, Sahai said, “The containment exercise in all hotspots including Lukerganj, Saidabad and Bhaluha village (Koraon) has been completed.”

Apart from a city-based couple, the seven other patients were migrants and had arrived in the city from states like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Delhi. It may be mentioned that the first Covid-19 case reported from Prayagraj district was an Indonesian national who had come to the city after attending the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi.

Meanwhile, district police intensified patrolling in the city of the view in view of third phase of the lockdown, which begins from Monday.

A senior cop said, “We have been maintaining a strict watch on new hotspots and strict measures have already been enforced to follow the lockdown orders.” A route march has also been taken out by policemen on city streets appealing citizens to keep inside the house and stay safe .


