Maharashtra health minister orders private hospitals to set aside 80 per cent beds for Covid-19 patients
2020-05-19
PUNE: Private hospitals in the state, especially in Pune and Mumbai, will have to reserve 80% of their beds for Covid-19 patients who will pay as per the government hospital rates. 


Health minister Rajesh Tope, who issued the order on Monday, said there is a spike in Covid-19 cases in both cities and a shortage of beds. 

“ Local authorities will make sure that private hospitals adhere to these directives till there is reduction in cases. This order will be followed for the next three months which are crucial and it will be mandatory for all private hospitals,” the minister told TOI on Monday.

Stringent measures in all the containment zones and a lockdown for these areas will continue depending on the availability of beds at Covid-19 hospitals. 

“If no beds are available, the lockdown in the containment zones will continue, and if beds become available, there will be some relaxations,” he added.

Tope, after speaking with Kerala health minister K Shailaja and her team via a video conference on Monday, said the challenges for both the states were different.

“Kerala does not have slum clusters like Maharashtra. However, we have to learn from their model of tracing, tracking and quarantine monitoring. Maharashtra has over 30,000 cases and over 1,900 deaths while Kerala was able to restrict it to 600 cases,” he said.

In his interaction, the state health minister sought a way to ensure social distancing in congested places like Dharavi, a hotspot, which has so far recorded over 1,200 cases. 

Kerala had provided the best quarantine system and its effort to motivate frontline workers with celebrities calling them up would be implemented in the state, he added. 

The southern state was doing 1,500 tests a day while Maharashtra was taking up 15,000 tests because of which there was a huge number of positive cases, Tope added.

All health department posts will be filled up immediately and AYUSH directives will be implemented after they are issued, he added.


