Health dept steps up drive against Covid-19, hosps set up isolation wards
2020-03-07
Prayagraj: Even as no case of novel coronavirus has been reported in Prayagraj, the district health department has introduced a slew of measures to detect potential patients and spread awareness about the virus.

As per the data released by the health department released on Friday, 60 passengers had returned to Prayagraj from Asian countries like China, Hong Kong and Thailand since December 29. 

Of these 29 flyers have been put under observation by Integrated Diseases Surveillance Programme (IDSP) teams for 28 days each.

District epidemiologist Dr Anshu Vaish said the health department was maintaining a database of travellers arriving in the city from countries affected by novel coronavirus.

“Of the 29 quarantined residents, 31 were released after 28 days and the remaining 29 passengers were put under isolation at their homes,” Vaish added.

He also added that the department had sent a blood sample of a traveller to Lucknow’s King George’s Medical College (KGMC) for being tested. However, the test results turned out to be negative.

The department has also set up a control room and launched helplines to spread awareness about COVID-19.

The helpline numbers are 0532-2640645 and 9415238998. 

The health department on Friday reviewed the preparedness of the administration to tackle a potential outbreak and directed officials to keep a close tab on the situation.

Urging resident to keep panic at bay, the officials said that isolation wards have been set up at Swaroop Rani Nehru Hospital (15 beds), Beli Hospital (10 beds), Colvin Hospital (10 beds) and District Women’s Hospital (10 beds). The number of beds will be increased, if the need arises.Meanwhile, district authorities have also decided to spread awareness in public places and have put up banners and posters at railway station, bus stands and malls. 

President of Allahabad Chemist & Druggist Association Anil Dubey said, “We have distributed around 2,000 ‘3 Ply Face Masks’ in the city on Friday. We have also placed fresh orders with our suppliers at Kanpur and Lucknow.”


