Health secy asks Bokaro admin to keep a pool of docs ready for Covid duty
2020-05-12
BOKARO: State health secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni has asked the Bokaro administration to keep a pool of registered practising doctors, both from government and private entities, ready to engage them for Covid-19 duty in case of exigency.

The advisory has come in the backdrop of huge number of people set to return to the district and finding certain gaps related to human resource, training, infrastructure, laboratory services, infection prevention and control protocols at Bokaro General Hospital (BGH), the only Covid-19 designated hospital in the district with 45 isolation beds. Moreover, BGH is also facing shortage of manpower.

Kulkarni directed Bokaro DC Mukesh Kumar to review and address the gaps at BGH and submit a fact sheet by Tuesday. Talking to TOI, Kulkarni said, “The Bokaro administration has been asked to identify doctors from both government and private health facilities. First, the government doctors will be deployed and if required, private doctors will be engaged to treat Covid-19 patients.”

The health secretary also asked the administration to check whether BGH is following infection prevention and control protocols strictly or not. He said the DC has been asked to ensure that BGH has separate entry and exit gates, provide oxygen in 80% beds in the Covid ward, set up a sample collection facility, provide treatment protocols to doctors, nurses and santisation workers and maintain adequate stock of PPEs.

In the recent days, the threat of coronavirus infection has increased after the arrival of migrant workers, students and people from different parts of the state and the country. More than 20,000 migrant workers are also expected to arrive in Bokaro in trains and buses. 

Currently, BGH has limited manpower but has to dedicate a full team of doctors, nurses, paramedical staff and sanitisation workers in its Covid ward. On normal days, it caters to 40,000 indoor patients and 11 lakh outdoor patients annually. The BGH administration has requested for additional staff dedicated to fight the virus.


