Health surveys in villages to detect Covid-19 suspects: Goa CM
2020-04-03
PANAJI: Stepping up measures to combat Covid-19, chief minister Pramod Sawant on Thursday said that the state authorities will conduct health surveys in villages to find out if anyone is suffering from cold or any other novel coronavirus-related symptoms.


Talking to reporters following a video conference with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday, Sawant said the PM has advised that village-level surveillance be carried out to detect possible cases. Accordingly the chief minister said that he has “directed the health secretary to come out with a format through which survey can be conducted in villages to find out if any person is suffering from flu or cold which can result in spread of Covid-19”.

The chief minister said that if more cases are found in villages then cluster containment would be done. 

The next month is crucial, Sawant said, adding that it has not been decided whether the lockdown will end on March 14 or not. “We will suggest to the Prime Minister to continue keeping the borders closed for a few more days,” the chief minister said.

On reviving the Goa’s economy post lockdown, he said that an economic revival team would be constituted to advice the state government.

Paramedical staff, Ayush doctors and others will receive updated information about Covid-19 via video conference in the next few days, Sawant said even as he appealed to religious head to spread awareness about the virus. 

On the availability of groceries, the chief minister said that around 430 trucks have crossed the border with essential commodities. However, he warned that if people continue to treat the lockdown casually and venture out, then he would be forced to direct police to take action.

During the video conference, the PM addressed the issue of Goan seafarers stuck overseas, Sawant said. “The PM has already spoken to all Indian embassies aboard. A list of Indians aboard is being prepared. They will be lifted and brought back to India, but it has not been decided when,” he said

He also said that the government is ready to keep the around 8,000 Goans working aboard in state quarantine facilities. 

