Sangli health department's letter on coronavirus monitoring goes viral
2020-03-04
KOLHAPUR: A letter, dated February 27, which was undersigned by the Sangli district health officer and district civil surgeon and instructed medical officers to keep an eye on individuals with travel history to coronavirus-infected countries (to monitor their situation) has gone viral in the Sangli region.


The letter has names of seven individuals and their detailed addresses. After getting to know of the goof-up, Sangli district civil surgeon Sanjay Salunkhe clarified that the said individuals merely had a travel history to these countries and they were asymptomatic.

In his appeal to the media, Salunkhe said: “The details of individuals who have returned to Sangli have wrongly been made viral, saying that they are infected by coronavirus. The truth is, they are all asymptomatic in nature. They are normal people just like every one of us. They have already been screened by the state government authorities upon their arrival at the airport. They were later released after it was made sure that they had no symptoms.”

He further added that generally, the returning passengers, who have travel history to the coronavirus-hit countries, are sent to their respective district’s civil surgeons and survey officers of the health department, so that they can be monitored for any kind of health-related issues.

He said until now, not a single coronavirus patient has been found or reported in the Sangli district and it is the need of the hour to stop spreading the rumours about these individuals being patients or even suspects. They are all healthy. 

Salunkhe has appealed to people to not reveal the names of these individuals, as it is a violation of their privacy.

While speaking to TOI, he said that the individuals are regularly monitored as per the health department’s protocol. Meanwhile, the medical experts have said that while no specific anti-viral treatment is available for the ailment, precautionary steps are advised including good personal hygiene, handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, close contact with people who are sick and consumption of raw or undercooked animal products.


