Heavy rainfall in city amid lockdown Locals fear covid spread as temp drops
2020-04-27
Bareilly: The city witnessed heavy rainfall and thunderstorm on Sunday afternoon, bringing a slight drop in both minimum and maximum temperatures, and a significant chill in the air. The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has predicted partly cloudy sky with rainfall and possibility of thunderstorm for a couple of days more. The unseasonal rainfall amid lockdown, however, triggered fear among locals, from the unsubstantiated but widely-held belief that the Covid-19 virus survives longer in cooler temperatures. According to information from IMD, the maximum temperature recorded in the city was 30.1°C, 9°C below normal, while minimum temperature was 22.9°C, 1°C above normal. Maximum and minimum humidity was recorded at 100% and 61% respectively, while 20.2mm of rainfall was recorded on Sunday. Thunderstorms lashed the city in the afternoon, followed by heavy downpour which continued for around two hours. Thick black clouds covered the sky which lowered visibility even as it started raining at around 1pm. Roads were already deserted, except for some locals who had stepped out for emergencies, while the few people allowed to step out, like vegetable vendors, were spotted caught in the rainfall. There was panic among locals concerned that the sudden change in weather would accelerate the spread of Covid-19. “It is believed the virus can survive for a longer duration in lower temperatures. If true, such weather might only add to the prevailing problems,” said Amit Khanna, a local. “I have come across number of messages and posts on social media that suggest the virus can’t survive in hot and humid climates. Thus, the current weather could be suitable for its survival,” said Hema Singh, a resident of Rampur Garden. As per IMD predictions, similar weather conditions with partly cloudy sky, rains and thundershowers are likely to prevail over the next couple of days, with minimum and maximum temperatures hovering around 20°C and 34°C respectively. 