Heena, the ray of hope at Jodhpur Covid-19 hotspot
2020-04-29
JODHPUR: At Nagori Gate, one of Jodhpur’s hotspot zones, Dr Heena Aftab is a familiar face. 


Heena is popular not because she heads a four-member medical team for screening and sampling in the area, but for her positive attitude. 

Amidst the pandemic gloom and scare in the area, Heena shines as a ray of hope. Even while warning residents about Covid-19, she tries to spread cheer and motivate local residents to fight the pandemic by taking proper precautions. And one of the favourite ways is to pick up the mike and sing ‘Jeet Jayenge Hum, Hum Agar Sang Hain.’

Nagori Gate is under curfew and has reported 75 positive cases till now. The zone continues to give jitters to the administration and medical teams because of the hostile behavior of residents.

“Intitally, the atmosphere was extremely tense in this locality as the residents, mostly from the Muslim community, had their own concerns, perceptions and priorities,” says 30-year-old Heena, a unani doctor.

The first few days were marked by utter misbehavior and non-cooperation by people. But then changing her approach, she decided to give patient hearing to their concerns.

“Mostly people here are daily wagers, illiterate and underprivileged with about 12-15 members at least in a house. There concerns were food and milk. But they were not allowed to go out due to curfew,” said Heena, who is coordinating with the administration to address their basic needs.

A local volunteer from the area Zakir Bhai said it was the determination and devotion of Heena that people here are now so forthcoming for screening and sampling, which was unimaginable earlier.

Heena started interacting with people, learning about their lives and would often crack jokes about the ‘Chinese virus’ besides holding discussions about ‘Hindustan’s war on the virus.’ Gradually, she managed to convince them.

“It is because of her that people are now coming to madrasas and mosques in their area to give swab samples for testing. They are doing it on her call,” Zakir said.

Samplings, which was barely 50 per day in the area, has now shot up to more than double. So far, over 1,350 samples have been taken. 

She played a crucial role in tracing the chain of the first positive patient, who belonged to a big family and has now recovered and returned home. Uncle of the patient said Heena was so humble and cooperative that not only us, but all from the area have agreed to support her.

Her husband, veterinary surgeon Zahim Ahmed Quazi, understands the importance of the work she has been doing. “I am proud of her,” he said. 

But her two children Faizan (4) and Shavez (1), currently under the care of her in-laws, have to wait for at least 90 minutes after she returns from duty to hop onto her lap.

“Safety and precautions are of highest priority here. I could not risk the lives of my family members so I go to my children after disposing of medical accessories, washing my clothes and bathing,” she added.

