‘Hello Mommies’: Udaipur cops’ drive for pregnant women during lockdown
2020-05-12
UDAIPUR: Cops generally invoke fear among people, specially amid the strict lockdown in the wake of the pandemic, when videos of policemen exerting force to keep people indoors are going viral. In Udaipur, however, pregnant women are getting to see a compassionate side of them, wherein cops, especially the lady police officers, are directly interacting with them to find out if the expecting moms are facing any discomfort. 


The latest initiative of Udaipur police — ‘Hello Mommies’, wherein deputy SP level lady officers have been assigned the task of building a communication link with expecting women in curfew areas like dense colonies inside the Walled City. 

The idea has been mooted by additional SP (city) Gopal Swaroop Mewara and three deputy rank officers Chetna Bhati, Sudha Palawat and Prem Dhande, who are the administrators of the ‘Hello Mommies’ group. 

“We are identifying expecting women in various colonies of the curfew-bound areas mainly under Surajpole, Ghantaghar, Ambamata and other police stations of the city. Beat constables and jawans on each checkpost have been asked to prepare a list of their respective areas so that we have a database of pregnant women who might be in need of medical or other assistance even in the odd hours. We are feeding their numbers in the group so that they may reach us directly in case they require any kind of assistance during the curfew period,” Bhati told TOI. 

The patrolling jeeps are also publicising the numbers so that more women are informed about the initiative. Active women volunteers from different colonies too would be added in the group so that they can keep the lady officers updated on any issues in the areas. 

Dy SP Prem Dhande said, “In some homes, where men have been taken to quarantine facilities, ladies and children are left with no help for getting essential items or medicines and in such situations, they can reach us.” The officer said that there have been situations when women required sanitary napkins, which were supplied to them through lady constables.
