Helpdesk at GMCH busts Covid-19 misconceptions
2020-04-11
Aurangabad: A Covid-19 helpdesk constituted and run by the community medicine department of the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) is proving to be a boon in view of the rising misconceptions about the pandemic. 

The helpdesk at GMCH’s Covid-19 facility also provides counselling to patients and relatives on treatment protocol, isolation, quarantine and social distancing. The helpdesk was formulated on the directives of GMCH dean Kanan Yelikar.

According to a release issued by the community medicine department of GMCH, detailed and accurate information is crucial in combating the ongoing epidemic and to avoid epidemic in future. However, many a times during an epidemic, wrong information penetrates into society which can be misleading. Such information is disseminated through social media and creates panic among people, the release stated. 

The helpdesk was launched on March 11 under head of community medicine department Mohan Doibale. The PG students, faculty members, social work superintendent are since engaged in the helpdesk management led by senior faculty members Jagannath Dixit and Naser Razvi.

The helpdesk was earlier stationed at the cardiovascular thoracic surgery (CVTS) building which was designated as Covid-19 ward. But, it has now been shifted to the medicine building of the hospital as the Covid-19 management has also been shifted there on Friday.

The helpdesk is active 24*7 and comprises two resident doctors and about two to three social workers to guide the patients,their kin and visitors on Covid-19 management, Arvind Gaikwad, the nodal officer of GMCH for media interaction said.

The Covid-19 ward of the GMCH sees people who are suspected to be infected with the novel coronavirus, those who have a travel history, contact history with confirmed cases and symptoms and also the positive patients. The helpdesk guides the patients who test negative or those who have a travel history on maintaining social distance and on home quarantine.


