‘Help! My 10-yr-old turning aggressive in the lockdown’
2020-03-28
Q: I have a 10-year-old daughter who has become extensively aggressive for the past two weeks. Due to staying at home, she gets irritated and it’s hard to keep her locked inside. What ways should I adopt to make her feel better? 

| Ankita Kapoor | Charbagh

A: Talk to her, listen to what she is feeling and avoid any negative communication. Connect with her daily for 25-40 minutes and try having a routine. Engage her in home-related small tasks like cleaning her toys, organising cupboards, dusting her own spaces. Play games, get a little creative, make her speak to her friends. Channelise energy of children and involve physical activities. This will help in both yours and your child’s mental well-being. | Swati Bhagchandani, student counsellor and clinical psychologist

Q: I am 6 months pregnant and the scare of coronavirus is causing a lot of stress. What should I do? | Mona Saini | Gomtinagar

A: Just stay happy and do not watch depressing news. Stay updated with the latest news and take precautions. There are also some heart-warming and inspiring stories about infected people who have recovered. Read such reports and you will feel better. Remember 98% infected people recover and only those are suffering from other complications take ill seriously. The elderly and people with low immunity and low nutrition may be vulnerable but precautions can save all. | Dr SC Tiwari, former head of geriatric mental health department, KGMU 

Q: I have a history of depression and isolation during lockdown is taking a toll on my mental health. I feel very lonely at times. How to cope with it? | Arshit Sen, Alambagh

A: Begin your morning by thinking about things you are grateful for. Make sure you have a family routine, talk to them, plan your day in advance. Have a good night’s sleep since it has a significant impact on our mental heath, take a stroll in fresh air, even in social distancing, you can sit on the terrace and breathe fresh air. Eat healthy as this is a time to stay fit and healthy inside as well. Don’t read social media forwards. Rely on authentic information on government websites or WHO | PK Dalal, head of psychiatry department, KGMU

Q: My grandfather is 78 years old. He used to take morning and evening walks in the park. Since the lockdown, we have been requesting him to walk on the terrace. However, he says his digestion is getting affected by walking elsewhere. He is in a very unhappy state. What should we do? | Rudransh Srivastava | Hazratganj

A: Any elderly person in a habit to do things on time does not like it if they deviate from their routine. The family should explain to him the purpose of the lockdown and tell him that it is not going to last long. For his own benefit and for his family, he should walk on the terrace from where he can see all the houses and people. Grandchildren should spent some time with him and find out what he likes to do so that they can communicate with him | Dr SC Tiwari, former head of geriatric mental health department, KGMU 

Q: My classmate lives in a PG while her parents are in Gorakhpur. She gets anxious sometimes. What can I do to help her out? | Nikita Srivastava | Sarojninagar

A: Many people, students, parents are affected by this lockdown in ways we cannot see. You should keep on checking on her since you don’t know what she might be feeling staying alone, away from friends and family. Have video calls and conversations where she is able to tell you what she is going through. Ask more friends to join in. Make her understand that the lockdown is for our own safety and things will soon get better. Catch up on virtual gaming with her | Swati Bhagchandani | student counsellor and clinical psychologist


