Hero Motocorp incurs of Rs 200 crore expense per month during lockdown
2020-04-04
CHENNAI: Hero Motocorp is incurring an ‘expense’ of Rs 200 crore per month during the Covid-19 lockdown.


 The company will however not cut workforce but will put its capacity expansion and other expenses on hold to tide over the current crisis.

Its chief financial officer (CFO) Niranjan Gupta said, “With the country under lockdown, there are no dispatches currently. To keep the basic facilities and operations running, therefore, we incur certain expenses, which are not more than Rs 200 crore per month. We will defer some of the planned expenses such as capacity expansion.”

Hero Motocorp’s current liquidity “is at a level of Rs 4000 crore although our reserves are much higher,” said Gupta. 
 News in BriefExplore Briefs100 Cong leaders write to Sonia Gandhi urging leadership change: JhaSome 100 Congress leaders, including MPs, have written to Sonia Gandhi asking for a change in the political leadership and transparent elections in the party, suspended leader Sanjay Jha tweeted on Monday. Jha, who was suspended from the party in July this year, said that several leaders have been "distressed at the state of affairs within the party."Music legend Pandit Jasraj passes away in US at the age of 90Indian classical vocalist Pandit Jasraj died on Monday following a cardiac arrest at his home in New Jersey, his daughter Durga Jasraj said. He was 90. One of India's greatest music legends, Pandit Jasraj leaves behind a storied legacy spanning almost eight decades. He was a receipent of the Padma Shri (1975), Padma Bhushan (1990) and Padma Vibhushan (2000).
“Being a debt-free company for several years and with a robust balance sheet, we are better placed than many others to weather this situation,” he said. The company also disbursed the full salaries for the month to all contractual workers. 

Among the expansions that could be deferred is the expansion spend on the company’s new factory in Andhra Pradesh. Hero MotoCorp lined up capex of Rs 1,500 crore in FY19-20 on the new plant and on upgrading its range to BS6. 


