High alert in Ajara after Jamaat returnee develops Covid-19 symptoms
2020-04-08
Kolhapur: The district administration is on high alert after an Ajara resident, who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi, has developed symptoms like cough and cold.

The man has been admitted to a hospital while his family members have been sent to institutional quarantine. The administration, as a preventive measure, has sealed all the roads leading to the area where the family was staying and has circulated pamphlets regarding how to prevent the spread of coronavirus.

District collector Daulat Desai has said that instructions have been given to the village-level committees to search for people who attended the Delhi event. “We have already quarantined 21 people who have returned from Delhi. The authorities concerned have collected the throat swab samples of the suspects and their family members. The results are awaited,” he said.

“The person who has tested positive was already in home quarantine. We have already appealed to the people to come forward and share their travel history if they have attended the programme in Delhi. We have also asked the village-level committees to get details of every person in their village and find out if anyone had attended the programme in Delhi,” he added.

Sampat Khilare, sub-divisional officer of Ajara-Bhudargad division, said, “We have noted the travel history of the person who has tested positive. He was in Delhi from February 10 to February 28 and then returned to Kolhapur. After returning, he was normal and later developed symptoms of typhoid and pneumonia. He went to a local government hospital in the first week of March, but as he could not recover we admitted him to the Covid-19 cell at Gadhinglaj for further tests.”

He added, “We have also moved his family from home to institutional quarantine.”

Radhanagari MLA Prakash Abitkar said, “There is no need for people to panic. They should strictly follow the lockdown rules and maintain social distancing. Everything is under control and the administration is doing its best to prevent the spread of coronavirus.”

‘Stay indoors for Shab-e-Barat’

Meanwhile, police have urged people from the Muslim community to remain indoors ahead of Shab-e-Barat that is scheduled to be celebrated on Thursday.

On this night, members of the Muslim community visit graveyards to remember their loved ones. “We have conveyed messages to the leaders of the Muslim community to ensure that people remain in their homes due to lockdown and maintain social distancing to avoid spread of coronavirus. Strict action will be taken if anyone is found violating the rules,” Prashant Amrutkar, deputy superintendent of police (Karveer division), said.

Gani Ajarekar, chairman of Muslim Boarding (Kolhapur), said, “All members of the Muslim community have decided to celebrate Shab-e-Barat in their homes. All the mosques and cemeteries will be locked on Thursday.”


