Highest single day spike in Vid, Yavatmal sends region’s Covid-19 tally to 50
2020-04-09
Nagpur: Vidarbha reported 10 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, highest number of positive cases in a single day since March 11 when the first Covid-19 patient was detected in Nagpur.

Out of these, eight are from Yavatmal and all of them closely associated with the Nizamuddin Markaz in Delhi. Akola and Buldhana recorded one case each taking Vidarbha’s Wednesday tally to 10 and overall number of Covid-19 patients to 50.

Yavatmal became the first district in the region to report eight positive Covid-19 cases in a day. Out of the eight cases, only one is a resident of Yavatmal city. Other seven are from other states.

“Eight more coronavirus cases have been reported from Yavatmal and out of them 4 persons are from Uttar Pradesh, two from West Bengal and one from Delhi and a local. All of them were in Yavatmal for religious activities,” said district collector MD Singh.

Amravati divisional commissioner Piyush Singh also confirmed that all eight Covid-19 positive persons had Delhi travel history and the seven from other states came from Delhi to Yavatmal. “Yavatmal now has total 11 positive cases. Three of them have recovered and discharged. Eight patients are in the isolation facility of Yavatmal GMCH,” he said. 

Notably, samples of about 65 suspects were collected last Wednesday and all of them have been admitted to the isolation ward of Yavatmal Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) since then.

Due to snag in the Covid-19 testing laboratory in Nagpur’s Mayo Hospital, these samples were sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, on April 3. Results of 51 samples came out today, while reports of 14 others are still awaited.

“Total 129 samples, including some from Yavatmal, were sent to the NIV. Out of them, seven tested positive today. All others tested negative,” said a laboratory official.

As the government has now designated AIIMS Nagpur as laboratory for testing samples from Amravati division, 13 samples from Yavatmal were tested in AIIMS today. One of them — sample of the local resident of Yavatmal — tested positive. With seven tested in NIV and one in AIIMS, the total number of positive patients in Yavatmal is eight. 

Earlier, three patients having Dubai travel history were treated at the GMCH and they recovered fully. Their 14-day home quarantine period is yet to be completed.

No new case in Nagpur: The city recorded no new case on Wednesday. The fifth patient, a businessman from Khamla, completed 14 days of the isolation on Wednesday. His swab samples were sent for testing. If tested negative, another sample will be tested on Thursday. If tested negative in the two tests back-to-back, the patient will be declared as recovered and will be discharged. 

Meanwhile, Nagpur’s first patient, an IT professional, will complete his 14 days of home quarantine on April 9.

More than 50 samples of high risk contacts of positive patients and new suspects admitted to the GMCH and IGGMCH are yet to be tested.

12 cases in Buldhana now: AIIMS Nagpur also tested samples from Buldhana and Akola on Wednesday. One more suspect from Buldhana, a close contact of the admitted positive cases, tested positive taking the total number of cases from Buldhana to 12, including one death.

“All confirmed positive patients are recovering in the 100-bedded isolation facility at women’s hospital in Buldhana. They are asymptomatic,” said civil surgeon Dr Premchand Pandit. 

Relief for Amravati: After three members of Covid-19 victim’s family tested positive on Tuesday, the administration in Amravati heaved a sigh of relief as no new case surfaced from any part of the district.

The administration has screened 3,966 persons to date and quarantined them all. It has sent 238 throat swab samples for testing out of which 170 have tested negative and four positive. Eleven samples have been rejected. Meanwhile, a suspected patient from Melghat tribal belt has been admitted to Covid-19 ward today.

Second case in Akola: Akola reported its second positive coronavirus case on April 8, within 24 hours of the first case came to fore. This patient is a resident of Akot Fail area, which is another densely populated area of the town. More alarming fact is that the patient had no travel history at all.

“We have sealed the Akot Fail area and started active surveillance within 3km area. High risk contacts of the patient have been already isolated in hospital,” said district collector Rajendra Papalkar. 


