HIGH-5: MEET THE 60+ COVID-BEATERS
2020-05-04
Bhopal: While it is a given fact that the elderly are more at Covid-19 risk than the younger population, a few instances of elders who have recovered from the deadly virus gives us hope. TOI gives a glimpse of cases where vulnerable elders people with underlying medical conditions emerged victorious after a bout of Covid-19.

Abida Begum, 80 

The 80-year-old, who suffers from blood pressure problems, has successfully battled Covid-19. Incidetally, the senior citizen had witnessed the MiC gas leak of 1984 that took place in Bhopal. Though vulnerable, even at 80, Abida Begum remains feisty and can pillion ride a motorcycle, if needed. “We do not necessarily have to bring out the car for my grandmother,” said emergency health services worker, Hashmin Khalid. Abida Begum tested positive for the deadly contagion, four days after her son and daughter-in-law tested positive for Covid-19 Her son is a health worker too. “I was standing on my feet in seven days,” she said. She was in the room next to her son. So what does she credit her quick recovery to? Compassionate treatment by the hospital and living in a joint family system, she says. She was admitted to the hospital on April 14 and was discharged on April 28.

Dr Upendra Dubey, 64

Health department veteran, Dr Upendra Dubey, is 64. Not only did he himself fight Covid-19, but he also cared for his wife and son who too tested positive for coronavirus . “I am over 60, with diabetes and other pre-existing conditions. I had fever for more than a week. That was a worry. But when my levels stabilised, I realised my body was producing sufficient antibodies for me to recover,” said Dr Dubey, who is deputy director in the health department. His wife and son have also been discharged. Currently, they are in home quarantine of 14 days. Dr Dubey is on work from home duty.

Ram Bharati, 75 

The senior citizen was hospitalised for the first time in his life when he was diagnosed with COVID-19. During hospitalisation in Bhopal, away from his family in Itarsi, he started operating a smartphone for the first time. A resident of Itarsi, about 100km from Bhopal, Bharati tested positive for Covid-19 on April 10. He worked in a clinic where a doctor had tested corona-positive. After his hospitalisation, Bharati returned to Itarsi on April 24. After four days in quarantine at Itarsi, he returned home. Bharati lives in a small house with 11 people. His lifestyle at 75 is perhaps what made the elderly man triumph over Covid-19. “My father walked about 3 km to the clinic. His daily routine was leaving the house at 8 am and returning past sunset. He also visited other locations where he cooked on special occasions,” said Bharati’s 35-year-old son, Mandlesh.

S K Mehmood, 78

The 78-year-old was diagnosed with COVID-19 on April 2 and recovered on April 20. The former mechanic’s lifestyle is a key reason for his quick recovery. Early to bed and early to rise, Mehmood sleeps by 10 pm and wakes up at 3 am every day. Extended morning walks and reading are part of his daily routine. Eating a balanced diet and citrus fruits was his stable diet, before the advent of Covid-19, “The body is like a machine. If you take care of its maintenance on regular basis, you do not get into a medical emergency,” he explained. 


