West Bengal: High-risk doctors get hands-on Covid-19 training
2020-04-10
KOLKATA: Medical officers from different state-run hospitals across the state have been trained to stay prepared for treating Covid-19 patients. Close to 500 such medical officers from 50 government hospitals have been trained on how to manage an infected patient efficiently in intensive care units and high dependency units.


Fighting the pandemic, the state government has designated four hospitals in the city specifically for Covid-19 patients, apart from isolation and treatment facilities in more than 94 hospitals across the state. With the number of infected patients with co-morbid conditions likely to increase, the government has already ordered 300 ventilators and is on the way of procuring 300 more.

“In such a situation, we need to ramp up preparedness and train medical officers working in critical care units across the state on proper operation of ventilators and better management of Covid-19 patients,” said one of the trainers.

Ninety medical officers are being trained daily in two batches over the past few days in hospitals including SSKM Hospital, Desun Hospitals-Siliguri, Burdwan Medical College and Midnapore Medical College. More doctors will be trained in the coming days.

“Intubation is a very tricky procedure and it should be left best to the ones who are trained. The rest can be trained on better monitoring and management of patients who are on ventilation,” said cardiac surgeon Kunal Sarkar.

According to sources in the health department, those who attended the training, which ended on Thursday, are doctors who are already working in critical care units and high dependency units. In addition to training them on proper operation of ventilators, they are also being trained on putting on PPE appropriately, social distancing norms and other hygiene guidelines so that they do no end up getting infected.

“Doctors are especially those dealing with critical care patients at the risk of getting infected. And a doctor getting infected has a serious implication as he/she might end up infecting other patients. Therefore, we need to know how to carry out procedures without getting infected while treating a patient in the CCU,” said another trainer.

Initiated by the state health department as a part of public-private partnership of SATS Academy Pvt Ltd, specialists in critical care medicine, including Ashutosh Ghosh, head of critical care at SSKM Hospital, and Arindam Kar, director, Institute of Critical Care Medicine, CMRI, had formulated the programme. The government has roped in 35 senior critical care specialists to impart the training.

“Our government is setting up treatment centres and standalone hospitals for treating Covid-19 patients. Therefore, we need to keep our manpower ready, including those who will be needed to treat critical patients,” said Mahua Banerjee, commissioner of the health & family welfare department.


