Highest single-day spike in coronavirus cases, Rajasthan total at 463
2020-04-10
JAIPUR: In the highest single-day spike, 80 people tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Thursday taking the total count of the infected persons to 463. 

According to the health department report issued on Thursday night, 39 persons tested positive in Jaipur while seven each cases were reported from Jhalawar, Jhunjhunu and Tonk. Five persons were diagnosed with Covid-19 in Jaisalmer, three cases in Jodhpur, two cases each from Kota and Banswara and one case each in Barmer and Bhilwara. 

Six cases were also reported from those evacuees who were airlifted from Iran and kept at the Army Wellness Centres in Jodhpur and Jaisalmer, said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). 

In Jodhpur, a 34-year-old doctor, who was involved in conducting door-to-door survey of Nagori Gate for screening of people for Covid-19, tested positive.

In a single day, the city reported 39 cases from different parts. Eleven persons were found infected in Purani Basti, 12 from Ramganj, seven from Patang Bazaar, one each case from Raja Park, Ghat Gate, Nahari Ka Naka, Manak Chawk, Sunharon Ka Mohalla, Subhash Chawk, Thora Nalla and from Navi Mumbai linked to Tablighi Jamaat. The person, who belongs to Raja Park, was admitted to a private hospital on April 4 with complaints of influenza-like illness. His mother is also suffering from the symptoms of Covid-19. 

In Jhalawar, seven persons who returned from Indore, have been found infected with the virus. 

Among seven persons who tested positive for Covid-19 in Jhunjhunu, three are contacts of Covid-19 person linked to Tablighi Jamaat (TJ), two are directly linked to TJ, one person returned from Dubai and another from Qatar. 

Bhilwara also reported a case after five days. A 47-year-old teacher who came to the OPD of district hospital with complaints of fever, cough and sore throat has tested positive. Health department officials said he had no travel history and no contact history. 

In Kota, two persons found infected were in contact of a Covid-19 case. In Tonk, seven persons who tested positive are contacts of Covid-19 patients linked to Tablighi Jamaat. Banswara too reported two cases who were in contact with a Covid-19 positive case. Two persons from Barmer two persons and six evacuees from Iran who have been kept in isolation facilities at Army Wellness Centres in Jodhpur and Jaisalmer have also been found infected with the virus. 


