High demand for Covid drug, but doctors say go easy
2020-04-10
LUCKNOW: City medical stores either do not have or are running low on hydroxychloroquine-based medicines, a class of drug used in treatment of malaria and rheumatoid arthritis.


In a reality check on Wednesday, around 30 pharmaceutical stores in different parts of the city told TOI that the supply of two medicines, demand for which is high, had stopped even before the lockdown had started. As word spread in early March that the medicine can treat Covid-19, the number of customers went up to 28-30 per day from five-six per week. 

A chemist in Narhi said, “Right before the lockdown, some people had stockpiled hydroxychloroquine. Now, we are giving the medicine only to those with genuine prescription.”Pratima Singh (38), a patient of rheumatoid arthritis, got her medicines after waiting for nearly a month. “The medical store from where I buy medicines regularly took four weeks to arrange the medicine for me as it was out of stock from March end,” she said.

Medical store owners said that demand will increase in the coming days when malaria season will come. 

“6 lakh tablets are used per day in India for rheumatoid arthritis using hydroxychloroquine drug. While there is currently no shortage of supply, logistics in lockdown are the problem. Second, there is one brand name which is most commonly used but that sells out first. Patients refuse to buy the 10 other brands that are of the same combination,” said Dr SK Das, former head of rheumatology at KGMU. 

“Patients should not panic if they don’t get the medicine, since this medicine takes three months to start showing effects and another one to three months for the effect to vain off. Even if they miss a few doses, it won’t make a lot of difference,” he added.

Durg inspector Madhuri Singh said, “Hydroxychloroquine-based medicines have been supplied to government hospitals on priority after the pandemic broke out.”

ADM, civil supplies, RD Pandey said, “We are in talks with wholesale dealers to identify the reason of limited availability and working to ensure that minimum stock is available to all. However, medicines will be sold to only those with valid prescription.”


