High temperatures, alcohol won’t protect you from Covid-19: Scientist
2020-04-09
NAGPUR: Temperatures higher than 25 degree Celsius do not prevent coronavirus, neither do vaccines against pneumonia. These and many other myths related to the disease were busted during the webinar observing 62nd Foundation Day of CSIR’s National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (Neeri).

Due to the ongoing lockdown, the event was held online on Wednesday afternoon. Rup Lal, senior scientist at the National Academy of Sciences and platinum jubilee fellow at New-Delhi based The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), stated that people need to stay away from misinformation.

“Drinking alcohol, being able to hold your breath for 10 seconds, vaccines and high temperatures do not protect you from coronavirus. Also, the disease cannot be transmitted through mosquito bites,” said Lal.

Stating that the asymptomatic patients are turning out to be a serious problem, the scientist stressed that virology and microbiology should be introduced in the political system. “Our policymakers need to be aware of the havoc microorganisms and viruses can create,” Lal added.

Further stating that strains isolated from USA are the most evolved, Lal stated this rapid evolution needs to be considered seriously for the development of drug or vaccine to combat the Covid-19.

Scientists also drew parallels between the ongoing pandemic and climate change. Rajan Welukar, former vice-chancellor of GH Raisoni University, pointed out that policymakers should learn from coronavirus and implement them to combat the bigger battle of climate change.

“Covid 19 pandemic is co-related to climate change. There is no better time than this to realize that investments in climate resilient infrastructure are very important. Coronavirus is giving us a wake-up call,” said Welukar. He added that climate change was a challenge much more dangerous than the pandemic. “The curve of Covid-19 will become normal. But the problem of climate change is only going to increase,” he said. 

Neeri director Rakesh Kumar highlighted some prominent developments of the institute and its future projects. “One of the megaprojects is metagenomics study of Ganga river from its origin to end. We have also developed a noise pollution application which is currently being used worldwide by almost 3 lakh people.We are also documenting all water bodies across the country,” said Kumar.

He added that Neeri will also be looking at how to deal with old vehicles plying on roads. The director further announced all employees of Neeri will be contributing their one day’s salary to combat coronavirus for the next 12 months.

The institute also distributed personal protection equipments including gloves, sanitizers and masks to corporators and different NGOS.


