Gujarat high court refuses bail to Asaram on Covid-19 grounds
2020-06-04
AHMEDABAD: The Gujarat high court on Wednesday denied temporary bail once again to Ashumal Harpalani alias Asaram on the ground of prevailing Covid-19 pandemic. The court said that since Asaram has a huge following, his release may bring thousands of his followers to meet him and it will aggravate the distressing situation.


Asaram is lodged in a prison in Jodhpur in Rajasthan as a convict in a case of sexual assault on a minor. He has been facing a trial in a rape case in Gandhinagar court. Therefore, he approached the HC for bail for four months stating that he being 84 years old with various ailments, he has all probability of getting infected with Covid-19 in Rajasthan jail. 

The HC had denied him temporary bail on March 30 when he sought release on a similar ground. 

This time, Asaram’s lawyer argued that some of the prisoners in Jodhpur jail are affected with coronavirus and this puts Asaram at a greater risk. Since various guidelines also advised to protect elderly from the virus, Asarm should be released temporarily from jail. 

However, Gujarat government vehemently opposed Asaram’s bail plea and argued that the jail authorities in Rajasthan, in fact, are taking ample precautions so that there is no spread of Covid-19 amongst inmates. 

While the HC said that Asaram did not raise any new ground for his release, it noticed the averment in petition that Asaram has a big number of followers all over the world and in India. Justice A S Supehia observed in this regard, “Considering the said averment, it would not be apposite to release the applicant on bail in light of the prevailing situation of Covid 2019, since there is a strong possibility that on release of the applicant, his thousands of followers will congregate to meet him, which will aggravate the distressing situation.”

Last month, Asaram’s son, Narayan Sai, also sought bail to provide assistance to his family, which he said was in need of help due to lockdown and Covid-19 pandemic. The HC had refused him temporary bail.

