Covid-19 threat: Delhi high court bars law interns from entering premises, for now
2020-03-18
NEW DELHI: Doubling down on efforts to restrict crowds, Delhi high court on Tuesday barred law interns from entering court premises till further orders.

In an administrative decision, the high court directed that interns attached with judges would not be allowed to access the court till further orders in view of the novel coronavirus pandemic. A circular issued by the registrar general of the high court also asked the security agencies not to honour intern passes till further orders.

“In view of the outbreak of Covid-19, the chief justice and other judges of this court have been pleased to direct that interns attached with judges should not be allowed to access this court till further orders. Security agencies are hereby directed not to honour the intern passes till further orders. Registrar (general/admin) is also directed not to issue any new intern passes,” it said.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The high court had decided on Monday to limit its functioning due to the pandemic and hold hearing of only a few benches till March 20.

The decision was taken at an emergency meeting of the high court’s eight-judge administrative and general supervision committee headed by Chief Justice D N Patel and the president and honorary secretary of the Delhi High Court Bar Association (DHCBA) to contain the spread of pandemic novel coronavirus.

All the courts in the national capital had also curtailed the functioning and restricting the entry of people on their premises starting with the Supreme Court. The high court had said all the pending matters, listed from March 17 to 20, before the court as well as the registrars or joint registrars would be adjourned to April 14, 15, 16 and 17 respectively.

All urgent matters to be listed on the following day would be determined by the designated joint registrars (JR). It was also decided in the meeting that the trial courts would only take up bail matters and cases which required urgent stay or injunction till March 31 and rest of the cases would be adjourned.

The high court, in its advisory, said no undertrial would be produced before the subordinate courts till March 31 and if production is indispensable, the facility of video conferencing be utilised.

The Delhi Judicial Academy had also suspended all its institutional training programmes till March 31, as per high court orders, after the committee said it would review the situation on March 20.


