Himalayan expeditions off, Pune trekkers worry about sherpas’ survival in Covid-19 season
2020-03-21
PUNE: Many city mountaineers, who have been preparing for summits in the Himalayan ranges for over two years, are disappointed as Covid-19 has halted expeditions in Nepal. 


More than their disappointment over a lost chance and money, they are worried about the sherpas and other businesses in the Himalayan valley which are completely dependent on trekking-tourism.

Umesh Zirpe, leader of Giripremi’s Mount Annapurna-I Expedition 2020 said due to coronavirus pandemic, their team had to cancel their expedition to the tenth highest peak in the world. 

“Our team was set to leave Pune on March 14. However, the decision by the Nepal government stalled our activities just 48 hours before the departure. It was sad to see the cancellation of one of the toughest mountaineering expeditions. Like every other dedicated mountaineer, we all had put in years of hard work and finances to summit this peak,” he said.

While Zirpe realises that the Nepal government’s decision was inevitable and restricting travel is a good move to stop the spread of Covid-19, he is more worried about the sherpas living in the area, whose entire livelihood is dependent on the money they get from mountaineers. 

“March-April-May is when most people go trekking in the Himalayas. One team of climbers means income for at least 10 sherpa families. With Covid-19 hitting at the peak season, the entire economy will tank. The mountains will always be there to climb, but with no tourists visiting the place and with no alternative source of income, their survival is in jeopardy. Now they are planning to advertise autumn for trekking to make up for the lost spring season, but that is not a good move as it is very risky to climb at that time and the sherpas will be risking their lives to earn money then,” Zirpe added.

K J Dawa Ongju, a sherpa from Nepal, said all of them are living on their savings. “There is not even a single team to climb which means 80% of our people are out of work. Due to coronavirus, we can’t go out and seek other work so we are living on our savings. Everybody here is waiting for the month to end to see if there is any change. If the travel ban remains, we will have no option but to go back to our villages and farm the small land parcels we have. But if the season doesn’t improve, survival is going to be tough,” he said. 


