Hindpiri man is Ranchi’s first and Jharkhand’s second Covid-19 casualty
2020-04-13
RANCHI: A 60-year-old man from Hindpiri locality, the epicentre of Covid-19 in the city, died of the virus on Sunday around 9am at the trauma centre of Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims) here. The deceased was the husband of the 54-year-old woman, who tested positive for Covid-19 earlier on April 6.


 Six of her family members, including her husband, tested positive on the same day and were kept at the Covid-19 isolation ward of Rims.

This is the second Covid-19 casualty in the state and first for the city. The first casualty in the state was a 72-year-old man in Bokaro district who died on April 8. 

After the Hindpiri man’s death, there are seven active cases, in the city and all are have direct or indirect links with the Tablighi Jamaat group.

An official communiqué from Rims said, “A 60-year-old male from Hindpiri area was admitted at the Covid-19 centre after he tested positive for the virus on April 6. He was put on ventilator since April 9 as he had developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). He was also suffering from type II diabetes mellitus and cardiomyopathy. He died during treatment on Sunday morning.”

Confirming the death, Rims director Dr D K Singh told TOI, “The patient was diabetic and had developed ARDS during treatment. As he had cardiomyopathy, his heart muscles were also not functioning up to the mark. He was put on ventilator because of breathlessness, but died on Sunday morning.”

Health department sources said the 54-year-old woman was probably infected by her family members who might have come in close contact with the 22-year-old Malaysian woman, the state’s first Covid-19 case detected on March 31. The Malaysian woman with Tablighi Jamaat connection had stayed in the neighbourhood for four days. The other active case is a 62-year-old cleric from the same locality who also had interacted with the Tablighi Jamaat members. He had tested positive on Saturday. Six of his family members are also in isolation at Rims and his contact-tracing is on.

Based on the statements of the cleric about his movements, the officials are expecting a surge in the number of infected persons in the area. Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said the number of Covid-19 cases might increase after completion of the contact-tracing exercise. “We have appealed to the people, who have come in contact with the cleric, to come forward and get themselves tested,” he said.

“The primary contacts, six family members of the cleric who had direct contact with the visiting Jamaat members, were shifted to isolation on Saturday. We are now tracing the secondary contacts and are trying to trace people who have had come in direct or indirect contact with him based on his movements. Till now, 20 people have been identified and their samples have been sent for testing,” Mishra added.

