Hindpiri sealed for next 72 hours, stern warning against lockdown violation
2020-04-07
Ranchi: With two Covid-19 cases detected in the last one week, Hindpiri area has become the epicentre of the viral disease in the state and the Ranchi district administration on Monday clamped prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPC for the next three days, banning all forms of movement, including individuals and vehicles. 

All entry and exit points leading to Hindpiri have been sealed with immediate effect and police have been asked to enforce the lockdown strictly. The administration now plans to repeat home screening and contact tracing in all neighbourhoods of the area where members of Tablighi Jamaat were hosted. A control and command centre has been set up at the Guru Nanak School campus for the purpose. A team of district officials will co-ordinate in enforcing the lockdown as well as ensure supply of essential items in the area from the centre.

Addressing the media from the centre, DC Rai Mahimapat Ray said, “As we have found the second patient from Nala Road in Hindpiri area, we are invoking Section 144 of CrPC with immediate effect, which will be applicable across all 15 lanes of the locality. All entry and exit points leading to Hindpiri have also been sealed and no one will be allowed in the area with immediate effect and I assure the residents that the district administration will supply essential commodities at their doorsteps and no one needs to venture out.”

Ray appealed to all those who have come in contact with the infected persons or with their group to come forward and seek medical assistance immediately. In a stern warning to those who try to violate the lockdown, he said, “If anyone is found venturing out on the streets, they will be booked under relevant sections of Epidemics disease Act, IPC and CrPC. We have also arranged for medical teams at the control and command centre and people in need will be provided round-the-clock and immediate medical attention.”

The DC further said, “We have formed a team of volunteers from the area, who in co-ordination with district administration, will ensure supply of essential items to all those in need. The volunteers will deliver ration items as well as medicines at their doorsteps and we will be issuing helpline numbers soon, so that people can contact us and put in requests.”

SSP Anish Gupta, who also addressed the media, said, “As Section 144 has been invoked, a police team led by SP (city) Saurabh has been deployed for round-the-clock surveillance in the area. PCR vans, tiger mobile patrols as well as on foot security personnel will be guarding the area to enforce the lockdown strictly. Anyone found roaming on two wheelers or moving around unnecessarily will be taken to task and if a repeat offender is detected, cases will be registered against them under relevant laws.”


