Delhi: Hindu Rao Hospital suspends coronavirus sample testing due to backlog at lab
2020-06-05
NEW DELHI: Hindu Rao Hospital’s fever clinic has temporarily stopped accepting nasal and oral swab samples for the novel coronavirus testing. As many as 50 people who went to submit their samples had to return disappointed over the past two days, said a senior doctor at the hospital run by North Delhi Municipal Corporation.


Explaining the reason behind the decision, a civic official said that National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) has asked the hospitals not to send any more samples because of a huge backlog. A communication was received from the NCDC joint director in this regard on Wednesday, added another official.

“Consequent upon the increased number of samples sent by various hospitals and surveillance sites from Delhi to Biotechnology Laboratory than the amount which could be handled, to keep the turn around time up to 48 hours, a huge backlog of samples has resulted in the lab. In view of this, it is requested that the samples from all the hospitals and sites from Delhi may kindly be diverted to other Covid testing labs. The status of backlog shall be notified immediately,” read the NCDC’s letter.

A north corporation official told TOI that no decision has been taken yet to divert the samples to other laboratories. “On Wednesday, no samples were taken. On Thursday, eight samples of only admitted ward patients were taken. Some doctors from Rajan Babu Hospital had also come for the testing, but we were helpless,” said a doctor on the condition of anonymity.

The north DMC is running a fever clinic at Hindu Rao Hospital where patients are screened and samples are taken in the form of nasal and oral swabs. Before the operations were hit, the fever clinic used to take 45-50 samples every day. “Earlier, the samples used to be sent to NIB Noida laboratory as well, but they had refused to take them recently. We don’t have in-house labs like bigger hospitals,” the doctor added.

