HipBar offers digital help to overcome withdrawal symptoms & lockdown blues
2020-04-01
Chennai: Diageo-backed liquor-tech start up HipBar has offered its bouquet of tech-services to the Tamil Nadu and Kerala state governments, which will ensure safe alcohol home delivery to bonafide consumers, satisfying the primal objective of social distancing. The platform which to deliver with proper checks including age verification, it could well turn out to be the perfect via media. With lockdown shutting down liquor supplies across states, withdrawal related issues are sweeping across the country. States such as Kerala has seen seven suicides as tipplers were denied their quota of booze, cases of spurious liquor and home brewing is surfacing, opening a newer set of problems to an already stretched government machinery. Kerala Government had announced prescriptions from government doctors for dispensing liquor to the dependents, and this was shot down by the IMA.HipBar, whose payment solutions are currently used by TASMAC, ran India’s first alcohol home delivery service in Bengaluru from August 2017 to November 2018 before facing legal headwinds. From its on ground experience, it developed an e-governance technology platform to help governments to organise and manage last mile delivery of alcoholic beverages in two working models, the hyperlocal model (Swiggy / Zomato) and the next day delivery model (BigBasket / Grofers). The state excise departments control the supply chain using a number of archaic methods like licenses and passes in movement of alcoholic beverages. HipBar said, when its technology is put to use, it can effectively regulate the last mile deliveries from a single dashboard. HipBar says if the governments want to cater to the alcohol deprived in a state of lockdown, home delivery can be operationalised almost immediately. “We are ready and waiting by the phones. States will realise that technology assisted home delivery of alcoholic beverages is better than the status quo on all fronts. Technology assisted alcohol home delivery is not a poor alternative. It's the best way to regulate consumption at a micro level and implement the moderation agenda at scale,” said Prasanna Natarajan, CEO, HipBar.