Historian, CU emeritus professor passes away after contracting virus
2020-05-11
KOLKATA: Historian Hari Vasudevan, a leading expert on Russia and emeritus professor at Calcutta University, passed away in a city hospital in the early hours of Sunday. He had tested positive for Covid-19 and had been put on a ventilator a day before his death. He was 68. Vasudevan is survived by wife, historian Tapati Guha-Thakurta, and daughter Mrinalini.

Vasudevan was admitted to the hospital on May 4 after his fever refused to subside. He tested positive for Covid on May 6, went into respiratory distress soon afterwards and was put on ventilator support on Friday. He died at 12.40am on Sunday. Doctors said Vasudevan had other chronic ailments.

After completing his PhD at Cambridge University, Vasudevan wrote and taught on Russian and European history and politics and Indo-Russian relations at Calcutta University, Jamia Millia Islamia in New Delhi, King’s College in London, Cornell University in the US and Kiev University in the Ukraine.

The authority over his field of study combined with the natural flair of teaching and winsome smile made him a favourite among peers and students. Had he not responded to historian Amalesh Tripathi’s call to join the Calcutta University, the city would have perhaps lost Hari Shankar Vasudevan to other institutions, historian Irfan Habib would tell his friends.

Vasudevan never let fame get in the way of his camaraderie with colleagues and students. While Russian studies brought him to the history department of CU and he continued to be an observer on Russia till the very end, Vasudevan’s interests included European history, American history, study and comparisons of Constitutions of the world and the Silk Route.

“Vasudevan brought with him a breath of fresh air to the department. Since he was trained abroad, he was able to look at history through the prism of that training,” said fellow historian Arun Bandyopadhyay, whose association with Vasudevan spans over four decades.

Vasudevan was observing the Covid and wanted to compare it with the Black Death, recounted Ramkrishna Chatterjee, publications secretary at the Asiatic Society.

Though Vasudevan lived and worked in Kolkata much of his life, he had left India while in middle school. After finishing school in Kenya where is father was posted, he went to Cambridge and graduated in history and later completed his Phd in pre-Bolshevik Russia. He and Netaji scholar Purabi Roy had visited Russia to investigate Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose’s disappearance.

Jadavpur University vice-chancellor Suranjan Das, who worked with Vasudevan for over four decades, said: “We were working on an Indo-Myanmar project that he initiated for the Netaji Institute of Asian Studies. Alas that will remain incomplete now.”

It was Kingshuk Chatterjee, a student turned colleague, who broke the news to Guha-Thakurta and Mrinalini who are in home quarantine. Chatterjee accompanied the hearse to the crematorium at Dhapa. “For me he will remain the biggest observer of global history, making it a genre, much before studying global history became fashionable like it is today,” he later said.

Unable to come to terms with the loss, his wife said: “There were no last words, no good byes... It struck me like a bolt... There was so much to be done together, academically and even for the household. We hadn’t travelled much together, we were just planning to do that this summer.”

Friends, colleagues and students expressed their grief and solidarity with Guha-Thakurta and Mrinalini on social media. Many friends and colleagues remembered him as an ardent cook, a splendid host, an avid reader with a keen taste in music. And nearly everyone felt the way his wife did: “Hari, we have to keep believing that you have really left us.”


