Hit hard by coronavirus, travel industry in Coimbatore faces its worst crisis in three decades
2020-03-14
COIMBATORE: This is that time of the year when travel company offices in the city gets flooded with summer vacation enquiries and bookings. The picture is altogether different this year. Most of the travel firms are empty, except for a few trying to work out cancellations. 


Travel agents in the city say the industry is facing its worst crisis in three decades, much worse than the lull after the first H1N1 outbreak. According to them, domestic tourism has also been hit as almost every state in the country, including neighbouring Kerala and Karnataka and other popular destinations such as Jaipur and New Delhi, has begun recording coronavirus (Covid-19) cases. 

While schools have declared holidays for children in lower classes from this week till April first week, the kids are forced to stay indoors. Sushmita Khanna, a resident of R S Puram, says, “My daughter has been pestering me to go to my mother’s place in Mumbai. But I can’t promise her anything, because of the virus outbreak. Maharashtra has four cases and we have been advised to stay away from airports, especially since I also have a four-year-old son.” 

As on Friday morning, the country has reported 76 cases of Covid-19. While stockbrokers and investors watched glumly the bearish run of the stock market, travel agents were busy marking the destinations hit by the virus to exclude them from their offerings. 

R Krishnaraj, president, Travel Agents’ Association in Coimbatore, says, “The city residents usually travel to hill stations in South India and North India. However, with all the popular holiday destinations such as Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Maharashtra and Karnataka recording Covid-19 cases, no one is coming in or calling up for enquiries.” 

Expressing a similar view, Nirupa of city-based Ashok Travels, said people were scared to travel. “They are not only completely avoiding flights unless necessary, like business or medical reasons, but also afraid to travel by road. This includes even bold honeymooners, because their families advise against it. Holiday planners are almost nil.” 

Indian luxury resorts are, however, yet to slash their rates, with top players sticking to their peak season rates in April and May. “While we are seeing some cancellations by foreigners, we are getting new bookings from foreigners who are forced to extend their stay due to Covid-19 outbreak. We are hopeful that the business would pick up by April-end,” said a manager of a star hotel on Avinashi Road. 

