Hit by cash crunch & Covid, NMC sacks contractual staff
2020-05-29
Nagpur: Priya Puri (name changed), a contractual social worker working for the Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s slum rehabilitation authority for the past four years, suddenly found herself out of job last week.

Working on contract from 2016, she was told that NMC had effected a manpower cut due to the Covid-19 impact on business.

Puri is among the 200-odd contractual employees whom NMC have told that their services were no longer needed, and it was squeezing out temporary staff in a bid to trim cost. 

On May 27, as many as 50 civil engineers hired by the civic body in May 2019 too received discontinuation letters. Rahul (name changed) said that the NMC had appointed them for monitoring various central and state governments funded projects.

The NMC had appointed many unemployed engineering graduates, especially civil engineers even at zone levels, on contract basis to overcome dearth of manpower.

Those rendered jobless overnight on Thursday met mayor Sandip Joshi who too expressed concern over the development. Joshi told them that he would raise the issue with municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe. 

According to Joshi, it’s not right time to discontinue services of engineers. Due to pandemic, there are no new job opportunities across the country, the contract engineers told the mayor.

Some of these engineers told TOI that apart from monitoring civic works, the NMC also availed their services in various other jobs. Even during Covid-19 lockdown, they assisted the NMC in enforcing rules in containment zones, monitoring temporary vegetable markets etc.

“Four civil engineers had helped the civic body in converting its hospitals like Pachpaoli maternity hospital, Indira Gandhi Rugnalaya etc to handle Covid-19 patients,” said one of the ousted engineers. 

On municipal commissioner’s directives, the NMC’s general administration department was tasked to shortlist contractual workers. The department has started the process to discontinue another 25 civil engineers who had been appointed on contract basis in 2016 for monitoring cement road works.

They too termed the NMC’s retrenchment a deviation from the Central government’s directives.

NMC’s deputy municipal commissioner Nirbhay Jain confirmed the development and said that most of the construction works of the NMC have come to a halt. “The civic body’s financial condition warranted cost cutting. Whenever the work resumes, the contractual staff will be called back,” he said.


