Hit by lockdown, auto drivers seek governement’s help in Hyderabad
2020-03-30
HYDERABAD: Auto rickshaw drivers in the city, who are struggling to make ends meet amid the lockdown to prevent the spread of Covid-19, sought help from the state government.


Most of the auto drivers buy food with the money they make each day and have no savings to fall back on. They said their families have been struggling for food and other basic amenities due to the unprecedented 21-day lockdown.

“Our first concern is how to feed our families, not the virus. We usually earn about Rs 500 to Rs 600 per day which we use to buy food, save up for rent and pay other bills. With the government announcing the lockdown, we have no other means of income or savings to fall back on. We will starve to death if this continues for a longer period,” said Mohammad Rameez, an auto driver. “I request the government to help us overcome these tough times,” Rameez added. Rameez and his family are from Warangal and have been residing in Hyderabad from the past 2 years. 

Similarly, another auto driver, M Ramnath said, “I do not have any money left to finance my auto or to even buy groceries. I am the only earning member of my family and I do not even have a white ration card to avail benefits of the government. I request the government to help us survive these tough times.” 

Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on March 22 announced that one month’s ration and 12 kg of rice will be given to each of the 87.59 lakh white ration cardholders in the state. While the relief from the state is yet to arrive at many places, unions say that many auto drivers who depend on their daily earnings to feed their families do not have white ration cards. 

“This unprecedented 21-day lockdown is forcing a lot of auto drivers to struggle for even the basic needs. While those who have white ration cards will receive the ration in a few days, those who do not have the cards will be the ones who will suffer the most,” said Satti Reddy, a member of Telangana Auto Drivers Joint Action Committee. 

“None of them were prepared for this lockdown and are struggling to feed their families. We request the government to consider our plea and help the auto drivers,” said Reddy.


