Covid-19: HIV drugs for virus patients only when needed, says panel
2020-03-18
JAIPUR: The drugs (lapinavir/ritonavir) useful in treating HIV provided to Covid-19 patients by SMS Hospital doctors can cause adverse effects too, states the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Management, Preparedness Document of AIIMS, New Delhi. 


The Indian regulatory authority, Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, has accorded approval for restricted public health emergency use of this treatment protocol (lapinavir/ritonavir). 


Coronavirus in India live updates

Additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh said the use of two drugs, which were provided to three Covid-19 patients in SMS Hospital, who were cured with the help of the two drugs, can be used in public health emergency only. There are provisions of using them in such emergency cases. He said before giving the drugs to patients, they took nod of ICMR and the Indian Drug Regulatory Authority.

An article published in Indian Journal of Medical Research, the experts of ICMR and AIIMS pointed out that the ICMR has suggested lopinavir/ritonavir combination therapy for laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 patients based on the observational studies of clinical benefit amongst patients with SARS-CoV and MERSCoV, as well as the docking studies conducted by the National Institute of Virology, Pune. The Indian Regulatory Authority, Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, has accorded approval for restricted public health emergency use of this treatment protocol.

The article was written by Tarun Bhatnagar of ICMR, Chennai, Manoj V Murhekar of AIIMS, Nivedita Gupta, Naveet Wig and Raman Gangakhedkar of ICMR-Delhi, which further stated that the initial treatment protocol was for administering the combination treatment to all laboratory-confirmed patients. 

However, the first three laboratory-confirmed patients from Kerala had mild symptoms on diagnosis and had a stable course of illness. Hence, lopinavir/ritonavir treatment was not administered in these patients. 

“It is however, crucial to initiate the treatment before patient develops features of severe illnesses,” reads the article ‘Lopinavir/ritonavir combination therapy among symptomatic coronavirus disease 2019 patients in India: Protocol for restricted public health emergency use’. 

However, AIIMS Preparedness Document of AIIMS, New Delhi, advocates that a prior consent of the patient is required before giving these two medicines to patients. 

