HNBGU hosts webinar on Covid-19 impacts
2020-05-04
Dehradun: The Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal Central University (HNBGU), Government Post Graduate College in Gopeshwar, and Aerosol Air Quality and Climate Research Society jointly hosted a two-day-long webinar on effects of Covid-19 on environment and economy. The webinar, that concluded on Sunday, saw participation of speakers from universities and colleges from across India and from abroad as well. During the webinar, they spoke on the impact of Covid-19 on air quality, climate change, and environment. 

Speaking on the impact of Covid-19 on air quality, Ranjit Kumar, assistant professor, department of Chemistry at Dayalbagh Educational Institute of Agra, said that after analysing the data collected from around six cities of India, it was found out that vehicular emission was the major reason for pollution in India. “In our recent study, we have found out that vehicles are responsible for maximum pollution in cities. Our research has suggested that India must use periodic lockdowns, may be for smaller duration like a couple of days, to reduce pollution,” he added.

Another speaker Rajan Sudesh Ratna, economic affairs officer in South and South-West Office of United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ESCAP), New Delhi, delivered a speech on “socio-economic impact assessment of Covid-19 on South Asia”.

“IMF estimates that the global economy will shrink by 3% which is equivalent to around 9 trillion US dollar. Growth forecast for India in 2020 is 1.9%. Thus, focussed policy interventions are necessary for attracting investments and technology, becoming part of higher value chain, reforming social and agriculture sector, infrastructure and financing,” he added.

Professor Alok Sagar Gautam from HNBGU informed that speakers include doctors, academicians, virologists, and scientists. A total of 130 faculty and research scholars participated in the webinar in which more than 30 papers were presented.


