Hold your ears, do sit-ups: Aurangabad cops to lockdown violators
2020-04-25
AURANGABAD: To keep a check on those violating lockdown orders as well as those stepping out of homes without masks, the city police have started opting for public shaming by making rule-breakers to hold their ears while standing on the road.


On Friday morning, police teams were found opting for public shaming of the violators in the areas of Shahgunj, Buddilane, Roshan Gate, Osmanpura, Garkheda and Pundaliknagar to name a few.

In the past couple of weeks, the authorities have already imposed fine on hundreds of violators caught sans wearing mandatory masks or for violating the lockdown orders. In addition to this, many violators have also faced action under relevant sections of The Motor Vehicle Act. 

Sources confirmed that the area police stations, apart from the traffic police, have been tasked to opt for initiating action under The Motor Vehicle Act, instead of getting into any argument with the violators.

Wearing masks has been made mandatory for respective authorities at the local level in all the red-zone districts of the state. Anyone caught without mask is imposed with a spot fine of Rs 500. 

Police authorities said that several people do not have work and money due to lockdown. “Imposing fine on such people may be inhuman in certain cases, so we have decided to punish them,” said an officer.

Sources in the police department said that considering financial crisis that a large of section of the society is undergoing, police prefer alternate legal ways of keeping a check on violators unless imposing fine remains the only way.

Aurangabad commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad on Thursday, using the special powers conferred to him, issued orders imposing strict restrictions of the lockdown from 1 pm to 11 pm, except for the essential services including pharmacy stores, milk dairies, LPG services, on duty government employees as well as the industrial houses that have been granted permission to function.

