Holi amidst coronavirus
2020-03-11
Panaji: Brightly-coloured powders and water balloons were launched by revellers celebrating the festival of colours at Azad Maidan, Panaji on Tuesday, amidst fears of the coronavirus. Goa, so far, has not tested a single positive case, and this seems to have motivated people to take to the streets to celebrate Holi. However, many of the celebrators were non-Panjimites with most of the city’s residents choosing to opt out of the festival this year.

“Every year, we see a crowd of over 2,000 people, but this year there were only 1,000. People were cautious and many Panjimites stayed away. Migrants and people from beyond city limits showed up and participated,” festival organiser Shantaram Naik said.

Announcements were being made at the venue informing attendees to leave the festival if they have a cough or cold. Some volunteers even kindly escorted people who were seen sneezing, out of the premises.

“We were aware that there would be lukewarm response to the festival since there were fears about the spread of coronavirus. People who regularly come for this festival may not have turned up with their families, but the celebrations overall took place devoid of any fears,” advocate Gunwant Juneja, resident of Panaji for 35 years, said.

“The crowd was smaller this year, and those that did participate did so owing to their attachment to the tradition of celebrating Holi at Azad Maidan. My children Prithvi and Poorwa, especially wanted to come and enjoy this festival since this is how we celebrate it as a family annually,” Pramod Naik Sardesai said.

There were volunteers at all entrances to inform people that they must not enter if they are not healthy. 

Besides locals, volunteers were keeping foreigners informed as well.

“There were about 25-30 foreigners who were enjoying the event. They were not forbidden entry into the festival. But the organisers made announcements about the dos and dont’s to avoid the virus infection,” another regular attendee Parwinder Singh said.


