Home bakers, small outlets whip up Easter treats in lockdown
2020-04-11
BENGALURU: In times of lockdown, small bakeries and home bakers are coming to the rescue of people looking to buy Easter treats. This despite shortage of ingredients and manpower.


“The reason we decided to make Easter treats is because it gives us an opportunity to spread happiness among people through fresh food during these sombre times,” says Tazeen Kapadia of Lagom Patisserie. Tazeen and her husband Saad, who run the one-and-a-half-year-old store, are dishing out Easter specials of dark chocolate babka and hot cross buns this weekend, even though the prices of supplies have doubled. We made hot cross buns last year and they were a super hit,” says Saad. 

The lockdown may have families sitting at home but that hasn’t stopped them from ordering Easter eggs, says Shishum Hinduja, co-founder of Happy Belly Bakes cafe and patisserie. “We generally have a special menu for Easter but this year, due to skeletal staff and fewer ingredients, we have decided to make only Easter eggs,” says Shisham, adding: “We have had people calling us from abroad asking us to deliver the eggs to their families in the city. Parents planning treasure hunts for kids have placed orders.” 

Home baker Seema Punjabi’s Easter menu looks good. “I plan to make traditional carrot cake, coconut Easter-theme cake, chocolate Easter eggs and nest cupcakes,” says Fraser Town resident Seema, for whom living in a largely Catholic neighbourhood was a good reason to work for the occasion. 

“Besides a few five star hotels, it is home bakers and a few other small outlets which are doing interesting things for Easter. I, for instance, ordered hot cross buns from The Sour Baker, a home baker just a lane away,” says Aslam Gafoor. The Soul Company, a city-based experiential platform, has roped in a few popular chefs and homegrown brands to put together a special fundraiser Easter menu, adds Gafoor. 

Delivery services to the rescue

Besides being available on platforms like Swiggy, Dunzo and Zomato, most small bakeries are also taking orders through their Instagram pages. “We are trying to reach as many customers as we can across the city through delivery services,” says Shisham. “I have sent bakery orders to places like Vidyaranyapura and RMV Extension using Swiggy and Dunzo and will use them to deliver Easter specials,” says Seema, who receives orders mainly on her Instagram handle @thesugarfairy23.

————-

Box: Low-key celebration

With churches shut, Easter is likely to be a low-key affair for the Christian community in the city. Normally, churches see large crowds during the Passion Week between April 5-11, especially for Palm Sunday, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Easter Sunday. In fact, the community observed Maundy Thursday and Good Friday by watching the service online.

“We are traversing difficult times unprecedented in the annals of human history. Good Friday and Easter are extraordinary moments; they bear special significance in reassuring us that these difficult times too will pass,” said Peter Machado, archbishop of Bengaluru. 

“Every year, we witness maximum attendance during our Good Friday and Easter services. During this lockdown period, we have been engaging with people through our website and social media handles,” said Rev Johnson V, pastor-in-charge, Bethel AG church.

JA Kantharaj, a Koramangala resident, said: “Most Christian families are not celebrating Easter in a big way due to the Covid-19 crisis. This is the first time in recent years that we are unable to attend the holy mass. My family will stay indoors and pray to God to help us overcome this crisis.”

Meanwhile, many bakeries have witnessed a sharp dip in the sale of Easter eggs and hot cross buns due to the lockdown. Owners say they are facing a manpower crunch due to transport issues and fear of Covid-19. 


