Home-quarantine for 32 who came in contact with confirmed patient
2020-03-17
Aurangabad: A 62-year-old person, who was in the isolation ward of the District Civil Hospital, tested negative for coronavirus. Another 36-year-old woman with symptoms was admitted to the isolation ward and her swab sample was sent to NIV in Pune on Monday. There have been no fresh confirmed coronavirus cases in the region yet.

Even the 59-year-old patient, who had tested positive for coronavirus on Sunday, has had no history of fever in the past 24 hours, the medical administrator of the private hospital where she is undergoing treatment said. The patient is stable and does not currently need ventilator support, the doctor added.

Soon after the patient’s test report was released, she was put on antiretroviral therapy. According to the doctor, the therapy seems to be working and the only discomfort the patient has reported is drug-infused gastritis, which is common in such cases.

The patient, who had travelled to Russia and Kazakhstan, had returned to Delhi on March 3. She had then travelled to Aurangabad via Mumbai. Subsequently, the woman had delivered a lecture at a city-based college. According to Nita Padalkar, the municipal officer of health in the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation, all her students have been screened and none of them has shown any symptoms. They have all been home-quarantined.

“We have also examined and conducted the primary enquiry of 32 persons, including the confirmed patient’s family members and those she came in contact with over the past few days. No one is having any symptoms, but they are quarantined,” Padalkar said.

Meanwhile, the municipal corporation has deployed nine teams to conduct a door-to-door survey in the area where the patient resides. The teams have screened 840 houses and five individuals complaining of fever, cough and cold were found to be seeking treatment, the AMC said.

Doctors at the private hospital, where she is in isolation, said: “Her third day of ART will be completed on Tuesday. We have to take the second swab on Wednesday for Covid-19 test.”

According to district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni, of the four samples from the dustrict that were sent to NIV, three had tested negative and one was positive.


