Homeopathy, ayurveda docs want a chance to treat Covid-19
2020-05-11
RANCHI: With allopathy is using trial and error method in some cases to treat Covid-19, doctors of alternative medicines feel they should be given a chance to prove the efficacy of their treatment.

Though the homeopathy association in the state has decided to distribute two lakh doses of Arsenic-30, believed to be an immunity booster, the state government is yet to decide on allowing this field of medicine and a research on homeopathy for treatment of Covid-19.

A homeopathy practitioner on Kanke Road, Dr P K Choudhury, said, “Homeopathy has a variety of medicines for patients. Practitioners of homeopathy analyse a patient’s disorders in detail before giving medicines which proves to be more effective.” He added, “We should be given a chance on an experimental basis to treat Covid-19 cases as homeopathy has a very unique way of treating patients on a case-to-case basis.”

Meanwhile, ayurvedic doctors are also eyeing an opportunity to treat patients affected by the virus. The ministry of Ayush has decided to research on coronavirus and the effectiveness of ashwagandha on patients along with the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and a few doctors of the branch of medicine are confident about positive results on Covid-19 patients.

Padmanabhan Pandey, an aryuvedic doctor at Daksha Ayurveda, said he had written a letter to the senior authorities regarding permission to treat Covid-19 patients, but was denied. He said, “Allopathy is also treating patients on a trial and error method, so why cannot we be given a chance? We have giloy, ashwagandha and other medicines which can yield positive results.”

He added, “Most of the people think ayurveda is all about herbs, but we also have different types of minerals which can be very good for patients and can assure recovery. We have mixtures of natural medicinal herbs and minerals like Jai Mangal Ras and Tribhuvan Kirti Ras.”

Ayurveda doctors also prescribed turmeric milk and application of mustard oil in the nasal and naval cavities to limit the possibility of infection.

Dr Hari Kumar of Kerala Ayurveda said, “Treatment of Covid-19 is under experiment, but we can go for citrus fruits and turmeric in milk to boost immunity. Body massages are also great way to boost immunity.”


