Home quarantine posters put up in Delhi to prevent spread
2020-03-25
NEW DELHI: To prevent the spread of novel coronavirus, Delhi government started putting up posters of ‘home quarantine’ outside the houses of those who recently came back from abroad or were in touch with suspected Covid-19 patients.


According to officials, more than 15,000 such posters had already been put up till Tuesday to make the family and neighbours aware that they were under quarantine. Officials said strict action would be taken against those violating the orders including registration of FIR under Section 188 of IPC for disobedience to order promulgated by a public servant.

The posters were in addition to the hand-stamping process at the airport, which was started on March 18, for those who were not showing any symptoms for Covid-19 but were advised home quarantine.

According to officials, there were around 30,000 residents of Delhi who arrived at the Indira Gandhi International Airport since March 1 and had been put under quarantine. This included 18,573 passengers of category C, screened at the airport between March 18 and 22. Officials said these passengers were asymptomatic (with symptoms) when they reached Delhi and put in category C as ‘low risk’ by doctors screening them and suggested home quarantine for 14 days. Another 1,173 passengers of category B, high risk, (above 55 years of age and with medical history or co-morbidities) were under quarantine at government facilities.

After a number of complaints poured in that some home quarantined people were not following the orders, the government decided to put up such posters outside their homes, which was done by ASHA workers. Officials said the purpose of the posters was to create a sense of awareness and urgency in mind of the quarantined person, their family and the neighbours that that they have to stay indoors. “This was done in overall public interest,” New Delhi district magistrate Tanvi Garg said.

“The posters put up outside the homes have the date till when the person was supposed to be under quarantine and also had numbers of the district helpline,” said an official.

