Coronavirus: Homes turn into offices as companies scramble to keep work flowing
2020-03-20
BHUBANESWAR: Following the state government’s recommendation to citizens to remain in home isolation and practise social distancing to keep the novel coronavirus at bay, many corporate houses and private companies have asked their employees to start working from home.


To enforce this, some companies have started entire moving computer systems to the houses of employees. Others are arranging for laptops for their workers. Companies that have not yet implemented work from home are trying to ensure that employees sit at some distance from each other and have access to hand sanitisers, water and soap and a clean office environment.

“The data stored in our systems/desktops can’t be moved to workers’ laptops. There is a risk to the security of our clients. So the company has started moving the desktops of the employees to their homes. This is taking some time but should be complete in a day or two,” said an employee of a multinational IT firm with an office here.

Employees who have been asked to work from home said there were both advantages and disadvantages to it, but added that they were ready to do it to follow guidelines. “There is no problem in working from home. I think internet service providers — both cable or mobile — should consider upgrading net speed for free during this phase. Similarly, DTH satellite TV providers should consider providing all channels for free,” said Piyush Ranjan Rout, an urban planner with Local Governance Network, who is now working from home.

Online departmental store, Grozip, has also asked all its staff, except delivery boys, to work from home. “Everyone is happy to do so and their productivity has also gone up,” said Anand Mishra, founder of the startup.

Dairy manufacturer, Milk Mantra, said it had taken several initiatives to keep their employees safe from coronavirus. Around 40 per cent of its employees in the corporate office are working from home. “We are using Zoom to ensure that the work flow is smooth. We have shared a schedule to help people manage their personal and work life while working from home,” said Rashima Misra, co-founder and executive director (organisation development and brand communication).

In its office, Milk Mantra is wiping all doors, work desks and laptops with sanitisers thrice a day. “At both our plants in Gop and Sambalpur, we have put up awareness posters in English and Odia. Our plants have sanitisers,” said Misra.


