Coronavirus in West Bengal: Home from ship, crew member looks at third two-week isolation
2020-03-15
KOLKATA: Though Swarup Chapadar is back home in Diamond Harbour, his quarantine status is far from over. The 28-year-old was among the five crew members on board the British-flagged cruise liner Diamond Princess, which had to be emergency off-shored in Yokohama. Although Chapadar tested negative for Covid-19, he was first quarantined inside the ship from January 26 to February 11 and then, after arriving in India, in a Gurgaon Army camp from February 28 to March 13. His third quarantine period began after he reached home at 9pm on Friday. He will be able to step out after 14 days on March 27.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The journey from Japan to Kolkata was exhausting, he said. “It was so scary. I am happy to be back home at last. But my neighbours are not even looking at me,” said Chapadar, who is currently on a two-month leave.

His ship, with 3,711 people on board, including 138 Indians, had reached Yokohama on February 3. Among the 132 Indian crew members, 14 tested positive for Covid-19. 

“I am especially concerned about my three-year-old niece who lives with us and my elderly parents. For their sake, I don’t mind being quarantined all over again,” said Chapadar, who is using a mask, avoiding contact with others and generally living within the four walls of his room. Fortunately, his wife Aparna is in Bengaluru and will not arrive in Kolkata till April. 

Chapadar joined Diamond Princess on November 18, 2019. “It was my second job and I left home on a day’s notice because it was such a good opportunity. When our captain announced that we would have to anchor a day ahead, he asked us to stay put in the ship. Some of us were quarantined, which actually meant ‘kept under observation’. Others were in isolation since they showed preliminary symptoms,” he recalled.

His colleagues from other states told him that government officials were in touch with them and were enquiring about their health. “No one from our government has come to see me,” Chapadar said. Ulga Nathan, district magistrate, South 24 Parganas, told TOI, “We shall follow protocol and do the needful.”

