Home quarantine list made public by authorities in Nagpur
2020-03-21
NAGPUR: Social media groups in Nagpur were abuzz on Friday evening as a list of home quarantined persons in the city went viral and people expressing shock at the breach of privacy.


The list had names of over 300 people in Nagpur city who have been advised home quarantine/isolation. Apart from the person’s name, the list has details like their residential address, mobile number, start date of quarantine and name of police station under whose jurisdiction the person’s residence comes.

Though the list is now spinning around on social media and gaining a life of its own, TOI has learnt that it was made public by the authorities themselves. Speaking to TOI, divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar said that the list was made public by his office as part of an effort to seek help from community members in ensuring people conform to self-isolation guidelines. 

“The names and address are available on the portal. We just want people to keep an eye in the neighbourhood and inform us if they see these people socializing,” said Kumar.

He added that names of those who have tested positive must not be made public, and that it does not apply to those in home quarantine.

With the list going viral, city police were almost on the verge of registering a complaint and getting ready to take action against those sharing it. Sources say they stopped after learning that it was the authorities themselves who had shared the list.

A glance through the list throws up prominent names from the city who most probably returned from abroad and have been advised home quarantine as a precaution. Right from senior doctors, educationists, businessmen to professionals — about 10 names there could easily figure in the city’s Who’s Who list.

Businessman Tejinder Singh Renu said, “It preposterous that people are sharing such sensitive information on social media. This will lead to social boycott of such people and their families.” 


