‘Homeopathy can treat Covid-19 but no common medicine for all’
2020-03-22
Veteran homeopath Dr Vilas Dangre believes that homeopathy has a combination of medicines with which one can treat a Covid-19 patient and can even get the patient cured, if given a chance. But this combination differs from person to person. Mass distribution of one homeopathic medicine as a cure or prevention of coronavirus is unscientific and against the principle of individuality on which the homeopathy is based on, he claims. 

In an interview with TOI, Dangre spoke at length about the burning issue which has hit the world in a scary way.

Excerpts... 

Q. Is there any medicine in homeopathy to cure Covid-19?

A. My one word answer is yes. That’s because homeopathy can treat Covid-19 symptomatically with a combination of medicines. But if you ask me exactly what that combination is then it would be difficult for any homeopath to tell you. This is because homeopathy is based on a principle of individuality. Every individual is a different case for us. We can’t generalize. Two individuals showing a similar set of symptoms may be prescribed different sets of medicines in homeopathy based on various parameters. So, my final answer is yes. Homeopathy has a medicine for Covid-19, but there is nothing like one common medicine which is applicable to all.

Q. Some groups are distributing homeopathic medicines, drops at public places claiming it be preventive vaccines. How reliable are these medicines?

A. This virus is new and all systems of medicine are still in the research phase. Presently, no system has discovered a medicine or vaccine to tackle Covid-19. Even doctors practising modern medicine are treating only the symptoms. No doctor of any system can claim to have a vaccine or a medicine for Covid-19. You can have immunity boosters to keep yourself fit and protected from viruses, but it couldn’t be called as Covid-19 vaccine. I also came across some practitioners who claimed in the media that homeopathy has a medicine that can cure Covid-19. I think some of them were over enthusiastic and many wanted instant popularity by issuing such fancy statements in the media. How can they claim their medicine can cure or prevent this disease when there is no evidence to support such a claim? Some practitioners are even distributing proven homeopathic immunity-boosters among masses. Their intentions are good. They could be thinking that their gesture will keep people away from unnecessary panic. But I think that even this exercise should be avoided.

Q. Given the scenario, is a little bit of panic good?

A. It is because I believe that a little bit of panic for a disease like Covid-19 is a must. We just can’t take it lightly. People may stop observing social distancing and taking other protective measures after getting the so called vaccines. This may put them at risk. Such immunity boosters can keep you fit, but may not protect you from coronavirus entirely. This virus spreads rapidly. It can affect a large population within a short span of time. We have examples of Iran and Italy where thousands have died just because people failed to follow the necessary preventive practices. At the same time, I also suggest avoiding unnecessary panic. Many people are so scared that they have stopped meeting their neighbours. The example of a positive patient’s family in Nagpur is still fresh. Their own neighbours have boycotted them socially. We should avoid this type of misconduct. Be alert, be vigilant, but don’t be terrified of coronavirus. We have no option but to fight it together. The entire world is fighting it.

Q. What is the best remedy to ensure safety? 

A. At present, the only way to protect ourselves is to maintain social distancing practices, hand-hygiene, avoiding visits to public places, parties and marriage functions. We are observing a janata curfew today and I think we need to observe more such curfews in the future. This is the only way we can stop the spread of coronavirus. For those who believe in homeopathy, my only suggestion to them is to not follow a common medicine. It’s against the basic principle of this system. Rather, you can visit your doctor, share all symptoms and get medicines as per your individual condition. This is the most proper way of getting homeopathic treatment.

Q. Some theories are claiming that the harsh summer of Vidarbha will end coronavirus. Your thoughts?

A. It’s unscientific to say so. In fact, such misconceptions will only complicate the situation. All of us must spontaneously practice social distancing. As far as my knowledge is concerned, the outbreak of coronavirus is not going to stop in a month or two. It’s not even a question of summer or winter or rainy season. It’s at least a year-long fight and we must be prepared for it.


