Home-baked cakes, special cards: Innovative Mother’s Day celebrations during lockdown
2020-05-11
LUCKNOW: From baking a special cake, playing secret games with her, binge watching her favourite movies to making special cards with minimum resource, doing household chores and giving her a treat of her favourite meal, children ensured celebration of Mother’s Day, despite the lockdown.

Aashiana resident Vaasavi Shashan and her sister, Sayonna, took over kitchen duty from their mother and prepared her a special lunch and cake. 

“As a kid, I would make handmade cards for her every year, but was unable to do it for few years due to my hectic schedule. I'm glad the lockdown made us relive sweet, old memories,” she said.

To cheer up her mother, Simran Taneja, a make-up artist, created a special video for her. “Many things might have changed during the lockdown, but not mother’s love. We have few photos of us together so I decided to click more today. Never mind we couldn’t go out, we celebrated at home,” said Taneja.

Making the most of the lockdown, entrepreneur and fashion blogger Nishi Athwani played an innovative game with her mother, where she had to pick up a chit with questions on her mother, answer them and see whether it matches with her mother’s answer. “I thought let’s find out how much I know my mother. What’s her favourite sweet dish and colour or what she does when she’s sad? I got two answers wrong, for which she was supposed to punish me, but she actually hugged me,” said Nishi, who also shared the video on her Instagram page.

For those living away from family, video calls and sharing pictures on social media was the only way out. Lucknow resident Ratan Saini, 31, who’s stranded in Mumbai due to the lockdown, took her mother on a video call and wished her. 

“Now, I know how she feels living away from kids. Video calls were the only option to wish her,” said Saini. Stuck in a Delhi hotspot, another Lucknow resident, Tarun Kochar, video-called his family and saluted her mother for her dedication.

Pawani, daughter of Additional SP (Uttar Pradesh Police) Rashmi Sinha, wrote a letter, while many shared pictures on social media handles with a Mother’s Day caption. 

