Covid-19: Home quarantine violators warned of action in Chennai
2020-06-05
CHENNAI: As the city records 1,000 cases everyday, the city corporation has decided to tighten the screws as far as Covid-19 containment strategy is concerned.

 Patients as well as their contacts on home quarantine who violate the discipline and are found roaming outside their homes will be identified and taken to government Covid care centres or institutional quarantine centres. Greater Chennai Corporation commissioner G Prakash and special Covid officer for the corporation J Radhakrishnan announced this at a press meet on Thursday. 

Such violations have been found, he added. “We will observe the people in home quarantine with the help of the local police as they know of the happenings in the area better. Such people will be tracked and we shall slap cases against quarantine violators,” Prakash said. 

Prakash said 85% of people were following the rule but 10%-15% weren’t. He added that there were enough beds available in Covid care centres and that such violators would be comfortable there.

“On one street, we found people breaking the containment barricades and walking without masks. They apologised for doing so on seeing us. Such people will be dragged to government centres and booked,” Radhakrishnan said, adding that some of the people were unable to comprehend the gravity of the situation.

There was a direct co-relation between people wearing masks and case load decreasing, he said citing data. The senior IAS official said everyone should wear masks for one month compulsorily and that people should start questioning those who aren’t.

He reiterated how in streets where masks were being worn, there had been a substantial drop in the number of cases. “In Bojarajan Nagar in Royapuram, Thideer Nagar slum, on VR Pillai Street, cases have dropped to 0. It is only because containment practices were followed strictly and people wore masks,” he said.

Prakash praised the TN Slum Clearance Board settlement in Kannagi Nagar. “We found 95% of people wearing masks when we went on a surprise visit. The place has 1 lakh people and a high population density. The situation could have gone out of control if not for their discipline,” he said.

GCC has started running 100 fever camps apart from those in their primary health centres, Radhakrishnan said. Testing in Chennai was of the order of around 5,500-5,700 a day. “Grocery shop owners, push cart vendors and tea stall owners in and around containment areas were also being tested,” he said.

Prakash said volunteers from 98 NGOs were going door-to-door in slums and ensuring that people with co-morbidities like diabetes and hypertension were taking tablets on time.


