Home budgets reworked to factor in Covid
2020-05-27
Bhopal: Families have another task during the season of lockdowns — adjusting their household budget to factor in the new ‘necessities, and with declining income across the board, including additional expenses has become a challenge.

Masks, sanitisers, gloves and immunity boosters were never so integral to people’s lives as they are now. Not part of household budgets either, now they seem to be essential for survival itself, thereby pushing people to rework their budgetary arithmetic in a manner that their priorities are redefined at least till the coronavirus pandemic persists.

Somesh Tiwari, who works with an IT company, says, “As of now, we are not feeling the pinch that much. But, when you go to purchase an ordinary mask (use & throw masks as you call it) and have to shell out Rs20 to 25 for it, you do feel the pinch. Once the lockdown is over, my wife and two children, who have hardly stepped out of our home during the lockdown, would also go to school, markets and other places. They will all need masks and sanitisers. Use of soaps and detergents will go up manifold as everyone, who goes out, takes a bath on return and the clothes are washed. Even cars will need sanitisation. The coronavirus effect on our lives will definitely raise the cost of living by Rs2,000 to Rs3,000. Salaries, on the other hand, are either declining or are static.”

When asked how the family proposes to.make up for the extra money required to meet the new expenses, he says, “We discuss the issue often and the solution appears to be to use less petrol and cut down on expenditures like eating out and outings on weekends.”

Pratiksha Sharma, wife of an under secretary at Mantralaya, says, “We are already spending more as everyone is at home all the time. We are eating more, having tea and coffee more. Now, he has started going to office, so mask and sanitiser is additionally required. More washing powder is required, more electricity would be used as washing machine is being run more. We have not calculated how much extra we would be required to spend, but certain things like use of car or visit to mall will have to be reduced to make up for the extra expenses.”

Vinod Shrivastava, a chemist, says that in addition to masks, sanitisers and gloves, people are spending a lot more on what is being sold in the name of “immunity boosters” — Chyavanprash, protein powders, multivitamin pills, aloe vera juice and things like that. “As far as where they will cut expenses to make up for their increased expenses on such stuff, I only presume that they won't eat or allow their children to eat junk food along with these things.”

It is not only the middle class or poor sections of the society, who have suffered financially due to the pandemic, but affluents sections, too, and they are also finding ways to reduce their existing expenses.

“I used to drink in a three-star hotel's bar. When liquor shops and bars got closed due to the lockdown, I purchased whisky in black, but it was not much of a difference to me as I was drinking at home and spending almost the same amount as I would have spent in the bar. Yet, it was pinching because there is no income for the past three months. So I have decided to continue boozing like this only after the liquor shops and bars open so that I spend less and could continue paying the staff of about 10 people that I have,” said a contractor, on the condition of anonymity.


