Home salons help citizens sport the quarantine look
2020-05-03
While one team of celebrity hairstylists is challenging desis to grow out their tresses through the lockdown, cricketer Kapil Dev has gone to the other extreme by opting to shave off his hair. India cricket captain Virat Kohli was lucky enough to get his partner actor Anushka Sharma to give him a trim, while actor-producer-director Subodh Bhave wielded a pair of scissors to give his sons a haircut. Tough times call for extreme measure indeed.Bushy eyebrows, overgrown hair, unkempt beards and more salt than pepper in the hair are the order of the day since salons and barber shops have been shut due to the lockdown.Like celebrities, common people aren’t far behind. After watching multiple videos on basic methods to cut men’s hair on YouTube, city-based product designer Kanchan Varma-Tapadia sat husband Anand down to give him a haircut. At first she experimented with medium length, then she opted to give Anand an almost shaved look the next time.According to Varma-Tapadia, she also indulged in some self-grooming over the last few days. “Cutting his hair was more of a need than a choice, but it was definitely fun. I’ve been doing self-grooming too. You also get so many kinds of Do-It-Yourself (DIY) kits in the market that are functional and easy-to-use. Apart from my husband’s haircut and self-grooming, I also gave our nephew a haircut a few days ago,” she stated.Several families across the city have taken to self-grooming in the absence of professional help. The prickling heat, grown-out hair and beard are causing several men to opt for getting their trims and shaves. Women too have decided to use natural ingredients to nourish their skin and hair during the lockdown. Several women stated that they have made home-made wax, have tried their hands at threading. Women are also indulging in face-cleaning and other treatments themselves.A 9-year-old resident of Bhandarkar Road, Param Jalan said, “My father has given me haircuts twice during the lockdown. My hair grows fast and it had started irritating me. My father saw some videos on YouTube and gave me a haircut. The first time he was giving me a haircut, I happened to move which led to an uneven cut but it was not very noticeable. The second cut was perfect. It was a fun time with my father.”A joint family from the city has taken to grooming and haircuts between themselves. “My hair was growing and I needed a haircut desperately due to the severe summer heat. My cousin, who loves styling, took up the task of getting me a haircut. I gave him a free hand to style my hair and was his ruse for his maiden approach with the trimmer and scissors. He did a good job getting me a nice short haircut, making me feel much lighter over all,” stated Gaurav Shah.Shah’s haircut gave other family members confidence to get styled as well. Having observed his hairdresser use a trimmer to shave his hair, Wanowrie resident Yuvraj Chaudhary said, “I wanted to chop off my hair for a while and since it is summer, long hair was getting untidy. I have a trimmer at home and I used it to shave my hair off.”