Coronavirus in Gujarat: Home quarantine violators turn headache for Vadodara
2020-03-23
VADODARA: The violation of home quarantine order seems to have become a major concern for the health officials as well as the administration battling the coronavirus pandemic. Sources pointed out that the extreme measures like moving police complaints against violators as well as roping in the police to check them had to be taken in wake of the situation.

According to officials in both the Vadodara city and Vadodara rural health systems, it had come to light in multiple cases that those who were home quarantined were not following instructions. When officials pointed this out to persons advised isolation at home, it often came to light that they were taking things casually as they were not taking ill.

“They do not seem to understand that a person can remain asymptomatic for one to two weeks and still transmit the disease. Health teams even explain this to them, but they do not seem to care,” said an official.

Sources said that the VMC had to start issuing notices to home quarantined people to make it binding on them to stay home else they would face penal action. This was also made public, but even then some did not care and offences had to be registered.

Now the city police too will be joining the local administrators for strict implementation of self-quarantine for those persons who have returned from abroad recently. 

Teams of healthy policemen have been formed at local police station-levels under the supervision of deputy commissioner of police (administration) Saroj Kumari.

“Our police staff will be part of teams of doctors and district administration officials which will go to every household where persons have returned from foreign countries,” said police commissioner Anupam Singh Gahlaut. 

He added that this will help in ensuring that the guidelines on self-quarantine are strictly followed.

A decision in this regard was taken at a meeting attended by Gahlaut, district collector Shalini Agrawal and municipal commissioner Nalin Upadhyay.

