Home quarantine in Pune for Amar Photo Studio troupe after US tour is cut short
2020-03-21
PUNE: After several flight delays, being stranded in San Jose and overcoming other trauma, the actors of Amar Photo Studio, a popular Marathi play, who had to cut short their tour of the US is back home. 


They could perform just three of the 15 shows lined up over 35-40 days. The entire team has been coming in batches. Actor Amey Wagh was part of the second batch that arrived on Thursday. The first batch landed on Wednesday and the third was in transit.

Wagh said it has been traumatic since the decision to cancel the shows was made. “We have never in our careers cancelled shows for any reason. I have stood on the stage despite being operated on my legs, members have performed despite deaths in the family, unwell artists have performed scenes with a nurse monitoring them in the wing. We believe the show must go on. So the decision to come back half way was painful, but it was a social responsibility,” he said.

The troupe has had to bear economic losses too. He was stranded in San Jose and had to put up at his relatives till the travel plans to Pune were sorted out. The stores had run out of bread, milk and eggs, he added.

“I was to fly back but the airline had to reschedule my ticket when suddenly there was an announcement by the carrier that all flights were cancelled. There was no chance of rescheduling. Our calls never got through and there were no responses to e-mails. We had to drive to the airport and there was nobody to address our queries. After a two-and-a-half-hour wait, an airline official helped us. We had several cancellations in this period and there was a time when we sat in the plane for take off and 15 minutes later that flight was cancelled,” he said.

He finally got a flight three days ago and landed in Mumbai safely and was out within one hour after the mandatory health check. He was not allowed to come back to Pune as a precautionary measure.

Fellow actor Parna Pethe, among the first to arrive in Pune, travelled for almost 40 hours. She said international airports were vacant. 

“At Mumbai airport, there was a separate queue for those with symptoms. In these times of crisis, there is a feeling of unity among all people,” she said.

She has quarantined herself after reaching Pune. “I have isolated myself. My partner, Alok, is in self-isolation at his parents’ house. We will not be meeting for 15 days as a precaution. I am not moving out of my house and I have told my house help to take leave,” she added.

She plans to watch films and web series, cook and clean the house which makes her self-dependent. Parna stays in the same society on Sinhagad Road where the first Covid-19 couple from Pune live. She said the members and office bearers have been cooperative. 

“They have supported me and I am staying here despite coming from abroad. I have heard so many stories of people being ill-treated and facing stigma from society members out of panic. I have felt welcomed here,” she added. 


