Home quarantine list that went viral upsets many
2020-03-22
Nagpur: On Friday, a list with names of quarantined people in Nagpur went viral on social media leading to debates in various groups about the utility of such information being made public. Later, the authorities clarified that the list had been put up on their portal with a view of seeking community’s help to keep tabs on those who are under home quarantine.

Though there were talks about registering an offence against those forwarding it on social media, no official action had been taken till the time of going to press. There were almost 400 names there with some of them being prominent citizens of the city, or their immediate family members.

A senior doctor couple, whose name figured in the list, felt that this amounted to breach of privacy. “I appreciate the intention of the authorities and they are doing a fantastic job, but the list should not have been made public. It caused a lot of embarrassment to our family. Many friends and families started calling up and it took some time to take control of the situation,” said the doctor.

Later in some groups, message from family members of a person named in the list started circulating. The message expressed thanks “for the concern shown” and assured that the person is not simply in home quarantine and not a patient.

In another WhatsApp group, friend of one such person named in the list said that it was very upsetting for the family. Speaking to TOI, he said “The person is my classmate and he is being contacted on phone and WhatsApp by well wishers. In our school group, thankfully nobody is discussing it, though they do the same in private chat. But I feel this invades their privacy and people will stay away from them.”

The list also included directors of Centre Point group of schools, Arun and Aruna Upadhyaya, who insisted that TOI mention their names in the article. “We had returned from London as based on travel history, we were advised home quarantine. I am actually happy that the list was made public because this leads to an automatic social distancing with friends and family,” said Upadhyaya.

“This way, people know that they should not come to meet us for a few days more. And authorities have been fantastic with one Dr Khan from NMC calling me everyday to check on health status and even cops coming to inquire regularly. So, I feel that authorities are doing the best to make home quarantine work and the list going public has not upset us at all,” Upadhyaya added.

There was commotion at a nationalized bank’s branch on Saturday morning after a staffer claimed that a customer had breached home quarantine guidelines. The rest of the customers panicked and the branch was soon evacuated.

The man claimed that it was his uncle who had been put in home quarantine, and he was merely depositing a cheque on his behalf. Police said that they were investigating the statements of the person.


