Follow social distancing while harvesting: Khaps
2020-04-28
MEERUT: Often in the news for their brush with the law over contentious diktats, khaps of western UP have issued a different set of instructions to followers this time, especially farmers, asking them to honour physical distancing while harvesting crops, and not to venture out of homes unless necessary. This time, the khaps’ diktat was hailed by the administration.


“These are unprecedented times and we all have to follow one line of action, and that is to stay at homes. Everything else can wait,” said Surender Singh, head of Desh Khap in western UP.

Heads of some of the prominent khaps have appealed to their followers to “strictly follow rules during lockdown” and maintain social distance at the time of pandemic. The appeal has come when the wheat harvesting is going on in large swathes of north.

From time to time, most khaps have come into limelight for controversial diktats like banning of love marriages or same gotra marriages. Some also prohibited women from wearing jeans or keeping mobile phones.

In 2018, the head of Balyan Khap, Naresh Tikait, while opposing a Supreme Court verdict, had even threatened, “We will not allow the girls to be born or let them study if these kinds of orders are passed by the court. What will they do then? ” This came after the apex court observed that “khap panchayats’ opposition to the marriage of two consenting adults is illegal and violation of human rights.”

However, coronavirus pandemic has prompted khap leaders to join hands with the government.

Suhash Chand, the head of Desh khap of Brahmin Samaj said, “Majority of villagers belong to farming sector and it is very important that in the times of wheat and cane harvest, a social distancing of at least one meter is observed by the farmers. We have been appealing to our villagers and pradhans via social media to strictly follow the rule.”

Chaudhary Ram Singh of Sain Khap said, “We (khaps) all are unanimous in following the instructions by the health department and are trying to implement it.” 


