Andhra Pradesh: Hooch brewers brave lockdown for profit
2020-04-28
VIJAYAWADA: Unavailability of liquor and beer due to the lockdown has come as a boon to hooch trade in Andhra Pradesh. Despite raids, seizures and arrests, hooch traders are brazenly continuing their trade given the sustained demand for it.


Earlier, assembly speaker Tammineni Sitaram had said brewing of illicit liquor (hooch) has been increasing indiscriminately and hooch traders are turning millionaires. He expressed his anger at the excise department for its failure to curb it.

The prohibition and excise department had initiated a driver since March 23 to check hooch brewers. The department has so far registered 4,266 cases, seized over 36,000 litres of hooch, destroyed over 8 lakh litres of jaggery wash, seized over 30,000 kgs of black jaggery and arrested over 4,000 persons.

The uptick in hooch brewing can be attributed to two reasons. First, with the lockdown forcing a larger number of people to stay home without any income, brewing hooch seems to be an easy to way to earn money. Second is the rising demand. With bars and alcohol shops closed, many alcoholics have turned to drinking hooch. It is hence of little surprise that the drink, hitherto considered undesirable, is selling for 500 to 1,500 a bottle.

“Acting on credible information, our officer have raided several places, seized large quantities of hooch, almost double of what we usually find, and destroyed ingredients during the lockdown,” said Vineet Brij Lal, director of enforcement, prohibition and excise. “Raids will continue lockdown or no lockdown,” he added.

A senior officer with the department said there are several people with previous experience of brewing the alcohol in different flavours such as mango, orange, cashew, blueberry and other fruit flavours. They seem to have increased production to meet the demand and make easy money. Besides, since a majority of the people prepare hooch near farm fields or inside their houses, no one gets a wind of it, he added. Raids show brewing of hooch is more active in the border areas.

Speaking to TOI, T Anil Kumar (name changed), a hooch buyer, said that he purchased a bottle of cashew flavour hooch at 1,000 during the lockdown. The brewers claimed that they have increased the price owning to the risk involved in the trade.

Expressing his concern over the flow of the hooch from Odisha to parts of Vizianagaram district, deputy excise commissioner, Vizianagaram, YV Bhaskar said, “Our teams have been collecting information to bust hooch trade. Tipplers have to be careful as the hooch is being laced with sedatives and dangerous chemicals,” he said.


