Hopes soar over no Covid-19 cases in central Tamil Nadu
2020-04-25
TRICHY: A fortnight after recording zero positive cases, the central districts once again recorded no Covid-19 cases here on Friday even as the recovery of some patients presented new hope to the people. 


None of the eight districts – Trichy, Karur, Pudukottai, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and Nagappattinam — in the region figured in the list of positive cases posted by the state health and family welfare in the evening. Prior to this, the region witnessed no cases on April 10. 

In the past four days from Monday to Thursday, the central region saw a total of 24 cases but the curve bent on Thursday with only two cases reported in Thanjavur and Tiruvarur. Though many expect the scenario to continue, it would depend on the result of the pending tests in the districts as the health teams have been lifting samples from symptomatic patients in the containment zones every day. 

Karur led the way in discharging more number of cured Covid-19 patients with 143 discharged from the government medical college hospital. In Friday’s discharge list, the hospital had 21 patients from Karur and one from Dindigul. They included three girls aged two, three and six. A young mother who delivered a baby boy a month ago and tested positive recently also got discharged. The the baby has tested negative. 

A 60-year-old male patient from Kumbakonam also returned home from government medical college hospital in Thanjavur. “Caring is the best medicine for the cure. I received good care in the hospital,” he told reporters. He was one among the eight patients discharged from the hospital. 

A total of 24 patients including 16 from Trichy, three each from Perambalur and Ariyalur and one patient from Pudukottai were undergoing treatment at Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) in Trichy. The district administration is awaiting results for some more symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. 

There has not been any positive case in Pudukottai district over the last four days after the first case emerged from Mirattunilai panchayat on Monday. While he has been under treatment in MGMGH, tests of a total 59 samples from across Pudukottai were negative on Friday. 

In Ariyalur district, a total of 617 samples were taken from suspected Covid-19 patients for laboratory tests of which six tested positive and 509 tested negative. Cases in Perambalur, Tiruvarur and Nagappattinam also remained unchanged on Friday keeping the total cases in the region at 232. 

