Horses starve in Hyderabad as lockdown slashes caretaker revenues
2020-04-27
HYDERABAD: Over 250 horses and ponies could starve with coronavirus pandemic slashing revenues for caretakers of these animals in the city. These horses, mainly used for marriage processions, joy rides and film shootings, are emaciated to a point where their ribs are visible beneath their patchy skin.

The nurture of these horses — mainly found on roadsides and a few stables at places such as Chaderghat, Chudi Bazaar, Hassannagar, Necklace Road, Puranapul, Dhoolpet and Panjesha — depends on the daily wages earned by their caretakers. They only get fed when there is money to buy feed. “I have three horses and I am not able to feed them because of the lockdown. We usually buy the feed them with the money that we earn from marriage processions and film shootings but since the past one month, everything has been cancelled. I know they are starving but I am helpless,” said Abdhul Mohsin, a caretaker from Chaderghat. 

Mohsin’s concerns are echoed by Haroon Ahmed from Begum Bazaar who says: “Before the lockdown, I used to spend nearly Rs 400 on feed for each horse per day. If there is no support forthcoming to keep them safe, these horses, some of whom are ponies, will starve to death.” 

Meanwhile, a few animal lovers in the city along with Dr Veerendra Kaja of the Hyderabad Race Club (HRC) have collected some funds and also started a fundraising campaign to save the starving horses. Dr Kaja told TOI that they have identified nearly 30 horses at Chaderghat and Begum Bazaar whose owners were not in a position to feed them. 

“We purchased chickpea, husk, wheat bran that is regularly offered to these horses and handed it over to the owners. While I collected some funds from my friends to help a few horses, there are several more that are suffering in the city,” said Dr Kaja. The fundraising campaign — Please Help Feed Hyderabad’s Starving Horses — was started by Rebecca Gupta on ketto.org to help horses that are in need of food and medical care.


