Kolkata: Hospitals with Covid labs go in for upgrade to test patients in OPD
2020-05-28
KOLKATA: Hospitals with Covid-19 testing facilities across the city are set to start screening swab samples collected from OPD patients. After the Bengal government’s circular, issued on Tuesday, allowed hospitals to test Covid-19 samples from OPD patients, the hospitals with Covid testing labs are upgrading their infrastructure in anticipation of more patients to undergo the test. 


“This is a positive move by the government. This will widen the scope for tracing more infected people, lead to timely intervention and help in the Covid containment strategy,” said Dr Alok Roy, chairman, Medical Group of Hospitals.

So far the norm was that all patients would have to be admitted in the hospitals with Covid testing facilities, even if the patient is asymptomatic. Doctors said that in some cases, the corona test reports of the patients, who need to undergo a simple surgery, take as many as three days to come. 

“This new testing strategy has come at the right time when there is the need to test more asymptomatic patients. This will ease the mental stress that a patient has to face for hospitalisation and bearing its cost,” said Rupak Barua, group CEO, AMRI Group of Hospitals. Currently, seven hospitals in the city have Covid testing labs. Of these hospitals, three, including Medica Superspecialty Hospital, have RT-PCR testing.

A patient has to come from the OPD of the hospital, if asymptomatic, or from the fever clinic, if symptomatic. The new testing strategy, however, will not be applicable to government hospitals.

“Currently, we are able to handle the samples of our admitted patients only. But we are revamping both our labs and we should be able to handle more samples by the first week of June,” said Barua. AMRI group of hospitals has Covid labs at Dhakuria and AMRI.

Hospitals like Peerless have decided to make patients sign a form saying that they will follow strict home isolation norms till the result arrives.

