Noida hospitals to screen all for Covid-19?
2020-04-19
NOIDA: With experience from the Jaypee Hospital case where a 62-year-old woman from Muzaffarnagar tested positive for Covid-19 after her surgery last week, all hospitals in the district may soon be asked to triage, screen all patients of emergency and trauma cases and set up an isolation ward for suspected coronavirus patients who come in for other treatments.

The instructions have already been issued by the district administration to the three Covid hospitals in the city that are also catering to general patients. GIMS, Child PGI and Sharda hospital have been asked to set up quarantine wards with 30 to 50 beds where patients who come in with other complaints but also have ILI symptoms can be treated till their Covid test reports are available, officials said.

“We have issued orders to these Covid hospitals for screening of non-coronavirus patients and the protocol that needs to be followed. We are also deciding on instructions for the other hospitals,” district magistrate Suhas LY told TOI.

The woman from Muzaffarnagar had come to Jaypee Hospital in Sector 128 on April 7 for a surgery on April 7 for a surgery related to a pancreatic cyst. The surgery was performed the same day. During her routine before the surgery, Covid-19 testing was also done by the private lab. It reported her as a positive case the next day.

Meanwhile, the DM has also made it clear that for emergencies and life-threatening diseases, “hospitals cannot refuse treatment even if there is a suspected case”. “It is against medical ethics. Hospitals need to just take precautions, use PPE kits and other safety gear and keep the patient isolated. This has already been made clear to all hospitals.”

On Saturday, a patient requiring dialysis allegedly passed away after a private hospital in the city denied the procedure and asked her to be tested for Covid first. The hospital claimed that the health department had issued guidelines stating that such suspected patients will be tested for coronavirus before giving any treatment.

Health department officials, however, denied the claims and said that there were clear guidelines to treat all patients in emergencies, taking necessary precautions. There are also separate guidelines for hospitals regarding patients requiring regular dialysis, officials said.


