West Bengal: Hospital doors still shut for non-Covid patients
2020-05-01
KOLKATA: Critically ill patients continue to be turned away by some private and government hospitals despite the union health ministry and the state health department’s notifications this week seeking easy access to hospitals for non-Covid patients.


Intekhaf Chowdhury, a doctor, found most hospitals shutting their doors on him when he tried to admit a close relative suffering from cancer. “I was told by the hospitals that they were not admitting new cases. It is ridiculous, what will people do in an emergency? My relative has a condition, which cannot be managed at home, otherwise I would not have tried to get him admitted,” said Chowdhury and added that if a doctor like him was refused, others would be even worse off.

He said he had contacted two hospitals on EM Bypass but they refused admission. “One said that emergency cases were not admitted at that hour and the other said that they have no ICU beds. Finally, my relative had to be admitted in a hospital which has got Covid positive patients. So we are now looking for a different hospital,” Chowdhury said. He added that the patient’s protein level has reduced and he needs hospitalization.

Union health secretary Preeti Sudan, in her missive to the state governments on Tuesday stated that hospitals in the private sector are hesitating in providing critical services such as dialysis, blood transfusion, chemotherapy and institutional deliveries to regular patients fearing Covid-19 and were keeping hospitals closed.

Oncologist Saurav Datta said cancer patients are suffering due to the threat of Corona and hospitals must realize the urgency and arrange for their treatment. Indranil Khan, another oncologist said the cancer patients have a huge problem in reaching hospitals for chemotherapy or other illness. “I am trying my best to arrange beds for patients. Many hospitals have made screening mandatory before admitting cancer patients,” Khan said. He added “Cancer patients have low immunity and thus more vulnerable to Covid-19.

Several patients with diarrhoea and kidney problems have also been refused admission over the last two weeks. Behala resident Sadananda Giri said he had a major problem in getting a relative — who suffered food poisoning — admitted to a private hospital. “They relented after I kept pleading with them for more than an hour,” he said.

