Hosps put off surgeries to make room for Covid cases
2020-03-17
Bhopal: Only emergency surgeries would be entertained at tertiary care hospitals run by the state government — which will be on complete lockdown for treatment of confirmed Covid-19 patients, according to a senior official of the Directorate of Medical Education.“All elective surgeries, except for extreme medical emergencies, would be held up. Only confirmed Covid-19 cases would be treated in medical college-run hospitals of the s. The new protocol, to stop all elective or planned surgeries, is to avoid risk of further transmission of the disease. “Medical college-run hospitals will be for treatment, not isolation. Quarantine and isolation are being handled by the health department,” he said. Hamidia hospital has a 10-bed facility for treatment of Covid-19 cases.PPE, mask demand stabilises: After almost two weeks of scare, essentials like face masks and sanitisers are now available in the market. Panic buying over the last few days has led to a marginal increase in the cost of some medical products like N95 masks, said Lalit Jain, a medical supplies businessman.“Ethical medial suppliers refused to get inventory like masks and sanitisers at inflated rates. The situation is much better now with the imposing of Essential Commodities Act,” said an MP FDA official. However, some of the hospitals are yet to reach comfortable levels of procuring basic medical support in case of Covid-19 patients increasing. “Cross-infection and transmission to health workers and others is a potential risk. Measures are in place to avoid it,” said Hamidia hospital superintendent, Dr AK Shrivastava.“A mask is good for about six hours or less. Prolonged use of a mask can be unhealthy and increases the risk of other infections,” said Dr Rajiv Singh. Old aged, pregnant women and those with pre-existing conditions linked to COPD, are advised to minimise travel and stay away from large crowds.Pathogen found 37 days after exposure: The WHO is warning of a longer than expected incubation period for Covid-19. An interim guidance released on March 13 by WHO could lead to increase in isolation, quarantine time period as followed by the health department. A Covid-19 pathogen respiratory tract was detected 37 days after contact, a new study found, suggesting that set incubation periods be many weeks.The longest observed duration of virus shedding in survivors was 37 days, according to WHO’s interim guide for clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) when Covid-19 disease is suspected. It was released on March 13. WHO cites Lancet’s reference of patients in Wuhan, China. Till now, incubation period of Covid-19 is understood to be anywhere between 14-28 days. Pregnant women concerned about exposure or symptoms indicating possible infection with Covid-19 are also being warned, said a consultant with the health department.The new protocol — to stop all elective or planned surgeries in state-run hospitals — is to avoid risk of further transmission of the disease