Kolkata hospitals struggle between Covid-19 infection and non-Covid-19 services
2020-04-26
KOLKATA: Four leading private hospitals in Kolkata, which have been treating Covid-19 patients over the last fortnight and had to quarantine several healthworkers, have chosen to continue with their operations for the sake of their non-Covid patients, many of whom are critical. Even though pushed to the brink of a shutdown, they are carrying out swift sanitization jobs and enhancing checks to make sure their non-Covid patients remain unaffected. This, they claimed, will not only help scores of critically ill people who are now admitted but will also help the hospitals survive at a time when patient count has dropped and revenue plunged. 


A patient and two employees of the Institute of Neurosciences Kolkata (INK) tested positive on Friday, leading to the quarantine of a dozen healthworkers. It forced INK to shut down an ICU where the patient was admitted and sanitize it. While the patient has been shifted to a hospital in Salt Lake, INK will continue normal operations for the 50-odd patients. 



“Even during these testing times, INK has continued to extend its services for the neurologically sick patients, those who wish our service and those who are already admitted to our hospital. At this crucial moment, we do not wish to cease these services as this will be inhuman for the serious patients,” said a statement issued by vice-chairman Hrishikesh Kumar, who himself is now in home quarantine.

Several patients have tested positive at Peerless Hospital, not a Covid-19 designated one, as well. The hospital has now stepped up screening at its fever clinic. Here, too, a number of critically ill non-Covid patients are under treatment and can’t be moved immediately, said medical superintendent Sudipto Mitra. “Other than serving our patients, we need to keep the hospital afloat. With a sharp plunge in the number of patients, the revenue has dropped. So, our survival now depends on patients and we are not contemplating a shutdown,” said Mitra. 

At the Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre and Research Institute in Thakurpukur, most patients had to be shifted after an admitted patient tested positive last week. But around 50 critically ill are still being treated at the hospital. The authorities had been finding it difficult to get the workforce back on duty. “With help from the administration, we have been able to get enough on board to keep the hospital functional. It’s not fully functional, though, since we now have a mere 200 out of our 800 healthworkers on duty,” said medical director Arnab Gupta. Out of the quarantined employees, 90% have tested negative, which has revived hopes of a quick resumption of normal services. 

At ILS Hospital in Dum Dum, two isolated patients had tested positive leading to the quarantine of a few staffers. With a thorough sanitization, the hospital has carried on services even though it falls in a containment zone.


