Patna hospitals far from ready to tackle coronavirus threat
2020-03-15
PATNA: From shutting down educational institutions to cancelling sports and cultural events, the state government has come up with several measures to prevent spread of coronavirus. Health officials said the department was fully prepared to tackle the threat. TOI on Saturday visited some premier hospitals in the city to check the ground reality.


Patna Medical College and Hospital: PMCH, the state’s largest government hospital, has set up a 20-bed isolation ward for patients with coronavirus symptoms. The hospital has converted its VIP cottage into an isolation ward. PMCH deputy superintendent Dr Rajesh Kumar, who was on visit to the isolation ward, said four people had been kept there. “Samples of two patients were tested negative for coronavirus. We are awaiting reports of the two remaining patients,” he said. The nursing staff at the isolation ward were wearing masks but working without other protective gears. The emergency unit of the hospital was, however, stinking. Sanitizers were nowhere to be seen.

Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences: This hospital lacked sufficient ventilators. Though IGIMS has 40 ventilators, all were occupied on Saturday. A hospital staff said patients are being returned due to lack of ventilator. Two rooms with one bed each had been separated for coronavirus suspects. IGIMS superintendent Dr Manish Mandal said, “We will use the top floor of our rest house with 40 beds as isolation ward and make arrangements for additional ventilators.”

New Gardiner Road Hospital: There was no facility to handle coronavirus suspects at the hospital. Though around 300 patients visit the outpatient department of the hospital per day, it lacks ventilator. The hospital also has no ICU.

Private hospital on Bailey Road: Unlike government health institutes, this private hospital was much cleaner. Posters and banners have been put up in the waiting room, informing people about precautionary measures. Dr Talat Halim, regional director (east) of the group that runs the hospital, has initiated several measures to improve infrastructure at the hospital for the treatment of the coronavirus suspects. Senior infection control nurse of the hospital, Nidhi James, said a dedicated team was working to keep the hospital neat and clean. Deputy nursing superintendent of the hospital, Sandeep Singh, said announcements are made at an interval of every one hour, asking people to wash their hands. 

