Andhra hospitals to get more oxygen lines to make life easier for Covid patients
2020-04-27
VIJAYAWADA: Hypoxia has emerged as the new focus area in Covid-19 treatment in the state. Due to the compromised lung function and capacity in some Covid patients, oxygen cannot reach red blood cells, leading to hypoxia. 


There are about 1,200 beds with oxygen lines in the state-level Covid hospitals as well as district-level Covid hospitals, besides 2,200 beds with oxygen lines in other hospitals identified under line one to line six Covid hospitals. 

Now, the state health department has decided to add oxygen lines to about 2,000 more beds in the state-level Covid hospitals itself to augment its infrastructure in the battle against Covid-19.

According to medical experts, some patients do not even exhibit any breathlessness symptoms despite having exceedingly low blood oxygen saturation levels, which is called as silent hypoxia or happy hypoxia in medical parlance. The insidious form of hypoxia makes it difficult for the treating doctor(s) before it progresses into the advanced stage. To tackle the same, the Covid-19 treating facilities in the state were recently supplied with nearly 1,900 pulse oximetres. 

These devices do not only help in monitoring the oxygen saturation levels of the patient, but also detect hypoxia early. According to reports, several Covid deaths in other countries were attributed to persistent hypoxia or it at least leading to severe complications such as tissue damage and infections.

Special chief secretary, medical, health and family welfare department, KS Jawahar Reddy said; “As per the emerging Covid data from other countries, it is hypothesised that some Covid patients will develop impaired oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and hypoxia. It is also assumed that oxygen supply is better than providing the patients with ventilator facility,” said Reddy.

The special chief secretary said that 2,000 more beds in the state-level Covid hospitals will be fitted with oxygen lines in the next three weeks in addition to the existing ones. 

“The civil works pertaining to these oxygen lines are likely to be completed by May 20. We have already supplied 1,900 pulse oximetres to the hospitals. Breathlessness is an ominous manifestation in Covid patients. I request the public to call 104 and seek medical intervention if anyone is experiencing breathlessness or feels like they are gasping for air,” said Reddy.


