Coronavirus outbreak: Hospitals stare at shortage of medicines, equipment after imports squeeze in Kolkata
2020-03-08
KOLKATA: Slowdown of imports from China following the novel coronavirus outbreak has led to a scarcity of medicines and clinical equipment across several private hospitals in Kolkata. At least two of them are facing a shortage of essential equipment like catheters and cardiac medicines that are sourced from China. Others fear their stocks would run out in the next two-three weeks.


While prices of some essential drugs have already shot up due to the supply squeeze, hand sanitizers, masks and thermometers, which have seen a sudden spurt in demand, have turned scarce.

About 70% of India’s active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) are sourced from China.

RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences, for instance, is facing a shortage of medicines like Heparin — a blood-thinning drug — and Enoxaparin — also an anticoagulant that prevents blood clots.


‘Rational use of drugs needed to avert crisis’

Besides shortage of essential medicines, RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences is also facing a scarcity of thermometers, most of which are imported from China, said RTIICS zonal director R Venkatesh.

Medica Superspecialty had run out of angioplasty catheters last week but has managed to procure them from an alternative source. Suppliers have warned that flow of several drugs sourced from China could soon be affected. “If the situation doesn’t normalize within a month, several medicines and equipment will be unavailable,” said chairman Alok Roy.

Across its three units, AMRI Hospitals are yet to face a shortage of medicines but the authorities fear that if the import restrictions persist for a month, a crisis is imminent.

Not just hospitals, even doctors are feeling the heat of the supply choke. Dermatologist Koushik Lahiri had ordered a skin examination equipment along with a giant magnifying glass, which are lying at the Chennai airport waiting for clearance since late-January. Several common drugs used to treat diabetes and blood pressure are already in short supply, said paediatrician Santanu Ray. “I am finding it difficult to prescribe alternatives,” he said. According to Heart Foundation of India president KK Aggarwal, rational use of drugs is needed to avert a crisis.

