Coronavirus outbreak: Kerala hospitals readying reserve teams as precaution
2020-03-20
KOCHI/T’PURAM: Major hospitals in the state are sending one-third of their doctors and other medical staff on paid leave after cancelling scheduled non-emergency surgeries in view of the Covid-19 situation. At the same time, government doctors have urged health minister K K Shailaja to create a pool of reserve doctors instead of deploying everyone in hospitals.

“We have developed an employee protection scheme and have decided to keep one-third of our employees out of the hospital till April 15 so that they will always be available if need arises. The rest will be working at the hospital,” said KIMS Healthcare Group CMD Dr MI Sahadulla. This arrangement started on Monday. Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences has made similar arrangements. “In departments like critical care, anaesthesia and emergency, one-third of the staff has been asked to go on paid leave for 10 days,” said AIMS deputy superintendent Rajesh Pai.

They are not alone. There are several other hospitals across the state in the process of making similar arrangements to ensure that they have enough reserve pool of healthy staff, if a situation like the one at Sree Chitra Institute arises. This will ensure that there is no shutdown of hospital services due to staff falling sick. “We are advising the elderly consultants in our hospital to avoid the hospital for few days,” said chairman of Baby Memorial Hospital, Kozhikode Dr KG Alexander.

Meanwhile, government doctors have sought a two-week leave for a pool of doctors (at least one-third) so that they can be deployed if there is a community spread of Covid-19. They said healthcare professionals are under high-risk category now, with four doctors already kept under observation for treating suspect cases.

“There is high risk for health professionals and it might end with doctors going on quarantine. This will lead to a medical crisis where health professionals will not be available to tackle the situation. We have asked the health minister to ensure that one-third of us professionals including doctors, nurses, and other paramedical staff be given paid leave for two weeks. They will serve as reserve pool,” said state president, academy of pulmonary and critical care medicine Dr T P Rajagopal.

It might seem strange, but there is a need to create a team of second-line doctors. At least 30% of the doctors should be reserved to meet the emergency. If there is more spread, this will mean that more doctors will go under isolation, said IMA vice-president Dr N Sulphi. “More patients are coming to medical colleges and general hospitals and the doctors here are at risk. A reserve pool becomes necessary. We have apprised the health minister of this need,” said state secretary of Kerala Government Medical Officers Association Dr G S Vijayakrishnan.

“We are analysing the situation and collecting the details of doctors from each medical college. I believe government has also taken up this issue,” said state secretary of Kerala Government Medical College Teachers Association Dr Nirmal Bhaskar.

Already, hospitals are witnessing a significant dip in footfall for OPD consultation and the in-patient occupancy has gone down by 40 to 50%.


