Lucknow: Hospitals still not coronavirus-equipped
2020-03-15
LUCKNOW: Despite tall claims by health authorities regarding preparations to deal with coronavirus challenge, four prominent government-aided hospitals of the city are yet to meet the standards prescribed by the World Health Organisation (WHO).


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

A reality check conducted by TOI at King George’s Medical University (KGMU), Lokbandhu Hospital, SPM Civil Hospital and Balarampur Hospital on Friday revealed several preventive steps need to be taken urgently to ensure proper isolation of patients.

KGMU: There are no separate registration counters, entrance/exit and signages for suspected/confirmed coronavirus patients and those with flu-like symptoms at KGMU’s outpatient department (OPD). 

Though a 52-bed isolation ward with separate toilet facility has been arranged, there are no exclusive beds for suspected cases at the casualty ward of trauma centre where patients suffering from various ailments and injuries are brought first.

Suspected cases are referred to isolation ward only after preliminary examination. Till that time they are with other patients. Chief medical superintendent Prof SN Shankhwar said, “Directions are being issued to ensure that all suspected cases are directly brought to isolation ward.”

SPM Civil Hospital: An 11-bed isolation ward with toilet facility has been set up at the hospital. However, there isno exclusive queue or waiting area for patients with flu-like symptoms. 

There are no awareness posters or signages to guide patients to isolation ward. Chief medical superintendent Dr RK Porwal said, “Signage to guide to isolation ward will be installed soon.”

Balrampur Hospital: The hospital has one isolated bed in emergency ward and has an 18-bed isolation ward but has no signage to guide patients. There is no separate arrangement for suspected cases at registration counter or OPD. 

Spokesman SM Tripathi said, “Separate arrangements will soon be made for suspected cases. Signages will also come up soon.”

Lokbandhu Hospital: The hospital does not have separate registration counter and OPD for suspected cases, although there is an 11-bed isolation ward and signages on the premises.

“Preparations are underway to enhance both OPD and in-patient facilities for suspected/confirmed coronavirus cases,” said CMS Dr Amita Yadav.


