Pune: Hospitals to get negative ion generators to fight Covid-19
2020-03-31
PUNE: The negative ion generator developed by an incubatee firm at the Science and Technology Park in Savitribai Phule Pune University will soon be installed at various hospitals across the state to control viral, bacterial and fungal infections.

The Science and Technology Park is an institute promoted by the department of science and technology (DST) of the Indian government and the Savitribai Phule Pune University.

Department of science and technology has released Rs1 crore to manufacture and scale up the product, built by JClean Weather Technologies. As many as 1,000 units would soon be ready for installation in various hospitals in Maharashtra, the state government said.

The principal innovator behind the technology, DB Jadhav, said, “We built it some 6-7 years ago. A year ago, we incubated a company with STP. We are working on a model with them, which will be effective in 1km radius.”

Jadhav, a former employee of the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, said he used to put aside 20% of his salary every month for research. “These machines cost about Rs 40,000 each. We have received Rs 50 lakh from DST and will receive remaining amount after some time. Our facility in Pashan will be able to manufacture about 200 units in seven days and remaining will be manufactured in a phased manner,” he said.

One hour of operation of the negative ion generator machine reduces viral load within a room by 99.7% depending on room size. Four such machines have already been installed at Naidu hospital in Pune.

“This machine generates negative ions at 10*8 (10 raised to the power 8) ions per second. This starts a continuous chain reaction in its vicinity. Unlike other micro-organisms, viruses cannot live on their own as they are just a strand of RNA with a protein cover. These negative ions immediately react with the hydrogen in the protein cover, effectively destroying the virus or disinfecting the virus, which means it is no longer able to attack humans,” said Science and Technology Park’s director general Rajendra Jagdale.


