Hosp staffers distribute sewai, sweets among Covid patients spending Eid without family
2020-05-26
Bareilly: For a 33-year-old Covid-19 patient, who is undergoing treatment at a hospital, it was the first Eid when he was not with his family.

The man who tested positive upon returning to Bareilly from Maharashtra’s Dhule said, “The lockdown rendered me jobless and I faced with many problems. However, I decided to return home as I wanted to be with my family on Eid. A vehicle owner charged Rs 2,500 and dropped me at the Delhi border. I then walked down to Rampur, from where police sent me to Bareilly in a vehicle. Although I was suffering from acute pain while walking, I continued with my journey as I wanted to be with my family, especially during the festival. But to my disappointment, I was sent to Bareilly and hospitalised. I am missing my family a lot on Eid. However, I felt better when hospital authorities served us sewai and sweets along with the lunch.”

Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “As patients undergoing treatment at Covid-19 level-1 hospital could not be with their families to celebrate Eid, we distributed sewai and sweets among them to make them happy.”

A 29-year-old patient from Shahjahanpur said, “Though the factory in Mumbai got closed in the lockdown, I managed to survive with the help of locals. However, I decided to go home only to be with my family on Eid. After changing three vehicles in three days and shelling out nearly Rs 6,000, I reached Shahjahanpur on May 14. I directly went to a hospital to get myself examined as I didn’t want put my family at a risk. I was quarantined in Shahajahanpur, but later shifted to Bareilly after I tested positive.”

He added, “I didn’t even get to see my family members. I thought that this Eid would be without sewai as no one from the family would be able to send sewai here. I was, however, surprised by the sweet gesture of the hospital authorities.”

A 24-year-old patient who returned from Mumbai to Bareilly said, “This is my first Eid when I am not with my family. However, I am happy that my family members, who were institutional quarantined at another hospital, were discharged from the hospital on Sunday.”


