Delhi: Hospitals become hotspots as Covid care exacts heavy price
2020-04-28
NEW DELHI: The number of healthcare workers affected by Covid-19 in Delhi crossed 200 on Monday with Max Healthcare confirming that 33 staff members at its Patparganj hospital had been found positive for novel coronavirus.

“Of these 33 healthcare workers, 32 are currently admitted at Max hospital Saket and one patient has been discharged,” the hospital chain said.


 


A hospital spokesperson said 581 healthcare workers at Max Patparganj were tested over the past two weeks as per the mandatory policy announced by the group on April 14, days after two patients admitted for non-Covid-19 procedure tested positive at the Saket facility.

However, healthcare personnel at Max aren’t the only ones affected by Covid-19. As per rough estimates, six other private hospitals, including Apollo, Sir Ganga Ram and Maharaja Agrasen, have been affected by the crisis.

Among the public hospitals, Babu Jagjivan Ram, Ambedkar hospital, Delhi State Cancer Institute, AIIMS and Safdarjung are the worst affected.

Data suggests that most healthcare workers affected in Delhi were involved in non-Covid-19 operations. “Those working at facilities designated for Covid-19 are well-prepared and protected. They wear Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) at all times. But at non-Covid-19 facilities, the level of readiness is not the same. This exposes healthcare workers to the risk of infection,” said a senior doctor at a private hospital.

The doctor said screening of all patients visiting the hospital is the most important measure to prevent the spread of infection. However, till recently few hospitals, including those where cases have been found, had standalone flu clinics. “The segregation of suspected patients with others isn’t foolproof either. The fact that most hospitals have centralised air-conditioning adds to the vulnerabilities,” he added.

All healthcare workers at hospital not designated for Covid-19 are supposed to wear N-95 masks at all times. Dr SK Sarin, the chairman of the task force constituted by Delhi government to manage the Covid-19 crisis in the state, told TOI that even patients visiting for OPD services were required to wear masks. “Those with no visible symptoms for Covid-19 can do with ordinary surgical masks also,” he added.

However, paramedics, nursing orderlies and other staff members at non-Covid-19 hospitals, including both private and government ones, complained that the supply of N-95 masks was limited and they often had to use ordinary masks.

“Right now, all patients coming to hospitals have to be treated as suspected Covid-19 cases. They have to be managed with precautions, unless tests confirm they don’t have the disease. But due to shortcomings, such as lack of PPEs, clear-cut guidelines and sometimes the fault of patients who hide their travel history or diseases, healthcare workers get affected,” said Leeladhar Ramchandani, general secretary of Delhi Nurses Federation.

According to a recent article published in The Lancet, healthcare workers deployed at Covid-19 facilities also suffer from physical and mental exhaustion, the torment of difficult triage decisions, and the pain of losing patients and colleagues, all in addition to the infection risk.

“It is vital that governments see workers not simply as pawns to be deployed, but as human beings. In the global response, the safety of healthcare workers must be ensured. Adequate provision of PPE is just the first step. Other practical measures must be considered, including cancelling non-essential events to prioritise resources, provision of food, rest, family support and psychological support,” stated the article.


