Covid-19 in Mumbai: Hostels, guest houses to be used for quarantine
2020-03-20
MUMBAI: The Mumbai suburban collector has passed an executive order to take over hostels and guest houses across the city to convert them into quarantine centres. A request for more hotel rooms has also been sent to various hospitality groups for use as quarantine facilities. The takeover includes hostels in RCF, BARC, MSEB, Hindustan Petroleum in BKC, IIT-Bombay campus and the MTNL guest house in Hiranandani, Powai.



An executive order to the effect was passed and quarantine facilities will be available for all flyers coming into the city from various international destinations. It is believed these facilities will largely be used to accommodate C-category patients who do not show symptoms of Covid-19. 

“We need to quarantine people for 14 days and for that we need a huge number of rooms. These patients are those under C-category with minimum chances of getting others infected. They have come from those countries and hence they need to be under quarantine,” said collector Milind Borikar. A letter to that effect was shared by IIT-Bombay director Subhasis Chaudhuri with the IIT family. The 15,000-plus residents currently on campus are a worried lot as students, faculty, staff and their families are objecting to the state government’s decision of putting so many other lives at risk.

The order was passed “despite our strong objections and efforts. The campus is still alive with many students, staff, faculty members, their families and casual workforce. The collector’s officer has verbally assured that the quarantine area will be properly secured through police,” read the director’s letter. Students who informed their parents about such a decision called the faculty and deans of the Powai institute and expressed their anxiety.

“The designated buildings are Vanvihar Guest House, H-18, well-maintained part of H-8 (B-wing), and the MTNL guest rooms (in Hiranandani). While we understand the difficulties that the state is facing, administrators of IIT-B were ordered under the provisions of the relevant Act. Kindly ensure maximum protection to your family and yourself,” read the director’s note. Some 180 rooms in Powai will be available for quarantine.

