Hosur cut roses go waste as coronavirus hits exports
2020-03-13
Krishnagiri: Once home to colourful and fragrant roses, what welcomes one to Hosur today is the sight of withered and dried up cut roses. Out of business for the past one month, the lives of cut rose exporters too are equally faded.According to the cut rose exporters, they are facing a loss of nearly Rs 2 lakh a day as the Gulf and other foreign countries have banned the import of goods from India in the wake of coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. As there are no takers for the flowers, which can’t be preserved for long, they end up in garbage bins, instead of flying abroad to lit up the moods of several hundreds.Famous for cut roses, Hosur grows varieties such as red giant, red horizon, red corvette, happy hour, passion royal class, red palace, bohemia, discovery, gold strike, rimini high society, tenga venga bugatti, king fisher, apricot kiwi and avalanche classic and duet across more than 1,000 acres. The main export markets are Gulf, Europe, Japan, Southeast Asia, Australia, Middle East and Russia. N Ahmed, an exporter, said, “The roses grown here are in high demand abroad. The flowers will be sent to all these countries throughout the year. The demand is usually high during the Valentine’s Day, when the export crosses more than 1.5 crore cut roses.” Pointing out that they usually export four lakh cut flowers a month abroad from Bengaluru, the exporters said they hadn’t clocked any business after February 14. “The business totally depends on exports. Following the ban imposed by the Gulf and other countries, the export has come to a standstill in the region,” an exporter said. According to them, the demand for the flowers has taken a dig in the local markets too. “We will not get good rates as this is not a marriage season. Usually, we sell a bunch of 10 gerbera flowers at Rs 150 in the local market during the festival and marriage seasons. At present, it is priced at Rs 12. We are not even getting the production cost.”