Hoteliers in Nainital, Mussoorie oppose govt’s decision to use hotels, resorts as quarantine centres
2020-06-05
Nainital/Mussoorie: Hoteliers in Nainital and Mussoorie have written to the state government and administration against the government’s decision to use the hotels and resorts in the state as quarantine centres.

In the letter, the hoteliers have stated that instead of taking a number of properties across the state, the authorities must take just a few properties located outside the cities for quarantine purpose.

Speaking to TOI, Dinesh Sah, president of Nainital Hotel and Restaurant Association, said that they wrote that staff in most of the hotels have gone back to their villages and therefore they do not have the facility to manage hotels as quarantine centres. Moreover, most of these hotels are in the cities and if the people are quarantined in them, there is a threat that the virus might spread. "Till now, most of the positive cases have been reported in returnees and if they are quarantined in the hotels there is a threat that the virus might spread," Sah said.

He added that several hotels in Nainital have already been converted into quarantine centres despite the fact that the town is several km from the state border as well as the nearest railway station. "We had closed our hotels in March itself and since then our revenues have plummeted. Now that guidelines were eased we were finally planning to open up, however, if the government decides to use our hotels as quarantine centres the hotel association will protest," he said.

Echoing similar sentiments, Sanjay Aggarwal, Secretary of Mussoorie Hotels Association, said, 

"Developing quarantine centres in a number of hotels scattered across the town could pose safety issues for residents of the town. In fact, on knowing about shortlisting of certain hotels as quarantine centres the residents living nearby have already started raising objections." 

In their letter to the administration, the Mussoorie hoteliers have suggested a few hotels, schools and hostels located outside the main town where quarantine centres could be established. Notably, around 20 hotels across the town have been shortlisted by the local administration for quarantine centres. These properties are located in various parts of the town and many of them are located in the heart of the town on the Mall Road.


