Covid-19: Hotels, restaurants, malls to open in Rajasthan tomorrow
2020-06-07
JAIPUR: The state home department on Saturday issued orders to unlock hotels and other hospitality services, restaurants and clubs, and shopping malls from Monday in the state.

The meeting of religious leaders convened by chief minister Ashok Gehlot on unlocking places of worship decided to constitute a committee under district collectors comprising religious leaders, CMHO and district police superintendent to decide on the modalities according to the local conditions. No date has been fixed for now for opening places of worship.


 


The state home department order said they had to strictly follow the standard operating procedures (SOPs) issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare (MoHFW) on June 4.

According to the SOP issued by the Union health ministry, persons above 65 years of age, persons with comorbidities and pregnant women are advised to stay at home, except for essential and health purposes.

The table-setting arrangements for restaurants and clubs will ensure at least six feet distance between them.

Fast-food restaurants with standing arrangements will have to ensure a distance of eight feet between tables and not more than two guests on a table.

According to the central government guidelines, gaming arcades, children play areas and cinema halls inside shopping malls would remain closed till further orders.

The detailed guidelines issued by MoHFW said only asymptomatic persons would be allowed at the malls with mandatory hand hygiene (sanitizer dispenser) and thermal screening provisions.

The management of malls will deploy adequate manpower for ensuring social distancing norms and staggering of visitors.

All staff who are at higher risk namely older employees, pregnant employees and employees who have underlying medical conditions, to take extra precautions. They should not be exposed to any front-line work requiring direct contact with the public.

Shopping mall management should facilitate work-from-home wherever feasible and ensure people maintain physical distancing of a minimum of six feet, when queuing up for entry or when inside the shopping mall as far as feasible. Similarly, number of people in the elevators should be restricted, duly maintaining social distancing norms while use of escalators with one person on alternate steps be encouraged.


