Hoteliers demand relief package, claim heavy losses due to lockdown
2020-05-14
HARIDWAR: Owners of those hotels in Haridwar which are on lease are suffering heavy financial losses due to the Covid-19 lockdown as the pilgrim footfall to the holy town has dipped to almost zero. They demand a bailout package from the government stating that even the upcoming religious events like Kanwar Yatra and other bathing festivals are not expected to witness a big turnout. There are around 700 hotels and guest houses in Haridwar. Among them, around 60% have been given on lease by the property owners. Anticipating huge rush of pilgrims in view of Kumbh Mela next year, many hoteliers had paid hefty lease amounts in the range of Rs 1.5 lakh-to-Rs 2 lakh per room for a year. However, the outbreak of coronavirus has dashed their hopes of seeing pilgrim footfall to the city.

Hoteliers say that religious tourism is the base of Haridwar economy but they don’t see business getting back on track for at least the next two years.

Vibash Mishra, a city-based hotelier, told TOI, “I took two hotels on lease at high prices in view of the Kumbh Mela but today, I have run out of money due to the lockdown. Even before the lockdown, hoteliers were suffering as rail services were hit due to construction work on railway tracks. Around 60% of city-based hotels are on lease and most of the hoteliers have already paid lease amount to the owners. So, now they don’t even have the money to pay salaries to their staff.”

According to hoteliers, lease rent for each room of hotels located near Har ki Pauri and other banks of Ganga in the city is around Rs 1.5 lakh-to-Rs 2 lakh and in the city area, it is around Rs 1 lakh-to-1.25 lakh for each room. 

Ashutosh Sharma, president of Haridwar Hotel Association, told TOI, “We did 30% business between May and June but this summer season has been completely washed out due to the lockdown. We have so far lost around Rs 100 crore in Haridwar and there is no hope for revival of the industry for at least the next two years. The state government has announced some relief in electricity bill but that is not sufficient. Water and sewage charges should also be waived off and government should give us loans under Veer Chandra Singh Gaharwali scheme to help the hotel industry. If we are not provided with more relief, thousands of workers will lose their jobs. Meanwhile, we are taking steps to help those hoteliers who have taken hotels on lease.”


