Covid-19: Hotels now must screen staff, travellers in Gujarat
2020-03-08
AHMEDABAD: Intensifying their fight against COVID-19, the state health department on Saturday issued a directive making it mandatory for hotels in the state to screen travellers and staff members. Hotels have been asked to procure hand-held thermal scanners and arrange for thermal screening of all travellers.


“It is mandatory to screen all international travellers and all staffers at hotels. Hotels have also been asked to check with domestic travellers about their travel history. If a traveller is found to be showing symptoms, it must be reported to the state health authorities,” said Jaiprakash Shivahare, state health commissioner.

 
 

A number of hotels in Ahmedabad have already initiated measures to combat COVID-19. “We have begun screening employees and ensuring they do not have any flu symptom. If they do have them, they are given medical assistance and days off from work,” said Narendra Somani, president, Federation of Hotels and Restaurants Association (FHRA).

The FHRA also issued an internal advisory to hotels, urging them to take precautions and follow Union government guidelines.

Ahmedabad has a slew of international hotels hosting guests from across the globe. Facing the virus outbreak, hotels have largely initiated proactive measures.

“We are in the process of procuring handheld devices to screen travellers as advised by the government. We have made sanitisers available in all public corridors of the hotel, and at the front desk and restaurants. The hotel will be providing masks and sanitizers to guests on request,” said a city-based hotelier, who asked not to be named.

Some hotels are also urging guests and employees to self-declare details about their travel and health. “All employees at our hotel are asked to fill a declaration form, stating their travel history and health condition and those not in perfect health are told to take leave and recover before coming to work. All corners, surfaces and public corridors are cleaned and sanitized every hour. We have also displayed a health advisory from the Union health ministry at the reception, in the lift and in other public corridors of the hot5el,” said another hotelier.

