Hotels cashing in on paid quarantine option for flyers
2020-05-27
Coimbatore: From a time when multiple cab services set up kiosks outside the airport to fish for passengers, hotels are now trying to attract passengers with “paid quarantine” options. Hotels are marketing the quarantine option through the district administration. The paid quarantine option has provided them with a small revenue stream at a time when business has taken a body blow, apart from providing relief to passengers afraid of being sent to a government facility.Officials from public health department said at least 120 of the 364 passengers arriving at the airport and instructed to quarantine themselves on Monday chose “paid quarantine” in one of the city’s hotels. At least 40 of the 185-odd passengers who arrived in the first half of Tuesday also chose this option. “We offer hotels in three pricing grades, Rs 1,500, Rs 3,000 and Rs 4,500 to Rs 6,000. We allow passengers to choose their options. Around 18 hotels have come forward agreeing to quarantine passengers,” said Ganesh of Express Holidays, who is coordinating this initiative as a social service mission.The hotels offer a minimum 24-hour package, including a night stay and three meals, airport transfers and small concessions. “Some passengers request at least their luggage be sent off to their homes and families. They want their relatives to come and drop something off to them in the hotels among others,” said Ganesh. As per the current trend, 60% of people who opt for paid quarantine opt for the Rs 1500 odd bracket, the remaining 25% opt for the Rs 3,000 per person bracket and the remaining 15% opt for the Rs 4,500 plus bracket. Hotels say it is a risky proposition to allow quarantining of travellers, but it’s a small business opportunity coming their way. “As per government guidelines, we don’t open our restaurants, only offer room servicedon’t allow the quarantine guests to enter any of the common areas, have a created a separate check in counter for them and we carefully monitor their services like food preparation linen handling etc, since we can’t risk anything going wrong,” said Ramesh Chandrakumar, general manager of Grand Regent Hotel. 