‘Do not reuse N95 mask if worn near a patient/hotspot’
2020-05-29
Q: Please advise whether banquet halls, guesthouses/hotels are bound to return the amount paid in advance now that their services would not be availed. | ML Kesarwani

A: All hotels are working as per their refund policy. Due to the sudden cancellations of events because of the pandemic, they are refunding their clients’ money. If not, then they are giving them credit vouchers in which the customer’s money will be adjusted in any future event they wish to hold in that hotel. We cannot comment on every banquet hall or guesthouse but they must be opting for the same. | Girish Oberoi, general secretary, Uttar Pradesh Hotel and Restaurant Association.

Q: A doctor has told my father that regular dosage of a homoeopathic medicine would enable us fight Covid-19. Is this true? | Rajesh

A: It is being claimed that Arsenicum album can fight Covid-19. However, we cannot comment right now. | Dr Rama Srivastava, president, Indian Medical Association, Lucknow chapter

Q: How should we clean an N95 mask for re-use? Will water or alcohol affect its quality? | Divyanshu Srivastava

A: If you are wearing the N95 mask in a Covid-19 area or a hotspot, then the mask cannot be re-used. You need to dispose it off. If not, then you can reuse it by sanitising it with sodium hypochlorite solution or sanitizer with alcohol content of 70% and above and leave it overnight. After that, you can reuse it. | Dr Rama Srivastava

Q: I am a 77-year-old patient of blood pressure and diabetes. I had an angioplasty in 2017 and was undergoing regular check-ups every few months. My check-up was scheduled in March but has not been done. What should I do? | HK Sinha

A: You should regularly take the medicines prescribed by your doctor and consult them over phone in case of any emergency but do not move out of your house since you are a high-risk patient and staying at home with all safety precautions would be best. Most pathologies are offering home services and you can ask for your blood sample to be collected. | Dr Rama Srivastava


