Hotspot Covid patients being shifted to quarantine centres in Bhopal
2020-05-19
BHOPAL: In one of its kind initiative taken by the Bhopal district administration, even people who have not come into contact with positive patients or been their second contacts are also being shifted to quarantine centres if they wish so, and being taken care of. This is being done in the densely populated Jehangirabad, a major corona hotspot in the city. Close to 300 positive cases have been reported so far from the locality. 


District collector Tarun Pithode said, “We wanted to break the chain of the disease in Jehangirabad locality and, to an extent, we have been successful in doing so. Apart from the people who had been the first contact of the positive patients or second contacts, we also shifted families who were likely to be first or second contacts”. “Those people who were having more family members, living in densely populated areas and primarily are in such a condition where they could not practise social distancing even if they wish to do so, were motivated and shifted to quarantine centers. Initially there were some issues, but we talked to local public representatives, community leaders, and convinced people. As of now, more than 300 people out of 1,500 who were roughly shifted are those who were not in primary or secondary contact of any positive patient,” he added.

SDM Jehangirabad, Jameel Khan, said, “We have been doing it since April 28, but started a campaign to reach door to door for motivating people from May 6 onwards. And till date, more than 1,500 have been shifted. Quarantine centres have been set up, more than 50-60 hotels have been acquired and all arrangements have been made for the people who are being shifted to the quarantine centres.” Police and civic body officials have also been roped in for shifting people from Jehangirabad.

Speaking on the police arrangements for shifting people from Jehangirabad, area ASP, Rajat Saklecha, said that police assists district administration teams and helps them shift people from the area. Initially, many people resisted shifting, but the police convinced them that it is for their own safety. Two inspectors, including SHO Jehangirabad, Virendra Singh Chouhan, and ASP, Ashish Khare, are supervising the process and coordinating with BMC and district administration. BMC provides the vehicle for shifting people from the area. He said that many policemen posted in Bhopal district force, PHQ and SAF reside with their families in Jehangirabad. They too are being shifted. Till date, around 450 people, including policemen and their families, have been shifted.

