Housing society ready to welcome Maharashtra’s first Covid-19 couple, daughter
2020-03-24
PUNE: Setting an example, members of a society on Sinhagad Road here have brought down walls and established what good neighbours can be by planning to welcome back the family that went into quarantine after being infected with coronavirus.


The family comprising the first Covid-19 positive couple in Pune and their daughter have now staged a full recovery and will soon be discharged from Naidu hospital. 

The society’s committee said they have sensitised all members and informed everybody that the family will be back after a complete recovery and that they should not be singled out. 

Members and the committee regularly call the family now in quarantine in Naidu hospital to check on their health and take updates about their discharge.

Other members, who were not infected, have been facing discrimination in the neighbourhood ever since the name of the society went viral on social media.

It took them a few days to come to terms with the behaviour, but with the lead from the society’s committee and members, there is a positive feeling among everybody. They are taking all precautions by sanitising the premises like lifts among other infrastructure.

A member who is in-charge of a building said, “We have already sent out messages to our members stating that there should not be any fear in their minds about the family that will be discharged from hospital. We have been telling them that the family will be home after having recovered completely. We have the house keys of the family and we plan to sanitise their home with help from the civic health officials and with the family’s permission.”

Another building head from the society said there was a lot of unnecessary discrimination that the society members had to face initially in the neighbourhood. “A member went to a medical store for a purchase. When the member conveyed the society’s name, the shop owner looked shocked as if the member had committed a crime. It was extremely difficult for us in the first few days. But things are settling down now,” he said.

The members said they are in regular touch with the family that is recovering at Naidu hospital. “We keep assuring them that they will get all the support required once they are back,” the building head told TOI.


