Tamil Nadu: House surgeons want ‘special mention’ about handling Covid-19 cases
2020-04-02
CHENNAI: House surgeons working at government hospitals across the state have requested the government to recognise their extended period of service by making a special mention about handling Covid-19 cases in their final completion certificates.


Around 2,500 candidates from the 2014 batch, who began their compulsory rotatory residential internship (CRRI) last March, are working in government hospitals as house surgeons. Right now, these medicos, posted in other wards, are kept as reserve force for Covid-19 cases.

Their internship period ended on March 28 but was extended by a month in wake of the coronavirus crisis. Though this is an opportunity for these young professionals to gain the experience of handling a pandemic at the very start of their careers, it comes with challenges. House surgeons said they would have less time to prepare for post-graduation (PG) and will fall behind in seniority when compared to their counterparts from private medical colleges who have completed their CRRI.

"We’ll have less time to prepare for NEET-PG scheduled in January 2021 and Medical Recruitment Board’s hiring process for medical officers, if any," said B Arunandhi, general secretary of Tamil Nadu Medical Students Association (TNMSA). It will be better if the state can urge the Centre to postpone NEET PG 2021, he said.

At present, most government medical college and hospital administrations have stopped issuing CRRI completion certifications for their original posting period (March 2019-March 2020) so that they can register with the State Medical Council.

TNMSA has requested the health department to mention about their service rendered during the pandemic in their completion certificates or in a separate certificate as a token of appreciation which its say will be "highly encouraging".

Also, TNMSA has asked the government to sanction salary and ensure that house surgeons will also be one of the beneficiaries of incentives announced for all healthcare workers involved in handling the pandemic. It requested the government not to deduct any amount in the name of food and accommodation charges during their extended period of service from their salaries.

The association stressed on the need for providing Personal Protective Equipment including N95 masks and hand sanitisers in sufficient quantities to all house surgeons as role of healthcare professionals might be crucial in the coming days with the number of cases on the rise.

