Madhya Pradesh state assembly gets ready for Rajya Sabha polls amid Covid-19 crisis
2020-06-11
BHOPAL: Preparations for the Rajya Sabha polls amid Coronavirus pandemic has started at Madhya Pradesh state assembly. A meeting to discuss the poll procedure, while maintaining precautions due to pandemic, was held at the assembly on Tuesday.

Rajya Sabha polls for three seats from MP will be held on June 19 with the Congress fielding former chief minister Digvijay Singh and Phool Singh Barraiya, while BJP are fielding former Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia and Sumer Singh Solanki.

Principal secretary of MP Vidhan Sabha Awadhesh Pratap Singh discussed the precautionary measures to be taken with health department, Bhopal Municipal Corporation and capital project administration officers.

Measures like thermal screening, sanitisation of assembly premises and deployment of health check-up team was discussed in the meeting. Officials of departments concerned including health and municipal corporation were asked to ensure all basic facilities required to check the spread of virus.

Officials said the preparations to ensure smooth functioning of the Rajya Sabha poll process would continue in the coming days. Political activity in MP, as in most states, has come to a standstill since March when the lockdown was imposed to tackle the spread of Coronavirus.

Both BJP and Congress have announced two candidates each for the three RS seats in MP. As per the state’s arithmetic, both the Congress and BJP are in comfortable position to secure victory for at least one of their candidates.

BJP has upper hand and is expected to bag the third seat. In the 230-member MP legislative assembly, 24 seats are vacant and a candidate needs to secure 52 votes to win. BJP has 107 MLAs while Congress has 92. The much-awaited expansion of the Shivraj Singh Chouhan government, which came to power on March 23, is also on hold and may take place after the RS polls.

The monsoon session of MP state assembly is also likely to be convened by July-end. The session would focus on social distancing norms for the MLAs and the assembly secretariat has already begun work on it.


