Tamil Nadu: How a sugarcane farmer ensured a sweet time during lockdown
2020-06-13
CHENNAI: When lockdown restricted some, it gave wings to others. A sugarcane farmer has made use of the days by installing a jaggery-making unit at his house in Perambalur as a step towards self-sufficiency. 

Like many small-scale farmers, T Ramraj was clueless about what to do with the sugarcane on his one one-acre farm when the lockdown was declared in March. Since the crop was nearing harvest, he couldn’t find workers to cut and transport them to a jaggery-making unit. Being a follower of green crusader and organic guru G Nammalvar, Ramraj didn’t want to look back. He wanted to find a solution to the crisis.

It was around the same time that he heard about a jaggery-making unit up for sale near his village. He bought a sugarcane crusher and other materials from the unit. It took a week for installation and soon the production started. However, finding money for buying the used machinery was a challenge indeed.

"I didn’t have money to buy the items. It cost Rs 40,000. At the same time, I knew I should never miss the opportunity. My brother helped. I managed some money from my friends and that’s how it all began," said Ramraj, who lives in Silakudi, a village in Perambalur.

Being a sugarcane farmer, Ramraj was selling his crops to the nearby sugar factory through middlemen. "I used to sell sugarcane to the factory in Perambalur. We were being exploited in the market. The middlemen made huge money. I was thinking of being self-sufficient for long. Even though lockdown restricts our movements, it showed me how to become self-sufficient," said the 28-year-old.

Ramraj’s unit got the support from his seven-member family, which included his wife’s father and mother. The unit has produced more than 1,500kg of jaggery (nattu sakkarai) so far. "I sell the product directly to the wholesale market. There are no middlemen. I can also save money when it comes to labour cost and transportation," he said. "A week ago, we finished our work. We have packed and kept the jaggery safely. It will be taken to the market in a couple of days," he said. 

Does he follow safety measures against Covid-19? "We follow safety measures against Covid-19 by wearing masks and keeping social distance in the unit. We don’t take chances," he said. "Lockdown may be depressing, but it literally opened my eyes. It showed me the path to success."


