How the lockdown has marked the return of our motta maadis
2020-05-20
In the hustle and bustle of everyday life — pre-coronavirus, we mean — most of us would often go by a standard schedule: work, go out, sleep, repeat. In the post-coronavirus time, however, the rules of recreation get a facelift. And this is where the humble terrace comes in. Chennaiites tell us the different ways in which they have rediscovered their motta maadis in the past few weeks.


Bird-watching and chillFor many, the terrace has always been a hotspot for birdwatching, says seasoned Chennai birder, Christy Bharath. “Since not everyone gets to be the monk with a Ferrari to sell, I hope the terrace zone continues to inspire birdwatchers, even after the lockdown,” he says. 

AM Aravind, who began a video series to help out new birders, adds, “People in my apartment complex, who I meet on my terrace, were surprised I have spotted over 30 species from my terrace in an urban residential area. I am glad people are noticing the birds now, but I would love more people to do this.”


High-teas to cosy dinnersWith weekend eat-out sessions out the window, most people are turning their terrace spaces into makeshift eateries. Throw in a picnic sheet, a few mugs of coffee and some snacks, and you have yourself a special evening, says Gauri, a homemaker in the city. “I used to do this with my parents all the time in my childhood. After all these years, I am happy this trend is coming back now. Youngsters these days are finally learning the value of open spaces,” she says, adding that her weekly dinner soiree has brought her closer to her family.





Terrace workout, the new fadThe next closest thing to capturing the adrenaline of early morning runs are terrace workouts. Actor Arun Vijay says, “I am used to working out indoors since I travel a lot for shoot. But this time, I headed to my terrace to do workouts. I’ve rarely used this space during normal times, but now, it’s different.” 




Srikkanth M, a software professional, who works out with his wife every day on the terrace, says, “Working out in a tiny terrace seemed like an impossible task as we were used to exercising on YMCA grounds! So, we opted for HIIT (High Intensity Interval Training) that was apt for small spaces. The duration of the workout is shorter, but it is said to give better results and burn more calories than the usual functional training that we do.”



