How pandemic crippled their lives
2020-04-18
Selvam, 53, of Ulaganeri, cycles to his favourite spot on the Town Hall Road in the city every morning for the past one week anxious to see whether shops have opened, so that he can also set up his toy stand again. 

Selvam, father of three, says that his life has turned upside down ever since the beginning of the lockdown. "The government dole was not enough to sustain the family. I have to pay my son’s medical bills, for which I will have to beg or borrow if the situation continues," he said.

His elder son has just finished his education and is waiting for a job, and the second son had to undergo kidney transplantation about two years ago, and that was when Selvam donated his kidney. "My 24-year-old son is doing well, but I have to ensure that he gets his medicines regularly, which will cost Rs 5,000, and now even daily food has become a big question," he said. "I gave him my kidney, believing that he would take care of our family," he said. The transplant was done at a private hospital in Madurai, and he had borrowed money for the surgery.

"My business is small toys and leather belts which I put on a temporary stand on the pavements. I used to earn Rs 500 a day, but for the past 20 days I have not even earned a single penny," he said.

Social distancing will keep people off autos -S Balamurugan, Auto Driver

S Balamurugan, 34, of Aruldosspuram, an auto rickshaw driver, says that his daily earnings had been about Rs 800 with which he could comfortably manage his family expenses and fuel for his vehicle. "I had admitted both my children to private schools, because I wanted them to have good jobs, but today I doubt whether I can pay their fees for the next term, which is more than Rs 20,000," he said.

"He says that his friends have been talking about how difficult life would be after lockdown. They think that people would not be able to travel in autos, because social distancing cannot be maintained if thrwee people travel in a vehicle at a time, we are all apprehensive of becoming unemployed," he said

Making ends meet with unpaid rent -N Telfer Moses, Bike taxi driver

N Telfer Moses, 35, is able to run his family with the unpaid rent of Rs 4,500 for the month of March, thanks to the kind hearted land lord. Life has not been easy for this orphaned B.Com computer applications graduate, especially after the Covid-19 outbreak. The impact started hitting him had a week before the lockdown.

His regular jobs were not enough to run his family of four including his wife who is a homemaker and two children aged eight and three. "I became a driver with a bike taxi aggregator about a year ago. Riding 10 hours a day I used to get Rs 650 and after fuel expenses I took home Rs 400," he said.

Since March 15, he has been 50% less rides due to the outbreak and the app was locked by the aggregator preventing rides from March 23. "The dole from the government is hardly enough to buy milk for my children for a month," he said.

"My landlord was generous. But I have to pay him Rs 9,000 next month. I hope things will settle down by then," added Telfer who is among the nearly 600 bike taxi riders in the city. 

Well-wishers still give me some work -M Balamurugan, Ironing man

M Balamurugan, 50, is a well-known face in Gomathypuram, Madurai, as he has been ironing clothes for people in the area for nearly a quarter century. An iron vendor, he had worked 24 X7 and could be seen among piles of clothes from 8 am to 9 pm along with his wife Murugalakshmi.

Life was smooth for him before the lockdown as he used to iron not less than 150 pieces for a fee ranging from Rs 6 to Rs 20 based on the type of dress. "I used to make about Rs 1,000 a day. Now, people are not moving outdoors and there is no need for ironed clothes. Some well-wishers still give me a handful of clothes to iron, about 20 pieces a day, so that I make some money," he said.

The couple say with their daily earnings being affected, they are now trying to make ends meet. 

How I wish I had studied well -K Sakthivel Murugan, Construction worker

A construction worker for 30 years, Sakthivel Murugan, 40, of Keela Vaidhyanathapuram in Madurai says the crisis has made him realise the importance of education. "I did not study well and started working at construction sites to augment my family’s income. I learnt the tricks of the trade and became a mason, but today I fear that my family will go hungry," he said.

He used to earn Rs 500 a day and get work 22 days a month. The construction industry has not been doing well and there have been problems in salaries. "But now, even my little savings have almost diminished, because I have had to pay rent and buy groceries, vegetables and medicines for my family,’’ he said.

He has been forced to borrow money from his contractor to make ends meet. ``If life gets back to normal, I would be using a major portion of my salary to repay the loan, and that would again put my family in a tight situation,’’ he said.

He had registered long ago with the welfare board for the unorganised sector, but now has been told that only those who renewed their applications would get the Rs 1,000 government relief. 

Waiting for temple gates to open -P Mariamma, Sweeper in temple

“I hope things will be fine when my grandson turns one-year-old on May 3, the last day of the 40-day lockdown," says P Mariamma, 51, of Bibikulam who is a temple sweeper. After losing her ailing husband, the widow has been the lone earning member. Her divorced young daughter and grandchild are her dependents. 

She has been working in a temple in Thallakulam for the last 10 years, since her husband’s demise. Sweeping the temple twice she earned Rs 6,000 a month. "Now the temple is closed due to Covid-19 and we are only hoping that the gates are opened sothat I can be back to work," she said.


