Covid-19: How Nagpur shifted to non-red zone despite having so many positive cases
2020-05-20
NAGPUR: It was a pleasant surprise for many and a shock for some when state government included Nagpur in Covid-19 non-red zone regions on Tuesday while declaring some relaxations in Lockdown 4. 

Nagpur is having total 374 confirmed positive cases including 7 deaths, and at least two Covid-19 hotspots in city itself. Moreover, at least 13 localities in city are under contamination. Still, Nagpur managed to exit from the red zone tag because city fits in five out of the six parameters necessary for the multi-factorial analysis of Covid-19 scenario. 



Most popular parameter that everyone knows is total number of active Covid-19 cases in city. This means, total positive patients taking treatment in hospitals. Ideally, this number is expected to be zero or no new case should be reported in last 21 days. Nagpur fails on this parameter. The city has total 374 cases, out of which 290 have recovered and discharged and seven deaths. This means total 77 patients are taking treatment in Nagpur. 

However, there are five other parameters too, and Nagpur fits in those. Second one is Active cases per lakh population which should be less than 15. Nagpur’s active positive cases compared to population are 2.56 cases per lakh if we consider city’s population as 30 lakh. 

Third criteria is doubling rate which is expected to be more than 28 days. In Nagpur, it’s 37 days as per NMC. Fourth parameter is case fatality rate which means death rate as compared to total cases. This is expected to be less than 1%. Nagpur, at 1.87% is quite near to this mark. 

Fifth is testing ratio and Nagpur has done explanatory job in this parameter. Ideally, a city must test 200-plus citizens per lakh population. With 8,248 samples tested till date, Nagpur has checked 275 persons per lakh population. Sixth and last parameter is sample positivity rate. Out of the total samples tested, only 374 tested positive in city which is 4.53%. 

Akola and Amravati — both municipal corporation regions have failed in most of the six parameters. Akola’s population is approximately 10 lakh and the number of cases there is already 279. Despite of availability of lab at Akola itself, the total number of samples tested from here is only 2,826. Amravati’s population is around 28 lakh and the samples they have tested is 2,838 which means nearly 101 people per lakh population. Amravati also has its own lab facility now. 

The credit of Nagpur’s success must be given to the aggressive contamination drive by the Nagpur Municipal Corporation. The NMC took proactive steps and ensured proper tracing, identification and quarantine of the close contacts of positive patients. Apart from this, door-do-door survey done during earlier three weeks reported many cases and avoided further expansion of chains in areas like Khamla and Jaripatka. 

Even today, NMC Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe is not ready to take any chances. According to him, Nagpur’s technical inclusion in non-red region is not enough but the entire curve needs to be flattened. “We have reported 3 deaths in last three days and several cases from new areas. Further relaxation from lockdown may encourage spread of virus which will be major jolt to our sincere efforts. So, I am planning to issue independent guidelines for city by May 22,” he said in a video statement issued by NMC. 


