How political turmoil hit Madhya Pradesh’s coronavirus fight
2020-04-18
BHOPAL: It was March 20 -- the day Kamal Nath resigned as chief minister of Madhya Pradesh after three weeks of political turmoil – that the first Coronavirus patients were detected in Jabalpur. There was no known Covid-19 case in Bhopal or Indore then. Now, less than four weeks later, the two cities have over 1,000 cases and Madhya Pradesh has shot to #3 in coronavirus count in the country.


It’s been 25 days since chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan took oath for a fourth term, but MP is yet to have even a health minister or home minister, let alone a cabinet. 



Chouhan has been non-committal on swearing in a cabinet for now, saying the “focus is on combating the pandemic”. On April 13, he set up a 'BJP task force', packed with party leaders, to tackle Covid-19. Three days later, Madhya Pradesh had a record 391 cases, and the CM sought to reassure people by saying that the numbers are going up because so has testing.

With lakhs of residents confined indoors in containment zones, the question on people’s minds is did the political turmoil cost the state dear in the fight against coronavirus?

On April 16, CM Chouhan said in a video statement: “There had been no meeting on coronavirus with the chief minister in attendance till I took over. Health staff had also not been trained on how to protect themselves from infection.”

However, Tulsi Silawat -- who was health minister in the Kamal Nath government till he went away to Bengaluru with 17 MLAs of Scindia group on March 10 -- differs. Asked if there was a delay in focusing on coronavirus threat and whether he, too, was responsible for it to an extent, he told TOI: “No. I had convened a high-level meeting on March 5 on coronavirus, which was presided by the then chief minister. Madhya Pradesh was the first state where an appeal by the chief minister was published in newspapers, but then I resigned on March 8-9 and Tarun Bhanot was given charge. Coronavirus threat was not that potent at that time but it’s a challenge now, both for MP and India. We should stop politicising the issue and do what the PM and the CM are asking us to do.”

The political turmoil consumed the larger part of March, when coronavirus was spreading its tentacles undetected. The administration – which too was gingerly watching the political twists and turns -- began making efforts on its own, but in hindsight it was clearly far from enough.

Bhopal collector ordered lockdown on March 22 and Indore followed the next day. Just two days after lockdown, Indore would have its first Covid-19 death on the night of March 25.

State BJP chief V D Sharma admits there was a “little delay” in focusing on the coronavirus threat in MP due to the political crisis in March, but blames the Congress. “It was a Congress-made crisis. We never aggravated the crisis at any point in time. They indulged in horse-trading, tried to wean away (BJP MLAs) Sharad Kol and Narayan Tripathi. Later, conflict within Congress led to revolt. As a political party, we could not have kept our eyes closed to all that. But, if there has been a delay in making all-out efforts to control the spread of Coronavirus infection, Kamal Nath and Digvijaya Singh are responsible for it. We only responded to the crisis. Otherwise also, Kamal Nath says, Rahul Gandhi had warned of Coronavirus spread on February 12. What was he (Nath) doing for a month? Not a single test was conducted, nor were kits purchased,” Sharma said.

Former minister Sajjan Singh Verma, a close confidante of Nath, also acknowledges there was a delay in preparing to tackle the coronavirus threat but holds BJP responsible. “We had said suspend the House because it’s time to fight coronavirus. The Speaker adjourned the House on March 16 because of the impending coronavirus threat. At that time, Shivraj Singh Chouhan had sarcastically said he didn’t know that the Speaker was an astrologer. If we had continued in the government for some more days, we would have attended only to Coronavirus. It was our intention, too, but BJP in its lust of power, undermined the coronavirus threat, which is now killing hundreds of people.”

State Congress media cell in-charge, Jitu Patwari, however, said: “Despite the political crisis, we were focusing on coronavirus. We knew the gravity of the situation. The Speaker adjourned the House on March 16 because of coronavirus. Chief minister Kamal Nath resigned rather than prolong the issue further. The decision to close down cinemas and malls was taken by our government only. We were on the right path, but BJP’s lust for power aggravated the situation.”

