How shrinks chipped in to cure Covid patients
2020-05-04
TRICHY: When a 26-year-old man from Chinnavarapalayam of Karur district tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday after his return from Chennai, he was found blaming himself for making his family members and people in the neighbourhood vulnerable to infection.


Once he reached the medical college hospital, he started showing signs of depression. He got stressed up emotionally and went a step ahead to share videos in the social media weeping and sobbing while blaming himself.

To give him mental support, Karur government medical college hospital dean Dr E Theranirajan called him over phone to say that even the British prime minister wasn’t an exception. Besides, he can feel better as none of his contacts were tested positive so far.

Apart from monitoring positive patients, it is the effective mental health care given to the patients at the hospital that has helped patients recover, said medical staff at the hospital.

A team of eight trained counsellors and three psychiatrists have been keeping track of the mental health of patients through constant interactions. Apart from daily counseling, audio or video calls by psychiatrists helped patients take control over their emotions.

Shock and denial was the first reaction when we reveal them of their infection, which later develops into anger. They start showing symptoms of depression before accepting the reality. “Our intervention comes during depression, as they become sleepless and lose appetite. They will have suicidal ideas and crying spells,” said N S Kumar, faculty from department of psychiatry. “Out of the 168 positive patients from Karur, Namakkal and Dindigul districts, we have administered medication to 4-5 patients who had symptoms of anxiety or depression,” he said.

Asked on the reasons for depression among patients, Kumar said some had severe stress over social stigma of being avoided by the society after returning home. Some were worried about their names appearing in news reports. We had no other go but to go for anti-depressant drugs to keep them calm,” said S Balamurugan, another faculty member.

We also had to counsel around 10 parents whose children were admitted to the hospital. But once patients started going home after recovery, they began building hope, he said.

We will tailor questions in a way to get the reason for their depression by constantly speaking to them. By giving sedatives, we ensured that such people get adequate sleep, which helped them boost their immunity, said Kumar.

