How Delhi is closing down to shut out coronavirus
2020-03-20
NEW DELHI: The government has decided to suspend non-essential public services from Friday till March 31 but directed officials to work from home and remain connected with offices online and telephonically. Those activities categorised as ‘essential’ will, however, continue.


These and other decisions were taken in a joint meeting of lieutenant governor Anil Baijal and the chief minister Arvind Kejriwal with other Delhi ministers and senior government officers at Raj Niwas.

 
 
The categorisation of ‘essential’ and ‘non-essential’ services is likely to be done by Friday, the chief minister said.

The joint meeting of top government functionaries and senior officers witnessed the health department making a detailed presentation on the present status of coronavirus spread in Delhi, action taken by various authorities, availability of quarantine facilities and hospital beds and proposed measures to contain Covid-19.

 
 
In a statement issued after the meeting, Baijal said directions were issued to make thermal screening mandatory at public places and efforts would be made to scan every person going in public space while traffic police have been told to stop breath analyser test. Hotels that have the facility to quarantine people have also been directed to waive the tax on rooms.

Neighbours and RWAs should be informed about those under home-quarantine in a residential complex and fine on spitting in public places is to be strictly enforced.

 
 
Briefing the media, Kejriwal said the Delhi government was taking all relevant measures to contain the spread of coronavirus. “We have a capacity of 768 beds installed at the quarantine facilities till now, with only 57 beds that are currently occupied. We have 550 isolation beds in the Delhi government hospitals for the treatment of Covid-19 patients, out of which 40 beds have been occupied. There are 95 beds available in the central government hospitals, out of which 67 beds have been occupied by suspected Covid-19 patients. We are also mapping the requirements of all the government and private hospitals in Delhi, and we will issue directions that all the machinery and ventilator facilities in these hospitals should be in working conditions,” the CM said.

“Following reports that many people are escaping from quarantine facilities, we have started stamping all those who have been advised to self-quarantine themselves. This is a very dangerous situation as they infect others who deliberately or non-deliberately come in their contact. If they don’t abide by the do's and don’ts, we will have to take strict measures against them, including filing FIR or taking them into custody,” Kejriwal said.

He added that while all restaurants in Delhi shall remain closed till March 31, home-deliveries and take-aways will continue. “All educational institutions have also been shut down, including ITIs, polytechnics, universities, colleges, and schools till March 31 for both teaching and non-teaching staff,” he said.

The CM appealed to people to “comprehend the intensity” of the situation and avoid stepping out of their homes, especially senior citizens. “Stay at home as much as you can. Private sector institutions should also allow employees to work from home. Senior citizens are the most vulnerable of all and they should avoid going out,” he said.

Responding to reports of people hoarding eatables, Kejriwal said panic buying should be avoided. “It will only worsen the situation. Both the Centre and state governments have been working in close coordination. There has been no community transmission until now and if we continue to work like this, we will be able to control the situation,” Kejriwal said.

The LG has also directed officials to explore the possibilities of running mobile vans in residential areas to sell essential commodities of daily use and medical items.


