Covid-19 outbreak: How Delhi’s case No. 10 may’ve set chain reaction
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: If you want to know how one Covid-19 patient can set off a chain of infections, Delhi’s case No. 10 is a good example. The patient is a woman with a history of travel to Saudi Arabia. 

According to government data, five of Delhi’s 30 novel coronavirus cases so far, excluding her, are linked to her. This includes the Dilshad Garden resident’s two daughters, her brother, mother and a doctor who attended to her before she was taken to Guru Tegh Bahadur Hospital with high fever, cough and shortness of breath.


Covid-19 outbreak: Latest updates


While the woman’s son is in self-quarantine at home since he hasn’t exhibited symptoms of Covid-19, according to sources, the doctor himself became the city’s case No. 30. The doctor’s wife and daughter too have shown signs of infection and are in GTB Hospital awaiting the results of testing.

 
 
 
District health officials disclosed that 74 people living in the neighbourhood of the Dubai-returned woman are under surveillance. “When the woman tested positive for Covid-19, we rushed to her residence to ask her family for names and addresses of people who had visited them since March 10, the date of her return from Dubai,” an official said. “They weren’t very cooperative, so we had to seek the help of the local police to get information. We also used footage from the CCTV cameras installed near their home to identify some people who needed to be put under surveillance.”

The woman’s brother and mother live in northeast Delhi’s Jahangirpur. People the two came in contact with are also being screened, sources said. But one particular area which may prove to be a veritable hub of disaster can be the mohalla clinic where the doctor who came in contact with the woman consulted patients. 


More on Covid-19

 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete coverage
  Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
  52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
  Helpline numbers for states and UTs
  Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
  How to stay safe
  How to quarantine yourself at home
 
Between March 12, when the feverish and coughing woman visited him, and March 17, when the woman tested positive for the coronavirus, the doctor continued seeing patients at the mohalla clinic. The clinic has since been shut down and the district surveillance team is trying to get the list of patients that visited the facility over the five days. It is likely the number will over 100 cases, all possibly infected by the doctor.


