Rajasthan: How tourist hub Pushkar kept coronavirus at bay
2020-05-10
AJMER: Pushkar has become a role model for keeping foreign tourists safe and not a single person has tested positive for Covid-19 in the last two months. 


From the last week of March to April end, there were around 700 foreign tourists in Pushkar. After the international cattle fair in November, many foreigners remained in the town for Holi. Till March 24, around 2,000 tourists had left the holy town without proper screening.

 

Local people were worried about the foreign tourists as most of them were from Israel, Italy, Britain and Spain. “We started confidence building and had quarantined every foreign tourist for 28 days. We got the support of hotel owners who ensured that tourists remain inside their rooms,” said RAS officer Devika.

 

The doctors would conduct daily screening of foreign tourists. Thereafter, the administration coordinated with different foreign embassies in New Delhi to airlift their nationals. “No tourist was allowed to leave Pushkar without proper screening. If the administration sent a bus ferrying tourists to New Delhi, the driver was quarantined for 14 days,” added Devika.

She added that teams were working round-the-clock to monitor the screening of tourists and locals. Collector Vishwa Mohan Sharma was monitoring and coordinating the situation along with the state government.

In the last 30 days, 500 foreign tourists, 160 of whom were from Israel, were sent to New Delhi after coordination with their embassies. Around 260 foreigners are still in Pushkar. 

In Ajmer, small towns like Beawar, Nasirabad and Kekri are under curfew because of positive cases found there but Pushkar is still out of danger zone. The roads leading to Pushkar are sealed since a month and no stranger is allowed inside without proper screening. 

Other tourist cities like Jodhpur, Jaipur and Udaipur are in the red zone with high number of coronavirus positive patients. The Pushkar model became successful with the five Cs-community aid, coordination, confidence building, cooperation and continued screening. SDO Pushkar Devika Tomar said that the success could be attributed to district collector and SP of Ajmer who gave directions to safely send foreign as well as domestic tourists to their homes.

Recently, minister counselor Yaacou (Kobi) Rosh of Embassy of Israel wrote to Pushkar SDO and her team expressing deepest gratitude for cooperation and timely assistance to Israeli nationals in the current pandemic situation. The embassy said that this has strengthened bilateral relations of India and Israel. Similarly, gratitude is also pouring in from foreign nationals who reached their homes safely.


