How Google Maps & Call Detail Records are helping authorities fight spread of Covid-19
2020-04-10
Meerut: At a time when novel coronavirus cases are soaring, technology has come in handy for the UP health officials to keep a tab on patients individually, like tracking their travel history and fixing areas where tracing and surveillance has to be done.While Google Maps is being used to find the one to three kilometre radius of the epicentre of each positive case, a government portal launched on Thursday will help in tracking foreign returnees and other positive cases individually, by uploading their stage by stage details.Not just this, the state health department is also tracing tower locations with the help of Call Detail Records (CDR) of the suspected and positive cases, especially of those who are not disclosing their travel history and movement in the past.“The government has come up with a portal on Thursday, where we have to report on individual case basis. On the portal, we have been asked to update the travel history, current location, the date of sending samples, and positive or negative report status there. This is being done to track the cases individually by the district authorities and to take them into surveillance if at all needed,” said Dr Vishwas Chaudhary, Meerut district surveillance officer.This comes at a time when the state’s tally of coronavirus positive cases has crossed the 400 mark.While containment plans are being pressed into action at the local level where ever positive cases are being reported, active case survey by approaching people door-to-door is also being done. Dr BS Sodhi, chief medical officer of Saharanpur said, “In Saharanpur alone, as many as 2,119 people are in institutional quarantine. However, the main problem that we are facing is that people are afraid to come forward with travel history. To break the chain of the virus, knowing their travel history is of utmost importance. This is why, we are depending on call detail records of the people under surveillance to find their locations in the recent past and thereby zero-in on their contacts.” UP has reported four deaths till now, one each in Meerut, Varanasi, Agra and Basti. While door-to-door surveys are a must at this time, technology, too, has come handy for the health officials. Dr KN Tiwari, chief medical officer of Bulandshahr said, “We are taking help of Google Maps to find the three kilometre radius of all the hotspots in the district. It is helpful for us to focus on the places where contact tracing can be done.”