Delhi: How sealing helped contain coronavirus spread
2020-04-25
NEW DELHI: Delhi government’s decision to unseal the containment zone of Mansara Apartments in east Delhi’s Vasundhara Enclave has come as a ray of hope for thousands of people currently locked down in their houses while the number of Covid victims has steadily risen in the one month of the lockdown in the capital. The apartments had been sealed in the last week of March after a person tested positive for the novel coronavirus. Movement of people was restricted, though agencies ensured the residents didn’t face a shortage of any essential commodity.











 
While Delhi government has declared close to 100 localities as containment zones so far, the number of Covid cases in most, barring one or two, has so far remained static. Only people who were perhaps already infected at the time the area was sealed may have added to the daily count.

District administration officials insisted that Delhi government’s Operation Shield — acronym for sealing, home quarantine, isolation and tracking, essential supplies, local sanitisation and door-to-door checking — was the only way to deal with the coronavirus. “Containment is the only option and it has proved highly successful. By sealing localities and restricting movement of people even in densely populated areas such as Mandawali and Krishan Kunj, we managed to control the spread,” claimed district magistrate (East) Arun Kumar Mishra.

While the central government’s guidelines prescribe containment if there are at least 10 Covid cases or two deaths in a locality, Delhi, being a dense city of over two crore people, adopted more stringent norms. As B M Mishra, district magistrate, South, explained, “We generally seal an area if there are three cases close to each other in the same locality. But sometimes, we have declared a street a containment zone even if there was just one case and we suspected there could be more. Like in the case of Mehrauli where one case proved positive, we decided to declare the area a red zone immediately because we suspected infection might have spread. Rightly, after testing samples we detected nine cases.”

According to the guidelines, a containment zone continues to remain sealed with no person allowed to exit or enter the area for 28 days from the date of the last person testing positive for Covid-19. To ensure that people living in the containment zones do not face problems regarding essential commodities, the district administration creates a WhatsApp group of families and senior officials for resident to log their daily requirements. The designated vendors bring the essentials to the barricade locations, from where civil defence volunteers convey them to doorstep. This ensures social distancing and nil exposure of asymptomatic people to the outside world.

While the number of cases in most containment zones have been static, some densely populated areas — Chandni Mahal in old Delhi and Jahangirpuri in north — saw spikes despite the restrictions, forcing the authorities to take more drastic measures. The new cases could be attributed to flagrant violations of the strict lockdown protocols.

In his digital press conference last week, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal had to cite Jahangirpuri as one such locality. There, 26 members of an extended family living close to each other had tested positive. 

The Chandni Mahal area in the Walled City also witnessed a spike in Covid cases. Nidhi Srivastava, DM (Central), said the district administration and police had started conducting flag marches in the area twice a day to coax people into following the guidelines. “We are also carrying out aerial vigilance by drones to keep people indoor,” she said. “In addition, we have roped in 80 local volunteers to keep a check on people, apart from two-wheeler patrolling. The area has been divided into four for better monitoring.”

Srivastava added that another reason for more cases emerging in the area was the higher number of samples tested. “We have taken more than 2,000 samples so far of both symptomatic and asymptomatic people,” she revealed. 


