How local biz & buses are driving city’s lockdown delivery network
2020-04-18
Gurgaon: After hitting a few supply chain glitches going into the lockdown, the Gurgaon administration has come up with a procurement and delivery plan that could be a template for all cities. The Municipal Corporation of Gurgaon (MCG) now acts as a link between residents and the state administration to get groceries, vegetables and fruits delivered at the doorstep fresh from wholesale markets and mandis — by buses, too, if required. And all this is in keeping with specific requirements of residents.

“We ask our residents what they need, collate it and mail it to MCG. Groceries are delivered within a day, and fruits and vegetables take two days,” said CP Singh, vice president of DLF Phase 2 RWA. The society is one of 12 — across both containment zones and lockdown areas — that have been using the service for the past 10 days. About 1 lakh households are part of the delivery network by now.

The MCG then forwards the lists to the food and supplies department for groceries and the Haryana Marketing Board for fruits and vegetables. “We, then, get in touch with the wholesalers’ and retailers’ association to figure out which groceries vendor we should approach for which area,” said Monika Malik, director of the food & supplies department. The marketing board, similarly, goes by the lists to procure vegetables from the Khandsa mandi and fruits from the Azadpur mandi.

The groceries are carried to societies in buses, provided by Gurugram Metropolitan City Bus Limited, and sometimes in small pickup vans, provided by the Road Transport Authority or the MCG, at times coordinated with RWAs. The produce is taken to societies directly by the vendors, again, at a time coordinated with the RWAs. When residents step out to collect what they have ordered, volunteers ensure social distancing is maintained.

The system works well for both the vendors and the residents — it’s cheaper, better and ensures steady business for vendors who may otherwise have incurred losses. Because items are procured from larger markets, people pay wholesale rates for groceries and mandi rates for produce. “Prices of vegetables are at least 25% cheaper,” said Shashi, a vegetable vendor. Residents are happy that they get fresh fruits and vegetables delivered without any hassle. “We are very happy with the quality of produce we are getting,” said Colonel Sanjay Sharma, a resident of Sispal Vihar in Sector 49. Besides, because all deliveries are based on orders, there is no rush or lining up to buy things before others do.

There is a sense of apprehension, though. “We wear masks and sanitise our hands all the time. But what if we come in contact with someone who has Covid-19?” asked Om Prakash, who drives a mini truck supplying groceries. Government officials involved in the project said demand is likely to rise as more people get to know about the service. If that happens, supply chain management might become a challenge, especially with the onset of summer. For the vendors, it has to be business as usual: “It’s our job. We have to do it.”


