Covid-19: How this ‘Super Girl From China’ ended up spooking Lucknow’s A-listers
2020-03-22
LUCKNOW: ‘Main super girl from China’ is one of the songs Kanika Kapoor is known for. Now, after she tested positive for Covid-19, the memes of this song which have gone viral must be haunting the A-listers of the city who were in parties where the singer was in attendance.


Many of these home-grown celebrities—politicians, serving and former bureaucrats, businessmen—have come out and got themselves tested. Many others are still trying to hide. A state government spokesperson told TOI that reports of the places and parties attended by Kanika Kapoor are being studied.


Coronavirus in India live updates

One of these parties was organised at the official residence of Lokayukta Justice Sanjay Mishra. Although he didn’t respond to any of TOI’s calls and messages, many of those who attended the do confirmed that it took place at his Gautampalli residence.

Former UP minister and senior Congress leader Ranjit Singh Judev, who was present at the party, told TOI it was held under the banner of Scindia Old Boys’ Association (SOBA). “It was held at Justice Sanjay Mishra’s official residence and office-bearers of the association, alumni of the school and some more guests, including Rajiv Kapoor and his singer daughter Kanika Kappor were also present,” Judev said, adding “a film producer Vishnu Agarwal and owner of a famous coffee chain were also among the guests.”

“I left the party early because I had to attend another party at the residence of former BSP MP Akbar Ahmed Dumpy. Kanika was also there,” said Judev, who has undergone a test for coronavirus. He said that nearly 75 guests were present at Justice Mishra’s residence during the party.

Former health minister Anant Kumar Mishra also confirmed that SOBA had thrown its annual party at the residence of Justice Mishra and it went off well.“I am planning to undergo a test for confirmation,” Mishra said, adding, “Kanika joined the party as she is the daughter Rajiv Kapoor, who is also a SOBA member.”

The Lokayukta throwing a party for an association at his official residence has been taken note of by the higher ups in the government and that, too, after appeals made by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and chief minister Yogi Adityanath on March 13 urging people to avoid mass gatherings till the outbreak is controlled.

Kanika attended three similar parties in the city on March 14 and 15. Several well-known people from the city who attended them are feeling spooked. Some are coming out on their own, but many are still reluctant.


