How equipped govt hosps in city are to treat Covid-19 patients: HC
2020-05-12
Prayagraj: Hearing a PIL alleging laxity in treatment of a corona positive patient, which resulted as the first death due to Covid-19 in Prayagraj, the Allahabad High Court on Monday directed the state government to inform as to how the 11 government-run hospitals in Prayagraj city are equipped to manage the situation as has arisen owing to the coronavirus.

These 11 government-run hospitals of city of Prayagraj are SRN Hospital, Prathamik Chikitsalaya Kendra, Duffrin Hospital, Colvin Hospital, Kamla Nehra Hospital, SN Children Hospital, Sardar Patel Memorial, TB Sapru Hospital, TB Hospital, Rajkiya Medical Care Unit, Phaphamau and Government Hospital, Prayagraj. 

Hearing a PIL registered as ‘inhuman condition at quarantine centres and for providing better treatment to corona positive people’, a division bench comprising Chief Justice Govind Mathur and Justice Siddhartha Varma also directed the state government to inform as to whether the facilities like intensive coronary care units, intensive care units, dialysis units, ventilators and mobile X-ray machines are available with the hospitals run by the government in the city of Prayagraj. 

Besides, the court also directed the state government to inform the number of qualified doctors and nurses (apart from interns) working in these hospitals. “With regard to each hospital details shall also be furnished as to how the premises are sanitized and cleaned,” the court directed.

The court fixed May 14 as the next date of hearing.

Earlier, on May 7, 2020, the court had taken cognizance of a letter alleging that first Covid-19 death in Prayagraj had taken place due to laxity in treatment and had asked the chief standing counsel, representing the state government to avail necessary instructions (information) in the matter.

A high court lawyer, Gaurav K Gaur, through an e-mail had conveyed to the court that wife of Virendra Singh, an engineer had conveyed him telephonically that the quarantine centre, where her husband and other family members were lodged, lacks adequate hygienic conditions. Engineer Virendra Singh was first person who had died due to Covid-19 in Prayagraj.

The letter also brought to the notice of the court that adequate treatment was not provided to Virendra Singh, who unfortunately succumbed to coronavirus on May 6.

Today (on Monday), the state government informed that Virendra Singh, despite medication, passed away. 

On this the court observed, “The video which had been floated by the wife of the deceased also showed certain slackness on the part of the administration so far as the maintenance of the quarantine centers were concerned.”

Before passing the above directives, the court observed, “The instructions as have been received by the E-mail from the state, show that there were sufficient steps taken by the State to improve the quarantine centres. The treatment which was administered to V K Singh also appears to be appropriate. However, as we are not aware about the preparedness of the State with regard to medication it intends to administer to people who might be further getting affected by the Novel Covid-19 virus, we are continuing with the instant Public Interest Litigation.”


