How extended lockdowns are changing dynamics of families
2020-05-31
PRAYAGRAJ: With fourth phase of lockdown coming to an end, and people expecting its further extension, families across the country and in the city are facing mobile addiction and behavioural problems in children.


The psychiatrists in the OPD of MLN divisional hospital (commonly known as Colvin hospital) have noticed increase in the number of parents bringing their children with problems of mobile addiction and behavioural changes. After detailed analysis, several deficits were observed in the family dynamics during the lockdown. Clinical psychologist at MLN hospital, Dr Ishanya Raj said, “After meeting so many patients and doing counselling of them and their wards, we observed some factors influencing the family dynamics during the lockdown, which include less interaction with children, poor parenting practices, impaired parenting style in form of distorted communication, reinforcement of maladaptive behaviour, poor supervision etc.”

For instance, in any household, many a time adults in the family are seen busy in the world of internet, mobile, television and social media. “Due to current nuclear family structure, children do not have the opportunity to play and involve in other recreational activities which lead to more use of mobile phones by them like playing games, social media, web series etc, which is a worrying factor”, said Dr Ishanya Raj. Some children use mobile phones for more than 12 hours in a day or more due to absence of interaction among family members, which can lead to behavioural issues.

“Recently, we come across a case wherein the parents thought that their son was at fault. But on close analysis, we found that the father is in the Army, mother a teacher and sister a medical student. Thus everyone is busy on their mobile or internet throughput the day. This is a problem of the entire family and is the genesis of changing family dynamics”. According to Dr Rakesh Paswan, consultant psychiatrist in the same hospital, “Through detailed analysis of the parenting style, the deficit areas need to be identified, and with the use of psychological interventions, these kinds of issues can be tackled.”


