How senior citizens in Noida are coping with lockdown
2020-03-26
NOIDA: Some of them are patients, others are giving care to spouses undergoing treatment, and most have retired and are leading a slow-paced life. Several elderly persons of the city, especially in the sectors, live on their own as their children are now employed in far-away towns. It’s a tough time for them as they are now left without the support of helps, cooks and in some instances, drivers too.

Domestic helps are a most important support system for the elderly people as many of them could be alone after their spouses’ death. The lockdown along with no help is now forcing them to manage their homes all alone and even give care to an ailing partner at the same time.

Meenakshi Sharma, a resident of Sector 21, is somehow multitasking despite her ill health. “I have been unwell for over a month and my husband suffered a heart attack two months ago. Now I’m cooking, cleaning and taking care of his medical requirements, all by myself. We are managing somehow but the lockdown announced amid Covid-19 scare, of course, is taking a toll on us,” she said.

In Sector 37, Meera Khanna has been living on her own, but she usually tries to keep herself busy. 

“I have friends here. I meet people and have social get-togethers, so I never feel lonely or helpless. But now suddenly without helps and other supports, I am forced to cook, clean utensils, and feel very disconnected. My daughters live in Ghaziabad and South Delhi. I could have gone there but the border is sealed, and it’s not possible to go now,” Khanna said.

Meena Vohra, a resident of Sector 21, who runs a community facility for elderly citizens of the city, claimed most do not have the strength to clean homes, cook meals and get all essential commodities as they do not have the habit ogf going out of the house to make purchases.

“In our group, there are elderly people who are suffering from several health problems. Some are frail and others have never lived without the support of helps, cooks and drivers. So, it’s a big shift to tougher situation. We are trying to make do with those helps who live with their families and those who are available now. Some of us are cooking for a friend who is too unwell. We are trying to be there for each other,” said Vohra, who lives with her husband. Her three children live abroad. 

Vohra said a friend’s driver was stopped at the society gate and she had to go to the hospital. “People are facing problems. Elderlies need support and we are not equipped for an emergency situation,” Vohra added.


