How villagers in hills made use of lockdown to repair and build roads, construct pits for water harvesting
2020-06-04
NAINITAL: Forced to remain cooped in their villages for over two months due to the novel coronavirus-induced lockdown, several villagers in the hills of Uttarakhand have spent their time building roads, digging pits for water harvesting and improving other public facilities in their area.

The villagers of Naai in Okhalkanda block of Nainital district for instance have dug 15 pits – referred to locally as ‘chaal khaals’ – that act as reservoirs used to conserve water and to prevent forest fire in hills. Speaking to TOI, Chandan Singh Nayal, a resident of the village, who initiated the digging of the pits, said that 15 such pits had been made, each of which can store 5000 to 10,000 litres of water. “Despite receiving enough rainfall throughout most of the year, there are very few natural sources of water in the area. Our forefathers have been building these chaal khaals for hundreds of years but in the past few years, the number of such water bodies has drastically reduced and therefore not only humans but even animals wander towards the villages in search of water,” he said.

The pits are also helpful in times of forest fires. “Our village has a profusion of pine forests which are prone to fires. But since these pits store water for most part of the year, the land becomes humid. Traditional wisdom has it that they impede the spread of the forest fire and later trees that can hold water are also planted in them so that fire caused by the pine trees can be stopped,” Nayal said.

Reacting to the initiative taken by villagers, Nainital district magistrate (DM) Savin Bansal said that “the administration will provide all help to the locals who have been working to improve the civic conditions in their area.”

Meanwhile, in Mangaliya village of Pauri Garhwal district, villagers utilised the lockdown time to construct a motorable road. The villagers, including several women, were involved in cutting rock, clearing bushes and flattening the path which could earlier be used only by people as a dirt track for walking. The village can now be reached by car. “Most of us had almost nothing to do the entire day. So after a couple of weeks of sitting idle and angered by the fact that despite so many letters to the administration and politicians, we still didn’t have a road, we finally decided to do something about it. Within a few weeks, we had cleared most of the stretch and broadened the road so much that now even a car can reach our village,” said Shakuntala Devi, a resident.

Pauri DM Dheeraj Garbyal, when apprised of the initiative taken by villagers, said that he, too, will “ensure all help is provided to the villagers of Mangaliya in making the road permanent.” 

In yet another instance, villagers in Shilauti in Kumaon -- where a road project had remained stalled for almost 10 years -- pooled in money and resources and finally completed the road with their own efforts. “The track was barely a meter and half wide. We had used this track for some time but because of the landslides and careless approach from the authorities, the track was soon covered with debris boulders and shrubs,” said Durgadatt Paldiya, a resident of Kharki village and former member of the Block Development Corporation. He added that the villagers worked from early morning till noon every day and finally completed the road.


