How a Dehradun institute is readying visually & hearing-impaired people for a fight against Covid-19
2020-03-31
DEHRADUN: In tune with the government’s efforts to spread information about novel coronavirus and contain its spread, an institute in Dehradun is playing its part to keep the hearing and visually-impaired community fully aware about the contagious disease.


National Institute for the Empowerment of Persons with Visual Disabilities (NIEPVD), which comes under the ministry of social justice and empowerment, is producing contents in the form of audio files and in sign-language videos so that those who cannot hear or see are also aware about the disease.

According to the World Bank, nearly 1 billion people in the world experience some form of disability and it is extremely important that this large population is not left behind in the fight against Covid-19.

The institute which primarily caters to visually impaired people told TOI that all the health advisories and news regarding Covid-19 is being converted into a format which is more convenient for the visually and hearing-impaired people.

“Within days of the first advisory came out from health ministry, we converted it into Braille script for the convenience of the visually impaired people. Then those scripts were sent out to 500 organisations which are in some way associated with the NIEPVD. These 500-odd organisations work for the benefit of physically and intellectually disabled people and each organisation caters to more than 700 people with disabilities of different kinds.

“Later, we realised that it’s better not to pass on information through some paper since it can act as a carrier for the coronavirus. So, it was better to pass on most of the information through electronic mode, a non-touchable mode,” said Nachiketa Rout, director of NIEPVD.

Despite the staff not being able to come to the institute, the audio and video files are being churned out on a daily basis. In order to make sure that there is no shortage of content, the institute is making use of its staff which works in its Composite Regional Centre in Sunder Nagar, Himachal Pradesh.

“Our staff converted all the advisories into audio formats. In order to access the audio, we placed QR codes on e-pamphlets which can be found on our website and they have been circulated across other organisations too. The e-pamphlets have summarised points but in order to get to know in detail one has to scan the QR code. For instance, the e-pamphlet will have a point to maintain social distancing but in order to know the reason behind, one has to scan the QR code and get the details in audio format. We also have a team in Sunder Nagar which is also contributing to content material,” added Rout.

The institute also converted advisories into video formats for hearing-impaired people.

Rout further said, “Later, we realised that there is a large community of hearing-impaired people and it is important for them also to be aware of Covid-19. So we decided to convert advisories into video formats too in which they will be explained in sign language.

“Our institute generally caters to only visually impaired people. Yet we produced sign language videos for the hearing disabled people so that they don’t feel left behind and know about preventive measures against Covid-19. The communication between a deaf and a blind is next to impossible and we have content which is made for both of them available on our NIEPVDwebsite.”

The NIEPVDs efforts were appreciated by the ministry of social justice and empowerment. Recently, one of the videos made by the institute was even shared on the Prime Minister’s Twitter handle. The institute told TOI that the circulation of their content is increasing daily.

NIEPVD will soon come up with a 5-minute daily health bulletin in which measures against Covid-19 will be read out. They will also be told in sign language.


