Coronavirus in Tamil Nadu: How the vulnerable are under watch
2020-03-21
CHENNAI: At least 50 people sitting inside the control room at the directorate of public health have a long list of more than 300 names. This includes 169 passengers who travelled by two coaches of the Delhi-Chennai Tamil Nadu Express along with the 20-year-old hair dresser from New Delhi, and 85 passengers who were on board an international flight from Dublin along with a 21-year-old student. Both the hair dresser and the student have tested positive for Covid-19.


While Kerala and Karnataka advertised modes of transport and routes thorough press releases and social media along with a flow chart on patient’s movements when he or she was symptomatic, Tamil Nadu health department has kept details under wraps. “We will not miss a single person. We have shared names of contacts with other states as well. If we cannot reach them we will look at other ways,” health minister C Vijaya Baskar told reporters. “All contacts including family, friends, neighbours, colleagues are advised home quarantine even though we don’t know the source of infection,” he said.


 
The public health department has been directed to contact and counsel all co-passengers to remain on home quarantine. Southern Railway has handed over names and contact of 163 others who travelled with him in the two coaches of Delhi Chennai Tamil Nadu Express that reached Chennai on March 12. All these passengers are considered “low-risk” contacts. “They will also be asked to stay in home quarantine. “They have to report to the health officials on call if they have symptoms of Covid-19. Seven of his friends are in government quarantine,” a senior public health official said. In addition, the state has also advised 39 residents of Arumbakkam area who came in contact with 20-year-old hair dresser to stay in home quarantine.

The international carrier has handed over passenger details to the health department. The state got the contact details of all passengers who travelled with 21-year-old patient from Ireland. “Four of his family members residing in Virugambakkam are already in home quarantine,” the official said.

A team of doctors, from the school health programme, have been deputed to hold video-conferencing with passengers who are on home quarantine and yet another team is answering queries from the members of the public on the 104 helpline. The state officials and doctors have been told to instill confidence in people who are under home quarantine. “The aim is to ensure they stay at home and call us if they have symptoms. This will help us contain the virus,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh. “We are hearing complaints about how passengers under quarantine are being stigmatised by neighbours. One woman was asked to vacate her house. Releasing the area of residence or places where they have visited may worsen the situation,” she said.

On Friday health officials said after they urged relatives of the student from Ireland to quarantine themselves; sanitary staff also disinfected the area. “We did this for safety but this was enough to trigger panic. Photos, videos and audio clips are triggering panic,” said a senior health official.

Doctors at the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital said the condition of both the patients being treated at the isolation ward was stable. They are being monitored by a team of doctors from infectious diseases round the clock.

