Coronavirus scare: HP shuts cinema halls, Punjab swimming pools & gyms too
2020-03-15
CHANDIGARH/SHIMLA: With the rise in number of coronavirus (Covid-19) cases in the country, Punjab government on Saturday decided to close cinema halls, swimming pools and gymnasiums from Saturday midnight till further orders. Himachal Pradesh too decided to ask educational institutions and cinema halls to remain shut till March 31. However, board exams will be held as per schedule.


The Punjab government order also banned public gatherings, including sports events, conferences, cultural events, fairs and exhibitions, till further orders from the midnight of March 14.

Punjab health minister Balbir Singh Sidhu said that the state government is taking all steps needed to deal with the situation and there is no need to declare coronavirus as epidemic in Punjab. He also clarified that no patient suspected to have Covid-19 is absconding or missing in the state.

There has been only one confirmed case of coronavirus (Covid-19) in Punjab so far. The condition of the Italy-returned man, who is currently admitted to a government hospital in Amritsar, is stable, the minister said.

The state government had on Friday ordered closure of all educational institutes in the state till March 31.

Sidhu also said that the state government is taking up with the medical companies for supply of adequate number of hand sanitisers.

Himachal chief minister Jai Ram Thakur urged the people not to panic. In Himachal Pradesh, 593 people having travel history of coronavirus-affected countries are under surveillance. So far, all the samples have been found negative.

Missing details 

Referring to reports of 335 passengers who recently returned from abroad and were untraceable, Punjab health minister Balbir Singh Sidhu clarified that all of them had been screened upon arrival and found to be asymptomatic. A state government press note issued later said the contact details of 335 passengers "are incomplete and lists have been shared with district administration to contact them to know about their health status".

