Coronavirus outbreak: Haryana gets highest cases in a day
2020-04-01
CHANDIGARH/HISAR/SIRSA: Haryana recorded the highest rise in Covid-19 positive cases in a day on Tuesday, with the figure rising by seven, from 22 to 29. 


Of the seven persons who tested positive, two are children. The state health department’s bulletin confirmed this in the evening. 

The new cases included a Sirsa woman and her two children, a Hisar woman, two from Faridabad and a nurse from Panchkula. One of the cases from Faridabad is of the husband of a woman from Surajkund, who tested positive on Monday. 

So far, Gurugram has the highest number of cases, 10, among districts. It is followed by Faridabad (6), Panipat (4), Sirsa (3), Panchkula (2), and Hisar, Palwal, Ambala and Sonipat, from where a case each has been reported.

Seven of the 29 patients have been discharged as they tested negative after treatment. Besides, a patient has been shifted to Punjab. 

In Sirsa, the woman and her two children, aged 6 and 8, who have tested positive do not have any travel or contact history. Sirsa civil surgeon Viresh Bhushan said 13 other members of the family had tested negative. Both children have been shifted to the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences (PGIMS), Rohtak, for treatment, he said. 

The district administration has declared Bansal Colony, where the trio lives, as a containment area and nearby areas as buffer zone. The woman had organised a kitty party, and 28 women who attended the event and their families have been quarantined. 

The 59-year-old woman of Hisar, who tested positive, had returned from the US on March 17, after meeting her son and daughter-in-law. Hisar civil surgeon Yogesh Sharma said the resident of Sector 16-17 tested positive on Monday night. “The woman was kept in quarantine on her return. She has been admitted to Agroha medical college. Her husband, a retired army officer, has been kept in isolation at Hisar general hospital. His sample has also been sent and the report is awaited,” Dr Sharma said.

In Panchkula, the nurse had been deployed in isolation ward and she had acquired infection from a woman from Kharak Mangoli village. Her case was confirmed on Tuesday morning, said the Panchkula civil surgeon.

A government official said the Surjkund woman’s husband worked for an MNC in Noida. 

His colleagues had tested positive for Covid-19. Since then, the office had been closed down and employees and families quarantined. 

The other Fardabad resident who tested positive had returned from abroad and had been quarantined at a hospital in New Delhi. “We have put the contacts of those testing positive under observation. Health of all patients is fine. The first woman who tested positive has been discharged,” the official added.

