HSC paper collection system changed due to coronavirus
2020-05-15
Nagpur: The state’s education board has modified its HSC (Std XII) answersheet collection/submission process to conform with guidelines regarding travel restrictions and Covid distancing. From Friday, evaluated HSC answersheets will be collected at district level and then transported to the board’s divisional office in Nagpur. Earlier, the answersheets would be brought by moderators directly to board’s Civil Lines office.

Ravikant Deshpande, Nagpur divisional board secretary, issued a circular to all stakeholders about the timeline for paper collection for areas outside Nagpur. Deshpande said, “We start on Friday in Bhandara and Gondia. Then on May 18, answersheets will be collected in Chandrapur. On May 19, we will take up Wardha and Gadchiroli.” Every moderator has been informed as to which centre they have to submit the answersheets along with the timings for the same.

Teachers union welcomed the move saying they have been demanding such a step right from the start. Vidarbha Junior College Teachers Association (VJUCTA) had been vocal about how the Nagpur divisional board office should handle the huge crowd of teachers that assemble there for paper submission.

Ashok Gavhankar, general secretary of VJUCTA, said, “Till last year, hundreds of evaluators would land up to submit their answersheets leading to crowding at the office. Yes it was ‘organized chaos’ but our issue is how to maintain distance between ourselves when coronavirus is spreading. We told board officials they have to change the collection system entirely, otherwise it will be very risky for our members.”

He added that after paper is collected at district level, it will be dispatched in trucks. An answersheet’s evaluation journey begins with 800-1800 of them being assigned to a moderator (a senior academician). Each moderator will be given a paper valuation instruction sheet, commonly called docket, and briefed about their workload and deadline.

These moderators then distribute the papers to the evaluators, whose numbers can range anywhere between 10 to 15. For the major and mandatory papers, just over 100 moderators take charge while for the optional papers sometimes less than five are in charge. After evaluation, paper is sent back to moderators who in turn submit to the Nagpur board office. 

Once answersheets are recieved in board office, marks will be tabulated and sent to Pune headquarters for results declaration.


