Hubei students in home quarantine
2020-02-09
KOCHI: The 15 students who returned from Hubei province in China have been home quarantined.

Immediately after the 12 girls and three boys landed at Cochin International Airport from Bangkok on Friday at 11pm, they were taken to Kalamassery Medical College in sterilized ambulances, where they were examined. “As they had no symptoms, swab samples were collected and they were advised home quarantine,” said a health official.

The students had travelled from Kunming Airport in China to Bangkok and boarded an AirAsia flight for Kochi.

Meanwhile, the tourism department has asked hotels and homestays in the state to provide a list of tourists from novel coronavirus-affected countries who checked into their properties between January 30 and February 4.

Accordingly, the department has received a list of 80 to 90 nationals from five countries – China, Singapore, Hong Kong, Malaysia and the Philippines.

Most of these tourists are from China and Hong Kong. “The tourists checked out in the first week of February itself. But the staff of hotels and homestays do not have details of their later movements. Most of the tourists stayed at homestays and hotels in the Fort Kochi area,” said a tourism official in Ernakulam.

The details have been shared with health officials. “We are in touch with hotels and homestays in Kochi and have asked them to adhere to the revised guidelines regarding coronavirus infection. As of now, no tourist in Kochi is under quarantine,” said an official. 

Speaking in Thiruvananthapuram, state health minister K K Shailaja said 3,144 people in the state are still under observation. However, no new positive case has been reported and only 45 people have been isolated in various hospitals.

The remaining people are under home quarantine. Even though the 'state-specific disaster' tag has been withdrawn, the minister said surveillance and monitoring of people is continuing. Of the 330 samples sent for testing at the National Institute of Virology in Pune, 288 have tested negative. The remaining results are expected in a day or two. Of the 72 people who travelled from Wuhan two are from Tamil Nadu. All the three positive patients are stable, she said. 

Fears recede in ThrissurThe fears of an outbreak are receding in Thrissur, where the first positive case in the country was reported. 

Only seven people are under hospital-based surveillance now, after the discharge of another two persons on Saturday, according to an official release. In all, 253 people continue to be under home quarantine in the district. 

Results of 70 out of the 80 samples sent for tests from the district have been received and no fresh cases have been reported. 

The condition of the student who was infected is improving. Another sample of the student has tested negative. 

However, district collector S Shanawaz said it is not clear whether the result was of the latest sample. “We had sent a couple of samples for testing, and only by Sunday will we be able to ascertain whether it is the latest sample. One of the earlier samples from the student had also tested negative. Also, we can say she is cured only if two consecutive samples test negative,” the collector said. 

Two more persons have been arrested in the district for spreading false information on the virus outbreak. 

1 admitted in Kozhikode District collector Sambasiva Rao chaired a meeting on Saturday to assess preventive measures in the district. The collector also assessed the functioning of the helpline for people who arrived from nCoV-hit countries who are under home quarantine.

The collector also had a phone conversation with Dr Jamaluddin, in-charge of screening of passengers arriving on international flights at Karipur airport.

One person was admitted to the Beach Government General Hospital isolation ward with mild fever. Till Saturday, 378 persons have arrived in the district from nCoV-hit countries, of which 377 have been kept under home quarantine by the health department.

