Big dent? Covid-19 cloud over Telangana’s revenues
2020-03-29
HYDERABAD: Thanks to the coronavirus pandemic and lockdown, revenues of the state government have suffered a big dent. Though the state government has been giving priority for public welfare and releasing funds to tackle coronavirus spread, it is worried that it has a mountain to climb to pay salaries, pension to government employees and also to release amounts for regular welfare schemes if the situation does not ease by April.

March being the closure of the financial year, the government had hoped to net more revenues than the monthly revenues from various revenue earning departments such as commercial taxes and transport department. 


 

Official sources said the government earns about Rs 9,000 crore every month through various taxes and from the Centre’s share. Of this, the state gets about Rs 7,000 crore from GST, excise, stamps and registration and transport department.

“Of the total revenues, about Rs 3,500 crore is required for salaries and pensions to government employees and the rest is required for payment of bills and implementing welfare schemes like Aasara pensions. Our assessment is the government has only 40% revenues in its kitty this March. For payment of salaries and other expenditure, there will not be any problem for this month (April 1). But, if the lockdown is extended, the state may face problem for payments for April (May 1),” a senior finance official averred.

Sources said the commercial taxes department, which is the primary source of the revenues, had earned Rs 45,000 crore during 2019-20. Thanks to the lockdown, the department has not been able to garner much. “In March 2019, collections from GST and VAT were Rs 5,200 crore. Now, it has not even crossed Rs 3,000 crore,” a senior official of commercial taxes department said. 

Every month, about four lakh registered traders make payments by 20th for the transactions or invoices issued in the previous month. For instance, for February 2020, they have to make payments by March 20. Though the payments can be paid online, many have not paid their taxes due to the lockdown.

“We have asked the respective tax officials to call up the traders of their respective circles to make payments for this month,” an official of the commercial taxes told STOI.

Many traders are reluctant to pay as they have no business and also have to make salary payments for their workers, sources said.

