HUL Q4 net slips 3% on lockdown
2020-05-01
TNN

Mumbai: Even the short beginning of the Covid-19 induced lockdown within FY20 managed to dent Hindustan Unilever’s (HUL’s) March quarter performance with net profit down by around 3% and underlying volume growth decelerating by 7%.

The fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) major reported a consolidated net profit of Rs 1,520 crore in the quarter ended March 31, 2020, while product sales declined 9.6% to Rs 9,055 crore. Sales of its out-of-home ice cream business and beauty & cosmetics business came to a halt since mid-March.

The only other time when HUL reported a decline in volume growth in recent years was during demonetisation (December quarter) when it was negative 4%. Given that the March quarter witnessed only the early period of the lockdown, industry analysts feel the company’s June quarter performance may not be any better.

HUL CMD Sanjiv Mehta said operations are currently running at 75-80% of normative levels and manufacturing is mainly for essential health, hygiene and home care products. Mehta said it is difficult to predict how things will pan out after May 3. During the quarter, while beauty & personal care sales were down by about 14%, home care witnessed a 4% decline in revenues and food & refreshments were down by about 7%.

However, unlike other firms, HUL increased its expenses on advertising and promotion marginally to Rs 1,175 crore to remain competitive. HUL CFO Srinivas Phatak said, “The disruption in supplies following Covid has impacted our performance. While the macroeconomic context was challenging even before Covid, there has been a greater deceleration in discretionary spends, resulting in the overall FMCG market growth falling below 2%. Yet, our performance has been competitive and we have gained a quarterly market share of 50 basis points (100bps = 1 percentage point) at a corporate level.”

The company said it is re-evaluating all costs so as to continue to invest towards the best opportunities. But Mehta said, as of now, the company has neither shed any jobs nor taken salary cuts. However, he added, “We would not be able to say what is going to happen in the future. We will look at the situation as it evolves,” he said.

Phatak said the company’s overall performance for the full fiscal year has been resilient and competitive with strong cash generation “reflecting the strength of our portfolio of brands and our balance sheet”.

For FY20, domestic consumer growth was 2% with underlying volume growth of 2%. Profit after tax at Rs 6,738 crore was up by 12%. The board of directors has proposed a final dividend of Rs 14 per share. Given its strong position on cashflows, the company is supporting distributors with credit for a few days while being judicious about how it will deploy credit to maintain supply continuity.


