Maharashtra: Human intelligence tracks down 40 Tablighi Jamaat members in Yavatmal
2020-04-09
NAGPUR: Even as seven of the eight Covid-19 positive cases in Yavatmal were found to have a Tablighi Jamaat connect, sleuths have identified 52 persons in a drive to scan members of the organization in the district.


State authorities are mainly tracking persons by their digital footprint on the basis of cell phone calls. However, 40 of the 52 persons zeroed in upon at Yavatmal were found purely on the basis of direct human intelligence. The 40 are confirmed to have a Tablighi connect, with chances that the rest may not have gone to the Jamaat’s Markaz, but had been somewhere else in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area. All of them have been quarantined. 

Piyush Singh, divisional commissioner of Amravati, which covers Yavatmal district, said, “Mobile tracking has also led to confusion as this has brought people of other sects into the net, because their phone location was at Nizamuddin. However, 40 persons were found purely on basis of direct intelligence from sources about their Jamaat link.”

Total 649 persons are being tracked in Nagpur and Amravati divisions for their Jamaat Markaz links.

In the six districts of Amravati division, 206 contacts were identified, of which 152 have been quarantined, while the rest are within Maharashtra but living in other districts, where they have been quarantined, said the commissioner.

In Nagpur division, 419 of 443 persons have been traced, with 25 living within Maharashtra but outside Nagpur division jurisdiction, and 93 living in other states. The respective collectors have been informed about their location, said Dr Sanjeev Kumar, commissioner of Nagpur division. The highest number tracked is in Nagpur district at 282, of which 20 are yet to be traced.

Abdul Bari Patel, secretary of Tablighi Jamaat’s Nagpur and Chhattisgarh wing, said it is expected that his counterpart in other districts of Vidarbha would have also informed the police about members who visited the Markaz.

These persons can be either those who had been to the Nizamuddin Markaz or members of the Tablighi Jamaat who have come down to Nagpur on preaching tours, he said.

Sources said members keep visiting the Markaz from time to time as they also tour other parts of the country.

