Bihar: Human beings brought Covid-19 crisis upon themselves, says experts
2020-06-05
PATNA: As the world gears up to celebrate Environment Day on Friday amid the Covid-19 pandemic, experts claim that human beings brought the crisis upon themselves. They, therefore, ask people to start thinking of ways to change their lifestyles.


This year’s theme for World Environment Day is biodiversity and experts are of the opinion that depleting green cover, intensive farming and disrespect for animals have led to the spread of coronavirus.

During an online event hosted by a farm animal welfare organization, ‘Compassion in World Farming’, on Tuesday, noted primatologist Jane Goodall urged people to change their diets and the way they treat animals in order to avoid pandemics like Covid-19 in future. “People should stop exploiting and destroying natural habitats of animals and plants,” she said.

Patna University’s zoology department head Arbind Kumar also pointed out that the recent crisis created due to Covid-19 was simply a result of disproportionate exploitation of natural resources.

Throwing light on rapid urbanization, environmentalist Mehta Nagendra Singh said, “The number of birds, which depend mainly on trees and water bodies, has declined drastically because of deforestation and diminishing wetlands.”

Even teens and youngsters raised concerns over the degradation of biodiversity. A Class X student of Notre Dame Academy, Nilaa Chandrasekar, said, “It is not just the responsibility of the government or the local bodies to keep our cities clean and protect biodiversity. It is a collective effort.”

Meanwhile, some experts believe that the lockdown imposed to curb the spread of coronavirus has had a positive impact on the environment. 

State environment, forest and climate change department principal secretary Dipak Kumar Singh told this newspaper on Wednesday, “As soon as people started staying indoors and stopped using vehicles, nature began healing. Unusual events like wild animals roaming on the streets and the Himalayan peaks becoming visible happened.”

Bihar State Pollution Control Board chairman Ashok Ghosh also said, “Corona proves that nature can heal without spending crores on various projects.”

