Humanity first: City volunteers wage a war against hunger during the lockdown
2020-04-12
Bhopal: At the time when people are scrambling for essentials amid the corona lockdown, Bhopal’s Good Samaritans are facing all kinds to hurdles to supply food and other essentials to the homeless and needy. Cops, they say, stop them asking for passes before granting permission to move out. A lot of homeless and needy people are totally dependent on these volunteers for their two square meals during the COVID-19 pandemic. Individuals and groups have taken up the task to ensure that not a soul stays hungry amid the lockdown. However, these volunteers are able to supply the food in limited quantities at the time when bulk needs are being given preference over individual meals. Saumya Singh, a volunteer heading a group of helpers supplying food packets to the needy at various parts of the city, said, “We coordinate with community leaders of Shehri Mazdoor Sanghtan who help us decide the quantity of food and essentials needed to be procured. Our focus is on providing basics to people such as flour, rice, cooking oil, vegetables, detergents, soaps and items of daily use. With restrictions imposed on our mobility, we are finding it difficult not only to get the food grains etc., but also to take them to the needy people. But despite all odds, our efforts are on.”Another volunteer, Chandni Asnani and her team are focused on providing essential hygiene products to the poor and needy. “We have been trying to divert the calls to official numbers provided. Earlier we had been coordinating among ourselves for requests of essential medicines and food from different parts of the city, but now we can’t cater to all of them. People help us deliver supplies in bulk on some days, and on other days, we try to place orders online and help them out.”Volunteers have been receiving calls mainly from areas situated right in the heart of the city. These include Gautam Nagar, Sabri Nagar as well as areas like Ganga Nagar, Jaat Khedi, Sargam Basti, Bagh Farhat Afza etc. The requests are largely from daily wage workers who have lost all means of livelihood due to complete lockdown.Pet lovers are doing their bit as individual responsibility. Samarth Amarnani, a branding consultant, said, “Earlier, I had been feeding stray dogs around Lalghati, but now, I also procure food to distribute among cows, cats and pigs. During epidemics, we never think of animals and their well-being and I want to change this thought process.”(By Aishwarya Shrivastav) 