Covid-19 scare: Hundreds of Telangana, Andhra Pradesh students stranded as Italy on lockdown
2020-03-11
VISAKHAPATNAM: Hundreds of Telugu students from AP and Telangana are stranded in Italy as the Mediterranean country went into lockdown to tackle the sudden surge in Covid-19 cases. The students are in places such as Padova, Rimini, Modena, Milan — all declared red zones for the virus. With Italy registering 97 deaths on March 9, more government restrictions, especially in travelling, have been placed from Tuesday.


The students are a worried lot given the shortage of masks and restricted entry at supermarkets. From Tuesday, everyone has been told to confine themselves at home while shutting down all public places.

Telugu students that TOI spoke to said hospitals were reluctant to give ‘fit’ certificates and there was no provision to check those without symptoms, making it difficult for them to return. Sources added that Indian embassy authorities too are insisting on fit certificates to be considered for evacuation.

Badarinath Gella from Kodad in Suryapet district of Telangana has just completed his engineering degree from one of world’s oldest institutions in Italy – the 931-year-old University of Bologna. He told TOI from Italy: “Over 30 of us are still stranded in Bologna. I am worried. It is very difficult and time consuming to get medical fitness certificate here, especially because we do not have symptoms.”

Nearly 50 Indian students are studying at the University of Padova, which is again a red zone, while five Telugu students, mostly from Vijayawada, are stranded at Moderna. Leela Krishna Chowdary from Anantapur, studying agriculture in Padova said, “As Padova got quarantined we cannot come back to India. We are not even allowed to move to other cities.”

A Sree Charan Teja from Hyderabad, a final year aeronautical engineering student at Milan, had to remain back as he had a renewal date for a stay permit. “When Codogno was quarantined, there were no stores open, including grocery stores,” he said. “It will be bad if the situation is similar in Milan. There are around 100 Telugu students there. The rules don’t allow more than 10 people at a time in supermarkets.”

He added: “When it comes to health check-ups, we need to call 1500 if we have symptoms. But as per my knowledge there are no health camps where we can volunteer for a virus check-up. As per current national restrictions, all institutes and places of public interest, sports and wellness centres are closed till April 3,” he said.

Prasanth Chasdiel, hailing from Mantada village in Krishna district of AP, who is studying for MSc in tourism economics and management from Rimini campus of the University of Bologna, said: “Rimini has been quarantined along with 11 other provinces. During the outbreak, the flight prices were hiked. We cannot move out and we also need a fitness certificate to come to India. Everyone is worried at home.”

