Huts set up away from villages to quarantine migrant workers
2020-06-03
JAISALMER: As many migrants are returning from Mumbai, Gujarat and south India to Jalore, Barmer and Jaisalmer districts, people in rural areas have started quarantining the migrants in huts located a few metres away from the villages. 

Many villagers have even put up blockades, which are illegal, to stop the entry of outsiders. Two brothers who came from Tamil Nadu to their village under Sheo police station area in Barmer district were quarantined by their family members in a hut built 300 metres away from their home. Similarly, in Nokh area of Jaisalmer, villagers have adopted the same method, while in a village in Jalore, villagers have blocked the entry of outsiders into their village. 

Since last week, there has been an increase in coronavirus cases in Jalore and Barmer and all positive cases have been the migrants who came from Maharashtra and Gujarat. Looking to this, villagers have started awareness campaigns and have been coming up with unique methods. 

Jalore collector Himanshu Gupta said that after April 27, more than 90,000 migrants have returned from different states and still many are in transit and the number will go above 1 lakh. The administration has directed the villagers to keep the people coming from other states in quarantine. He said that gram seva samitis have been formed in even small villages and gram panchayats have been directed to inform nearest district administration representative on seeing any outsider coming to the village, and if any person breaks the quarantine, then a case is to be lodged against that person and that person is to be kept in institutional isolation. 

Barmer collector Vishram Meena said 49000 migrants have come in the district. He added that 52 people have tested positive, of which maximum are migrants.

District collector Namit Mehta said that they have made three different types of committees for monitoring home quarantine arrangements.


