Coronavirus outbreak: Hyderabad Archdiocese suspends all services
2020-03-21
SECUNDERABAD: The Archdiocese of Hyderabad has suspended all church services across the city such as mission preaching, stations of the crosses and novenas, except masses with limited number of people, until March 31.


Archdiocese of Hyderabad, Rev Thumma Bala, in a letter to members of churches in the city, issued pastoral directives in consultation with the curia officials. 

 
 

Exempting himself from the obligation to attend masses on Sundays and days of obligation till March 31, the archbishop asked all the parish priests, priest-in-charge, and heads of the institutions to suspend all church services except mass till March 31.

He advised those above 60 years of age to not come for mass. “I urge all who are sick or having a weakened medical condition, having fever, cough and cold not to come to church for masses on Sunday and days of obligation,” read the letter. 

Following Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s call for ‘janta curfew’ on March 22 from 7am to 9pm, the archbishop has suspended the Sunday mass for March 22. 

The letter said, “On Sunday March 29, masses can be celebrated and those who want to participate in the mass can only be in smaller groups, not more than 50 as experts suggested, and those who attend, kindly take necessary precaution such as wearing mask, keeping the prescribed distance from others as mentioned by medical experts, receiving Holy Communion in hand, etc.” 

The archbishop has asked people to follow the mass on the official Catholic TV channel, Divyavani, or YouTube and avoid any big social gatherings by all means. “The coronavirus pandemic is a matter of extreme concern as it is rapidly spreading around the world, in India and in the Archdiocese of Hyderabad too… Experts say that next few weeks is crucial for the control of its spread. I am issuing these guidelines with an intention to express my solidarity and concern,” said the archbishop in the letter.

Warangal bishop, Udumala Bala, said Sunday community mass on March 22 and 29 stand suspended in all churches in Warangal diocese. “However, priests will celebrate the holy mass as per the scheduled time but without the presence of community,” he said.

