University of Hyderabad researcher develops vaccine candidate
2020-03-28
HYDERABAD: Hyderabad has joined the scientific race to find a vaccine for novel coronavirus. A researcher from University of Hyderabad (UoH) has already developed a “vaccine candidate”, crossing the first hurdle in developing a new vaccine that could help prevent the spread of Covid-19. With coronavirus likely to emerge season after season like SARS and MERS viruses, a vaccine could help contain the rogue germ.


Dr Seema Mishra of department of biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, UoH, designed the potential vaccine candidates, which will help in development of actual vaccine. She identified the vaccine candidates as ‘T cell epitopes’. They will help in understanding all structural and non-structural proteins of Covid-19 for experimental testing. “Right now, best defence to prevent further Covid-19 infections is social distancing. Vaccination will take some more time due to the need for further work on these candidate epitopes. We are hopeful that our computational findings will provide a cost-and time-effective framework for rapid experimental trials towards an effective Covid-19 vaccine,” she said.

Like other viruses, novel coronavirus is a protein molecule with a lipid of fat covering or coat. But, it has its own genetic make-up that makes it different from other viruses.

Dr Seema disseminated her finding to scientific community worldwide through chemistry research and blueprint platform called ‘ChemRXiV’. She said laboratory studies (in vitro) are needed for conclusive evidence. “These vaccine candidates are small coronaviral peptides, molecules which are used by cells to trigger immune response to destroy cells harbouring these viral peptides. Using powerful immune-informatics approaches with computational software, I designed these potential epitopes (part of antigen recognised by immune system) in a way that can be used to vaccinate entire population,” she said.

A UoH statement said vaccine discovery usually takes 15 years, but powerful computational tools helped in enlisting these vaccine candidates in 10 days. A ranked list of potential candidate vaccines, based on how effectively they will be used by human cells to stop the virus, is generated by Dr Seema. “With no matches present in human protein pool, these coronaviral epitopes pose no cross-reactivity to human cells and hence, immune response will be against viral proteins and not human proteins,” the statement said, adding that these results will have to be investigated experimentally to provide conclusive evidence. 

This research is first such study on Covid-19 vaccine design from India.


