Hyderabad private hospitals charging lakhs for Covid-19 treatment
2020-06-14
HYDERABAD: Even as the Supreme Court is seeking a response from the Centre on capping treatment cost of Covid-19 patients in private health facilities, some corporate hospitals in Hyderabad are charging patients anywhere between Rs 25,000 and Rs 1.5 lakh a day.






Inquiries by TOI revealed that a few hospitals were reportedly charging around Rs 30, 000 a day only towards personal protective equipment (PPE) gear for hospital staff and other charges. Others put the charge at around Rs 4,000.




When TOI contacted a corporate hospital in Banjara Hills as a potential patient, a hospital representative informed that the treatment cost starts at Rs 40,000 a day, excluding PPE cost, in a normal ward. For twinsharing and a separate room, the cost would be higher.

“Only a doctor would be able to give you the exact cost and how many days of hospitalisation will be required,” the representative said, assuring that their treatment cost was way less compared to other corporate hospitals. The hospital even offered a discount if more than one person from the same family gets admitted for Covid-19 treatment.


Sources: State may fix tariffs for private hospitals treating Covid-19 patients

I got admitted for Covid-19 on Tuesday,” said a patient who is still being treated at the corporate hospital in the city. “All I am being administered is four tablets and an injection per day at a cost of about ₹50, 000 to ₹60, 000 daily. I feel that unless the government intervenes and puts a cap on treatment at corporate hospitals, there is no way a common man can afford this.”

“In states like Tamil Nadu, the government has fixed the slabs for Covid-19 treatment, but I don’t think that is the situation in Telangana. If the government fixes it, the hospitals will have no other option except to follow,” said Dr P Raghu Ram, president of Association of Surgeons of India.

A number of corporate hospitals were contacted to get their side of the story but none of the managers was ready to speak freely about the issue.

A hospital in Gachibowli is charging between Rs 1.3 lakh and Rs 1.6 lakh a day. A hospital in Kondapur, which has its branches in various locations in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, is charging about Rs 50,000 for an ICU bed and about Rs 30,000 for the general ward apart from PPE costs.

“A relative got admitted to a corporate hospital in Gachibowli for Covid-19 and was charged more than Rs 20 lakh for a 12-day stay,” a senior doctor, working in a government hospital in the state, said, adding, “the treatment is no different from what’s being offered in government facilities”.

In fact, the Covid-19 isolation wards in most of these hospitals are already full. “A real estate businessman was recently declared corona positive. Despite knowing who’s who in the state, he couldn’t find a bed at a corporate hospital and had to wait for a day,” an entrepreneur told STOI.

Of the total coronavirus positive patients in the state, about 200 are being treated at five major corporate hospitals in the city, 150-200 are under institutional quarantine at government facilities, about 600 under home quarantine and about 350-400 being treated at the state government’s Gandhi Hospital. The sources also confirmed that like Tamil Nadu, Telangana too would fix tariff for private hospitals treating Covid-19 patients in the next four to five days after organizing a meeting with managements of the corporate hospitals.


