Hyderabad: As lockdown turns off booze tap, addicted migrant kids struggle
2020-04-19
By: Lavanya.Menon@timesgroup.com

HYDERABAD: “It’s as though I have no control over myself – over what I speak or do. All I feel is an uncontrollable thirst for alcohol,” Akash (name changed), a migrant worker in his mid-teens staying at Chandanagar shelter camp, shivers as he recalls an aggressive episode of alcohol withdrawal after which he was rushed to a clinic a few days back.


Among the worst affected by the unavailability of alcohol during lockdown are children of the slums and minor migrant workers, as they pick up the habit early.



Dr. Rosy Gundra, whose non-profit Sankalp Foundation is helping Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation run shelter camps at Chandanagar and Lingampally, says she has come across many addicted children.

“At least 20 minors in the camps sheltering over a hundred migrant workers and homeless persons have been showing moderate to severe withdrawal symptoms,” she says. “A 14-year-old boy has been crying for just a spoon of liquor for days. Some days are particularly hard.”

She points out that the number is far higher in slums across the city. A survey conducted by her NGO in 10 of the slums last year pegged the number of minors addicted to alcohol there as close to 500, over 120 of them are girls.

“It stings that I can do nothing to calm my child, it’s as if she has gone mad,” Dhananjay (name changed), a beggar housed at Lingampally ZPHS shelter camp, stutters through tears.


‘Withdrawal symptoms in kids worse than adults’

His otherwise collected 14-year-old daughter had to be rushed to Kondapur Government Area Hospital on Thursday after an aggressive outburst. The girl, who begs along with her father for a living, has been addicted to alcohol for over a year now. Doctors TOI spoke to confirmed that withdrawal symptoms in children are far worse than in adults.

“Symptoms include delirium, hallucination and suicidal tendencies. If the affected can’t lay their hands on alcohol, they are likely to turn to far more dangerous substitutes which could be fatal,” says Dr B Jyostna, a neuropsychiatrist who works at Vijayawada Government General Hospital and also runs a mental health clinic in LB Nagar.

“After the lockdown, it is no longer uncommon for us to see children as young as 13 years in agony… If anything, this has really brought to light how many of our children are addicted to intoxicants,” she said.

“Alcohol withdrawal symptoms are both psychological and physical. The physical symptoms are hard to control and hallucinations can drive people to commit suicide,” Erragadda Institute of Mental Health superintendent Dr. Uma Shankar told TOI. No minor has, so far, been admitted to the institute during lockdown. Slums in the city where only a few alcohol withdrawal cases have been seen have a steady flow of illicit liquor, says Neloufer Tabassum, the co-founder of NGO Good Universe, which works in over 10 slums across the city. “Toddy sells for twice and even thrice the usual price. Slum-dwellers, including adolescents, pool in money to buy a bottle,” she said.

Slums such as Gowlidoddi, 8km from Hi-Tec City, have seen fewer withdrawal cases only because people have been brewing hooch within its premises, says Neloufer. The side-effects of illicit liquor is much worse than alcohol. But that’s the last thought on their mind, she says, “In this blind madness, they will drink anything they can lay hands on. No matter what it costs them.”

