Hyderabad: Birthday party trigger for 45 coronavirus cases in LB Nagar
2020-05-10
HYDERABAD: A birthday party thrown by a shop owner was the trigger for 45 Covid-19 positive cases and 15 new containment clusters in LB Nagar, which is now a hotspot for novel coronavirus in Hyderabad.


The virus spread soon after the shop owner, who stays in Saroornagar, threw the party for his friend in Vanasthalipuram. Those who took part in the party contracted the virus from the shop owner, who himself was infected from a worker in Malakpet Gunj where he has the shop. From just two containment clusters some time ago, the number of clusters in LB Nagar had gone up to 15 on Saturday.

Among the 45 positive cases, 25 cases pertain to the families of the two shop owners, confirmed a GHMC official. “Both the shop owners contracted the virus from workers at Malakpet Gunj. Both of them are family friends and visit each other’s houses. Some of their family members had fever and soon, the virus spread to the rest of the families after the birthday party,” a GHMC official told STOI.

On Saturday, GHMC commissioner DS Lokesh Kumar visited LB Nagar to take stock of the situation. Sodium hypochlorite solution was sprayed in Vanasthalipuram as well as in Saroornagar in the afternoon, while officials began looking out for the primary contacts of the positive cases.

“Those who have tested positive have been sent to hospital. Probe is under way to identify the primary contacts,” said a GHMC official. Though GHMC had decided earlier decided that home quarantine would be enough instead of isolating the entire locality, officials barricaded the area. “We had to declare the containment cluster in the locality following the new Covid-19 cases in LB Nagar,” the official said.

Both friends have shops in Malakpet Gunj, a wholesale market. While one stays in Saroornagar, the other resides in Vanasthalipuram. Both the areas fall under GHMC LB Nagar zone.

There were 57 positive cases in LB Nagar, out of which seven persons have recovered and five had succumbed to the virus. “All the 57 cases in LB Nagar have not been reported in a single day. When we started testing the primary contacts of the two shop owners, the new positive cases were detected,” said a senior GHMC official.

