‘I feel like a winner after defeating Covid-19’
2020-04-16
SURAT: Mangesh Vanare, 22, felt like a winner when doctors and nurses at New Civil Hospital (NCH) gave him a heart-warming farewell on his discharge after he recovered from coronavirus here on Wednesday.


“I feel like a winner. I have defeated coronavirus and it was only due to care and compassion of doctors and nurses at NCH. All the doctors and nurses stood in a row and they clapped for my fast recovery,” said Mangesh, an employee of DMart and resident of Pandesara, who had tested positive for COVID-19 on April 1.

The scene at the housing society where Vanare resides was also similar. The residents accorded a warm welcome to Vanare by beating thalis and showering him with rose petals. 

“I had not expected residents of my society to give me a warm welcome. When I entered from the main gate, people showered me with flower petals, they clapped and beat the thalis to welcome me. I was not ready for such a warm welcome in my society,” said Vanare.

Vanare added, “The residents of my society and my colleagues at DMart have gone through a lot of agony after I tested positive for the virus. With folded hands, I want to say sorry to all of them.”

After Vanare tested positive for the virus, Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) had closed down D-Mart supermarket located at Pandesara and about 1,493 customers, who visited the store, asked to get themselves self-quarantined.

“My mother, father, brother and about half a dozen family members were quarantined in a government hospital. My mother tested positive for the virus and was shifted to NCH. She is on the path of recovery and I am told that she will be discharged in a day or two,” said Vanare.

Vanare said he has posted a message on social media platforms about his recovery from the deadly disease. “My message on social media platforms will boost the morale of many who are suffering from the disease. It will give them hope that they too can defeat the deadly disease,” said Vanare

Health officials said Vanare was eighth patient to be discharged from NCH after recovery from the disease. Vanare has been advised home quarantine for 14 days.


