I have diabetes, can I contract covid-19?
2020-04-12
AHMEDABAD: Husband of Sunita Parmar (name changed), a resident of Ahmedabad, called up 1100 helpline recently to ask the psychiatrist on the line to talk to his wife. “She had got paranoid about anything from outside the home. She not only ensured that everything in her home is sanitized but also got her son to bathe five times a day,” said a psychiatrist with the helpline. 


“On the top of it, she believed that she had contacted COVID-19 without any medical consultation – as she had heard that many of the patients were diabetic – and insisted that nobody should come near her,” said a psychiatrist with the helpline.

As the intended 21-day lockdown is coming to its last leg, the calls to the helpline have increased, said state health department officials, as experts field questions ranging from confirming the symptoms to quelling citizens’ post-lockdown anxieties.

Dr Ajay Chauhan, superintendent of Government Hospital for Mental Health (HMH), said that the most common calls are related to ‘COVID phobia.’ “Few now can’t even stand the name and have refrained from consuming any details on the viral infection. We also suggest to such patients to restrict their exposure to the information in public domain and not to believe any rumours circulated on social media platforms,” he said, adding that the helpline is fielding over 300 queries since its inception.

“Different age groups are coping with the lockdown differently – in a recent case we received, a man was part of the gig economy and was just out of one job before lockdown. He’s constantly worried about whether he would get employment again and goes into a state where he forgets what he’s doing – eating or talking to someone or simply walking,” said Dr Ramashanker Yadav, a psychiatrist with the helpline. “Those living alone or without children also call up to share the anxiety – the most common complaint we get is lack of proper sleep.”

Dr Deepti Bhatt, a psychiatrist who is part of the consulting team, said that there is no apparent urban-rural divide. “It’s a phenomenon that has affected almost all and thus we are also getting several calls from towns and villages too. In most cases, we ask the callers to maintain a routine, follow good eating practices and connect with their families,” she said, adding that they would soon organize a special event for the workforce fighting COVID-19 from the frontline as they are also under constant duress. 


