‘I thought virus is too far from me. But...’
2020-03-23
Ahmedabad: How does a person feel when despite taking all possible precautions, the Covid-19 strikes? This was the crux of a heartfelt post by one of the first Covid-19 positive patients from Ahmedabad posted on a social media platform on Sunday. The woman with travel history to Finland is currently under treatment at an AMC-run hospital.

She stated in her post that travel to Finland was a gift to herself as she wanted to see the northern lights. She knew about the Covid-19 outbreak in Wuhan since January 15 but ‘I thought it’s too far from me... I’ll take necessary precautions,’ she wrote.

She flew to Finland in the beginning of March and took multiple domestic and international flights. ‘I wore an N99 mask, sanitized my hands a 100 times, washed my hands for 30 seconds as many times as I could, put the air vents on in my seat, sanitized my tray table and armrests,’ she wrote, adding that one cannot but use hands to touch masks due to security checks, passport controls, eating and drinking. But still there were only 10 cases in Finland at the time. And she thought the chances of her contracting the disease were close to non-existent.

When she returned, Covid-19 was already a pandemic but India still had few cases. She took the precaution of maintaining safe distance from families and other family members to the extent of isolating herself, washing her utensils and clothes with disinfectant and hot water. But on March 14, she got the first signs in the form of a slight fever. The general practitioner she saw advised her antibiotics. But as it persisted, she was tested and was found to have mild upper respiratory infection. On March 16, she visited a doctor friend at SVP where her samples for Covid-19 were taken and turned out to be positive. ‘As long as the numbers are few, this can be managed to a large extent,’ she wrote, adding that she’s worried about her parents even as they are fine currently.

‘Please take care guys whether you are sick or not sick, it’s not worth the risk. However, if you do think you’ve got it, please do not panic’ she wrote.


