I thought my life will end, says 4th Covid-19 patient
2020-03-27
Nagpur: The fourth Covid-19 positive patient is hoping to reunite with his family in the next two to three days after all his tests turned out to be negative. However, the world came crashing down for this professional working with an IT he was detected with the virus.

He was so upset that he thought it would be the end of his life after reading reports of deaths in China and European countries. He even called on his close friend and disclosed all investments he had made. After being in the isolation ward for 12 days, he now says his perspective towards life has changed completely. In an exclusive tête-à-tête with TOI, he shared his experience from being traumatic initially to a change that he termed as “second life”.

Excerpts:

 How it all began?

I was part of the team from same IT company that went to the US. We were four of which two fell sick. When our first colleague tested positive, second one, who was sick, pushed me to check my swab samples. In fact, the second one’s test came out to be negative. I went there very casually as I was completely fit with no cold, cough or fever. But when my test came out positive, it was the biggest shock of my life since corona’s name is synonymous with death.

 What was your reaction?

I was completely shattered and didn’t know what to do. I sat with my head down for half an hour thinking was it the end of my world? I then called up a close friend and told him to open an excel file on my laptop where I had all the files of my investments. I told him the password and advised him to pass it on to my parents in case something drastic happens. I wasn’t able to sleep properly for the first couple of days due to tension.

 How you are spending time in isolation?

Initially, it was bit difficult, but later I adjusted my schedule and made a timetable. I keep myself busy on phone and talking to my sister along with my parents, friends and relatives. I keep watching inspirational videos on YouTube and talking to some of the monks of Ram Krishna Math, who also kept my spirits high.

 What has changed in the last 12 days?

Truly speaking, it was roller coaster ride for me in this short span. This stay at isolation has changed my entire perspective towards life. Before coming here, I was content with my career growth like normal humans. It included high profile job in an IT company and career growth that I thought were the milestones. But, now I realized that these are not objectives of the life. I came back from the 2% of people from the world who were infected with the deadly virus which opened my eyes in a real sense. Now, I want to contribute towards betterment of the society in whatever way I can.

 How are the facilities and doctors at GMCH?

Usually, we tend to blame the government for poor facilities, but now only its manpower is working while taking all the risks to treat patients like us. They’re in fact lifesavers and I want to express my gratitude to them, including Dr Gosavi and his team of doctors and nurses. Even the staff here deserves appreciation, as they clean and disinfect our rooms thrice. I would rather say that they’re no less than soldiers, who guard our borders. I will carry this experience throughout my life.

 Any bitter experience?

After the list of quarantine patients was leaked, me and my family faced numerous problems as it contained my name. Me and my family received numerous calls and I had to literally tell them a lie that I was under isolation due to fear of social stigma. It was a very painful experience. It was kind of hypocrisy of the people who on one hand avoid helping out with the positive patients and families, but on other hand blindly forward such lists without thinking of implications on the persons named there.


