Surat: ‘I won! I defeated the coronavirus’
2020-04-03
SURAT: “I won, corona is defeated,’ said 45-year-old Kumarpal Ramniklal Shah after he came out of isolation ward of New Civil Hospital (NCH) here on Thursday evening. Shah, city’s third Covid-19 survivor, was the first positive case of local transmission admitted at the NCH on March 21. 


Kumarpal, an employee of a diamond company and a resident of Nanpura, had come in contact with the first COVID-19 positive patient who died at Mahavir Hospital on March 22. His close friend, Kaushik Mehta, insisted that he should visit the NCH for a routine test subsequent to which he tested positive for the virus on March 21. 

“The first COVID-19 patient was my boss and I was working in his diamond firm at Mahidhapura. A day before he was admitted in the hospital, I had gone to his house to deliver a diamond parcel where I had a brief meeting with him. When the health authorities declared that he was COVID-19 positive, my friend Kaushik Mehta insisted that I should go for the test at the NCH. I went to the NCH where my test confirmed that I was COVID-19 positive.” 

“I feel like I am born again. I had no symptoms whatsoever, not even cough, cold or fever. The doctors had given only two medicines and a syrup. The hospital staffers were very supportive and caring,” said Kumarpal, whose wife and two children are in government quarantine facility at Samras hostel on VNSGU campus. 

“I have only one message to COVID-19 patients and general public. Don’t panic, stay at home and follow government guidelines. Our country will win the fight against the deadly virus,” added Kumarpal. 

“For the last 14 days, I have missed my two small kids — Ratnam, 12, and Padmam, 6, — besides Pooja, my wife. I am told their health is fine and they may be released from the quarantine facility on Friday,” said Kumarpal.

When he arrived at his residence on Thursday evening, he received a warm welcome from his neighbours and other members of the housing society. “They had prepared food and offered hot water to drink. I am lucky to have such kind neighbours,” Kumarpal added. 


