Ichalkaranji under complete lockdown
2020-03-31
Kolhapur: With most people in Ichalkaranji continuing to violate the lockdown norms and coming out on the streets for non-essential reasons, the administration on Sunday decided to implement a complete lockdown in the town for three days starting Monday.

The textile town has thousands of workers whose livelihood depends on the textile units that are now shut. On Monday, the first day of the complete lockdown, all the essential services, including supply and sale of milk, newspapers and vegetables, operated till 9 am. All the shops, including grocery shops, remained shut on Monday and will continue to do so for the next two days.

Speaking to TOI, Dipak Patil, the chief officer of the Ichalkaranji Municipal Council, said, “Since the nation-wide lockdown was announced, we had exempted certain essential services from its purview. However, over the past few days, the police realised that people were still unnecessarily coming out on the roads citing different — often non-essential — reasons. We also noticed that people were crowding the vegetable markets, which was not the case before the lockdown. This was completely going against the spirit and purpose of the lockdown. That is why we have increased the policing activity to keep a check on various roads and take action against the violators. We have decided to completely lock down the town from Monday and no one would be allowed to come out on road for any reason. On Monday, we have received a good response. We expect people to support us over the next two days as well.”

“We have, however, exempted essential services like banking, hospitals and medical stores from the complete lockdown. People had already purchased groceries that should be sufficient for these three days. On Monday, milk, vegetable and newspaper distribution began from 6 am and wrapped up by 9 am. Since then, police have been patrolling the roads and streets of Ichalkaranji to ensure that the people stay in their houses. This will continue for the next two days, he said.


