ICMR sits on proposal to try Rs 5 arthritis drug for Covid-19
2020-05-26
Chennai: The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is sitting on a proposal for a clinical trial of an affordable and time-tested anti-inflammatory arthritis drug that has the potential to prevent thousands of deaths due to Covid-19.

Indomethacin has been used to prevent cytokine storm an abnormal immune reaction that kills Covid-19 patients in people with other health conditions. The drug costs Rs 5 a capsule, while Tocilizumab, a drug now used to treat cytokine storm, costs Rs 60,000 per dose.

Chennai-based kidney transplant surgeon Dr Rajan Ravichandran, who used indomethacin on his transplant patients first in 1989 to prevent cytokine storms, wrote to ICMR and its counterparts in the US and the UK on April 29 suggesting a clinical trial. While the UK department of health and social care wrote back saying the proposal has been forwarded to its Therapeutic Taskforce, ICMR is yet to act on it.

ICMR director general Dr Balram Bhargava told TOI that the council has received about 185 such proposals and requests on the use of different pharma products. “ICMR, along with department of science and technology, department of biotechnology and the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research are looking into them one by one,” he said.

In the US, meanwhile, doctors have found the drug to be effective in some 60 Covid-19 patients, often better than hydroxycholoroquine. Dr Jonathan Leibowitz, a primary care physician in Brooklyn, used it on his patients after his colleague Dr Robert Rothstein referred a 2006 study that showed the drug was effective against human SARS-CoV and canine coronavirus. When another colleague of his, Dr Aline Benjamin, tested positive for Covid-19, Dr Leibowitz asked her to try out the drug.

Dr Benjamin later said she had a dramatic reversal of symptoms cough and fever after one dose of indomethacin. “If we had used indomethacin earlier, many patients would not have gone to the emergency room,” Dr Leibowitz said in a recent interview with Medical Update Online.

Dr Rothstein wrote in the British Medical Journal on May 17: “We have found that treatment with indomethacin relieves the pain, stops coughing, and leads to a feeling of general wellbeing. Patients report ‘not feeling sick anymore’ … We have not seen this beneficial effect with hydroxychloroquine treatment or with ibuprofen and we have formed the impression that it is specifically related to indomethacin.”

Dr Leibowitz, in an email to TOI, said indomethacin “seems to have a clear positive effect and needs further investigation,” and indicated it was not being given the importance it deserves. “Medicine has been invaded by big businesses and refuses to consider drugs that don’t make money they are not sexy (while) trials are focused on Remdesivir and plasma, both of which, while having some effects, are clearly not penicillin.” 

Dr Ravichandran said it could be used on Covid-19 patients as a repurpose drug, but a largescale clinical trial is imperative, given the affordability and the promising results several studies on the drug have shown. A 1992 study found the effectiveness of indomethacin in transplant patients who suffer cytokine storm after administration of anti-rejection drug OKT3, something Dr Ravichandran had recorded in 1989. Another laboratory study in China has found the drug brought down the viral load in SARS patients.

“The drug has to be used early to save lives,” said Dr Ravichandran. “Going by initial anecdotal evidence, this can save lives and turn many patients asymptomatic within 48 hours, so they could be sent home to reduce the pressure on hospitals and treatment cost.”


