ICMR research in Rajasthan to gauge spread of Covid-19
2020-04-29
JAIPUR: In an effort to find out if coronavirus has spread in the community, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) will conduct a seroprevalence study across the state. 

As part of the study, samples will be taken from all the districts of the state randomly and they will be tested for Covid-19. The samples will be taken from the patients coming to out-patient departments of hospitals and also from the general population. 

“All districts of the state will be covered in the ICMR study. We are cooperating with ICMR in this study as it would help determine the prevalence of Covid-19 in the entire state. It’s a great surveillance tool and would help us prepare for any future eventuality,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). 

As of now, the health department is taking samples from affected areas only, where the cases have been reported. They are taking samples of people who are in contact with the infected people currently, but in the ICMR study, they will test the general population for Covid-19.

“From the districts which have not reported any case, they will collect 250 samples from outpatient department of hospitals and 250 from general population. In districts which have reported cases, 60 samples will be taken from outpatient department of hospitals and 60 from the general population. The study will determine if the coronavirus has spread to the community,” said a health department official, claiming that their future strategy for containing the spread of the virus will depend on the ICMR study. 

The health department has denied that the virus has spread in the community till now. The health department was relying on rapid testing for assessing the spread of coronavirus in the community, but the rapid test failed miserably in the state as the rapid test kits sent to the health department through ICMR gave ‘inaccurate’ results. Now, the ICMR study will clarify the situation about community spread of Covid-19 in the state. 


