ID refers two to NRS as number of Covid-19 suspects exceeds beds
2020-03-19
KOLKATA: The Beliaghata ID Hospital was forced to transfer two cases to NRS Medical College and Hospital’s isolation ward on Wednesday after the patient count exceeded its accommodation limit of 24 beds. 


ID Hospital is the nodal hospital for Covid-19 tests in Bengal and all suspect cases screened at the airport. Till Tuesday, the patient count was 10. On Wednesday, 15 more were admitted. Later in the day, the patients were transferred to NRS. On Wednesday, seven patients who tested negative for Covid-19 were moved out of the hospital, freeing up space. 

 
 
Anticipating a surge in patient count, the Bengal government is opening another Covid-19 testing facility in Kolkata at the School of Tropical Medicine (STM). Other testing laboratories are being set up in north Bengal and Midnapore Medical College and Hospital. The state has also sought approval to set up testing facilities in Malda and Murshidabad medical colleges. 

Cops on Wednesday also put in place special security arrangements for Beliaghata ID Hospital, which includes a full-fledged police outpost. Sources said this was to ensure that no one left the isolation ward nor entered it without approval of the hospital administration. The cops are also mulling setting up an information counter with help from hospital authorities and health department officials. “We have stepped up security as required. An assessment has been carried out at the police headquarters,” said Subhankar Sinha Roy, Jt CP (headquarters).

At present, two shifts have been introduced with an ACP and an inspector leading a 12-member team in each. The cops on duty have received instructions from the doctors on how to maintain their safety. “We are providing enough masks and hand sanitizers for these men. We have advised them to clean themselves after the end of duty,” said an officer. Sources claimed each police station has also been asked to prepare a team that can convince patients or those suspected of carrying the virus to stay in isolation at government facilities or at home.

The health department, in a high-level meeting on Tuesday, advised all state hospitals to set up isolation wards and ICU facilities for Covid-19 patients far from the OPDs. “OPDs are congested places in a hospital and may enhance the disease spread when these hospitals admit Covid-19 patients,” a senior officer said.

