Madhya Pradesh: Identify, isolate, test and treat to fight coronavirus, says CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan
2020-04-13
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan has instructed the officers to effectively implement the IITT (Identification, Isolation, Testing and Treatment) strategy to fight Corona virus in the state. He said that entry and exit from the infected areas should to be strictly prohibited to check spread of the viral disease.


The chief minister while reviewing the situation and arrangements for prevention and treatment of Corona along with senior officials in Mantralaya on Sunday said tt should be ensured that every infected patient is cured.

During the review, it was informed that a total of 8,250 people have been tested in the state so far, out of which 6,867 have been reported negative, 564 have reported positive and the reports of 2,931 are pending. Out of 1,158 tests in the state, on April 12, 1,067 reports are negative and 32 have been reported positive while reports of 59 are awaited.

The chief minister informed that 564 infected areas of 22 infected districts have been completely sealed. Therefore, it should be ensured that public movement is restricted in these areas. Drones must be used to monitor these areas and FIRs should be registered against those violating the orders.

He directed that there should be no shortage of essential commodities in any area and the supply chain should not be broken anywhere. Special care of hotspots should be taken, so that all the necessary items reach there.

Principal secretary urban administration department Sanjay Dubey informed that essential goods are being supplied through 400 vehicles in Bhopal. Supply of essential goods through 1,000 loader vehicles has also been started in Indore. The Sanchi parlours are open and hand carts are also being used to supply ration to people.

Chief secretary Iqbal Singh Bains informed that the Corona sample collection is continuously increasing. Today the pending samples have been sent by air to Delhi Lab for examination. Also, arrangements are also being made to send sample for test to Kota in Rajasthan.

During the review, it was informed that 55 Corona infected patients have been discharged after full recovery. In Indore alone, 7 people were discharged on Sunday. On this, the Chouhan said that such people, who are returning home after beating Corona and recovering, are not less than warriors. My best wishes to all of them.

It was informed in the meeting that 7 labs are presently working for Corona virus testing and 14 more will be operational soon. Efforts are on to set up 20 more diagnostic labs. Thus, there will be a total of 34 Corona testing labs in the state.

Additional chef secretary Manoj Shrivastava informed that health tests of total of 4.68 lakh labourers have been conducted in rural areas of the state so far. These include labourers from outside the state. As many as 18,174 labourers of various states are residing in the state. Foodgrain and food have been arranged for all these labourers. In addition, ayurvedic, homeopathic and unani medicines are also being distributed to them.

Chief minister informed that limited economic activities will be started after April 14 as per the guidelines of the Government of India. MNREGA works will also be started in districts where there are no reports of Corona infection. Apart from this, the work of tendu patta collection, mahua and other forest produce will be undertaken through Forest Produce Committees. Activities like making masks will be undertaken by women.

