If I can help even one person recover from Covid-19, I will be very very happy: Bengal's first plasma donor
2020-05-19
At 22, she not only defeated Covid-19, but Monami Biswas – a management student from University of Edinburgh – has now become West Bengal’s first plasma donor for the clinical trial on convalescent plasma therapy. On Monday, she went through a series of tests before donating her plasma at the Medical College and Hospital. Monami, who is yet to go through a few more tests, will finally be done with the process on Wednesday. According to many, plasma therapy could be a possible treatment for Covid-19 infection. 

“A couple of days ago, I got a call from Dr Yogiraj Ray – who tended me when I was infected -- asking me to come for the screening on Monday,” said Monami, who, in an earlier interview with us, had expressed her eagerness to donate plasma. “If my health parameters permit, I’ll surely come forward for the plasma therapy treatment,” she had told us. 

It took her roughly an hour before she was released. “The entire hospital looks different now. From basic thermal screening to everything else, it felt like I was going through some sanitised tunnel. There were many doctors — seniors and juniors. Within an hour, all my tests were done and I am told that my plasma has also been collected,” she told us. 

In March, Monami was admitted to Beleghata ID hospital when she tested positive for Covid-19 after returning to Kolkata from her university
 in Scotland. After a battle of 10-odd days, she finally defeated the infection and got back home. The gritty woman that she is, Monami prepared for her third semester and took the tests in May. “I completed my test on May 11. In the first and second semester, I scored around 80%. I hope to score 90% this time,” she told us. 

On her way back home on Monday, she was flooded with congratulatory messages. While talking to us, a happy Monami said, “If I can help even one person in recovering from Covid-19, I will be very very happy.”



