If US can lift citizens, why can’t India, ask crew of quarantined ship
2020-02-17
Madurai: “Is the life of an American more precious than an Indian’s? If the US can do it, why can’t India,” asked an anguished Anbalagan, crew member of the cruise vessel Diamond Princess currently quarantined off Yokohama, Japan because of coronavirus-hit passengers. He was referring to the efforts taken by the US to lift its citizens from the ship whereas the nearly 160 Indians are left to languish on board along with others. 

“We are in the danger zone and the problem is getting bigger with every passing moment. Wake up India,” said Anbalagan in a WhatsApp call with TOI late on Sunday night. A native of Madurai, Anbalagan said the US crew left the ship on Sunday and will be flying home on Monday. “Canadians too are preparing to leave. What about incredible India? From the beginning we have been pleading that the Indian crew should be sent back to India. Is Japan afraid of America and showing lethargy towards India?” he asked

He said the reply given by Union minister for health and family welfare Harsh Vardhan is disturbing for the crew. “We are in a depressing condition for more than two weeks. We made representations to the Government of India and applied pressure through the media but the minister has said there is nothing they can do but wait for Japan to act,” he said. “The minister said that Indians alone cannot be brought out. But, hats off to US president (Donald) Trump as he not only announced that he will take his crew from the ship but also did it,” he said.

Stating that the Indians are losing their morale due to the delay in rescuing them, he however expressed hope that he will soon be able to return home safely. The crew on board the vessel say that the virus had spread from a Japanese tourist. They added that the situation could have been handled better had the crew been allowed to disembark and quarantined separately. Since the Japanese government was acting slowly, they expressed fears that their quarantine could be extended well beyond February 19.


