IFS trainees: Covid-19 made them see things in a much positive way
2020-04-29
DEHRADUN: It has been a month since the two trainee officers of Indian Forest Service (IFS) were discharged from hospital after battling against the deadly Novel Coronavirus (Covid-19). The young men, who were the second and third Covid-19 cases in Uttarakhand, have a simple message for the people now, “take out all the negativity from life, when you have tested positive.”


Darshan Gatani, 32, who hails from Rajasthan and was discharged from Doon hospital last month, told TOI on Monday that he finished 28 days of home quarantine last week, after being discharged from the hospital.

“After coming out of the hospital, I spent most of the time concentrating on work, studies and maintaining my sanity. The time I had spent in isolation has actually added to my perspective to see life better. Above all, positivity is the key to tackle this disease as well as this situation [I mean the lockdown],” he said, adding that family’s patience and support also helped him a lot.

Swaroop Dixit, 27, from Maharashtra, also battled against the deadly virus, particularly, during his eight days of hospitalisation. “During the period of treatment, I only communicated with positive people, read things on positivity and refrained myself from rumours and negative news. That helped me to stay in a positive frame of mind which was very much important,” said Swaroop, who added that people should get out of the thought that "corona is the end of life or the world".

The recovered duo also appealed to people that they must cooperate with the government and follow the rules. They also said that people should develop self-confidence to defeat the disease and everyone must maintain hygiene and wash their hands regularly to keep the deadly disease at bay.

“We shouldn’t panic. That is the least we can do,” said Gatani. And then, Swaroop with a smile added, “I would say, when you have tested positive, just throw all the negativity out and be totally positive.”


