IGGMCH, GMCH start Covid-19 OPD; latter begins freeing up beds
2020-03-30
Nagpur: Both Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) and Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) have started separate Covid-19 out-patient departments (OPDs) from Monday. 

At IGGMCH, the Covid-19 OPD is running at the old casualty ward while it is near casualty ward at GMCH. The suspected cases are being checked for fever. Doctors said in case they fit the criteria, the patients are moved to the isolation wards for further investigation. 

Earlier, the suspected cases were directly taken to the isolation ward where positve patients too were admitted. This led to three patients fleeing the wards even while their test results were awaited.

GMCH has also started taking measures to free up beds occupied by recovered patients. As of Wednesday, GMCH had 70 additional beds for corona positive cases. Doctors said other patients who have recovered are being asked to take discharge.

Earlier, such patients would seek additional hospital stay. Mayo and GMCH beds are occupied by patients admitted by police or social workers. When they recover, they continue to stay back as most are destitute or can’t recall their names and addresses. But, with number of accidents going due to the lockdown, inflow of such patients has already dropped.

While IGGMCH authorities said they had sufficient beds for Covid-19 patients, GMCH had been keeping track of all such patients who could be advised discharged at the earliest since January. 

Three major focus areas are ensuring enough N95 masks, more ICU beds and freeing up beds occupied by recovered patients. 

They said GMCH has got 1,000 washable cloth masks stitched to be used in general OPDs. This will preserve N95 masks that are actually needed by doctors and paramedics working in isolation wards. 

GMCH is also in the process of setting up 150 ICU beds in a new building near the superintendent’s office. Another 50 ICU beds will be available at a ward that will be converted into isolation facility as per need. 

Doctors said 70 beds were already available at Ward 49 and 25 after advising “delayed patients” to take discharge. 

“Looking at best clinical scenario and without causing any damage to patient’s health, these beds were vacated at the earliest,” they said. 


