Vijayawada: IGM Stadium market closed, meat sale banned as Covid-19 cases climb
2020-04-19
VIJAYAWADA: With 59 Covid-19 positive cases till Saturday and several areas in the city marked as red zones, Vijayawada continued to remain on high alert.


The Krishna district administration and Vijayawada Municipal Corporation have stepped up implementation of lockdown measures and the civic body is focusing on controlling crowds at vegetable markets and has imposed a ban on meat sale in the city this Sunday.

The spike in the number of cases in the city over the past week has placed the administration on alert. Cases from Madhuranagar, Gunadala Gangireddu Dibba, Machavaram and other areas are posing a challenge to authorities as the source of infection is unknown. “We should be very cautious about the coronavirus. Despite our efforts, number of cases in the city increased all of a sudden. Around 10 cases were registered at one area in the city and we are still striving hard to trace the source of infection,” said district collector A Mohammed Imtiaz.

As part of containment measures, VMC authorities decided to close the makeshift vegetable market at the Indira Gandhi Municipal Stadium in view of the large crowds everyday. Instead, ten makeshift vegetable markets have been set up across the city.

Officials who had marked out boxes on the floor at stalls to encourage social distancing said, “despite our directions people are crowding the markets. We have closed the market at IGM Stadium. We have decentralised the markets and established different markets at Siddhartha Mahila Kalasala, PB Siddhartha College, Bishop Azariah School, SRR College and other prime locations in the city,” said VMC commissioner Prasanna Venkatesh. 

Officials added, “We have noticed huge crowds at Bishop Azariah Schoo and residents are requested to make use of vegetable markets arranged at nearby colonies.”

Meanwhile, Krishna district collector A Mohammed Imtiaz on Saturday issued orders imposing a ban on the sale of chicken, mutton, fish and other non-vegetarian foods in the city on Sunday.

Meat markets in the city will remain closed and illegal stocks will be destroyed if caught by officials, he said.

