IIIT Surat students develop AI Covid-19 scanner
2020-04-17
Surat: Two budding engineers of Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), Surat have shown considerable ingenuity to develop a Covid-19 scanner that helps to identify a potential patient without any need for a human to directly come in contact with the latter. The artificial intelligence-based technology has been developed by second year students of engineering while working remotely from Bikaner in Rajasthan and Ropar in Punjab, putting to best use the time available to them because of nationwide lockdown to contain the spread of coronavirus. The institute is preparing to approach Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) for funds to further develop the scanner for professional use.Krishna Ojha, a student of electronics engineering, and Ekta Arora, a student of computer science, used video cameras, data of infected persons’ movements, machine learning software, ultrasonic sensor and other devices to develop the scanner remotely. Ojha is in Bikaner since March 2 as he had undergone a surgery and Arora is in Ropar since the declaration of lockdown. The scanner instructs a patient to position himself properly and studies his/her body movements for a couple of minutes. If the patient has Covid-19 symptoms like cold, cough, running nose or sneezes, the scanner immediately analyzes the data and takes the former’s x-ray. "Many of my family members are doctors and it was shocking to know that many doctors had got infected in Rajasthan while treating Covid-19 patients. Hence, I and Ekta thought of developing a scanner that can identify a potential patient without any human having to examine him/her physically," Ojha told TOI over phone."We used x-ray data of Covid-19 patients to analyze chest infection. The scanner’s artificial intelligence itself decides if the person has infection and of what degree before issuing an alert to doctors," said Ojha."We had limited resources and it was challenging to develop the scanner while being under lockdown. The AI Covid-19 scanner can be used for examining patients after attaching it with some hi-tech medical equipment like digital x-ray scanner,” said Arora.The students submitted the project after its completion through video to faculty members of the institute. "Our students have developed something which is needed most in the current times. After their video presentation, we decided to approach MHRD for funding to develop the AI Covid-19 scanner to advance level," said Upena Dalal, dean academic, IIIT.PointersAI Covid-19 scanner (named Corontine) has been developed by Krishna Ojha and Ekta Arora, BTech students of IIIT, SuratIt automizes first stage of patient examinationIt first positions a person through audio instructionsIts video cameras then study the person’s body movements It records and matches the movements with its dataThe AI Covid-19 scanner can identify symptoms such as sneeze, running nose, cough and fever If basic symptoms of the person match, it decides to take his/her chest x-rayThe x-ray is then matched by it with the data of Covid-19 patientsA medical professional is alerted for further procedure if there is match on multiple criteria of the person’s symptoms