IIIT starts series to guide startups during lockdown
2020-04-08
HYDERABAD: Apart from conducting virtual classes, the International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad (IIIT Hyderabad) has started ‘Lockdown Talks’ and ‘Startup Gyan Series’ to guide startups on how to operate, market, and develop their businesses during the present crisis.

Initiated by the Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CIE) at IIIT Hyderabad, the lockdown talks were being organized once in two days, which will concentrate more on topics that are relevant to the current situation such as hiring practices, raising money, among other. The Startup Gyan series, meanwhile, is a video blog that would be uploaded every day. 

“We have already started uploading video blogs under Startup Gyan Series from Monday. As part of this series, startup founders will talk about their startup status and the journey so far through conversation on specific topics useful for other deep tech startups and the community at large. The video will be about 15-20 minutes long,” said Ramesh Loganathan, chief operating officer, CIE, IIIT Hyderabad, adding that by the end of the series they would have videos on about 30 topics which will be helpful to startups. 

Manish Ranjan, co-founder NanoHealth, who delivered the first talk in the Startup Gyan series, spoke about ‘Winning that first corporate customer’. 

Sharing his experience, he said the first corporate client comes from the close pool of references, but to gain their trust, startups need to be thorough in understanding the need and how they could encourage corporates to take up those extra steps which would be avoided otherwise. “The first 2-3 clients are the ones where startups need to reiterate their problem statements through quick identification of needs and build data to back it up for subsequent clients,” he added. 

The institute would also start ‘Unpitch’, where startups get an opportunity to pitch virtually to seek funding. “This will start on April 20. The startups will get to pitch to fulfil for one specific need in their firm,” Loganathan added. 


