IIM-Visakhapatnam develops Covid-19 predictive dashboard
2020-06-03
VISAKHAPATNAM: Indian Institute of Management, Visakhapatnam, has launched ‘Covid-19 Tracker’, an interactive predictive dashboard to track and predict the spread of Covid-19 in India.


It is the second predictive dashboard launched in India after one by the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi.

The dashboard projects spread of Covid-19 at the state level and will go down to district-level which will be of use for district administrations.

For example, when it comes to Visakhapatnam district, the dashboard predicts that cases may reach their peak between May 28 and August 29 with 95% certainty.

As far as Andhra Pradesh is concerned, infections may peak between May 27 and August 23.

Anirban Ghatak, lead researcher and a faculty of decision sciences at IIM-V, said, “The dashboard (www.iimv.ac.in/covidtracker) would even predict the district-level disease incidence. This is the only dashboard in India that does not only predict the peak infection, but also warns against a second wave of infection in case certain Covid-related restrictions are not maintained. The data predictions will also come in handy for the authorities to make informed decisions to contain the spread,” said Ghatak.

Prof Shivshanker Singh Patel, another lead researcher and a faculty of decision sciences, said the dashboard is self-explanatory on navigation and managerial fronts.

“It even helps any non-technical person to understand many other nuances of the predictive model when he/she navigates through the dashboard. The primary source of data are covid19india.org and their Github repository. The data and predictions in ‘Covid- 19 Tracker’ are updated on a daily basis,” said Prof Patel.

The tracker primarily helps predict the spread of the pandemic based on a modified extended susceptible-infected-removed (eSIR) model. It analyses district and state-level caseloads and represents a prediction of Covid-19 spread for various scenarios with different possible dates of lockdown relaxation, followed by varying degrees of social distancing guidelines that may be adopted post-lockdown.

It also proposes possible strategies to contain the Covid-19 spread in each district depending on the fraction of the population that may be infected at the peak.


