IIM Calcutta mulls online interview to navigate coronavirus
2020-03-15
KOLKATA: The government decision to put an embargo on large gatherings in its fight against novel coronavirus has prompted Indian Institute of Management Calcutta to consider online interviews of shortlisted candidates for admission to the 2020-22 academic session instead of personal interviews. Of the 2,000 candidates shortlisted for the 480 MBA seats at IIM Calcutta, around 700, who have chosen west and north India regions for the session, remain to be interviewed. 


IIMC authorities are likely to take a call next week. Usually, professors from IIM Calcutta travel to different centres across the country to conduct these sessions.

“The institute has finished personal interview of some candidates. But a large number of students are yet to meet the institute’s faculty members for final selection. This is likely to be called off,” said a source. “A proposal to hold the interviews online has been sent for the director’s approval. Instead of appearing for personal interviews in Mumbai and Delhi, the candidates there are likely to be provided with separate time slots at a designated place or centre, where they will have to report for online interviews with the faculty members in Kolkata.” The proposal suggests the candidates be divided into smaller groups and allotted different time slots in order to avoid large gathering at the centres. “The suggestions have been made, keeping in mind the government’s order to limit physical contact or proximity as much as possible” said an official.

However, one of the applicants, who have received interview calls from three IIMs, is apparently not quite happy with the online proposal. “It can lead to misunderstanding when the interviewer can’t see the interviewee in person. Physical presence helps several candidates make a positive impression. Interviews over the virtual world are impersonal,” he said. Even a teacher felt candidates might face difficulties “in absence of visual cues from the interviewer”. “It can be disadvantageous to a certain extent,” she said.

A senior IIM Calcutta official, however, pointed out that such an unprecedented situation called for alternative methods to navigate the current crisis. “If interviews are not conducted at the earliest, the academic session might be delayed, which is not conducive for a two-year programme,” he said.

