IIT-Kanpur cancels mega fest Techkriti due to coronavirus scare
2020-03-13
KANPUR: The annual technical and entrepreneurial festival of IIT-Kanpur, Techkriti-2020 has been cancelled in view of coronavirus scare, informed the media cell of the institute on Thursday.


Though there is no confirmed case of Coronavirus in the city but since Techkriti witnesses a huge footfall of students and visitors from across the country as well as abroad, the IIT-Kanpur administration, on Thursday evening, decided to cancel the mega event which was to start from March 19.

Techkriti is one of the largest technical festivals held in engineering and management institutes of the country. The fest witnesses participation of students from all IITs and top colleges of the country. During the fest a number of events including competitions like Model United Nations, Tech Summit, Entrepreneurial Conclave, Technocruise are held every year awarding goodies and prize money to the winners. Besides, workshops and talks by eminent speakers remians an attraction. Prominent artistes also visit the institute for performnaces during the cultural evenings. The website of Techkriti had been made live and all preparations were in place.

The cancellation of the fest has come as a setback for the students who had been preparing for the fest for past many months. A student told TOI that it takes an entire year to prepare for the grand event and its cancellation at the last moment is very disheartning. The cancellation was also a setback to the sponsors of the fest, he added.

Meanwhile, precautionary measures have been also put in place on the campus for protection against coronavirus spread without disturbing the academic atmosphere. The institute has also made the attendance of all postgraduate students optional till April 15. The residents of IIT-Kanpur have also been advised to avoid international travel till April 15 and all outreach activities on the campus have also been suspended until April 15.

The institute stated that it is in constant touch with the district epidemiologist as well as the health department about the situation regarding Covid-19.


