West Bengal: IIT-Kharagpur cancels classes, IIM-Calcutta pushes convocation back to avoid coronavirus risk
2020-03-14
KOLKATA: IIT Kharagpur on Friday suspended academic activities till March 31 to avoid any suspected threat from Covid-19. IIM Calcutta has postponed the annual convocation, which was to be held on the Joka campus on April 4. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“Students and campus residents have been advised not to leave the campus. Those students who live outside campus have been instructed to stay at home. Students will be able to avail of online facilities for classroom courses. Laboratory courses, however, would remain suspended until further notice,” the IIT circular stated. “The schools on the premises will also be suspended but the ongoing secondary and higher secondary examinations will be conducted as per schedule,” IIT director V K Tewari said in the circular. 


TimesViewKolkata is yet to get a single case but that may change, given the rising numbers in the rest of the country. But responsible behaviour — heeding all the guidelines laid down by health experts and government agencies — can contain the spread of this flu to a large extent. We must remember that a response feeding on panic will not help. 
All seminars, conferences and workshops have also been postponed until further notice at IIT Kharagpur. 

At IIM Calcutta, this will be the first time in a decade when the institute has been forced to defer the convocation. In a notice issued by director Anju Seth on Friday evening, the institute stated that “in view of advisories issued by the ministry of health and family welfare and the WHO to avoid large gatherings ... it has been decided to defer the convocation.” 

The notice, however, doesn’t mention any other date when the convocation may be held. “Several other IIMs, including IIM Lucknow, IIM Indore and IIM Bangalore, have also deferred their convocations which were scheduled to be held this month.

Several Kolkata schools on Friday issued circulars to parents about ensuring safety of students. South Point School spokesperson Krishna Damani said, “Handing over of report cards of the annual term of classes nursery-III, scheduled for March 17, has been deferred and fresh dates will be announced soon. Report cards for classes IV and V will be handed over to parents on March 24 and students will not be required to attend school on that date. An annual function of the school’s Saturday Activity Club, scheduled on March 21, has been deferred till further notice.” The school also postponed the showing of final-term answer papers to classes VI-VIII scheduled for March 16 to March 18. 

At the La Martiniere Schools, a notice was issued where guardians have been advised not to send their wards to school if they are down with fever, runny nose, cough or any infectious disease, till they completely recover and get a fitness certificate from a doctor.

At Amity University, classes have been called off till March 31. “All face-to-face classroom activities on campus have been called off with effect from Saturday up to March 31. In lieu of the suspended on-campus classes, online classes will be scheduled from next week so that there is no academic loss,” the circular said.


