IIT researchers: People junked public transport to beat virus
2020-04-03
HYDERABAD: Awareness about Covid-19 is higher in tier-1 cities as compared to tier-2 and tier-3 cities, reveals a study by researchers from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Hyderabad and IIT-Bombay. Interestingly, a majority of respondents, 93%, found private mode of transport to be safer compared to the public one.


The researchers studied the impact of Covid-19 outbreak on daily commute during the transition phase between pre-lockdown and lockdown period. Over 1,900 participants took part in an online survey, which collects data related to the daily commute and visit behaviour.

This study analysed travel and visit behaviour changes that occurred during the third week of Covid-19 outbreak in India during pre-lockdown period. Results indicated that in tier-1 cities, about 12% of the respondents switched from public to private mode during the third week of Covid-19 as against nine per cent in tier-2 and seven per cent in tier-3 cities.

Moreover, nearly 48% of people said they did not travel to work during the third week of March, whereas 28% had the same frequency of travel to work. Nearly 93% respondents found the private mode of transport to be safer compared to the public one.

“Given the uncertainties in the minds of the commuters regarding their travel behaviour due to social distancing, it is important for policy-makers and local transport authorities in general to understand the change in travel pattern,” Digvijay S Pawar, assistant professor, department of civil engineering, IIT-Hyderabad, who was part of the study, told TOI.

When enquired about cancellation of trips between the cities using major mode of transportation, around 18% said they cancelled their flights as against 20% who cancelled train journeys. This indicated that the awareness about Covid-19 was higher in tier-1 cities followed by tier-2 and tier-3 cities.

“We are also trying to understand the effect of Covid-19 on transportation-related emissions. The data on reduction in vehicle miles travelled and vehicle type will be used to quantitatively model the reduction in traffic-related emissions,” said researcher Pritha Chatterjee, an assistant professor with IIT-Hyderabad.

The researchers recommended spreading more awareness about the ill-effects and spread of Covid-19, especially among the weaker sections of society.


