Gujarat HC says finish quarantine, gives a month’s bail extension
2020-05-21
AHMEDABAD: Whether to remain in quarantine as a suspected Covid-19 spreader or to surrender at jail upon completion of his bail period and breach provisions of the Disaster Management Act? This was a question posed before the Gujarat high court by a prisoner while seeking extension of bail period.

Looking at the peculiar situation, Justice R P Dholaria granted one more month to the prisoner to surrender before the jail authorities by allowing his request for late surrender.



 The case involves a murder accused from Gondal, Nikunj Donga. He suffers from oral cancer and had obtained temporary bail form the high court for check up and treatment. He had to obtain bail because the police escort from jail to hospital often got cancelled due to police officials’ continuous duty in the lockdown. After his release on temporary bail, he went to Surat for the purpose of biopsy. Due to the lockdown and curtailed medical services, Donga had to be content with ayurvedic medicines.

Upon his return home in Gondal, the local authority ordered him to remain home quarantined on suspicion of being a Covid-19 spreader looking at his travel history. He has been confined to four walls since then. But he was required to surrender at jail because the bail period of one month was to complete. He requested the HC for bail extension through advocate Hedu Sudarshan.

It was submitted that Donga had no means to find out his Covid-19 status because private laboratories are not permitted to conduct RT-PCR tests and the government has stopped performing tests on asking on the mere basis of suspicion. It was also submitted that it would be a violation of the Disaster Management Act by breaching the quarantine orders, if he leaves his house and goes to prison. Moreover, due to the quarantine orders, his cancer treatment was also getting delayed, the lawyer submitted.

Meanwhile, the HC has issued express orders to jail authorities not to allow any prisoner inside jail without ascertaining that he is Covid-19 negative.

