Ill-fitting goggles may be letting coronavirus in: Doctors
2020-04-21
CHENNAI: Goggles distributed to healthcare professionals in Covid-19 isolation units could be one of the biggest sources of infection, doctors’ bodies in Tamil Nadu fear. Doctors also say thickness of the aprons isn’t as per the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) specifications.


A day after six post-graduate doctors at the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital tested positive for the virus on Thursday, several doctors’ bodies wrote to the state government seeking better quality PPEs.


 Coronavirus live updates 

 

Tamil Nadu Government Doctors Association president Dr K Senthil said on Monday many doctors were infected despite wearing protective gear. "While the ICMR has revised the spec of the coverall or jump suits to 95GSM, we are getting only gowns or apron of 75GSM. There are gaps between the hood and the collar, leaving the neck partially exposed. The goggles are like the ones sold on the beach. They don’t sit firmly on the nose, exposing the eyes to the virus," he said. 

The Federation of Government Doctors Association has made a representation to the state government. "When the whole population is under lockdown, hospitals and healthcare people may become the source of infection. We have been demanding certain things to minimize the involvement of healthcare people," said Dr S Ramalingam of the association.

Health minister C Vijayabaskar said the state was doing "everything" to ensure protection of healthcare warriors. "The products given to the doctors are quality tested," he said. 

Tamil Nadu Medical Service Corporation managing director Dr P Umanath said even when the ICMR recommended 60GSM as the spec for coverall, the state ordered products that are at least 70GSM. However, he said that local manufacturers were unable make proper goggles. "We have asked for two varieties of goggles – one can be worn over the spectacles, another that can be worn with spectacles. Vendors are taking time to produce good quality ones," he said.


