Covid-19: Kerala IMA urges caution, recommends bar closure
2020-03-19
KOZHIKODE: Indian Medical Association (IMA) state committee has said that utmost caution, by strictly observing social distancing measures, is a must during the next two weeks if the state is to prevent the progression of Covid-19 to stage-III, which involves community spread.


Addressing media persons at a press conference here on Wednesday, IMA former state president Dr V G Pradeep Kumar and IMA north zone secretary Dr Ajith Bhaskar said if Covid-19 enters stage-III, then the spread would be exponential and it would take just ten days for it to spread to 1,000 people.

“If people strictly observe the directions during the next two weeks, we will be able to stop the transmission. Once it goes to community spread stage, it could be very difficult to contain it as around 14-16% patients can develop pneumonia and some can develop acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) which needs ventilator support, and they are very limited in hospitals in the state,” Dr Bhaskar said.

Dr Kumar said that IMA had already proposed to the state government temporary closure of bars as they promote interaction of people for long periods within a closed and air-conditioned environment.

IMA also urged the government to provide personal protection equipment to all health workers engaged in virus screening.

Dr Kumar said that doctors under the association have decided to provide digital consultation to existing patients with long-term conditions like diabetes, hypertension, etc, for a limited period to prevent them from visiting hospitals. 

Also, IMA has directed all hospitals to postpone and reduce non-emergency operations and cases so that more beds are available for isolation, if needed.

“Existing patients with other ailments can contact doctors over WhatsApp and steps are being taken to have other digital consultation methods. It will lead to fewer patients having to approach hospitals for follow-up consultation,” he added.

IMA district president Dr Anil N Kutty, district secretary Dr B Venugopalan and IMA secretary Dr Shankar Mahadevan were present at the press conference.


