IMA Passing Out Parade held under Covid-19 shadow as cadets march in masks; Indian Army gets 333 new officers
2020-06-14
Dehradun: The Indian Army on Saturday got 333 new officers as the 146th Passing Out Parade (POP) was held at the historic Chetwode Drill Square of Indian Military Academy (IMA). A light drizzle and shadow of the Covid-19 pandemic couldn’t dampen the spirit of the ceremony, as 423 Gentlemen Cadets (GCs) including 90 from friendly foreign countries, all wearing masks, marched with perfection to the military tunes of “Col Bogey”, “Sare Jahan Se Achha” and “Kadam Kadam Badhaye Ja”. The reviewing officer of the parade was Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General MM Naravane.

Addressing the GCs set to join the Indian Army, Gen Naravane said, “You are just a step away from the historic and magnificent moment of your commissioning into the most elite forces. Let me adjure you to value the great traditions of the Indian Army, the basic tenets of which are love for your country, love and compassion for the men you command and unflinching loyalty towards them. The fundamentals of soldiering have been instilled in you here, the onus is now on your young and firm shoulders to define the various facets of the art of soldiering and to be men of formidable bearing, courage and stature.”

He also complimented parents of the passing out course for having motivated their children “to join such a noble profession, serve the nation and face all the threats that our country might be required to encounter in the present and the future”.

According to IMA authorities, the commissioned officers included 146 from the Regular Course and 129 from the Technical Graduate Course. 

The coveted Sword of Honour award was presented to Battalion Under Officer Akashdeep Singh Dhillon.

Gold medal for the Gentleman Cadet standing First in the Order of Merit was presented to Academy Under Officer Shiv Kumar Singh Chauhan. Silver Medal for the Gentleman Cadet standing Second in the Order of Merit was presented to Academy Cadet Adjutant Sakshyam Rana. Bronze Medal for the Gentleman Cadet standing Third in the Order of Merit was presented to Senior Under Officer Suraj Singh.

Silver Medal for the Gentleman Cadet standing First in the Order of Merit from Technical Graduate Course was presented to Junior Under Officer Bharath Yogendra. The Silver Medal for the Gentleman Cadet standing First in the Order of Merit from Foreign GCs was presented to Sergeant Doan Van Son (from Vietnam). Chief of Army Staff Banner was shared by Alamein and Sinhgarh Coy for standing Overall First amongst 16 companies for the Spring Term 2020.


