IMA protests order to treat non-Covid patients free at pvt hospitals
2020-04-18
NAGPUR: The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has protested the state government’s move to direct private hospitals to treat all non-Covid-19 patients referred by Government Medical Colleges and Hospitals (GMCHs) free of cost. The move came after all GMCHs and municipal corporation hospitals were converted to Covid-19 treatment centres in view of the outbreak.

IMA president Dr Avinash Bhondwe and secretary Dr Pankaj Bandarkar rushed a letter to chief minister Uddhav Thackeray and health minister Rajesh Tope, apprising them that it would be unviable for hospitals to treat such patients free, and they would be forced to down shutters. The IMA has demanded withdrawing the direction immediately, warning that it would spell doom for the private establishments and lead to irreparable loss to the already fragile health care facilities.

“We’ve demanded that the government reimburse private hospitals as per Ayushman Bharat, Rajiv Gandhi, Mahatma Phule schemes, or through CGS/EGIC, for the patients referred by GMCHs. These hospitals are already under huge burden of loan instalments and staffers’ salaries. The nationwide lockdown has further worsened their economic condition, as no business is taking place,” Bhondwe told TOI.

The government’s decision to ask hospitals to provide free treatment was implemented through respective collectors in various cities last week. “There is no uniformity in the collectors’ directives in this regard. In Mumbai, they said doctors would get Rs4,000 per patient while in other areas they were told to treat non-Covid patients free,” the IMA chief said.

Bhondwe further pointed out the Union health ministry’s directives on April 14 to the states regarding methodology of starting dedicated Covid-19 hospitals in GMCHs and seeking cooperation of private hospitals. “It has clearly laid down the procedure to be followed and there is no mention of offering free treatment to non-Covid patients,” he said.


