Kolkata: Imam offers mosque to set up quarantine centre
2020-05-08
KOLKATA: It is the time of Ramzan and locals in a Garden Reach cluster have come together with a proposal that should bring hope to the Kolkata Municipal Corporation that is desperately looking for spaces to set up quarantine centres. On Wednesday, the imam of the Jamia Masjid Gausia, popularly known as Bangali Bazar Masjid, proposed to give the entire third floor of the mosque on Iron Gate Road for quarantine purpose.

“It is a 6,000sqft space that we are offering for both locals and those from adjoining areas. But if more space is needed, we are ready to make arrangements. The options include opening up two other floors and schools in our area. KMC may use this space for quarantine purposes. We have readied it to the best of our efforts,” said Maulana Qari Md Muslim Razwi, the imam.

The idea of using part of the mosque as a quarantine centre, said Razwi, was discussed after both the local police and KMC officials approached them. 

“I was aware there was some opposition to setting up such centres elsewhere and I decided to discuss it with residents of Bangali Bazar, Iron Gate Road and Bichali Ghat Road. These are the people who offer their prayers here. The mosque is temporarily shut and it took a little bit of time to talk to everyone while maintaining social distance. However, we agreed on the plan and communicated it to the administration, including the Port division police,” said Razwi. 

Ward 134 councillor Shams Iqbal said his family has been associated with the development of the mosque for a long time. “Since most of us are praying from home now, I took this initiative on behalf of the KMC. I am happy that the locals and Imam Razwi welcomed the idea,” he said.

The two wards — 134 and 135 — whose residents pray at this mosque have multiple containment zones. “There are containment zones at Paharpur, Shyamlal Lane, Kasai Moholla, Bengali Bazar, Iron Gate Road and Bichali Ghat Road in Ward 135 and Ramnagar Lane, Fatehpur village and Maher Manzil in Ward 134,” said a KMC official.

Imam Razwi and Iqbal said the original purpose of the initiative was to set up a quarantine centre for locals. “It was a collective decision that everyone should feel there is a home open for them so they do not shy away from going to the quarantine centre if advised by KMC or health department officials,” Razwi said.

KMC officials said they will inspect the facility soon. “We are overwhelmed by the development. We hope others, too, come forward, especially since we suffered some setbacks in a few areas like Tiljala and Parnasree due to resistance from locals. We will ascertain that the mosque is not located in a crowded area and then accordingly communicate our decision,” said a senior KMC official. 

A local, however, claimed that the administration had approached them about the facility, but no final decision has been taken yet. 


Read this story in Bengali

