West Bengal: Immunity of patients’ close kin key factor in spread of Covid-19, says doctors
2020-04-06
KOLKATA: Family members of the Covid-19 positive patient, who had travelled to Egypt, were found negative and they were released from the MR Bangur Hospital last week.

 


This is the third instance in Bengal when immediate family members, who have been with a Covid-19 positive patient at home, have tested negative.

While they are in home quarantine at present, both the wife and daughter of the patient, who had also visited Egypt, have not shown any symptom so far. Experts claim that infectivity of the source and immunity of the recipient might determine spread of the disease in such cases.

“My father was having fever since he came back. We had taken him to the ID Hospital where he was admitted later. But neither me nor my mother showed any symptom. I developed a loss of smell a few days after we were admitted,” said the daughter of the Covid-19 patient.

Alarmed, they visited the government hospital again and were asked to remain under observation at the hospital. They were released three days ago after they were found Covid-19 negative.

Experts said that the in some of these cases, the first confirmed positive patient, especially those who returned from abroad, must have understood that he or she was at risk of testing positive later and hence took precautions like wearing a mask or keeping himself/herself isolated in the family.

The mother-in-law and wife of the Dum Dum resident, the Covid-19 patient who had died recently, also tested negative. The doctors attending him at the hospital, who went to home quarantine, also tested negative.

“The family tested negative and that is a big relief for the neighbours. The person who collected his blood samples was also found negative. We are, however, keeping a close tab on others who might have come in close contact with the family,” said Keya Das, councillor of Ward 26, South Dum Dum Municipality.

“One possibility is that the patient did not cough or sneeze at all or when he did that no family member was near him,” said internal medicine specialist Arindam Biswas.

Parents of the youth who returned home from Oxford and was tested positive were also sent back home after 14 days at a quarantine centre in New Town. Both the maids and drivers of the family also tested negative. “The youth maintained social distance and locked himself inside a room after he returned from UK. He did not even meet his father when he came to meet him. He did not even touch the button of the lift or railings. He had not even been to any public place,” said a relative of the youth.


