Immunity at risk as lockdown, isolation messes up sleep cycle
2020-04-30
Ranchi: Now into the sixth week, the nationwide lockdown, imposed to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus has affected the sleep cycle of many individuals. As people deal with new work arrangements and make adjustments to the daily routine, sleeping habits have become a collateral damage in the battle against the viral infection.

While some are, literally, losing sleep due the stress and anxiety over the rapidly-changing Covid-19 situation, a few are finding it difficult to get restful sleep owing to lack of physical activity as they remain confined indoors.

Harsh Kumar, preparing for his medical exams, said, “I have always been an early riser. When things were normal, I used to go to class at 8am and still felt energetic throughout the day. Now, I feel sleepy all the time.” Rohit Kumar, an avid biker, said, “I don’t have the option to go on long rides any more. I keep busy with my phone to kill time these days.”

Health experts sais exposure to natural light and regular meal times are two of the most powerful forces in aligning circadian rhythms. But for many, isolation has changed mealtimes and the amount of time spent outside. Dr Nirupam Sharan, a Ranchi-based pulmonologist and sleep specialist, raised concerns over the change in people’s circadian rhythm, popularly known as the sleep cycle, and said drastic changes will compromise people’s immunity in the long run.

He said, “We all have an internal clock, a circadian rhythm that the body follows. The stimulus for maintaining that rhythm is light and darkness. Everyone has their own biological clock and it is getting disturbed during the lockdown. People are not getting enough physical exercise, which is resulting in a change in their sleep patterns. In due course, particularly if the lockdown is extended, people will feel the effects of sleeping disorders and become less focused. Drastic changes in sleep patterns also affects mental peace and makes a person irritable.”

He added, “On vacation, when you have nothing to do, you tend to sleep late and wake up late. That’s what is happening to many people right now. People do not have to go to office, school or college and their daily routine has gone thorugh a vast change over the last month. People are sleeping going to bed later than usual, waking up late and some are having breakfast at 11am. This is disrupting their schedule.”

Sharan suggested that people should work out for at least an hour every day. He also emphasized on the role of a good diet in getting proper sleep. “One should not eat or drink anything for two hours before going to bed. Youngsters should and also refrain from using electronic gadgets a few hours before bedtime,” Sharan said.

He warned that once the lockdown ends, people might find it difficult to return to their normal schedule. “It is better to start changing your schedule gradually,” he said. Sleep deprivation or irregular sleep can lead to chronic diseases like diabetes, thyroid and cardiac problems, too, Sharan warned.


