‘Impact of Covid-19 will outlast pandemic’
2020-04-27
Varanasi: Agricultural scientist, former director general, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, former vice chancellor of Banaras Hindu University, Prof. Panjab Singh appreciated government’s concession to allow farmers to harvest their rabi crop amid lockdown, but expressed concern over the dependency on migrant labour in high producing states like Punjab and Haryana.

In an exclusive interaction, he told TOI, “The corona pandemic may last about six months, but its adverse impact on global economy will be for long.”

Economic experts have estimated the impact of Covid-19 on Indian economy resulting in a dip of 7-33 % of its GDP, depending on the number of working days lost (17-67 days respectively). The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) also estimates a 20% loss in GDP for India.

“In agriculture, we are faced with a unique situation when both demand and supply have taken a hit. Consumption has been impacted as many establishments are shut and the pace and nature of life has changed. And markets are receiving half the supply, especially of perishables like fruits and vegetables, due to logistical and lockdown hiccups. Less demand also implies a dip in prices of these products, resulting in lower income for the already strained farmer,” he said.

The impact of this would be more visible in coming months during sowing of the kharif crops.

“In India, 82% farmers have very poor shock absorbing capacity, and 54% of total labour force is dependent on agriculture and agriculture-related activities. Prompt procurement of farmers’ produce at MSP and cash payment will help them in present crisis. Governments should ensure timely provision of seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, machinery and credit on easy terms to help the small and marginal farmers sow next crop,” Prof. Singh added.

Covid-19 has impacted all but the most severely hit are the daily wagers, labourers and migrant workers who are about 45% of the workforce. Now, that these people are back in their native places, providing nutrition and livelihood to them should be the top priority short term measure by governments. They require free or highly subsidised foodgrain, pulses and cooking oil besides cash for their daily essential needs.

“Governments are trying, but reports from the ground tell us that delivery is not quite satisfactory in all states,” he said.

Employment schemes like MNREGS and food for work should be given higher allocation, and activated as soon as the pandemic subsides. State governments have a crucial role in implementing these schemes. A second relief package higher in quantum and of wider coverage is critical for meeting the challenge, Prof. Singh added.

Similarly, more than 4 crore small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in country contribute nearly 30% of GDP, but unlike large corporates have poor shock absorbing capacity and also need some financial package. This may call for revisiting financial, and production policies on case-to-case basis, he opined.

“In order to counter the socio-economic impact of pandemic, we immediately need to assist farmer in harvesting rabi and sowing kharif crops, provide food and cash relief to the landless and migrant labourers besides employment assurance financial and other support to SMEs,” he said.

“Our food grain reserve of nearly 55-60 mn tonnes is helping us in this hour. How can we provide relief on regular basis in a more decentralised way that its benefits reach all households even in the farthest corners of our country is paramount,” he added.


