Impending disputes keep law firms busy in lockdown
2020-05-06
Chennai: Strange as it may sound, Nivesh Khandelwal, founder of medical loan platform LetsMD, had consulted law firm Burgeon Law, as a pre-emptive move to see if any disputes may arise with vendors, during the normal course of business. Defaults from customers may arise, which may become disputes with the vendors on non-repayment.

“People at this point are fairly understanding and it is just expecting future disputes that we are analysing legal implications,” he said. 

It is a busy time for boutique law firms during the lockdown. With the economic activity taking a hit, impacting cash flows, reneging contracts and non payment of salaries these firms are working overtime to either settle disputes. Law firms such as Burgeon Law, Ikigai Law and the Law office of Madhavan Srivatsan are seeing a 30% jump in demand. They are focussed clientele — startup founders, who are contemplating invoking a force majeure, as many are facing existential crisis. “Once the lockdown is lifted, we expect an increase in contract defaults and litigation around this. In some cases, we have seen investors attempting to pull out from venture capital deals after signing term sheets. Promoters are reaching out for advice on this,” said Anirudh Rastogi,founder, Ikigai law

Roma Priya, founder, Burgeon Law, adds that individual angels who have lost money in the public market have paused their investments. “They are putting off closing the deals and are asking companies to meet them after the lockdown. There are also disputes happening between employers and workers on layoffs and salary cuts. At the end of the lockdown, some recovery suits could come out. Right now, however, parties are trying to mitigate the issue and deal with situations,” she said.

Rastogi said that the law firm is seeing disputes between investors and companies, especially in sectors that are heavily stressed such as travel, hospitality and non-essential consumer goods. “In most cases they involve renegotiation of contract terms, evaluating one's legal options, or preparing for a potential lawsuit,” he added.

Some companies are approaching law firms to see if it is legal to lay off or cut salaries of their employees. Madhavan Srivatsan, founder, Law of Madhavan Srivatsan said that this situation will also reduce the valuation of the funding the startups raise in future. “The companies are feeling the pinch and would not want to raise money at a reduced valuation,” he said. While seeing an increase in business, the law firms are helping with pro bono consultations. While Madhavan Srivatsan offers a free 2 hour consultation on Tuesday and Saturday. Burgeon law has a document made for those businesses looking to raise money or are dealing with a loss of business during the coronavirus pandemic.


