Improper management of samples increasing quarantine centres’ load
2020-05-12
Nagpur: Covid19 sampling of quarantined families is done together. But their test results don’t come together. This is increasing load at quarantine centres that are running full and seeing daily quarrels between health officials and quarantined persons.Many suspect cases including children have completed 14-day isolation and tested negative. Yet, they are not being released as reports of other family members are pending.Civil Surgeon Dr Devendra Paturkar told TOI overall Covid testing capacity of all VRDLs in Nagpur was 900 per day. The city has five labs at IGGMCH, GMCH, Aiims, Mafsu and Neeri. IGGMCH is the nodal agency to allocate samples to all labs.Besides city, these labs are conducting tests from places as far as Malegoan. This has created a backlog of city samples, say health officials.“Tracing a sample is very difficult. Many samples go through all the labs and become unfit. Then, the report comes inconclusive, requiring repeat sampling which again takes time,” said a health official. IGGMCH deputy medical superintendent Dr Sagar Pandey, who is incharge of corona patient care, said most samples of the day are kept with IGGMCH lab as it has the highest testing capacity. “Next highest lot is sent to Aiims, followed by GMCH and smaller numbers to Mafsu and Neeri. As soon as the reports come, IGGMCH mails them to the respective departments,” Dr Pandey said.Health officials said IGGMCH lab gives instructions over phone to distribute the samples which are not as per relation of suspects. “Entries are done online as per ICMR format sample referral SRF 10. It doesn’t have relation column,” they said.Officials at quarantine centres said a team from a particular lab collects the samples. “Later, we are told to check status with another lab. Finally, the reports come with a different lab name. Many times some members qualify for discharge but they are forced to stay back as reports of their family members remain pending,” they said.IGMMCH lab sources said the results are mailed to public health and NMC health department but not downloaded and maintained properly. “Password is given and they must constantly keep checking for status of those completing 14 days,” they said.Quarantine centre officials said there was lack of coordination as multiple agencies are involved. “State health department, NMC health department, medical education department are not in sync, though an app has been developed for it,” they said.InfoVRDLs | IGGMCH, Aiims, GMCH, Neeri and MafsuTesting Capacity | 900 per daySuspects Quarantined | 2400 (approx)What’s the problemIf say 400 samples are collected in a day, IGGMCH keeps 150, sends 100 to AIIMS, and even fewer to GMCH. Rest are divided into smaller lots among Neeri and Mafsu* The distribution is done over phone and not as per family connection of samples* As per quarantine officials, samples are collected by some lab teams* This leads to misplacing of samples and at times making swabs unfit* Even if one person qualifies for discharge he is forced to stay back as test results of others in his family remain pending