Andhra Pradesh: In 30 days of lockdown, TTD loses nearly Rs 125 crore revenue
2020-04-20
TIRUPATI: The Lord Venkateswara temple at Tirumala in Chittoor district in Andhra Pradesh, the richest Hindu temple in the country, completed 30 days lockdown on Sunday. The temple had closed down on March 20, five days before the nationwide lockdown was imposed to stem the spread of Covid-19.


 


Following the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) announced the closure of the Tirumala temple as well as the nearly 50 temples under its purview for an indefinite period.

This is the first time in history that the Tirumala temple has been closed for pilgrim entry for so long. The last time the Tirumala temple was closed was in 1892 for two days during the Mahant’s rule for reasons unknown.

The lockdown however has had an impact on the TTD’s finances. The temple’s average hundi collection would be between Rs 2.5crore to Rs 5crore making it the richest Hindu temple in the country. TTD has lost between Rs 125crore to Rs 150crore due to the lockdown.

Speaking to TOI, TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy said, “The lockdown has definitely impacted the TTD’s revenues like never before. But right now all our efforts are focussed on extending support to the state and central governments. Once the temple reopens, the TTD trust board will curtail unwarranted expenditure and find newer avenues to increase the temple’s revenue.”

“Even when the crisis ends, we will strictly enforce social distancing procedure in the best interests of devotees and the nation,” the TTD chairman added.

The daily rituals and annual festivals of the temple however continue to be performed as per prescribed agamas but in the absence of devotees.

Further, since the lockdown, the TTD has been trying to help those stranded in the city as well as the homeless and the poor. The TTD began distributing food to the needy in Tirupati on March 28. 

The temple administration is distributing nearly 1.4lakh food packets every day and has spent around Rs 10 crore in the pursuit yet.


