In a first for UP, Covid-19 patient delivers healthy baby
2020-04-21
AGRA: In a first for Uttar Pradesh, a 24-year-old Covid-19 patient gave birth to a healthy child at Agra’s SN Medical College on Monday. Born out of C-section operation, the child was immediately shifted to neo-natal ward, away from the mother’s grasp to cut the chances of him contracting the virus.

A team comprising junior resident doctors Yogita Gautam and Sana Ismail and anesthetic conducted the operation and the boy was out at 1:40PM.

This was the first time in the state where a coronavirus infected patient has delivered a healthy baby.

Talking to TOI, the mother said, “I am happy that my child came to the world safe and healthy. I am thankful to the doctors for their great service. I was very concerned about the wellbeing of my child. The doctors conducted a very smooth operation. I am confident that I will soon get well, and will be able to hug my child.” 

In-charge of the newly-developed Covid-19 facility at the government hospital, Dr Prashant Gupta said, “Our team did a great work. The child is healthy, and has been separated from the mother to ensure he does not get infected. The child has been handed over the family members. They have been directed to take care of the child. We will collect samples of the child after a few days for testing of Covid-19.”

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “It is a matter of joy for all of us that a Covid-19 patient has delivered a healthy baby. The health workers are doing a great job. They are inspiration for all of us. On Monday, six more patients were cured of infection and were discharged from hospital. So far, 26 people have been cured of novel coronavirus infection in Agra district”. 

A 100-bed multispecialty Covid-19 facility developed in a separate block of SN Medical College started operating on Friday. 

Developed following guidelines of the ministry of health and family planning, the centre has a labour room to attend to pregnant women with Covid-19 infection.

It has an operation theatre and an intensive care unit. If required, dialysis can also be done here. A dedicated team of 30 health staffers is running the facility. 


