Coronavirus in Odisha: In an unprecedented move, Jagannath Temple to close its doors to devotees till April 1
2020-03-20
BHUBANESWAR: The Jagannath Temple in Puri will be shut for devotees from Friday to April 1. The state government has also asked all collectors to enforce restrictions on entry of people in all religious places — temples, mosques, churches & gurdwaras — till April 1.


The state government has ordered the closure of the temple to prevent the outbreak of Covid-19. Servitors will continue to perform the daily rituals of the sibling deities of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra, but only if they observe precautions.

This is the first time the 12th-century shrine will be closed to devotees in living memory. “We have adopted the strong measure to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus. Daily rituals will remain unaffected,” chief administrator of Shree Jagannath Temple Administration (SJTA), Krishan Kumar, said.

Temple sources said nearly 70 servitors were needed to perform around 20 daily rituals at the shrine from early in the morning till evening. The temple administration said the daily preparation of mahaprasad for devotees would remain suspended till the shrine reopened. Only bhog for the deities would be prepared.

Kumar said the SJTA would look into ways to compensate the servitors for the financial losses they would suffer because of the ban on devotees.

Servitors supported the temple administrator’s move. “We welcome the decision as the novel coronavirus has triggered global panic,” said Shyama Mahapatra, a servitor.

The SJTA had on March 15 announced that it would compulsorily secure self-declaration forms from devotees before allowing them access to the shrine. The administration had also decided to streamline darshan and allow devotees to stand at least two metres apart in queue for darshan. “We decided to intensify the measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Once the temple is closed, tourists will also cancel their visit to Puri,” another district official said.

Chief secretary Asit Tripathy on Wednesday asked all religious institutions, including managements of temples, boards, trusts and governing institutions, to take measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19.


