Covid-19: In biggest 1-day surge, Tamil Nadu adds 874 cases, tally crosses 20,000
2020-05-30
CHENNAI: On the eve of the Tamil Nadu government’s meeting with its expert medical committee on easing the lockdown, the state’s Covid-19 count surged past 20,000 with 874 cases reported on Friday, the highest single day increase so far. Chennai accounted for 614 of the new cases, taking its tally to 13,362 or 66% of the state’s total of 20,246. Nine deaths were reported, pushing the toll to 154.

Chief secretary K Shanmugham told TOI that while the lockdown would continue, relaxations would depend on the ground reality and directions from the Centre.

Health secretary Beela Rajesh saw a silver lining in 765 patients being discharged from various government and private hospitals across the state, taking the number of those cured to 11,313. 

On Wednesday, director of medical education directed doctors from other district to report to Chennai for Covid duty. At least 600 doctors on a contract basis too will be joining work soon. “That is more than 50% of the positive cases. We now have fewer active cases,” she said. However, she admitted that “With increasing influx of migrants and possible relaxations of lockdown, we may have more cases soon within the city and outside.” On Friday, of the 874 cases 141 were people who had returned from other states. Since May 9, 1,000 people who had returned from abroad or other states have tested positive.

NIE epidemiologists say Chennai has a higher rate of infection compared to the rest of TN. The doubling time for Tamil Nadu is nearly 16 days compared to 14 days in Chennai. “Chennai’s neighbours also continued to add cases. On Friday, Chengalpet registered 61 new cases, Kancheepuram 12 and Tiruvallur nine.

The state health department has allotted 150 beds for Covid patients in each of the four peripheral hospitals in Royapettah, Tondiarpet, Anna Nagar and ESI hospital in KK Nagar. On Wednesday, Director of Medical Education directed doctors from other district to report to Chennai for Covid duty. The order that runs into eleven pages deputes specialists including oncologists, psychiatrists, paediatric surgeons, neurosurgeons and surgical gastroenterologists to various Covid care centres. And 600 doctors on a contract basis too will be joining work soon.

A bulletin released by the state health department on Friday evening said six passengers who returned from Maharashtra by air tested positive. Among those who opted to travel by road, there were 129 positive cases from Maharashtra, three from Kerala, one each from West Bengal, Telangana and Karnataka. At least 131 passengers from other countries have reported positive till Friday and 155 passengers who returned from other states and have been kept under railway quarantine have reported positive till Friday. Villupuram, Kanyakumari, Erode and Ariyalur had one case each from within the district.

A 33-year-old man admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital on Thursday died hours after admission. He had no comorbidities. The oldest on the list of casualties was an 86-year-old man with diabetes and hypertension who was admitted to a private hospital. The man died on Thursday. There were two more deaths in Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital– a 70-year old woman and a 66-yearold woman -- on Wednesday. An 85-year-old man and a 77-year-old man died at then GH on Thursday. A 62-year-old woman, a 63-year-old man and a 58-year-old woman died in private hospitals in Thursday.


