In biggest spike, Uttarakhand records 216 Covid-19 positive cases, or over 40% jump, in a day
2020-05-30
DEHRADUN: In probably the biggest spike in Covid cases in the Himalayan states, Uttarakhand on Friday reported 216 novel coronavirus cases taking the state’s tally to 716. This was an over 40% jump and the sharpest single-day spike the hill state has seen so far.

The highest, 85, cases were reported in Nainital district, of which 80 had taken the Shramik Special from Faridabad to Lalkuan.

Nainital chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Bharti Rana said that the train carrying passengers from Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Gurgaon and a few others states had reached Lalkuan on May 27.

She said, “We have quarantined all the passengers and in the first round of testing, 80 samples were found Covid positive.”

Last week, Nainital district had reported over 90 Covid cases and all of them had taken the Shramik Special from Mumbai that reached Haridwar on May 20.

A health department official said, “With over 200 cases reported in the district in a week, it’s getting very difficult to find beds for everyone. We have requested the administration of various districts to take back their residents who were tested here but are from another district.”

Meanwhile, Dehradun also reported 72 new Covid cases on Friday. Of the new cases, five are vegetable vendors and stockists from Niranjanpur Sabzi Mandi while the others are returnees from places such as Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh who all were in home quarantine so far.

Dehradun CMO Dr BC Ramola said that of the 72 new patients from Dehradun, 23 were moved to Government Doon Medical College (GDMC) till the time of filing the report. “The other patients will either be moved to GDMC or to AIIMS Rishikesh,” he added.

On the same day, Almora reported 21 new cases, followed by eight in Bageshwar and Tehri each, five each in Udham Singh Nagar, Haridwar and Pauri. Uttarkashi reported four new cases, followed by two in Rudraprayag and one in Pithoragarh.

With 23 patients recovering on Friday, the total recoveries in the state reached 102. While 1,439 new samples were collected from across the state on May 29, the health department is awaiting reports of over 4,000 samples, collected between May 23 and 27. The current recovery rate in the state is now around 13%.


