Delhi: In coronavirus time, worshippers told not to ignore safety tips
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: Amid novel coronavirus outbreak, the managers of places of worship in and around the national capital are making several efforts to check crowding on their premises to keep the infection threat at bay.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Apart from urging the devotees to reduce the frequency of their visits, they are putting up information boards on the premises to spread awareness on the coronavirus. They are also resorting to keeping hand sanitisers, modifying langars and urging the devotees to wear masks. With Navrati and the festive season falling in the time of Covid-19, all these steps are required, they say.

Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee (DSGMC) on Monday announced the banning of the entry of foreigners who had not completed their 15-day stay in India into the gurdwaras. The committee also distributed 10,000 face masks to those entering the city gurdwaras.

DSGMC president Manjinder Singh Sirsa said these precautions were being taken in view of the coronavirus threat. “Visitors will now be checked at the entrance of each gurdwara. While langar service will continue, those preparing or serving the meals have been asked to wash their hands after regular intervals. Sanitisers are already available,” Sirsa added.

DSGMC said people are also being encouraged to bring their own headscarves. “We are regularly disinfecting all handrails, lifts and chairs which the devotees come in contact with,” said Sirsa.

The Jhandewalan temple near Karol Bagh is among the oldest temples in Delhi and attracts lakhs of devotees during the auspicious period of Navratri. Ravindra Goyal, trustee of the temple, told TOI that a host of modifications will come into force a day before Navratri. The festival starts from March 25 this year. “Each entry point will have temperature scanners and sanitisers. Devotees will be checked near sanctum sanctorum too. Sewadars will be wearing masks,” he said.

“The temple, however, will not have a bhandara this time. Packed prasad will be provided. Chowki-Jagran, which attracts thousands of people, will also not be held this time. The temple premises will be disinfected every two hours, and many awareness banners will be put up,” Goyal added.

At south Delhi’s Kalkaji temple, the authorities will be distributing face masks on Saturday. The head priest, Mahant Surendranath Avdhoot, has appealed to the devotees not to come during Navratri without wearing a mask. “Hand wash stations will be established at the vital points in temple complex. We are trying our best and may Goddess protect us,” said the head priest.

Another major Navratri hotspot, Chhatarpur temple, has also appealed to the devotees to wear masks before coming to the temple.

“A meeting has been planned to discuss the precautionary measures, and every possible step will be taken to protect the devotees. We will install hand wash stations as well. A detailed plan will be shared after the meeting,” said NK Sethi, the temple in-charge.

Religious gatherings have proved to be one of the most challenging aspects of enforcing social distancing worldwide with many cases of outbreaks reported at such congregations.


