In Gurugram’s biggest day surge, 33 test positive for Covid, 12 cops among them
2020-05-27
GURUGRAM: In its sharpest single-day spike, 33 people, including 12 policemen, tested positive for Covid-19 in Gurugram on Tuesday, taking the district’s tally to 316. Of these, 134 are active cases while 182 patients have been discharged after recovery.


Gurugram has the highest number of cases in Haryana, followed by Faridabad with 233. All the policemen who tested positive are from the Udyog Vihar police station. They were on duty at the Kapashera border, where several workers had been assembling every morning over the past few days in order to gain an entry into the city.



While the cops are being treated at the ESIC Hospital in Sector 9, the police department said it has started an extensive contact tracing exercise. Samples of 35 policemen have been taken and they have been shifted to the quarantine centre at Manesar. The Udyog Vihar police station and the houses of the cops have also been sanitised. 

The personnel at both the Kapashera border and the Udyog Vihar police station have been replaced and provided with personal protective equipment (PPE).

“Some of our policemen have tested positive for Covid-19. They were on duty at the Kapashera border,” said police commissioner Mohammad Akil. So far, 14 policemen have tested positive for Covid-19. Two cops – one from Udyog Vihar police station and another from Bajghera police – had earlier tested positive on May 19.

Among the other patients, seven are from Sirhaul, three from Shankar Chowk, two from a Golf Course Road highrise, two from Hari Nagar and one each from Sector 10, Shakti Nagar, Sector 15, Sector 45, Dundahera, Kanhai and a DLF-4 highrise. While five patients are being treated at ESIC, the rest are in Medeor.

A health department official said contacts of each patient are being traced to curb the spread of the virus.

“We are planning to increase the containment zones as the numbers are increasing every day,” the official said.

The health department did not declare any Covid-19 death on Tuesday. However, the Suncity township RWA said that a 55-year-old man had died of Covid-19. “We have sanitised the entire area,” said Rakesh Malik, RWA president, Suncity. The health department said it was waiting for the final test result.

