UP: Dad of techie’s wife booked in India’s first Covid-19 FIR
2020-03-16
AGRA: In the country’s first novel coronavirus-related FIR, father of the Bengaluru techie’s wife was booked on Sunday for “negligent and malignant act to spread infection of disease dangerous to life” even as her samples sent to Lucknow’s King George Medical University confirmed her positive a second time.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The 25-year-old, who had recently come back from Europe before her husband tested positive for Covid-19 on March 12, took a flight to New Delhi and then a train to reach Agra on March 9. She didn’t know of her husband’s infection when she travelled from Bengaluru.


 

The FIR, based on a complaint by additional chief medical officer Dr Vinay Kumar, said that the woman’s father, a railway employee, “did not cooperate with medical authorities and lied to DM about daughter’s whereabouts”.


 

He’s been booked under IPC’s sections 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life). The charges carry provisions of a prison term up to two years, or fine, or both. 

Agra senior superintendent of police Babloo Kumar said, “We will add more names in the FIR as the investigation proceeds.”

Meanwhile, the woman’s father told TOI, “My entire family is in deep stress. Eight of us have been asked to stay in self-quarantine after our samples tested negative at KGMU. But the authorities have not yet shared information about our daughter. We just want our daughter back. I know she is fine.”

Agra district magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “The sample of Bengaluru-based techie’s wife from Agra has been tested Covid-19 positive. She has been kept in the isolation ward since Friday. The health department has started the treatment process.”

“We will continue to take legal action against anyone, who is found disrupting the efforts of state administration to prevent the spread of coronavirus and try to mislead or resist the standard protocol followed by the health department. Those spreading rumours will not be spared,” the DM said.

Railway authorities have asked six of their employees, including five neighbours of the woman’s father, to give their nose, throat swabs and blood samples to the health officials and stay in self-quarantine till further notice.

Agra divisional railway manager’s public relations officer SK Shrivastav said, “Following the district magistrate’s complaint, railway authorities are considering departmental action against him. For now, the employee and his another daughter, who is also a railway employee, have been sent on a 14-day leave.” 

