In Covid-19 times, locals throng beaches of N Goa for family picnic, salt water bath
2020-05-29
BAGA: Unarguably, Goa’s busiest tourist stretch, the coastline from Baga to Sinquerim is unlike its normal self. The lockdown norms have eased and visitors have begun trickling in, but the footfalls are nowhere close to the packed-to-the-brim scenes normally witnessed in May, with domestic tourists pouring in to enjoy summer in the state.


There are no hawkers, shacks or beach beds and no restaurants either offering meals with a sea view. 

The only visitors on this belt now are locals who have finally found the space to enjoy the annual summer salt water bath on their neighbourhood beach.

“Usually, in the month of May, there would be no space to sit in peace at this time of the year on the beach in Baga, leave alone sit for hours with our legs buried in the sand. My daughter lives in the neighbourhood and after learning from her that there is plenty of space on the beach this year, I specially planned a trip here for my annual ritual,” said 65-year-old Vimal Dabolkar.

Her daughter’s family also decided to take the opportunity to organise a picnic around her salt water bath.

“I couldn’t imagine swimming here normally. With far fewer tourists, it is all locals, people known to us from the neighbourhood, who are around us. I feel far safer doing this now,” said Dabolkar’s granddaughter and a resident of Nerul, Kanishka Pednekar, as she munched on home-cooked snacks on the beach with the family.

At Candolim, the shutters are down on tiny tattoo and swimwear stores that line the pathway leading to the beach. Local children are cycling in the empty beach pay parking lots.

Only the odd foreign tourists, who have opted to stay back during the lockdown, are seen strolling on the beach.

Like Kanishka and her grandmother, Siddhesh Jirge’s family too is snacking on the beach as they watch the sun set.

“We live in Bicholim and usually had to drive all the way to Morjim for some quiet time on the beach. This year, we found that the beach at Candolim is devoid of the usual crowds and we keep coming here every now and then now in the evenings to experience the quiet here,” said Jirge.

It is not even a fourth of the regular numbers for the month of May, said a lifeguard at Calangute.

“At Baga-Calangute this year, it is mostly locals who are coming here for their annual salt water baths or family picnics now. They spend the day here and leave. In the evenings, occasionally, an odd person may have a drink or two and venture into the water, so we have to be alert. But such incidents are far lesser than what we see under normal circumstances,” said the lifeguard.

Only a handful of migrant workers remain on this beach belt now.

“Most workers have left. I am waiting for a direct bus to take me to Hubballi and am waiting for an update on it. There were four deaths in my immediate family, but I could not leave due to uncertainty over transportation. The employer at the restaurant I work treats me very well and so I have preferred not to pack my bags and leave without a proper update on the transport,” said Tajuddin Khan.

For his employer Dominic Alexander, unlike other locals, there is no joy in staring at the empty beaches.

“The season is over already. We have to look forward to October and see what happens next,” he said.


