In ‘destination’ Green Zone, quarantine facilities run full
2020-05-05
PANAJI: While Goans outside the state and seafarers struggle to get back home, the state’s quarantine facilities are running full, as many people whose only connection to Goa is owning a second home here, seem to have made a beeline to the state. A senior government official told TOI that Goa, currently a ‘Green Zone’, is now a top destination not only for stranded Goans elsewhere in India, but also for those some have unofficially dubbed ‘VIP category’.

All those who have entered Goa of late have been accommodated in facility quarantine centres run by the government. And while officials declined to tell TOI who exactly these are and their reasons for coming to Goa at this crucial juncture in the state’s fight against Covid-19, it is clear that many of them are taking up valuable space in quarantine centres.

As of Monday, about 380 persons were placed in facility quarantine. “Most quarantine facilities have been full,” an official said.

Many of the inmates, sources said, are Goans who do not live in the state, but traditionally spend their summer vacations here. 

Keeping them company in facility quarantine are non-Goans who own properties and homes along the coastal belt and in the state’s interiors, and prefer to be in the green zone while the country fights Covid-19. Officials were tightlipped about them and the process they followed to enter the state.

“Authorities are having a tough time dealing with the increasing number of people in these facilities.”

One official familiar with running these centres minced no words. “We are going nuts,” he said. “They (inmates) make frequent demands, from specific non-vegetarian food to air-conditioners.” He said that those who demand specific food have been told to obtain it from elsewhere. “We can’t be dancing to their tunes all the time. It isn’t possible for serve meals according to each inmate’s personal choices.”

And food is the least of their demands. “Some want to move into starred hotels, but who will foot the bill?” asked one official.

The cost of quarantine for Goans is currently borne by the government, and this has led to another controversy. The official said, “Due to this free quarantine facility offered to returning Goans, seafarers allege they’re being discriminated against.”

And adding to the music are politicians, who have spent the last few days meddling in the quarantine system, especially in the cases of sailors currently placed in 14-day facility quarantine.

The Goa government’s facility quarantine system includes residencies operated by Goa Tourism Development Corporation (GTDC) and some other hotels that the state has requisitioned. Some have also been quarantined at the International Centre Goa in Dona Paula. Officials said that although the condition of GTDC residencies may not be as plush as starred hotels, the accommodation is very decent.


