Maharashtra: In her 4th litter, Tadoba’s friendly queen Maya delivers 5 cubs; no sighting due to Covid-19
2020-06-12
NAGPUR: A day after the death of a Tadoba tigress and capture of a problem sub-adult male, wildlife buffs have some news to cheer about. Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve’s (TATR) most charismatic tigress Maya (T-12) has delivered five cubs. Sources said they are now around 3 months old. With the reserve closed since March 18 due to the outbreak of coronavirus, it might be a while before wildlife buffs can have ‘darshan’ of the family. 


Also, the state forest department is yet to decide whether to throw open parks and sanctuaries in Maharashtra before and during the monsoon after the National Tiger Conservation Authority gave a nod with several conditions on June 5 after the lockdown was eased. 

This is Maya’s fourth litter since June 2014. Till now she has delivered 12 cubs of which five were killed by other males. Her first litter of two cubs was from Tadoba’s dominant male Gabbar, followed by three cubs from Namdeo in 2015, and third litter of two cubs from Matkasur (T-54) in 2017. This is the first time the dominant female of Tadoba has delivered five cubs.

Maya was part of a four-cub litter born in 2010 to Leela and a Hilltop male. She took over the territory after her mother Leela’s untimely death, and has been ruling over Tadoba since then with her tourist-friendly approach.

Maya is so popular that she has a Twitter handle in the name of @MayaTadoba which updates developments with her. This handle also helps tourists and general people understand jungle and tiger behaviour in particular.

According to reliable sources, the cubs were first sighted by forest staff near a waterhole in Tadoba in March when lockdown was in force. The cubs were again sighted in April and are being monitored. 

Naturalist Himanshu Bagde says, “The last time I sighted Maya was on March 15. I was with two German veterinarians who said the tigress was lactating and must have delivered cubs.”

Forest sources, who did not want to be quoted, confirmed the development. In November-December 2019, Maya was seen mating with Matkasur and a tiger nicknamed Tala (T-101), who had entered Tadoba with his male sibling Rudra from the park’s Kolsa range. With a gestation period of 90 days, the cubs must have been delivered in March first week.

“Considering past tragedies with Maya, where other opportunistic males have attacked her cubs to lure her into mating, we are cautious. There are six males and two females in her territory. We will ensure these cubs are safe and attain adulthood,” said sources.

Maya is not the first from Tadoba to deliver more than 10 cubs. The Katezari tigress, which too once had a litter of 5, had delivered totally 15 cubs, which have now dispersed. Madhuri, another tigress, has delivered 19 cubs since 2010 in Tadoba’s buffer zone Agarzari.

As per the latest report on ‘Status of tigers, co-predators and prey in TATR’ released jointly by forest department and Wildlife Institute of India (WII), there are 115 tigers in TATR landscape, with major chunk being in Tadoba.

Bagde says, “Due to Covid-19 pandemic wildlife tourism is paralysed. Tourists would now be eager to come to Tadoba and witness memories for a lifetime.”

“It also means people have a bigger responsibility towards forest and wildlife protection. With increase in tigers, we hope the economy around it also grows without disturbing nature,” said Bagde.


