In lockdown 4.0, Madhya Pradesh government wants ease of businesses in orange-green zones
2020-05-16
BHOPAL: The Shivraj Singh Chouhan government has suggested big relaxations in orange and green zones – including opening up private offices, limited public transport and most businesses – in lockdown 4.0, but wants tight restrictions to remain in red zones.




The Madhya Pradesh government has sent its suggestions to the Centre after PM Narendra Modi invited advice from all CMs for strategy for the next phase of lockdown.

Significantly, the government has proposed that it would like to keep only Indore, Bhopal and Ujjain in the red zone, since 80% of active Coronavirus cases are limited to these three districts. Nine districts, with up to 20 active cases, will be in orange and those with less than 20 cases will be in green zone, according to the state’s suggestion.

All major economic activities would be allowed in orange and green districts, but mass gatherings will be banned. The state wants to continue with its 7pm-7am curfew. 

The roadmap, as sent to the Centre, is for the period till May 31.

Red-zone districts will not have much relaxations inside city limits, but in areas outside municipal corporation, all activities allowed in orange and green zones districts will be allowed, if they are Corona-free, the state proposes.

While few shops will be allowed to open in red-zone city areas, markets can open beyond municipal limits and public transport may also resume with 50% capacity. Construction activities will also be allowed in those areas.

In green and orange zones, government and private offices will open with 100% capacity and inter-district public transport buses will ply at 50% capacity, in addition to resumption of public transport -- like city buses, taxis and autos -- inside cities, the government has suggested.

Except for red-zone districts, hotels and restaurants will also open but only for takeaway services. Malls, cinemas, schools, colleges and all kinds of socio-religious and political activities will remain banned.

The relaxations given in red-zone areas may continue and it’s likely a few more will be added if the district crisis management group decides.


