In lockdown, transgenders fight hunger & discrimination
2020-04-22
For Payal, life as she knows it has come to a halt. The Covid-19 lockdown has made sure of it. Groceries are scarce, work is suspended and fear is at an all-time high. Unlike daily-wage workers and other migrants, there is no one coming to the rescue of the Payals of our society. She has no bank account, no Aadhaar card and is a transgender person.

Diana Budiyal, a transperson who works for the advocacy and civil rights of the community told TOI that most transpersons stay on rent since their families have disowned them. They have basic awareness about coronavirus and understand the precautions they must take but she’s reaching out to them via telephone to make them truly aware of the gravity of the pandemic.

The Goa government may have announced that landlords are to relax rent, but this is not being implemented in places where transpeople live. “My landlady has threatened to evict me if I don’t pay the rent for March,” said Pallavi Mane, who is a transperson.

She is managing with the ration handed to her by Wajood, an organisation run by Budiyal. During this time of uncertainty however, she fears she will be devoid of a home if she doesn’t pay rent. “In times like these, we are grateful for even a little bit of help from people,” Mane said.

But with jobs few and far apart, the question remains how long will they survive on their meagre savings. “With no Aadhaar card or bank account, members of this community are not even accounted for. They require urgent help for food provisions or the community will be left with no choice but to beg,” she said.

Akshara Shetye begs on trains for a living. Since the lockdown she has been unable to accumulate enough money to sustain herself. “I’m not educated nor do I have a job which is why I have had to resort to begging. Owing to prejudice the transgender community faces, I have no means to make a living,” she said.

There are transpersons who are employed in Goa as daily-wage workers and lack proper networking to reach out to higher-ups to provide them with ration. However, some are not educated enough to understand the hierarchy so that they can go to the collector if there is no help from the local municipal council or panchayat. “There is no encouragement from the government’s side either to come forward,” a member of the community said.

After sorting out food for their stomachs and a roof for their heads, their worries don’t stop there. The next biggest concern is hormonal medication. Some of them are mid-transition and have been under hormone therapy to prepare for a sex change.

Budiyal said, “The flow of medicines has stopped because of shortage at medical stores and in some cases transpeople cannot purchase them because of lack of money.” Living in isolation and with sparse resources is its own daily challenge, but add to that erratic medical supply. This is enough to take a huge toll on the mental health of transpeople. Compared to testosterone, estrogen is a much more powerful hormone. According to those who have already transitioned, its irregular intake could result in side-effects including mental stress, depression, mood swings and loss of appetite.

“The transmission is a three-year procedure wherein it is mandatory to go for sexual reassignment surgery in the third year after hormonal therapy. It will be problematic if the process is abruptly stopped.” Budiyal said.


