In lockdown mode, e-office would have worked wonders
2020-04-07
Bhopal: E-office that failed to take off in Madhya Pradesh would have saved the day for officials and employees fighting Covid-19 pandemic.

Recently, 12 government employees, including top health department officials, were tested positive for coronavirus.

E-office system was introduced in April 2018 with an aim to facilitate paperless functioning of offices. Despite efforts of successive governments the idea never got implemented due to resistance from several departments, said sources.

Officials point out that the entire government machinery would have been operational and officials safely from their homes despite the 21-day lockdown till April 14 had the e-office system been in place.

The idea, however, was mooted in 2006 to shift from pen to the click of mouse. In 2016, it was back on the agenda. The government even set up a control room on the ground floor of the secretariat to monitor this system in 2017. Around 500 new computers and 150 scanners were installed at the secretariat, said officials. 

In April 2018, the general administration department (GAD) made it mandatory that all departments process files using the new system that was to be put in place. Bureaucrats were briefed about the e-office set up: file tracking system, maintaining secrecy of files, status of pending files, draft creation and others. Log in IDs were of around 1000 staffers were created to help them access their accounts and clear the files, said officials.

People in the e-office system were to be mapped through their names and not by designation. On receiving a file, an official would get an SMS alert or e-mail. Even digital signature was not required at every step. The system made it possible for an official to track a file and process it. The digital signature was required only while issuing orders, the officials added.

The system also enabled the department head access to track the complete file movement at all rungs. On the other hand, junior officials could view the files a step down and up the rung.

On April 4 this year, the GAD department directed that orders, correspondence and approvals be issued through e-mails, e-office (NIC) should be considered valid. However, in absence of e-office, officials can only use e-mails, but cannot track or clear the files at all levels.


