In lockdown, 20-25 runaway couples move Punjab and Haryana high court every day
2020-05-26
CHANDIGARH: Marriage palaces, wedding planners or those running related businesses may be staring at massive loss due sudden drop in solemnization of marriages because of the Covid-19 pandemic, but the Punjab and Haryana high court is still a safe haven for runaway couples. Around 20-25 runaway couples from Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh are approaching the high court daily, apprehending threat to their lives from their family and relatives for choosing their life partners. 


 


Around 20-25 cases being filed daily in the HC is a significant number at a time when the hearing of cases is highly restrictive and only around 100 cases are being heard every day via video conferencing.

Of 20-25 cases filed every day before the HC, the majority are from Punjab and Haryana and those from UT Chandigarh are comparatively low. After eloping with their partners, these couples reach the Tricity of Chandigarh, Panchkula and Mohali and after getting married in gurdwaras or temples, they approach the HC.


HC issues directions to SSPs after checking

The runaway couples ap-Prach the HC through protection petitions urging the court to protect their lives and liberty from their family or relatives opposing their relationship.However, after verifying facts of these cases, the HC has been issuing directions to the SSPs of concerned districts to protect the petitioners’ lives and liberty, if there is imminent threat from their families.

During normal functioning of the high court, out of around 1,000 urgent cases, around 100-120 fresh cases of runaway couples were heard daily by different benches.

The cases of runaway couples have been entertained by the Punjab and Haryana high court after October 2002 when the then Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana high court, Justice BK Roy set the precedent by granting protection to every runaway couple who approached the HC. In July 2012, the HC had empowered deputy commissioners (DCs), superintendents of police (SPs) and the district and sessions judges to protect life and liberty of these couples, whenever approached. However, the couples still are approaching the HC. In a majority of the cases, the petition is filed by the woman fearing threat to her life for marrying a man of her choice.



