In lockdown, maths teacher unlocks puzzles for children
2020-04-10
Surat: Seeing their wards idling away in the lockdown period treating it as an extended vacation, many parents are worried sick about their children’s education. So was Devarsh Barad, a Class IV student’s parents in Ghanitya village of Sutrapada taluka in Gir-Somnath district who were especially worried about their son's maths lessons. However, Ajit Barad, Devarsh’s father and a science teacher in the government school was helped by a friend who suggested joining maths teacher, Sursinh Parmar’s free online classes. Now, so engrossed is the father-son duo with the online classes, that there is no stopping them. “My son joined the online class through mobile App and is enjoying a lot. Even I joined him as Sursinh Parmar's style of teaching is really remarkable,” said Barad.Sursinh Parmar, 44, has been teaching mathematics in Vitthalpur village’s government primary school in Kodinar taluka of Gir-Somnath district. A recipient of Best Maths teacher from All India Ramanujan Maths Club in 2019, Parmar has invented new divisibility rule 8 in maths and was also awarded Innovative teacher award by the Indian Institute of Management-Ahmedabad (IIMA) in 2015.A popular teacher across the state, Parmar lives in Alidar village which borders Gir wildlife Sanctuary. "My life’s aim is to remove the fear associated with maths and make kids enjoy the subject. I thought of finding an alternative to the conventional method of teaching and therefore started teaching online," he said.Soon word spread about Parmar's online maths class and it now has more than 150 students of Class III and IV in a matter of few days only. "On Thursday, 158 kids from across the state joined the class. I teach them between 8:30am and 10am daily. Kids have to download the Zoo app. I have got licence version of the App so that up to 500 kids can join this online class at a time,” Parmar told TOI.  Parmar's initative also inspired a private school teacher to help in buying licence version of the App (Zoom Cloud Meeting App) so that more and more kids can get benefit of his maths class. Incidentally, Parmar’s simplified teaching has helped over 30 children from poor families successfully crack JNV entrance test to get free education till Class XII.Every Sunday, Parmar invites experts on different fields to interact with the kids. "Last Sunday, we invited Assistant Commissioner of Police (Surat) Haresh Mevada who talked about policing during the lockdown. Next Sunday, MD student Dr Monika Vaghela, who works in Lab in Jamnagar, will interact with kids about Covid-19 and how to be safe. Besides maths, this also help kids understand what's going around them in the world and about the virus,” Parmar added.