Delhi: In less than 10 days, 937 Covid-19 patients pick home
2020-05-10
NEW DELHI: In the wake of the government allowing Covid-19 positive people with mild symptoms to remain in home isolation, many patients have started availing the facility. In less than 10 days, the number of people opting for home isolation has crossed the 900-mark. On Saturday, as many as 937 people were staying in home isolation.

The facility has taken some load off the government Covid care centres and hospitals which are overburdened due to the corona crisis.


 


Following the guidelines from the Centre that mild or pre-symptomatic Covid-19 cases can be kept in home isolation, Delhi government on April 30 had issued a detailed standard operating procedure for the patient and the caregiver to follow during the home isolation period.

Before a person gets nod for home isolation, a health team comprising Anganwadi and ASHA workers under the supervision of a public health facility in-charge assesses the appropriateness of the facility of a mild symptomatic Covid patient. Apart from a separate room for the patient, only those having the 24x7 service of a caregiver are allowed home isolation.

All the people opting for home isolation are kept under regular health supervision. “On a regular basis, health staff are measuring the patient’s body temperature and informing the status to the district surveillance officer. The surveillance team also actively monitors the health condition of the patient and the caregiver telephonically and in some cases by personally visiting them,” said an official.

“The feeling of being close to their family gives the patients greater determination to fight the coronavirus,” the official added.

In case of serious symptoms, such as difficulty in breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, mental confusion or bluish discoloration of lips or face, those under home isolation have been asked to call the surveillance team. The patients will be shifted to hospitals for further treatment.

The home isolation will be over in 14 days if two consecutive test reports come negative. A passive surveillance of the persons will, however, continue even after they successfully complete the home isolation.

Delhi government has, meanwhile, appointed 37 doctors who will provide teleconsultation to the patients who are under home isolation and need the services of a qualified medical practitioner. It is an app-based service. The consultation will be available from 8am to 8pm on all days of the week, including holidays. The patients can make requests for teleconsultation through the contact numbers shared with them by the health department officials.


