In most Covid-19 deaths in Pune, poor health and late hospitalisation common link
2020-04-10
PUNE: The surge in Covid-19 fatalities in Pune stands true to the knowledge that infectious diseases take their worst toll on the slums. 


Of the 25 people who died in Pune till Thursday because of acute respiratory distress linked to coronavirus, 20 had underlying health conditions.




At least 17 people were from either the slums or the low income group from the congested areas of the city.

Four of the five critically-ill patients who succumbed at different hospitals in Pune on Thursday had diabetes, hypertension, asthma and ulcerative colitis. “About 80% of those who died in Pune were senior citizens,” divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said.

Health experts monitoring the Covid-19 outbreak in Pune said most patients reached the hospitals when their conditions had already worsened. 

Many who died came to the state-run Sassoon General Hospital in a critical condition. “They had symptoms for more than five to six days, but they had procrastinated despite having hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases,” the hospital's dean Ajay Chandanwale told TOI. 

Senior physician D B Kadam said the health seeking behaviour has remained consistent especially among the financially poor and less educated over the years. Be it swine flu or Covid-19, people tend to delay seeking medical care. It proves fatal in patients with pre-exisiting condition, he added. 

On Sunday, when the death toll went up to eight, Mhaiseker ordered containment zones for the slum areas in Yerawada and Bhavani Peth in Pune where there were two Covid-19 deaths. 

When 34 new cases were reported on Monday, the Pune Municipal Corporation sealed the entire core area in the Peths, and Kondhwa in the south of the city. Soon after, the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation declared containments zones in four low income group areas. 

Pune’s collector Naval Kishore Ram said there would be minimal movement in these cordoned off areas and made masks compulsory for all citizens. 

Shops with essential goods are open for a mere two hours in these areas to ensure a complete stay at home. 

Both civic bodies have rolled out an elaborate contact tracing exercise in these congested areas.

Health investigators who visit these areas said crowding and poor sanitation raise infections, malnutrition and co-morbidity hasten the disease’s onset and lack of awareness prevents patients from seeking early treatment. 

Health experts observing the spike in the death rate in Pune and in the state stressed on rigorous and random community testing. The government must ensure that no one is left out, they added. 

All cases with influenza-like illness, irrespective of travel history or contact with such persons must be put through the rapid antibody test followed by the PCR throat swab test to detect many more cases who can then be isolated to slow down the epidemic, co-convenor of Jan Swasthya Abhiyan Anant Phadke told TOI.

“We have been insisting on more tests from the very beginning. We even wrote to the Centre about it,” he told TOI.

On the mortality rate in the country, Phadke said it is about 3%, which was misleading because so far only people with foreign travel history or contact with such persons have been tested and deaths counted as Covid-19 cases. 

“There are a number of cases which have been missed in this testing and have not been counted as Covid-19 cases,” he added. 

Public health expert Raju Jotkar said testing had improved in the last two weeks in Maharashtra. “It should have been done from the very beginning,” he told TOI.

The surge in positive cases in Pune was because of a four-fold increase in testing since March, Mhaisekar said.

Community testing is an absolute must for the country, said Kerala-based health expert KP Aravindan. “This is best done by testing a large population for antibodies against the virus in stages to know the seroconversion rates. The tests can be a finger prick by a health worker and so can encompass a large number of people,” he said. 

Though difficult, the ICMR must push for testing many people after pooling samples and testing by PCR, he added. 

“This has to be followed by a series of tests in positive pools,” he added.

 (With inputs from Vishwas Kothari)


