In Ngp central jail, lockdown turns officers into ‘inmates’
2020-04-27
Nagpur: The Nagpur central jail would be completely sealed later this week as a precautionary measure to check the Corona spread. Seven other jails in the western Maharashtra, including four in Mumbai and Yerawada in Pune, have already shifted into lockdown mode following a direction from higher authorities.

It is learnt that an entire team of jail officials, including SP Anup Kumar Kumre, would enter the prison with their support staff and remain inside until further orders from an officer of at least Inspector general of police (IGP) rank. Even women jailors and their subordinate staffers would stay inside the prison. 

Officials and their entire teams in western Maharashtra prisons have have already spent two weeks inside the prisons. No one, including the undertrials or convicts, would be allowed to enter or leave the premises except for medical emergencies or other unavoidable circumstances. 

SP Kumre said approval for going into lockdown was expected to reach them later this week. “The arrangements have been made to camp inside the jail with adequate rations to last a considerable period. We also have a hospital inside the jail for medical emergencies. The decision of prison lockdown is being taken to avoid contracting the virus,” he said. 

In order to make lockdown effective, the jail authorities have also got additional premises sanctioned from the district collector to create quarantine facility where the new undertrials would be kept for a period of 15 days and their samples sent for testing. “The ones getting bail or those ending their sentence shall be released as per regular practice,” Kumre said.

The jail authorities had already created two quarantine facilities within the premises where a few inmates have been kept. Following approval of the collector, they now have an additional 30-bed one created on the programme lawn outside the jail and adjoining the inmate-operated car wash centre. 

Kumre said a team has been created to manage the quarantine facility and another would remain in reserve. “Two coordinating officers would manage the show outside the prison and also help the families of the personnel. Vendors of vegetable and other essential commodities would be allowed to visit the quarters of the jail personnel. We are stacking up the ration and other daily needs for the ones inside the jail,” he said.


