In Nanjangud, 753 pharma staff home-quarantined; kin of patients in public facilities
2020-03-31
Mysuru: Family members of eight Covid-19-infected Jubilant Pharma employees based in Nanjangud have been moved to public quarantine facilities set up in government buildings. Authorities ruled out shifting of all employees of the company and has home-quarantined them instead, assigning one constable to monitor 10 of them to ensure they stay indoors.

Since Friday, 10 employees have tested positive and results on 30 samples are awaited. 

As of Monday, 753 workers of the company have been home-quarantined. Groceries and other essential supplies would be reached to them, authorities said. After the infections were classified as a “cluster case”, the district administration had planned to quarantine all employees of the firm at choultries and other public buildings but health experts advised against it, saying it could cause virus to spread further. 

The district administration has got the company to pay 30% of employees’ salary in cash to ensure those home-quarantined can buy essential commodities. District minister V Somanna, who held a meeting with officials, said the employees will get at least Rs 5,000 in cash from the company within a couple of days. 

A sense of fear pervades Nanjangud, a temple town of 60,000 people just over 20km from the city. Located on the national highway, it is now out of bounds for people while Nanjangud Industrial area, 3km from town limits, is closed. Only a few units deemed essential are allowed to operate. The administration has cancelled the car festival of Lord Sri Srikanteshwara scheduled on April 3 — the first time ever, recall residents. Though essential services, such as grocery shops and pharmacies are allowed to open, many chose not to.

While family members of those who tested positive are quarantined at facilities set up in public schools in Mahadevapura, Hura and Sinduvahalli in Nanjangud taluk, a community hall in the town is also being readied for a potential spike in infections. 

Residents of KHB Colony in Nanjangud gathered in front of a government hostel on Monday, opposing arrangements to turn it into a quarantine facility. 

‘Quarantine breakers to be booked’

Referring to flyers who were stamped for quarantining themselves and still stepped out, district minister V Somanna said strict action would be taken. Many of the rubbed off the mark to evade public scrutiny. “Given that some of those home-quarantined have flouted norms, police will file criminal cases against them,” the minister said. A flying squad comprising senior officials has also been tasked with enforcing the quarantine. 


