In post-pandemic plan for schools, smart classrooms to be set up for students in UP
2020-05-24
PRAYAGRAJ: Although the student fraternity nowadays is relying more on the online mode of studies because of the Covid-19 pandemic but when things become normal, the students of eight selected intermediate colleges and primary/upper primary schools of the Sangam city would be taught in smart-classrooms.

These classrooms are part of the smart city project of Prayagraj wherein a total of 82 smart classrooms would be distributed among these eight institutions on priority.

In fact, the authorities of the firm leading the transformation of Prayagraj into a smart city, has already invited tenders in this regard from interested firms, the last date of which would be ending on May 25.

Giving details about the ambitious project, divisional commissioner and chief executive officer of Prayagraj smart city, Ravi Ranjan informed that as part of the project, a set number of classrooms, would be turned into ‘smart classrooms’ in the selected eight intermediate colleges and primary/upper primary schools of the city. “In the first phase, these classrooms would be equipped with the infrastructure needed for teaching under the ‘smart classroom’ which includes items like desktop computers, servers, projectors, white boards, Wi-Fi routers, UPS etc besides a sturdy and reliable broadband net connection”, the divisional commissioner said. .

“The teachers of these schools and colleges would also receive special training from experts to enable them to teach students using the tools available in these smart classrooms,” he added.

As part of the project, 11 such smart classrooms would be set up at Government Girls Inter College, Civil Lines, nine at Government Girls Inter College, Katra, 32 at Government Boys Inter College, North Malaka, 18 at Bharat Scout and Guide Inter College, Mumfordganj and three smart classrooms each at primary /upper primary schools of Rajapur, Lukerganj, Allenganj and Harwara.

The authorities are of the opinion that the first impact of the initiative in these eight institutions would be accessed and if it is found to be significant on the students, more such classrooms could be set up in other schools and colleges of the district as well, explained the CEO.

As per the plan, the firm entrusted with the task of setting up the classrooms will not only maintain them and ensure their smooth functioning for the next five years but also provide training to the teachers of these institutions, he added.


