In quarantined Kandal, volunteers step in to ease lockdown blues
2020-04-11
Udhagamandalam: Life ground to a halt in Kandal, the largest dwelling cluster in Ooty, after the locality was completely sealed following two residents testing positive for Covid-19. Nobody was allowed to step out of their houses and all public activity was barred in a bid to prevent community spread.

But a group of volunteers have emerged as a ray of hope. The 32 young men from different communities and different political leanings have come together to attend to the needs of residents in the area.

With a population of 45,000 residents, Kandal was part of the nationwide lockdown to help contain spread of the pandemic, just like other towns in the state. But things turned worse when two attendees of the Tabligi Jamaat conference in Delhi were traced to Kandal. In a span of a few hours, the district administration decided to quarantine the entire area. It was then that the volunteers stepped up to provide door delivery of grocery and other daily essentials.

“Braving the fear of the virus for the interest of the people, they showed solidarity in serving residents of Kandal”, said Vinayagam, a police inspector. Police verified all 32 volunteers and gave them special purpose identity cards. Their main purpose was to convince residents of the need to stay indoors, as their grocery and essentials were being supplied to their houses.

For administrative convenience, the quarantined locality has been divided into seven zones and volunteers are deputed to each division. While police keep a vigil on the main roads in the area, the volunteers assist police by requesting people to not step out.

Abhudhakeer, a volunteer attached to Tamil Nadu Muslim Munnetra Kazhagam, said. “We start our day by 6.30am by distributing milk to residents. While delivering milk, most residents give a list of grocery and vegetables,” he said. The volunteers purchase the grocery from nearby shops and deliver it to the respective houses, with the bills.

Nagaraj, another volunteer from Hindu Munnani Katchi, said, “We are doing this as a service to the society in difficult times…we don’t consider caste or religion when it comes to serving people.”.

As a safety measure, the district administration has provided all volunteers with masks, gloves and sanitizers.


