In shadow of Covid, puppeteer narratesmessage of safety
2020-06-03
Chennai: You may be familiar with the funny troubles of popular TV animation characters Motu and Patlu, but here’s a chance to see the duo play a serious role. Laxmana Rao, a fifth-generation puppeteer, introduces Motu and Patlu through his shadow puppets to create awareness about the safety measures that people must follow to check the spread of the Covid-19.Motu and Patlu are the main characters in the 10-minute play that Rao has directed. "I haven’t had any programme for the past three months due to the lockdown. But I want to use shadow puppetry to create awareness among people about the pandemic. A small gesture from my side to help people," said the Theni-based folk artist, who won the Kalaimamani award in 2019. Thol Pavai Koothu (leather puppet show) is an ancient form of theatre dating back to 1000AD once popular in the southern parts of India. The shadow images of handmade puppets are created on a screen. The person who moves the puppets mimics the dialogues followed by percussion instruments. Traditionally, storytelling in shadow puppetry involves mythological characters, but over the years contemporary issues have become part of its narrative. Rao, has earlier used the dying art form to create awareness about coastal conservation, vulture protection and other environmental issues. In Rao’s present creation, the story begins with Motu and Patlu being stopped by the police for not wearing protective masks and so are asked to surrender the bike. In the second scene, Yama (god of death) asks one of his attendants why the death rate on earth is high. Motu and Patlu land up before Yama, and Yama advises them to use a sanitizer and mask. "I am trying to provide a basic message to be followed to avoid the spread of Covid-19. I chose Motu and Patlu because they are popular among both children and adults," he said. Rao’s grandfathers once conducted shadow puppetry shows across Tamil Nadu but its popularity faded gradually after television and other modes of entertainment came in. "It’s difficult to survive as a puppeteer today. But I am confident that it still can interest people, that’s why I use this art form to convey messages that are relevant today," said Rao, who is facing financial difficulties as performances stopped due to the lockdown. "There are more than 20 members in my family. We are having a tough time because of the lockdown. We hope things will improve," he said.