In time of coronavirus pandemic, neighbourhood grocery stores bounce back
2020-05-10
The once flourishing but humble neighbourhood grocery stores were fighting a losing battle against large supermarket chains. But Covid-19 has turned the tables.

Today, it’s the local grocer who has turned into a superhero for residents. But many of these small businesses are wary: Will the good run continue after the lockdown lifts?

“We had been reduced to an emergency store over time by the supermarket chains. People would come to us only when they needed something urgently,” said a grocery store owner in the Deccan area. 

“But since the lockdown, people have once again turned to us for their monthly supplies.”

A resident of the area, Santosh Jalan, said, “Earlier, I would head to a supermarket on the other side of town to buy everything from cooking oil to detergent. But since the lockdown, I have been visiting a grocery store near my house. It always has what I need and re-stocks regularly. So I will continue going to the smaller store.”

About trade during the lockdown, Ramesh Agarwal, a grocer from Kalyaninagar, said, “Our shelves emptied in two days when the lockdown was announced. And that hasn’t happened to us in 30 years of business here,” he said.

Rasik Kothari, a grocer from Vimannagar, said his store is seeing some of its busiest days. “Supermarkets have a coupon system. People don’t want to wait in long queues so many have been coming to us. We have started home deliveries too.” 

Wadgaonsheri resident, Rajendra Chaudhary, said, “I have no option but rely on the neighbourhood grocer. A few items are still unavailable but the grocer has fruit and vegetables. The best part is that his shop is just a minute’s walk away from my home.” Bhawani, who runs a store on Salunke Vihar Road said visits to his shop have increased. “I also have new customers — upper-class people who come in big cars. I hope they continue coming to me. I am changing inventory to suit their demands,” he said. 

Prakash Punaram Chaudhari, owner of a grocery store along NIBM Road, said sales at his store have risen by over 200%. “But I fear a drastic slowdown after the lockdown lifts. I hope people will remember the role small shops played during this difficult time,” he said.

Resident Jigisha Priyadarshini said she will continue to support small businesses. “Grocery stores have been vital to the smooth supply of essentials in the NIBM Road area. One supermarket, which was carrying out home deliveries, refused to come to our housing society because ours is a building with 87 flats. It was the local grocers who came to our rescue. They aren’t allowed past our gates, but they leave parcels with the security,” she said.

Pimpri Chinchwad too is seeing a similar trend. “Many have started to queue up at the smaller shops. Earlier, people would travel five kilometres, at least, to the cheaper wholesale markets. But since they have started rationing, we have been getting their business too. We have never charged very high prices, but we cannot match discount coupons of online players. We can only assure our customers a steady stream of supplies,” said Jiten Parmar, a PCMC-based grocer.

An IT professional from the area, Shruti Sawant, said, “I tried adding items to cart a dozen times on an online platform. Each time, the slot remained unavailable. Now, I just walk across the road to get the stuff I need. The pandemic has obviously changed the way we shop. I don’t know if I will stick to this, but the local grocers have become much more reliable now.”


