Patna: In times of coronavirus, telemedicine comes to patients’ rescue
2020-04-01
PATNA: With people seeking medical help via virtual platforms amid lockdown, telemedicine services have finally taken off in the city. Of late, a sudden surge is being witnessed in the number of online and telephonic consultations people are seeking with doctors.


According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), telemedicine is one of the most essential services in strengthening the health system’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Indian Medical Association (IMA) is also making efforts to deliver free consultancy to people, for which it has issued numbers of health specialists. The state health department is also running a helpline number for all non-emergency complaints.

IMA-Bihar senior vice-president Ajay Kumar said around 300-400 doctors are giving consultation over phone to people across the state. “Keeping in mind the coronavirus spread, IMA has given a green signal to telemedicine facility. In just two-three days, more than 300 doctors from across the state, including Purnia, Muzaffarpur and Patna, have started giving free consultation to people who need medical advice,” he said.

Former IMA-Bihar secretary Dr Brajnandan Kumar said it was decided at a recent meeting with health officials that a website will soon be launched for availing telemedicine services. “The online portal will have different phone numbers on which people can give a missed call to avail free check-up,” he said.

The state health department is also running a helpline number – 104 – for all non-emergency complaints. State surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra said altogether 35,000 calls were received from across the state on this number and other district-level helpline numbers till Tuesday. “The queries have comparatively increased in the last few days. People are mostly asking questions about normal flu and viral infections,” she said.

Meanwhile, doctors said they receive more than 20 queries via phone calls per day. Dr Pratyush Kumar of Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) said the number of patients coming to the hospital has dropped significantly.

“I receive around 10-15 queries regarding different health problems every day. Telephonic calls apart, several people have started consulting me through online chatting platforms. People don’t come to the hospital apprehending that they might come in contact with Covid-19 suspects,” Dr Kumar said.


