In testing times, city churches go online as devotees mark Good Friday in isolation
2020-04-12
Ranchi: Churches in Ranchi embraced technology with most of them live-streaming Good Friday mass services by priests as thousands of faithful listened to them from the confines of their homes due to the lockdown imposed to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Behind closed doors of empty churches, priests comemmorated the crucifixion and death of Jesus Christ and offered prayers for all those suffering due to the Covid-19 outbreak. The ceremonies at all mainline churches were live-streamed for the benefit of the faithful. This is the first time Good Friday and Easter mass was live-streamed in the state.

In a recorded Easter message that was uploaded on the portal of the 175-year-old Gossner Evangelical Lutheran (GEL) Church, moderator Johan Dang said, “He died for us to deliver us from evil. He suffered for more than six hours, first carrying the Cross and later nailed to it and left to bleed to death. By becoming a man, Jesus made himself weak so that he could live among us. Through his death, Jesus brought us closer to God.” 

At the more than a century-old St Mary's Cathedral at Purulia Road in the state capital, Ranchi archbishop Felix Toppo, assisted by four pastors, prostrated, before the altar before commencing the Good Friday mass on Friday evening behind closed doors and without the presence of people. 

More than a thousand devotees from across the state witnessed the mass live-streamed from the Cathedral. “God loves us all. He endured insults, physical torture and finally death to demonstrate his love for mankind and to deliver us from evil,” Toppo archbishop said.

Churches across the city closed their doors for the public in the third week of March after temples and other places of public importance were shut to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Though members of various churches were asked to pray from their homes, a few of them planned to live-stream the proceedings on a daily basis.

Since Good Friday and Easter on Sunday are considered to be important and solemn occasions for Christians, the majority of churches ensured that prayers are live-streamed so that people can pray from their homes. Senior tribal leader Prabhakar Tirkey, when asked of his experience of attending virtual Easter services said live-streaming the service was a good decision. “I never heard of a virtual service before — the lockdown has made me more tech-savvy. I am watching the live-streaming of services on my laptop along with my family. It’s different, because the priest is on a screen. We are staying indoors only to keep everyone safe. Amid this crisis, these services have brought my family and me closer to God,” he said.

Another faithful, Jaya Ekka of Kanke area in Ranchi, said that despite facing audio problems due to slow internet speed, the virtual service was a welcome move. “I got to know about the live-streaming of Easter services through my local church. It was difficult to understand how to access the stream, but my son helped me access the Easter ceremony on my phone. When the Internet lags, the mass suddenly gets cut off. But connecting with God through my mobile phone was a novel experience,” she said.

Sitting in front of a desktop computer Seema Tirkey from Kanke Road, said, “In all the 60 years of my life, I have never seen anything like a virtual services. I liked the idea, but I miss that moment in church when you say, ‘Peace be with you,’ to complete strangers and they smile back.”


