Mumbai: In testing times, coaching centres join hands to share faculty and expertise
2020-02-10
MUMBAI: Coaching campuses, like many other businesses, are passing through testing times. With their backs to the walls, they have come up with a new model for tuition classes.

A dozen tutorials have joined hands in a mega Mumbai experiment to share faculty, experience and expertise, thus birthing ‘Edumentors’ out of the crisis. The core mission of these 12, who serve different parts of the city, is to share the big bill of faculty pay so that they do not have to cut corners. “We share our faculty and notes, our stationery supplier is the same and so is the man who furnishes our classes with tables and benches. The interior designer is the same. Coming together and sharing has been a celebration,” said Govindraj Chettiar, one of the directors of Raju Sir’s Academy.


 

The experiment is spreading. In Thane, Logical Academy, Excel Classes and Karnavat Coaching, which were all running three commerce self-financing courses with small batch sizes, joined hands to offer one course each. “Instead of cutting costs and running courses for 10 or 15 students, we decided to divide the market. Now each of us only takes one course. Students wanting to study BMS come to Karnavat, Logical Academy only teaches BAF and Excel picked the BBI programme,” said Sachin Karnavat. 

With a tagline, “Let’s merge to emerge”, the Maharashtra Coaching Classes Owners’ Association (MCCOA) seems to have found a way out of the crisis. “Of the 98,000 coaching classes in Maharashtra, 40% are operating at a loss or are just managing to break even,” said president Sachin Karnavat.

Now, consolidation is paying off. Four classes in Dombivli have broken down the walls of rivalry and prudently realigned. Amol Damle of Samarth Classes, Anand Subramanium of A’s Academy, Virchand Maisheri and Vijay Gawas came together to jointly offer tuitions for class XI, XII and CA and CS courses.

It’s not a rosy picture yet. With student enrolment plummeting, discounts are the order of the day. “Almost 90% of the classes are not getting the sticker price of their courses though most have not upped fees from last year,” said Narendra Bambwani, former MCCOA secretary. Fees at his Reliable Classes are down 25%. The reasons are many. Some students don’t join a class for the first term and sign up only for the final term, others turn to app tutorials. “Also, it is now easier to pass because of internal tests and the emphasis on objective questions. The choice in question exams has increased. Students in many subjects are asked to answer three questions of six,” added Bambwani.

The hyper competition in the market, with the introduction of digital platforms, has disrupted the tutorials business. “When parents come for admission, they demand discounts and if we don’t budge, we lose the student to a cheaper competitor or a home-maker who is running private tuitions out of home,” said Prajesh Trotsky, consultant to several coaching classes.

Unemployment has proved a double-edge sword for the business. “The ones without jobs are starting tuitions to teach and earn. And those with children are not sending kids to classes because of unemployment or poor pay cheques. Then, some students are moving to tech and online tutorials. Schemes like ‘pay-for-XII-get-XI-free’ abound in the market,” he added. Every student enrolled is a battle won and some are willing to go to any extent to get them.


