In the post-coronavirus world, we’ll have to create timeless pieces, go digital, and scale down, says the fashion fraternity
2020-05-09
With major fashion events called off or postponed indefinitely, orders cancelled, and stores shut amid the coronavirus pandemic, this is a testing time for the fashion industry but designers haven’t lost hope. Reinvention may be the key to kick-start businesses post lockdown, fashion fraternity veterans said as they came together for a webinar hosted by the Delhi Times. 
Titled ‘Revival of Business in Post-pandemic Era’, the session was moderated by Sunil Sethi, chairman, Fashion Design Council of India (FDCI). Well- known fashion designers Suneet Varma, Ashish N Soni, Namrata Joshipura, Anamika Khanna, JJ Valaya and Rajesh Pratap Singh spoke at the event. Excerpts from the discussion:


‘We all have to be prepared for a new normal’Sunil Sethi started the discussion with a question that’s on everybody’s mind these days – ‘When will things get back to normal?’ “We all have to be prepared for the new normal and each one of us has to set that new normal standard on our own. It won’t be anytime soon that we will get back to where we were,” Anamika replied.
Agreeing with Anamika, Suneet said, “I don’t think we should expect any kind of pre-pandemic normalcy. There will be a new normal, new ethos of doing business and a new structure that everyone will have to adapt to. It’s a two-way street - what the designers expect in terms of how we should roll out our businesses, targets we want to meet and markets we want to serve, and what the consumers expect. Once the pandemic is over, people may not want to spend big.”
“I totally agree, though we don’t know what the new normal will be like. For instance, people browsing through stores is not going to happen now. I don’t know how this is going to unfold,” Ashish added.


‘Experiential buying may pick up again’
Sethi then took the discussion forward to stock management and whether designers will have to take a new approach while planning their collections. Stressing the need to reinvent, Rajesh Pratap Singh said, “I hope we learn our lessons. There were these shows and things that weren’t required. I hope we move forward from there. From what we know, it may take a year and a half to deal with this pandemic. In that case, while many designers will go back to their drawing boards, 50% of our businesses will perish. Please, forgive me for being a bit negative. We will have to reinvent our businesses.”
Echoing the sentiment, Anamika said this period should not be considered as the end of the road but a change of pattern. “We have to change the way we think. Indian economy is very different. We will not go out and start spending as soon as the pandemic is over. We save for future and there is going to be discerning, need-based buying. For example, I would want to invest in something that will last longer. We have to create something that is timeless,” she said.
Valaya agreed, saying, “People who would want to spend big money would also want to buy something that will be an investment. So, clever designing and creating something that holds value for a number of years is needed.”
Suneet, at the same time, expressed the opinion that experiential buying may pick up again in days to come. “Before everyone set up fancy stores, we used to have brilliant sales through studios in our factories. I think that will be a very interesting option to explore again. For example, earlier, a diamond merchant family from Antwerp would set up home in my factory for four days and order clothes for 50 people. It was a more personalised way of being able to sell beautiful clothes without investing in an inventory and spending on overheads. This is something we can all explore for the next year or two. If clients are going to be scared to go to crowded places, they may want such private experiences,” he added.


‘Digital is the way to go but we will also have to step back and scale down’
Bringing the discussion to technological solutions, Sethi said that going digital was the need of the hour. As he invited speakers to share their views on the subject, Rajesh Pratap said, “Going digital is not just an option anymore. It needs to be done right away.”
“During the interim period, when people won’t be that comfortable stepping out, digital platforms will be important for sales, but the price point may remain a sensitive issue. Beyond a certain price point, the physical experience of shopping is still essential. Digital is the way to go forward but clearly, we will have to reinvent our business model. We will have to step back and scale down,” Namrata added.
Valaya agreed, saying that while digital is the future, when it comes to occasion wear, such as for weddings, the touch and feel factor is still important for consumers. “The amount of actual business we get out of social media platforms, such as Instagram, is incredible, but it goes up to a certain price point. To a large extent, the digital world is going to be the answer. But when it comes to wedding wear, brides and grooms would want to feel the outfit,” he said.
Suneet shared with the panel that as much as 50% of his business came from NRI clients, and that since the pandemic started, he has been getting 40-50 messages from his clients every day. “We get 40-50 messages a day from clients, asking for prices and delivery timing for items that they have seen on social media. So if people don’t travel, that does not mean there will be no sales. There may be a reduction but people will still want to buy,” he said.


‘The most important thing is taking care of our karigars’
Another concern area that the designers discussed was taking care of the people they work with. “The most important thing is taking care of our people. I don’t care about sales or whether this industry recovers today or tomorrow. My worry is, how am I going to take care of my people? How are we, as an industry, going to take care of karigars, weavers and craftspeople? The bigger an organisation is, the bigger the problem,” said Rajesh Pratap.
Ashish added, “We are all going to use our cash reserves. Our people are our brand. We have to support them. But when the rental guys come calling and there are no sales, we are going to hit major roadblocks.” Namrata couldn’t agree more with Ashish as she added, “What’s bothering me and most of my contemporaries are store rentals and wages.”
To conclude the discussion, Sethi had some important points to make, “I see the glass as half full. Our priority is our workers and our teams. We have to reinvent in a way that this family continues to be in a happy space. Each one has a different idea of how things will go and I am learning from this. All I want to say is that we cannot get off the treadmill. If we have to keep the industry going, we have to find alternatives. We have to reinvent.” 

