In testing times, Brigade Chalo... to donate blood
2020-06-14
KOLKATA: Amid the pandemic that has gripped the entire city, the College Street Coffee House Social Service Association has arranged for a blood donation camp at Brigade on Sunday (June 14) — World Blood Donor Day. According to a spokesperson of the association, representatives of all political parties had consented to be present at Brigade. They will donate blood in an air-conditioned bus specially designed for such a purpose. 


It is a different year for the association which has been organizing special blood donation drives at College Street every year with participation from from people of all walks of life especially those who are regulars at Coffee House adda. This year, the association has decided to shift the venue with a purpose. “We are passing through a difficult time when committed blood donors are also scared of the virus and thus are not inclined to such a social cause. But scarcity of blood is being felt everywhere. We have chosen Brigade to attract the attention of people, especially the youths to come forward to such a great cause without fear,” said Achintya Laha, general secretary of the association. 

Laha said they were particularly worried over the thalassaemia patients who need regular blood transfusion. But the lockdown has made it impossible for different blood donor associations or social welfare organizations to organize donation camps as no permission was being granted for such camps. 

According to Bhaskar Sinha, a blood donor who has been associated with the initiative for the past one decade, they are expecting over 100 donors at Brigade. “We are organizing the blood donation camp amid several restrictions. The administration has restricted the number of gathering at the ground and hence we need to wrap up the programme as fast as we can,” Sinha said. 

According to association sources, though they get 400-500 donors every year, this year they need to organize multiple blood donation camps to keep the supply of blood unhindered. 


