Delhi: In times of coronavirus, commuters and drivers wary of each other
2020-03-09
NEW DELHI: Ritesh Sharma regularly takes the cab to work. But in the midst of the novel coronavirus scare, the Vasant Kunj resident has started wearing a mask for his trips to central Delhi and back. “New cases are being detected every day. While I find app-based cabs a safer travel option than public transport, I’m still apprehensive. These cabs ferry a large number of passengers through the day and I’m worried whether the drivers keep the vehicles sanitised,” Sharma said. “I hope wearing a mask helps, but there is still the problem of touching surfaces like door handles and locks,” he said.


Suchismita Das, a Malviya Nagar resident, says she has had to forgo the cheaper alternative of shared rides. “For now, I have stopped taking shared rides. As you can’t completely avoid touching common surfaces, I vigorously clean my hands with a sanitiser as soon as I get down,” she said.

Drivers, too, are a wary lot, especially of passengers who might have travelled abroad recently. “Drivers working on both Ola and Uber platforms pick up and drop a large number of passengers at Delhi airport,” said Deepak Saraswat, general secretary of Sarvodaya Driver Association of Delhi. “How will a driver know if the passenger is coming back from a trip to a country like Italy, Thailand or Malaysia?” Sanjay Samrat, president of Delhi Taxi, Tourist Transporters and Tour Operators Association, met Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Saturday to request stringent health checks at Delhi airport to ensure that no traveller infected by novel coronavirus uses tourist cabs or buses. 

Cab aggregators Ola and Uber said they were taking necessary measures and also sensitising their driver-partners about precautions. “Our walk-in centres across cities have been equipped with a steady supply of health advisory material, sanitisers and masks, which can be picked up and used by the driver-partners to ensure the highest levels of cleanliness for themselves and their vehicles. This will help create a safer and cleaner ride experience for our customers as well,” Ola said in a statement. The company said that it was reiterating the importance of personal hygiene through a dedicated preparedness module for driver-partners to create awareness.

“We urge customers to join us in this initiative by adhering to health guidelines including personal hygiene and seeking immediate medical attention if they have flu-like symptoms. This will go a long way in ensuring their well-being as well as that of fellow passengers and driver-partners,” it added.

An Uber spokesperson said: “We are always working to help ensure the safety of our employees and everyone on the Uber platform, and we continue to be concerned by the ongoing spread of coronavirus. We have formed a dedicated team of Uber operations, security and safety executives, guided by the advice of a consulting public health expert, to respond as needed in each market where we operate in South Asia. We remain in constant contact with local public health authorities and will continue to follow their advice. We have also communicated their recommendations to our drivers.” 

Saraswat, however, claimed that even if the drivers were apprehensive of picking up a passenger, they couldn’t expect any help from the companies. “Not only would the driver have to pay a cancellation charge, but he would also be ‘offloaded’ from the aggregator platform. It takes three to four days for drivers to get themselves back into the system in such cases,” he said.

But Uber insisted that if driver-partners felt uncomfortable about picking up a passenger for safety reasons, they could choose not to accept or cancel the trip. However, they can’t discriminate against anyone based on their race or nationality. Ola said that its Partner Care teams and Safety Response teams were available 24x7 for any concerns that might arise for driver-partners and customers respectively. “We encourage everyone to proactively report any instance that may be symptomatic for us to help action and guide appropriately,” the company said.

Kamaljeet Gill, president of Sarvodaya Driver Association of Delhi, said: “When it comes to the coronavirus scare, drivers are at the forefront as we have to pick up passengers from hospitals and airports and you don’t know who could be infected. Our association has distributed hand sanitisers and masks to drivers and also asked them to keep their cabs clean.”

