In unlock phase, you are your own saviour, say doctors
2020-06-04
Nagpur: With several relaxations in the offing in the current lockdown from June 5 onwards, doctors have advised people to be their own saviours by following Covid distancing, using face masks, and eye protective gears to prevent person-to-person transmission of the virus. Indian Medical Association (IMA) Nagpur has released a six-minute video in which prominent doctors of the city have appealed people to follow the rules as we have to learn living with the novel coronavirus. “Our purpose behind releasing this video is to tell everyone that unlocking does not mean life should be back to normal immediately,” said Dr Archana Kothari, president of Nagpur IMA. “This will help all of us to take precautions. We need to minimize the risk of contracting the virus and maximize the effects and benefits of Covid distancing,” she added. “In fact, we have to take additional care during this period. With lockdown over, we are our own saviours,” said Dr Rajesh Sawarbandhe, honorary secretary of IMA Nagpur. Prominent doctors and former presidents of IMA Nagpur have shared valuable tips with common people in this video. “We have to follow a set of new rules. If two people are travelling in a car, the other person must avoid seating in the passenger seat. It is better to occupy the rear seat,” said Dr Kush Jhunjhunwala. Senior ophthalmologist Dr Rafat Khan said that touching eyes with hands should be avoided. “Face cover should be used as much as possible. It will keep you away from touching your face too often. Those working on computers must take a 20-second break from screen after 20 minutes of work to avoid rubbing their eyes,” he said.“We spend 8 to 9 hours at work and will spend even more post lockdown. We must maintain a proper distance from everyone during this time even if all of us look fine. Having meals together, sharing water bottles should be strictly avoided,” said Dr YS Deshpande. “Following distancing at market places, shopping malls is a personal responsibility,” he added. Pulmonologist Dr Rajesh Swarnakar shared a result of a most recent international review and meta-analysis of physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent Covid-19. “Transmission of viruses was lower with physical distancing of 1 metre or more, compared with a distance of less than 1 meter,” he said. 