Coronavirus scare: In UP, poultry firm buries alive 6,000 chicks in mass grave as sales nosedive
2020-03-18
MEERUT: Rampant rumours of novel coronavirus spreading due to eating non-vegetarian food has hit the poultry industry hard as the sales of chicken have nosedived. While some traders have been trying to balance it by reducing prices, a poultry firm in Bulandshahr district buried alive over 6,000 chicks, as “maintaining them had become unfeasible”.


According to sources, the poultry firm is based out of Punjab and runs a unit in Bulandshahr district in Uttar Pradesh. A huge pit was dug in a field in Mubarakpur village in Bulandshahar’s Unchagaon area where the chicks were dumped and later buried. Photos and videos of the incident were widely shared. 

In a similar action, a poultry farmer in Belagavi district of Karnataka, claiming to have suffered huge loss, buried 6,000 poultry birds over steep fall in prices against the existing cost of rearing them which is higher. Video of the burial was widely shared on social media, which drew widespread criticism.

In retail market, traders and meat shop owners are struggling to stay afloat as sales have gone down to “unprecedented levels”. “Our business has been badly hit by rumours on WhatsApp. Misleading texts along with pictures and videos of decomposing chicken were falsely shared as one of the sources of transmission of coronavirus,” Mohammad Musa, who owns a meat shop in Sotiganj area in Meerut, said. 

In western Uttar Pradesh, chicken is being sold between Ra 60-80 per kg, which is a considerable drop from Rs 140-160 per kg a month ago.

Sources in the poultry industry claim the considerable drop in prices have badly hit the business as poultry farm owners are having a hard time recovering prices of rearing the birds. 

According to an official estimate, 10 crore farmers are directly involved in poultry farming, animal husbandry and fisheries in the country, contributing more than Rs. 1.2 lakh crore to the GDP. Ministry of fisheries, animal husbandry & dairying has already debunked rumours to allay fears of consumers claiming that eating meat, fish and egg is completely safe. 

