In Udham Singh Nagar, 17 shopkeepers held for defying Covid-19 guidelines
2020-03-25
RUDRAPUR: As many as 17 shopkeepers were held by Udham Singh Nagar police on Tuesday after they were found to be flouting norms regarding Covid-19 during lockdown in the state. These traders kept their shops open even after 10 am despite the state government order that shops can remain open only between 7 am and 10 am. 


The state government on Monday had ordered that all ration, grocery, and milk shops can remain open only for three hours — 7 am to 10 am. 

Gadarpur SHO Jaswinder Singh told TOI, “On Tuesday at 9 am, police vehicles patrolled across the district and made the announcement that people have one more hour to make essential purchases. But even after 10 am, we found several traders violating the prohibitory orders.” The arrested shopkeepers also included former city president of BJP Harish Sukhija. 

According to Rudrapur SHO Kailash Chandra Bhatt, the accused have been booked under section 188 (violating order promulgated by the government), section 269 (Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), section 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) of the Indian Penal Code and section 81 of the Police Act. 

All of them were granted bail from the respective city police stations later, added the official.

Assistant Regional Transport Officer (ARTO) Sandeep Saini told TOI that 30 vehicles were impounded and their drivers were challaned for flouting norms on Tuesday. 

Meanwhile, the police also impounded 183 vehicles. Reports of misbehaviour by police officials also surfaced from some areas of the district. The locals alleged that police bludgeoned people who were out seeking essential medical services. 

"They were not even sparing women. I saw two policewomen beating an elderly lady near a petrol pump in the city,” said Sanjay Juenja, president of Rudrapur Traders’ Union.

Sonu Naagi, a resident of Bazpur, said, "Police broke down a bike with sticks and also beat the rider. They could have impounded the vehicle but they resorted to unacceptable methods.” When asked about the allegations, SHO Bhatt denied any such manhandling by police officials.


