In Vizianagaram, quarantine centres turning into hotspots
2020-05-09
Visakhapatnam: Quarantine centres in Vizianagaram are fast turning into Covid-19 hotspots. The three cases reported on Wednesday were all from quarantine centres — the one in Piridi near Bobbili, the centre at MVGR college in the outskirts and from the centre at Seethanagaram.

With the number of cases increasing and a majority of them being reported from quarantine centres is a cause of worry for the district medical authorities. Sources in the medical department said that with the rise in cases the number of sample tests being done has alos increased. Now, with some of the quarantine centres turning out to be hot beds, it has become imminent for them to conduct random testing in these centres.

Talking to TOI, DMHO Dr S V Ramani Kumari said, “The number of people returning to the district has gone up and majority of the cases reported so far are from quarantine centres established for returnees. Our priority is to pace up sampling and increase sample base in quarantine centres.”

Sources further pointed that medical teams are conducting tests across quarantine centres in the district and, more importantly, are focusing on centres where the cases have been reported. When asked about the actual number of samples collected in the last couple of days, the DMHO said that close to 500 people have been tested so far.

Dr Kumari further said, “We will be procuring another 1,000 kits for RTPCR sampling by Monday, while we have more than 2,200 TRUE NAT testing kits. Our focus is to conduct at least 1,000 tests per day to ensure that the sample base increases and we get a true picture.” 

District collector Dr M Hari Jawahar Lal, who inspected a few quarantine centres, said, “We are taking all measures to ensure that the centres are properly sanitised and social distancing is maintained. More importantly, we are identifying additional welfare hostels to deal with the growing number of returnees to the district.” 

Meanwhile, district medical authorities said that Vizianagaram will have its own testing centre by next week and it will be established in the district hospital.


