Inappropriate to refer to lockdown as curfew: Police
2020-04-25
Aurangabad: Senior police authorities as well as legal experts have expressed their reservations over the rampant use of word ‘curfew’ instead of using factually and legally correct terminology for the restrictions imposed in the current lockdown during which essential as well as emergency services have been granted exemption.

Police authorities, without mincing words, said that any violation of lockdown orders would result into registering a case under Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections 188 (disobeying orders duly promulgated by government authorities), 269 (unlawful or negligent act knowing to spread infection or any disease dangerous to life), 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease), 271 (knowingly disobeying any quarantine rule). In addition to slapping relevant sections of National Disaster Management Act – 2005 and Epidemic Diseases Act – 1897, against the suspect.

Experts unanimously pointed out that the word curfew is nowhere mentioned in any of the book of laws including the IPC and CrPC. Beed superintendent of police Harssh Poddar, a barrister by qualification said, “The word ‘curfew’ does not appear in Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Section 144 provides residuary powers to an executive magistrate to prohibit or enable certain acts deemed necessary to preserve law and order.”

Aurangabad superintendent of police (rural) Mokshada Patil said, “Lockdown is under disaster management act. To implement it magistrates have to issue restriction orders under section 144 of CrPC.”

Shedding more light on the issue, Aurangabad city’s senior-most deputy commissioner of police, Nikesh Khatmode Patil said, “Whatever orders are being imposed, are only restricting movement. They are neither curfew nor blanket ban on movement.”

High court lawyer Abhaysinh Bhosale said, “A lock down is imposed when there is a restriction on assembly but essential services are still available. Section 144 is imposed when assembly is prohibited under the IPC. A curfew is put in place when Section 144 is imposed along with essential services shut down. Violation of lockdown can lead to legal action, but in case of curfew, the violation leads to strict legal action and orders such as shoot at sight can also be directed to prevent unforeseen incidences.”

“A lock down can be enforced by a collector or chief medical officer in a particular area under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. This will be implemented through orders of the police commissioner under section 144 of CrPC. This gives them the power to restrict the assembly of 5 or more people in close quarters,” Bhosale added.

Criminal lawyers said lockdown is more about self-imposed restrictions while curfew is all about 100% forced restrictions imposed by the law enforcement agencies .


