Increase in no. of people in quarantine a cause for worry
2020-05-14
Kannur: The next phase of handling Covid-19 is not likely to be an easy task in the district with the return of expatriates and the corresponding increase in the number of people quarantined, coupled with the relaxation of lockdown restrictions.

Authorities have been claiming that the system for home and institutional quarantine are very stringent. Several hotels and lodges in the towns have been converted into quarantine centres, but it is a cause of concern as once the shops and establishments nearby are opened, it might lead to an increase in virus infections.

Though there has been no major increase in the number of positive cases, the number of people under observation has gone up considerably and quite a few of them are in isolation wards.

In Kannur, one more case has been reported and also a couple of people who came in the flight from Dubai has exhibited symptoms of the disease following which they have been admitted in the Covid hospital at Anjarakkandy.

At the same time, the authorities have claimed that a proper system is in place in the third stage of containment of the disease. The district planning committee in Kannur, which met on Wednesday, said those advised home quarantine should strictly stay in their rooms and should not venture out.

Local body chiefs, police and the PHCs should ensure that the people are adhering to quarantine protocols, said district panchayat president K V Sumesh.

Kasaragod has also been facing the same issue, since many people are going out after the relaxation in lockdown. Moreover, people from other states are sneaking in through interior roads evading officials. At the same time, the district administration has put in place a clear-cut strategy to handle the situation, said district collector D Sajith Babu. People coming from other states should have passes and priority would be given to pregnant women, kids, ailing people, senior citizens and women, he said. Those who come without passes would be shifted to government quarantine facilities and legal action would be initiated against them. Those who enter the district from other states should come via the Manjeshwar border only, said the collector.

But how effective would be home quarantine is what worries the officials though they have a surveillance system in place. If people under quarantine step out, it might lead to serious complications. But at the same time, if an entire locality is cordoned off it would also complicate the scenario further, which is worrying the authorities now.


