Increased water use during lockdown, so reduce, reuse and recycle
2020-04-01
In many parts of the country, the lockdown owing to the corona crisis is going to spiral into another big issue — water scarcity. With a lion’s share of people still reliant on fresh water and no concept of recycle and reuse in practice, staying put at home has increased everyone’s consumption patterns multi-fold.
AR Shivakumar, former scientist, Karnataka State Council for Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Science and water management advisor says, “There has been a surge in the domestic requirement, and with the depletion of groundwater, it becomes every citizen’s responsibility to save water.”


Reduce water usage
“The mantra is to use less and reuse more. So, collect the water that would be poured down the drain and use it for another purpose. When washing vegetables and fruits don’t do it under running water, soak them for a while in a dish and then wash. This water can be used later, to soak dirty vessels, or even for the first wash of utensils. Also, do not scrub dishes under running water,” advises Odette Katrak, co-founder Beautiful Bengaluru.


Re-use and recycle
“Every day, we flush down 30-50 litres of freshwater, per person, down our toilets. Substitute this with the water drained out during washing cycles of the washing machine. A washing machine uses 20%-22% of your daily water requirement, while toilet and washing combined uses 40-50%. You can save 20% by diverting the machine’s water outlet into your toilet bowl,” says Shivakumar. You can also reduce the amount of water in the flush tank by putting a one litre pet bottle filled with sand in it, says Lalithamba BV. Odette adds, “Water from washing pulses can be used to rinse dishes or water plants, but not to mop floors. Based on this, I evolved a water needs hierarchy framework depicting what secondary sources can be matched to certain needs, depending on whether clear, cloudy, soapy or muddy water would suffice.”


Avoid chemical cleansers, go natural
“Use natural cleansers to wash clothes, mop, and clean utensils. Unlike chemical detergents, these do not lather much and the water left thereafter, can be repurposed. We use the washing machine drain to water plants. Since the cleansers are natural and safe, there’s no harm done to the plants,” says Lalithamba.


Use reject from water purifiers
“For every 10%-15% of drinking water consumed by using a reverse osmosis (RO) purifier, 80% gets flushed out as reject. On average, a family uses 20-30 litres of water for drinking and cooking, which means for every 100 litres of water, you only get 20 that you can consume,” says Shivakumar. Odette adds, “Collect RO reject and use for mopping, watering plants, and cleaning the kitchen and basin, among others.”


Wastage is 100 times your drinking needs
On average, a home of four people uses 30,000 litres per month, meaning 250 litres per person per day. Of this, hardly 3-4 litres is consumed, and almost 100 times of the water consumed is being flushed down.



SMALL STEPS TO REDUCE WATER USE


 Redirect washing machine drain to clean toilet bowl
 Use RO reject to mop, water plants
 Fit aerators to taps 






