Increased resting, social media usage during lockdown an escape mechanism: GIM researchers
2020-04-30
PANAJI: Two professors at the Goa Institute of Management (GIM) have carried out a survey covering 231 respondents across the country to gauge their psychological response and coping behaviour during the Covid-19 outbreak and the resultant lockdown. In the survey by Divya Singhal and Padhmanbhan Vijayaraghavan, it was found that during the lockdown, respondents showed high involvement with social media, watching online movies and shows, and prolonged resting.

This prolonged engagement with social media, watching movies, and continuous rest or sleeping can be viewed as an escape or coping mechanism, the GIM faculty members noted.

More than 50% of the respondents (140) reported that their social media usage has gone up, as well as their time spent in watching movies and shows through online media. Over 150 respondents felt that reading forwarded messages on Covid-19 was depressing, said Singhal and Vijayaraghavan. 

“A majority of the respondents have become conscious of any bodily changes, sensations, mild cold, cough, sneezing, and experience concern and attribute them to the symptoms of Covid-19,” said Singhal, who is also chairperson of the centre for social sensitivity and action at GIM.

She said 41% of the respondents reported that they are not doing any physical activities such as yoga during the lockdown period, and 57% also did not practice any mind-calming techniques like meditation.

Seventy percent of the respondents said that they spend most of their time during lockdown resting, around 74% were happy they got more time to spend with their family due to the lockdown.

Singhal said that the respondents have resorted to coping by seeking social and emotional support by connecting with their friends and relatives, as well as spending more time with their family members, which can be viewed as social support-seeking behaviour. 

“Findings from various studies state that social support, especially from family, acts as strong protective factor for anxiety, and reinforces the belief that support resources are available to them,” Singhal said.

As news of Covid-19 started gaining momentum, the researchers said they realized a certain degree of vulnerability and worry. 

“This research idea stemmed from our personal motivation to know how people were feeling, reacting and coping with the pandemic,” she said.


