Increase Covid testing, don’t dodge orders: Telangana HC to KCR government
2020-06-09
HYDERABAD: Telangana high court on Monday pulled up the Telangana government on its handling of the Covid-19 crisis by raising a number of issues. It also threatened to issue contempt notices to the state health department if its previous orders on increased testing were not implemented immediately.

 


The court wondered why the state government had not conducted random Covid-19 tests to find out the spread of the virus in the community despite its orders on May 26 asking the state to do so.

The bench of Chief Justice Raghavendra Singh Chauhan and Justice B Vijaysen Reddy also directed the state government to give more details of patients, including their age and gender, in its daily bulletin, after petitioners alleged that the state was hiding the real number of infected patients.

During a hearing on a batch of PILs filed by Professor P L Visweswara Rao, Varun Sankineni and others questioning Telangana’s testing strategy, state public health director Dr G Srinivas Rao told the court that they had placed an order for 25,000 kits. These kits can conduct reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests to know community spread of the virus.

“That means you have not yet commenced them despite our order,” the Chief Justice said. The director said that ICMR had only recently suggested where to procure kits and that the tests would start soon. 

“We asked you to conduct more tests. We asked you to conduct tests on dead bodies going out of hospitals. You are not implementing them,” an upset Justice Chauhan said.

When advocate general B S Prasad said that the state had approached the Supreme Court challenging the high court order, the chief justice asked if the apex court had stayed the order. When the AG replied in the negative, he directed the state to start implementing all orders. “ICMR too has said that the cause of the death should be ascertained by doctors,” he added.

The Chief Justice also had doubts about the quality of protective gear being given to doctors and medical support staff and said: “As many as 72 doctors are affected by coronavirus and 400 medical staff have been quarantined. There are reports that nurses are made to wear PPE used by doctors. We may have to issue contempt notices to the health department principal secretary and the director if they continue to dodge (orders) this way.”

Referring to the horror stories he was hearing about Gandhi Hospital and the conditions prevailing there, the Chief Justice said, “We will send an advocate commissioner to study the situation in Gandhi.”

Dr Srinivas Rao explained that they are doing more tests now and are finding very little time to concentrate on media bulletins. “Doctors contracting virus is on account of some of the doctors staying in hostels. One of them went out and turned positive and he spread it to others in the hostel,” he said. It did not happen in the hospital,” he said.


