‘Indebted to our boss, will go back to Delhi after lockdown’
2020-05-29
PATNA: A group of 10 migrant workers landed at Patna airport on an IndiGo flight from Delhi at 7.20am on Thursday. Unlike thousands of their fellow migrants from Bihar, they did not have to cycle or walk hundreds of kilometers in scorching heat. These lucky men got to take a flight home courtesy their generous employer.

Pappan Singh Gehlot, a mushroom farmer in Delhi, not only took care of his employees during lockdown, he bought their tickets on an IndiGo flight to Patna and even gave them some money to take home. 

Naveen Ram, who has been working for the mushroom cultivator for a decade, said, “Our boss not only booked our flight ticket but also gave Rs 7,000 to hire a private cab to our village in Samastipur. Above all, he provided financial assistance to support our family in this situation.” 

“I got to see my one-and-half-year-old son Aditya after eight months. I had left for Delhi in August when my son was only three months old. All thanks to him,” he added.

All 10 workers said after the lockdown ends, they would return to resume their work.

Mahesh Ram, who hails from Sheerpur Gahar village under Khanpur block in Samastipur, said, “We were provided food and shelter during the two months of lockdown. We did not even realize that we are living amid lockdown. Because of him, our families did not suffer for money or food. Money was sent to their bank accounts.”

Full of praise for his boss, another employee Jeevak Ram, who is from Sakipur village in Khanpur block, said five of them got Rs 5,000 each from Gehlot. “He promised that he would transfer the money to other five as well. He also asked us to inform him if we need more money. Where would you find such a good boss in this world,” he said.

After landing in Patna they spent a few hours at the airport premises trying to book cabs. They finally had to hire three cabs to Samastipur because of the restriction on the number of riders per cab. “As the buses are not running, it is quite difficult to get a cab. We walked 1-km after that we got a private taxi. Thanks to Gehlot sir, we reached our homes comfortably,” said Lakhinder Ram over phone from his village.

Their boss told TOI over the phone that around 48 workers from Samastipur have been working at his farm for the past 20 years. “They are my responsibility. They worked for me between August and March. Other workers left during Holi. These 10 were supposed to leave in the first week of April but got stuck due to lockdown,” Gehlot said.

He added: “I tried to book tickets in AC coaches, but the seats were not available till June 15. It is difficult to get a seat in the Shramik special trains. Though they had no problems staying in Delhi, they were eager to see their family. So, I finally decided to book their flight tickets.”


