‘Indians genetically stronger to face viruses’
2020-04-27
The genetic make-up and food habits of Southeast Asians including Indians have given them a better chance of fighting Covid-19 keeping in view our encouraging response to the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003, says Dr T Mariappan, former scientist and now senior deputy director at Indian Council for Medical Research’s Vector Control Research Centre (VCRC). He also observed that the country will have to brace for tackling dengue and Covid-19 cases when the monsoon sets in.

“Southeast Asians are well protected hereditarily and have developed strong and powerful genes to fight against vector-borne viral diseases. They are exposed to various blood sucking insects, especially mosquitoes, unlike those in continents like Europe or Americas, which helps them develop immunity against several viral diseases,” said Dr Mariappan. He said India had little trouble during the SARS outbreak. According to a newsletter published by National Institute of Communicable Diseases, till April 9, 2003, no SARS cases were reported in India but other countries had a vast number of them by then. The virus causing Covid-19, SARS CoV-2, is from the same family of viruses.

“Food habits also play a part in ensuring we are protected from certain diseases. In South India, we keep ‘rasam’ in our diet. Its ingredients like garlic, pepper and bellary, which has anti-oxidants, protect lungs. Such food is included in our diet for years and years. Notably, the number of deaths compared to number of cases is much less in Tamil Nadu and India,” said Dr Mariappan. 

He also said that geographical location plays a role when it comes to number of cases, observing that districts like Nagapattinam and Ramanathapuram, which are close to the shore and have scattered population are likely to have less number of Covid-19 cases. Areas with dense population, like urban and semi-urban areas, would have more cases as there is more chance of Covid-19 spreading through contact.


