From vaccines to ventilators, India and US ramp up ties in fight against Covid-19
2020-04-01
NEW DELHI: From vaccines to ventilators, India and the US are ramping up cooperation as both countries tackle the coronavirus pandemic.


Among the development that will determine the course of the cooperation is a study on the clinical trials of Remdisivir, the anti-viral drug by Gilead Sciences, which is currently undergoing tests and a study should be out by mid-April. The findings will determine whether the drug can be used on Covid-19 patients. Given an ongoing cooperation with Gilead in India, the government hopes for a deeper relationship.


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

The second issue is the US FDA approval for use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for Covid patients. The US has asked India to relax the export ban on both and New Delhi might do it for the US.

Besides, officials says both countries are looking for ways to work together for vaccine development. India’s strength lies in its long experience in dealing with infectious diseases.

According to official sources, the US’ National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases, headed by Anthony Fauci, is cooperating with Gurgaon-based Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, headed by Gagandeep Kang, on virus and vaccine research. The Centre for Disease Control (CDC) and Indian Council of Medical research (ICMR) have already moved an existing cooperation programme into a higher gear.

On diagnostic kits and ventilator machines, India is depending on US companies for bulk supplies which, Washington has said, would be available to friends. Abbott, GM and Sanofi Pasteur are all producing equipment that India wants to procure as soon as possible.

Meanwhile, the MEA is pulling out all stops to procure protective personal equipment (PPE) and ventilators from around the world.

According to a statement by the ministry of health and family welfare, MEA is buying medical equipment from a number of places. “A Singapore-based online platform has been identified which can supply 10 lakh PPE kits and an order has been placed through MEA to procure them. Another supplier based in Korea, which has tie-ups with production companies in Vietnam and Turkey, has been identified with daily production capacity of over 1 lakh PPE kits. Orders are being placed on this company through MEA for supplying 20 lakh PPE kits,” it said.

MEA has placed orders for ventilators with companies like Hamilton, Mindray and Draeger. India has also ordered 10,000 ventilators from China.


