‘India can supply potential Covid-19 vaccines to the world’
2020-06-14
Mumbai: India is a major supplier of vaccines globally, and its manufacturing capacity could be useful for the world for potential Covid-19 vaccines. Several MNCs are talking to Indian manufacturers to see if their vaccines can be made here, Gagandeep Kang, vice-chair, Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (Cepi) said, adding that there’s reason to be optimistic as “data emerging from clinical trials says a vaccine is feasible”.

Globally, there are 230-odd programmes looking to create Covid-19 vaccines, with 130 companies being in a reasonably advanced stage. Of this, around 10 have already started clinical trials. In India, over a dozen companies are working on vaccines. 

“We have a long way to go. But we are on the right track, and we are moving as fast as possible — faster than what we thought was possible six months ago,” Kang said at a Harvard Business School webinar on ‘Science, Business & Vaccine Development to Combat the Pandemic’. 

There could also be problems over access to vaccines, regulatory and pricing issues and a global shortage of supply of syringes in the future. 

Availability and affordability of the vaccine will be key once it’s launched. “We need private-public partnerships and the communities to take this forward, as we saw with polio in India,” Umang Vohra MD and global CEO, Cipla.

He also said that emerging economies mostly focus on access to vaccine while developed countries usually target local manufacturing. “However, emerging countries should now focus on self-sustainability. India is one of the few developing countries with production capacity, and this is important. Most governments and countries should be vocal about being local in manufacturing vaccines and also regional cooperation,” he added.

He also said that countries rely on global funding. “Without a viable funding mechanism, the problem of a pandemic is impossible to tackle,” he added. 

There is a large-scale commitment required for vaccine funding and development now.

David E Bloom, Clarence James Gamble Professor of Economics & Demography, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health said, “We have underinvested in vaccine development. There will be a move to a new pattern of sustained and large-scale commitments to vaccine development, which will encompass Big Pharma and non-Big Pharma funders and developers. A crisis is also an opportunity, and it’s a good time to develop a funding plan. We have Covid-19 to thank because it’s providing irrefutable proof of the benefit of staying on course, when it comes to development and manufacturing of vaccines.”


