India's second coronavirus case reported in Kerala's Alappuzha
2020-02-03
ALAPPUZHA/THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Kerala reported the country’s second novel coronavirus (nCoV) case on Sunday, with a male student of a university in Wuhan admitted to Alappuzha medical college hospital testing positive for the virus. 


The first case was reported in Thrissur on Thursday and the female medical student is being treated at Thrissur medical college hospital.

Health minister K K Shailaja told reporters after a high-level meeting in Alappuzha that the second person tested positive – one among four admitted to the isolation ward at Alappuzha medical college hospital – had reached Kerala on January 24. “Three of those admitted were studying in China while the fourth person is a relative of one of them. We are waiting for test reports of others,” she said.


The health department received the test result of the infected person from National Institute of Virology, Pune on Sunday afternoon. Shailaja said there was no need for panic as the condition of both the patients is stable. “They have not developed any serious complications… There is nothing to panic but we need to be vigilant. The department is strictly monitoring the situation so that the virus does not spread from them,” she said.

Health dept to screen awareness video in schools

The health department has put 1,924 people under observation at their homes besides 75 admitted to isolation wards in various hospitals.

Till date, 104 samples of suspect cases have been sent for tests. Of these, 36 results have been received and two tested positive. In Alappuzha, four persons have also been admitted to the general hospital.

All those coming from China are under the surveillance of the health department.

“The only request to people is that if anyone who has come from China recently has not reported to the nearby health centre so far, they should immediately do so,” she said.

The department will screen a video in all educational institutions on Monday to create awareness on coronavirus.

Besides government, aided and unaided schools, the video will be screened in CBSE, ICSE, Navodaya and Kendriya Vidyalayas at 2pm on Monday.



