India slams US body for fake news, says stop communalising war on Covid-19
2020-04-16
India on Wednesday slammed the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) for spreading false media reports after the US body expressed concern over reports that Hindu and Muslim Covid patients were being segregated into different hospital wards in Gujarat. 


 "As if its peremptory commentary on religious freedom in India is not enough, the USCIRF is now spreading misguided reports on the professional medical protocols followed to deal with spread of Covid-19 in India," said MEA spokesperson Anurag Srivastava in a statement late on Wednesday. 


The @USCIRF must stop adding religious colour to our national goal of fighting the COVID 19 pandemic. https://t.co/CsdGplDWmL— Anurag Srivastava (@MEAIndia) 1586972407000

 USCIRF describes itself as an independent, bipartisan US federal government commission dedicated to defending the universal right to freedom of religion or belief abroad. 

"It must stop adding religious colour to our national goal of fighting the pandemic and distract from larger efforts. No segregation is being done in civil hospitals on the basis of religion, as clarified by the Gujarat government," Srivastava added.



More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

Reacting to report in a daily, USCIRF had tweeted that it was concerned with reports of "Hindu & Muslim patients separated into separate hospital wards in #Gujarat". 

"Such actions only help to further increase ongoing stigmatisation of Muslims in #India and exacerbate false rumors of Muslims spreading Covid-19," it had said.

 Besides MEA, Prasar Bharti New Service also slammed the US body for "peddling fake news". "Myth: USCIRF says #Covid patients are being segregated on religious lines in a Gujarat hospital, citing a news report. Reality: Unfortunate that this claim is based on a news item, already found to be fake and denied by the state government," it said. 


Patients are kept in different wards based on their medical condition, severity of the symptoms and age, purely bas… https://t.co/cS2429Aeti— GujHFWDept (@GujHFWDept) 1586936691000

Earlier, the Gujarat government said, " The health department of Gujarat has clarified that no segregation is being done on the basis of religion. Corona patients are being treated based on symptoms, severity, etc, and according to the recommendations of doctors". 


