Indian firm, Australia university team up for vaccine
2020-04-08
HYDERABAD: Human and animal vaccines manufacturer Indian Immunologicals Limited (IIL) has joined hands with Australia’s Griffith University to conduct exploratory research to develop a vaccine for the dreaded Covid-19 virus.




The Hyderabad-based IIL and Griffith University will be working on developing a ‘Live Attenuated SARS – CoV-2 vaccine’ (Covid-19 vaccine) using the latest codon de-optimization technology, which was zeroed in on after evaluating various options being followed across the world, IIL said.

The Hyderabad-based vaccine maker said the technology looks promising for developing a vaccine for prophylactic, active, single dose immunization against coronavirus in humans and is expected to provide long-lasting protection with a single dose administration with an anticipated safety profile similar to other licensed vaccines for active immunization.

“Our live-attenuated vaccine is expected to provide long lasting immunity against SARS – CoV-2 following a single immunisation and cross-protection against other coronaviruses (e.g. MERS, SARS-CoV-1). As this vaccine will be a live attenuated vaccine, it is expected to be highly effective by providing very strong cellular and antibody immune responses against the virus. The other benefit of a live-attenuated vaccine is a proven track record for economical large-scale manufacturing and well-known regulatory approval pathway,” explained Prof Suresh Mahalingam, Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Australia.

IIL managing director Dr K Anand Kumar said the research will explore both, intra-muscular and intranasal delivery mechanisms for the vaccine and the company expects to invest Rs 15 crore-Rs 20 crore in animal studies for the vaccine. The animal studies, including mice and monkeys, are planned to be conducted in labs in US and France. He, however, did not give a timeline on when the vaccine could go into human trials.

The latest collaboration comes even as IIL and Griffith University are conducting research and development of Zika virus vaccine, which is in pre-clinical toxicology testing.


