India joins 62 nations seeking probe into Covid outbreak
2020-05-18
NEW DELHI: India has joined a group of 62 nations which has backed a draft EU motion at the World Health Assembly, which will convene on Monday, for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus outbreak and WHO’s response. The motion seeks an “impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation” of the international health response under WHO to Covid-19 along with a timeline.



Confirming the development, official sources told TOI the motion was likely to be adopted unanimously. “It has language that was acceptable to all including EU and Australia and wasn’t objected to by either China or the US,” said a source. US and China though had not yet joined the group of 62 nations which have declared support for the motion.

The motion also calls for WHO director general to work with international agencies to identify the zoonotic source of virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including possible role of intermediate hosts, including through efforts such as “scientific and collaborative field missions, which will enable targeted interventions and a research agenda to reduce the risk of similar events”. 


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Lockdown 4.0: What's allowed and what's not in the three zones
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news

India, which will take over as the chair of the WHO executive board on Monday, has so far avoided lending support to any demand to put China in the dock for the origin of the novel coronavirus. The EU resolution too does not name China or Wuhan and is backed by China’s ally Russia.

PM Narendra Modi, however, has called for reforming and strengthening WHO which has faced criticism for being soft on Beijing with US President Donald Trump even describing the agency as a puppet of China. Speaking at the G20 virtual summit in March, Modi had said that the UN health agency needed to be empowered because it did not presently have the mandate to deal with a global pandemic like Covid-19. As foreign secretary Harsh Shringla had said recently India, as chair of the executive board, will look to promote new crisis-management protocols and develop more “adaptive, responsive, affordable and humane health care systems and resources that can be deployed globally”.

Apart from EU and Australia, UK, Japan, Indonesia, Canada, Brazil, New Zealand, South Korea and Turkey were also among countries which backed the draft motion.


