Coronavirus: Indians may be airlifted on Friday, Trichy collector tells ship crew over phone
2020-02-21
MADURAI/TRICHY: Japanese health authorities on Thursday started collecting swabs from the crew members of the ship Diamond Princess which has been quarantined off Yokohama due to the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) which infected them. Meanwhile, an assurance given by Trichy district collector S Sivarasu to one of the Indian crew members on board the ship that they will be airlifted on a special plane in a day or two has given a new lease of life to the worried men.

“As the quarantine period for passengers came to end on Wednesday, hundreds of them were evacuated over the last two days. Swabs were collected from us on Thursday and we were told that the results will be known in two to three days. The captain also made an announcement that a Philippines crew member who had earlier tested positive for COVID-19 has recovered and returned home,” Anbalagan, a crew member from Madurai, told TOI.

Devipriya, the wife of Muthu Ponnusamy, 42, of Trichy, who is among the five crew members from Tamil Nadu on the ship, petitioned the Trichy collector on Thursday. She appealed to the government through him to bring back the Indians including her husband who are on the quarantined ship. The chef who is a colleague of Anbalagan used to come home once in six months.

“My wife is a homemaker. My son and daughter are in class VI and V. They are worried over the undue delay in evacuating us from the ship. So she petitioned the collector. I spoke to the collector on a WhatsApp call through my wife’s phone and explained our plight. We want to be disembarked from the infected ship on priority,” Muthu said. The collector told his wife and the crew over phone that he is aware of the issue and also enquired about his health. “I spoke with him. He tested negative. He and other Indians are likely to be airlifted from the ship tomorrow,” the collector told TOI.

Meanwhile, the Indian Embassy in Tokyo stated that one Indian crew member is among the 79 new cases who had tested positive for COVID-19 on board Diamond Princess on Wednesday. In their tweet on Thursday, the embassy added that this takes the number of Indians on board who tested positive for COVID-19 to eight. Stating that they have been shifted to a hospital for treatment, it added that all eight Indians receiving treatment are responding well. “All other Indians on board are braving out the trying circumstances,” it added. However, the crew members on board are worried over the delay in getting a confirmation from the embassy in flying them to India.

