India’s energy demand dips sharply as lockdown bites
2020-03-30
NEW DELHI: India’s demand for petrol, diesel and jet fuel has declined by up to a third in the last five weeks, while power consumption dropped by a quarter as the coronavirus pandemic and the 21-day lockdown to check the infection from spreading brought almost all commercial and industrial activities to a grinding halt.

But LPG demand recorded 4% growth during this period as families were confined to their homes due to the lockdown. On year-ago basis, the demand is higher by 6.5%.

Latest data from grid operator POSOCO shows power consumption dropping to 2.59 billion units on Friday, the third day of the national lockdown. This is a level last seen on March 1, 2015, when India had 25% less generation capacity.

Power consumption has fallen as the lockdown hit the largest chunk of demand -- industry (41%), agriculture (18%) and commercial establishments (8%). Domestic consumption make up 33% of the demand, which is expected to rise over the next fortnight or so when families staying at home switch on air-conditioners as temperature rises.

Chairman of India’s largest refiner and fuel retailer IndianOil, Sanjiv Singh said demand for petrol has fallen by 13.5% between February 20 and March 28, diesel 21%, jet fuel 27% because the lockdown curbed economic activities.

The lower demand for refined products has forced state-run oil refiners to taper crude processing and invoke ‘force majeure’ clause to put off oil shipments for April as they have run out of storage for crude and refined products. News agency Reuters last week reported liquefied natural gas importers too deferring cargoes under the same clause after demand shrivelled as the lockdown sent CNG vehicles off the road and shuttered industries.

Oil minister Dharmendra Pradhan on Sunday explained the situation to his Saudi Arabian counterpart Abdulaziz bin Salman and Aramco CEO Amin Nasser through video-conference and requested additional LPG supply. The oil price crash also figured in the talks.

India imports 55% of the 27.5 million tonne of LPG it consumes in a year and Saudi Arabia supplies some 200,000 tonne of the fuel every month. It is also India's second-largest oil supplier, selling close to 2 million tonnes of crude very month.

Singh, who continues to work in spite of losing his father two days back, told TOI the company has mapped the demand for April and all its crude and products are full. He said the oil companies have crude and product stocks to last 10-15 days. LPG stocks are good for 20-22 days and additional supplies were being tied up from Saudi Arabia, Qatar and UAE.

“The PSU oil companies hold enough stock of LPG to last 20-22 days. Crude and refined product stocks are good enough to last for 10-15 days. Please don’t panic. It stretches the system,” he said.


“I expect LPG demand to rise further as people remain confined to their homes and free supply of refills to 8.3 crore poor households under Ujjwala scheme. We are tying up additional LPG shipments from Saudi Arabia, Qatar and UAE,” he said. India imports 55% of the 27.5 million tonne of LPG it consumes in a year and Saudi Arabia supplies some 200,000 tonne of the fuel every month.

IndianOil has mapped the demand for April “as the period till mid-June is crucial for the farm sector.” “If the lockdown continues for longer, we will have to prepare for that. But whenever the demand comes, our tanks all over the country are full. Our personnel continue to man their stations hand in hand with associates. There will be no dearth of products anywhere,” Singh said.

