Covid-19: Census Houselisting phase, NPR updation postponed until further orders
2020-03-26
NEW DELHI: Census Houselisting phase and National Population Register (NPR) updation, scheduled to be conducted simultaneously between April 1 and September 30 across the country, have been postponed until further orders in view of 21-day lockdown to contain COVID-19 pandemic. 

Sources in the government however said the January 7 gazette notification stating that houselisting phase of Census would be conducted between April 1 and September 30, 2020 and the July 31, 2019 notification listing the same timeline for NRC, shall continue to be valid. States must notify a 45-day slot within this six-month period to hold the two exercises.“While unforeseen circumstances arising out of the lockdown have necessitated deferring of April 1 launch — scheduled in NDMC area of Delhi, Meghalaya, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep — we still have a window until September 30 to reschedule. We will see how things shape up in the days to come and if there is any need to amend our notified Houselisting/NPR timelines,” an officer told TOI.



More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
 How to quarantine yourself at home
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news


Census 2021 was scheduled to be conducted in two phases -- the Houselisting and Housing Census during April-September, 2020 and Population Enumeration between February 9 and 28, 2021. The updation of NPR was proposed to be done along with the Phase I of Census 2021 in all the states and Union territories, except Assam. 

Citing the guidelines issued by home ministry with directions for their strict implementation, on the measures to be taken by the Centre and states/UT to contain COVID-19, as well as advisories of the health ministry on social distancing, the home ministry on Wednesday said the "first phase of Census 2021 and updation of NPR, which was to begin on various dates decided by the State/UT governments beginning 1st April 2020 and various related field activities, are postponed until further orders". 

Many states have expressed apprehensions about NPR update in the light of new questions added to NPR form, such as date and place of parents' birth. While Kerala has said no to NPR exercise, West Bengal and Telangana have put it on hold. Many Congress-governed states and even NDA ally JD(U) have suggested that NPR be done as per the 2010 questionnaire.

