India and China discuss joint fight against Covid-19
2020-03-26
Times News Network

New Delhi: Amid growing threat from the novel coronavirus, India and China on Tuesday discussed cooperation to jointly fight the pandemic which has killed more than 17,000 worldwide.

Foreign minister S Jaishankar said in a tweet that he and his counterpart Wang Yi discussed working together and agreed to build further on bilateral efforts. The two also spoke about the upcoming G20 summit.

India had earlier sent a planeload of relief supplies to coronavirus-hit Hubei province as a mark of solidarity with China. Providing more details of the conversation, Chinese ambassador to India Sun Weidong said on Twitter that the two ministers expressed sympathy and solidarity with India in its fight against Covid-19 and that China was ready to share its experience, provide assistance within its capacity and "open its channel for procurement to India".

Significantly, as the US and China spar over the origin of Covid-19, Sun tweeted that Wang said in his conversation with Jaishankar that "it’s not acceptable and detrimental to international cooperation to label the virus and stigmatise China, hope India opposes such narrow mindset". 

"Jaishankar agreed not to label the virus and the international community should send strong signal of solidarity," Sun said.

There was no official response from India to Sun’s comments.

"Wang Yi said we are confident that India can handle and win the battle against Covid-19. China and India should support each other, and jointly safeguard global public health. Jaishankar thanked China for its sympathy message and assistance of medical materials to India," Sun said.

Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the virus cases were first detected in December last year, on Monday reported one new confirmed case of Covid-19 after reporting zero cases for five consecutive days. On Tuesday, China announced that it will lift the three-month lockdown on more than 50 million people in the Hubei province, the epicentre of the deadly coronavirus outbreak, on Wednesday as Covid-19 had begun to abate.


