India won’t miss its annual Antarctic expedition despite Covid-19 situation
2020-05-14
NEW DELHI: India won’t miss its Antarctic expedition, scheduled in November/December, in the Covid-19 situation. The expedition will, however, be scaled down in terms of scientific and logistic activities due to the pandemic.


"We will have the next expedition as usual. But, it’ll happen with reduced members," said Madhavan Rajeevan, secretary, ministry of earth sciences (MoES).

The country is, meanwhile, trying to bring back 28 Indian researchers of its last year’s expedition (39th) who are currently stuck in South Africa.

Asked about the stranded researchers, Rajeevan said, "The people returned from Antarctica are still at Cape Town. We are trying to bring them back. They are, however, safe there."

The 28 researchers, returning to India after conducting their research at Antarctica, had reached South Africa in April. They, however, had to be quarantined in a hotel in Cape Town due to their travel.

The national centre for polar and ocean research (NCPOR) - India’s premier R&D institution responsible for the country’s research activities in the polar and Southern Ocean realms - and MoES have been coordinating with external affairs ministry for return of the researchers to India.

Though the country still has time to prepare for its 40th Antarctic expedition, the NCPOR had to cancel the expedition to the Arctic this year as it was to be launched in batches from April. Researchers, generally, go there in eight or 10 batches during April-October period.

India had launched its first scientific expedition to Ny-Alesund on the Spitsbergen island of Norway in August, 2007 to mark the beginning of research in the Arctic region. The Arctic expedition has been worked out to complement the country’s work in Antarctica with an aim to contribute to the global research. India has one research station - Himadri - in the Arctic region.

India’s Antarctic expedition is launched annually (once in a year) wherein about 100 to 120 members including scientists, engineers, doctors and support staff
are sent in batches between November and January of the succeeding calendar year.

Currently, over 40 year-round permanent stations are operated by 30 nations.

India presently has two research stations at Antarctica namely ‘Maitri’ and ‘Bharati’. It's Maitri station is functional round the year.

Currently, nearly 50 personnel are deployed at the station. The Maitri station occupies a strategic location in the Central Dronning Maud Land region of East Antarctica offering diverse opportunity of scientific research in disciplines such as Atmospheric Sciences and Meteorology; Earth Sciences including Glaciology, Geomagnetism; Human Physiology and Medicine; Micro-biology and Environmental Sciences.

