India Inc loosens purse strings to battle Covid-19
2020-03-24
MUMBAI/CHENNAI: From wealthy businessmen to well-known banks, India Inc is pledging its support in the fight against Covid-19. 


Mukesh Ambani, Venu Srinivasan, Axis Bank, SBI and Indian Overseas Bank are setting up medical facilities, making monetary commitments and waiving service charges.

TCS has introduced two additional paid leave categories — quarantine leave and special paid leave. These leaves will be 14 calendar days or higher as per each country’s government. TCS said the new guidelines would not affect existing leave balance.

 
 

Special paid leave can be availed by those employees who have tested positive for Covid-19. Quarantine leave category can be availed by employees who are asked to be in isolation or self quarantine, when found to be in contact with individuals who have tested positive or have travel history to affected countries. 

Mukesh Ambani’s RIL has set up a 100-bed facility in Seven Hills hospital in Mumbai in just two weeks for patients who test positive for Covid-19. “This first-of-its-kind-in-India centre is fully funded by Reliance Foundation (the philanthropic arm of RIL) and includes a negative pressure room that helps in preventing cross-contamination and controlling infection,” said RIL. Besides this, India’s largest private sector company has built an isolation facility in Lodhivali, Maharashtra and handed it over to local authorities. 

SBI has committed 0.25% of its annual profit for the current financial year to support health care for underprivileged people, while Axis Bank has set aside Rs 100 crore to support customers, employees, vendors, and government agencies. SBI reported a profit of Rs 10,900 crore in the first nine months of FY20. 

Indian Overseas Bank is waiving fees on digital payments, including cash withdrawal for its customers from ATMs for saving bank account holders from March 25 till April 30. Axis Bank too is waiving charges for savings, current and prepaid card customers till March 31. TVS Motor said it would protect all jobs and salaries of its employees even as its plants shut down due to the pandemic until further notice.

RIL added that the company has started to produce face-masks and other protective equipment such as suits and garments to equip health workers in fighting the challenge. Production is being enhanced to one lakh face-masks a day, the energy-to-telecom player said.


