India’s recovery-to-death ratio for Covid-19 improves to 90:10
2020-05-05
NEW DELHI: The outcome ratio — which is the ratio of recoveries and deaths — for Covid-19 has improved to 90:10 now from 80:20 on April 17, indicating better clinical management of patients affected with the virulent infection while 1,074 patients were cured in the last 24 hours, the highest number on a single day, the health ministry said on Monday.


Official data till 5 pm on Monday showed a total of 42,836 confirmed Covid-19 cases and of these, 29,685 were still active. While 11,761 cases have been cured and discharged, the death toll has increased to 1,389. At present, the total recovery rate is 27.52%, opposed to 13.06% on April 17.

“Each and every death is a concern. Therefore, it is important that we develop deeper understanding of Covid-19 treatment and focus on how we can improve this outcome ratio,” health ministry joint secretary Lav Agarwal said while adding that the country would have to adjust to a new normal.

The doubling time of cases has slowed to 12 days, an improvement from 8.2 days around a fortnight ago and 3.4 days before the lockdown. However, the government reiterated that there was no room for complacency and state governments and people needed to follow social distancing and other norms along with restrictions even as the lockdown is being eased in a staggered manner in some parts of the country.

“In earlier pandemics, it has been observed that while norms are relaxed when social mobility is allowed, if restrictions are not followed properly, then suddenly the transmission rate may go up,” Agarwal said. He emphasised that states must ensure rigorous containment measures, so that the case load remains low. “They must also ensure effective case clinical management while focusing on infection prevention and control,” he added.

Highlighting that India was “transiting into a new normal”, the government said everyone must act responsibly with easing of lockdown. “It is important that as lockdown eases, we should follow protocol and guidelines related to physical distancing, follow preventive measures like hand hygiene and environmental hygiene and deal with Covid-19 by being careful, aware and alert.” Agarwal said.


