Indoor pollution from firewood poses higher Covid risk: Researchers
2020-05-02
Chennai: If avoiding outdoors could protect people from Covid-19, researchers warn that staying indoors may not be any safer. Researchers said Indian slum dwellers will be exposed to extreme indoor air pollution while burning firewood or coal for cooking that could put them at greater risk for suffering respiratory infections and make them vulnerable to Covid-19. The issue of regular exposure to biomass burning for cooking gains significance as the people living in tiny shacks are unable to maintain social distance and forced to stay indoors, end up inhaling the smoke.

The researchers from Indian Institute of Public Health, Hyderabad, and Maastricht University, Netherlands, said communities of slum dwellers, refugees, guest workers are most vulnerable as they often use solid fuels for cooking and heating inside their poorly ventilated houses. They said while women and young infants are routinely exposed to indoor pollutants during cooking, with total lockdown, the entire family is forced to stay indoors where men may also smoke. The observations were made based on several international studies that found a link between exposure to air pollution and Covid-19.

“Pollution impairs the first line of defence of upper airways — cilia. A person living in an area with high levels of pollutants is thus more prone to develop chronic respiratory conditions and susceptible to any infective agent,” said the research paper published in Environmental Research journal. As there is a lack of evidence, the researchers suggested epidemiological studies to study the association between exposure to biomass smoke and Covid-19.

One of the studies based on which the researchers made the observations is one done in Northern Italy, which indicated higher prevalence and mortality of Covid-19 could be partly associated with exposure to a higher level of air pollution. Another study in the United States found significant association between air pollution and Covid-19 deaths. An analysis during the outbreak of SARS in 2002 in China revealed that infected people living in more polluted regions were twice as likely to die as those in less polluted areas. Smokers too are at greater risk. A recent study in China on Covid-19 patients in hospitals found smokers were 14 times more likely to die as compared to non-smokers.

According to studies by Chennai-based Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research (SRIHER), household air pollution is believed to be responsible for 4.8 lakh deaths in India every year. Household air pollution, whose main source is burning of wood, coal and charcoal for cooking, is also a major cause of pneumonia, a leading cause of death in young children from low income families. It is also believed to contribute to low birth weight and stunting in children, increased blood pressure and other cardiovascular and respiratory effects in adults.

India, including districts of Nagapattinam and Kallakurichi, is now part of a global study to assess the impact of LPG stove use on household air pollution and health.

Kalpana Balakrishnan, director, ICMR Centre for Advanced Research on Air Quality, Climate and Health, SRIHER, who is involved in the study, said, “The multi-country study, which is the first such trials conducted in India, is expected to have major implications for expanding and accelerating the use of clean cooking among rural populations and especially, among pregnant women in India.”


