‘Indore almost in Stage-3 of Covid-19 spread phase’
2020-03-27
INDORE: It’s almost Stage-3 in Indore. The district made a sudden jump after nine positive cases of coronavirus through contact infection came to the fore in past three days. Indore reported nine positive cases in past two days and one death so far. 

CMHO Dr Praveen Jadia said, “Indore district has directly jumped to a stage somewhere between second and third stage. There are four stages of COVID-19 or coronavirus infection.” 

The health department had been screening international passengers since January 29. We have tested samples of any person found with symptoms, said Jadia. However, no person was tested positive for Stage-1. The positive cases only began appearing in district from Tuesday, said Jadia. There were many among the positive cases, who do not have any travel history and are unable to give details of contact history with any infected persons, added Jadia.


Stages of Spread


Stage-1, 

Positive cases have travel history of countries affected with coronavirus infection. At this stage there is no spread of the disease locally. 


Stage-2

There is a local area of infected persons. At this stage, the infected persons usually are acquaintances, relatives or family members of person infected by travelling in an affected country. 

Fewer people are affected, source of virus is known and is therefore easier to perform contact tracing and contain spread via self-quarantining


Stage-3

In this stage those who have not been exposed to an infected person or anyone, who has a travel history to affected countries are tested positive. 

In other words, people are unable to identify where they might have picked up the virus from. Unfortunately for Indore, there are a few cases similar to this stage. 


Stage-4 

This stage is the worst, where it becomes an epidemic. It becomes impossible to control and contain the spread of infection. In this case, number of infected persons increases exponentially


Source: Pravin Jadia, officials of rapid response team of health dept

