Indore under total lockdown till Monday
2020-04-01
Indore: The Indore administration is preparing for a surge in Covid-19 cases, possibly as high as 150 in the city itself, and the first step was to extend the total lockdown to a week. Till next Monday, everything in the commercial hub of Central India stays shut — medicines, milk supply and print and electronic media being the only things open.

“We are anticipating a rise in number of Covid-19 patients up to 100 or 150. We all should be mentally prepared for this. Areas like Ranipura, Nayapura, Daulatganj and Hatipala will need to be contained. We have started a survey in these areas to identify primary and secondary contacts of the Covid-positive cases and they are being shifted to quarantine facilities,” said Indore collector Manish Singh.

All 17 coronavirus patients, identified in Indore on Tuesday, were in the quarantine facility in Asrawadkhurd area as they were in close contact of those who had earlier tested positive for the virus, the collector said .

The administration is gearing up for the challenge. The required number of quarantine facilities, including those set up in marriage gardens and hotels, have been arranged while hospitals have been classified into different categories for treatment of patients, he added.

“Dedicated teams of administrative officials and doctors have been formed to survey suspected cases and for sampling, treatment and inventory management,” Singh said.

The collector appealed to Indoreans to stay at home for the duration of the complete lockdown and assured them that arrangements have been made for home delivery of milk, medicines and ration.

“Safety of government employees and others involved in battling the Covid-19 outbreak has been ensured,” said collector, adding that all health employees will be insured under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package — Insurance Scheme for Health Workers Fighting for Covid-19 — and are being provided with personal protection equipment.

Covid-19 may have spread fast, but it is not as deadly as swine flu as maximum coronavirus patients get cured, he assured. “Indians have resistance power to combat the virus but there are densely populated areas, where we are working to check its spread,” said Singh, adding that Aanganwadi, Asha and ANM workers have been roped in to distribute ‘immunity-boosting medicines’ in different areas.

IMC commissioner Asheesh Singh said a control room has been set up in AICTSL’s building, where calls are received on suspected Coronavirus patients and information is passed on to rapid response teams for checks. On an average, 100 calls come in a day.


