#IndoorRun: Even lockdown can’t stop these running enthusiasts
2020-04-27
In an ideal non-coronavirus world, this is the time of the year when marathoners and runners would be setting new milestones and pushing themselves to prepare for running events. But in the lockdown, when going out is not an option, running enthusiasts came up with alternate fitness plans, but nothing could replace their running routine. As a compromise, many have joined the trend of indoor run – moving around furniture to create a ‘running track’ and making use of whatever space they have available at home. 
While most people are running loops in short, 50m stretches, Ironman and Ultraman finisher Adil Nargolwala is lucky enough to have a garden and driveway for his runs. Due to availability of outdoor space, he has been able to do more than 10km runs on most days. “I challenged myself to run 21km at home on my anniversary just to keep myself motivated and I did complete that challenge,” he says.




A virtual running event
Gurgaon-based long-distance runner Mihika Wahi Gupta shares, “I use a 50m area in my home for my run and have been posting pictures online. When I saw many others show interest, I started Lockdown Indoor Run – virtual running event where people can post pictures running in their homes.”


Running indoors not ideal, warn experts
 News in BriefExplore BriefsRunning experts and coaches appreciate dedication of those running indoors, but running in loops for long durations can put extra pressure on muscles, they warn. “Extremely small loops – with too many turns – can increase load on the foot and the ankle complex, hence ankle stability work as a supplemental exercise is must. Running is not a standalone activity, there is a set of essential mobility and strength exercises that need to accompany a running plan,” says Chandan Chawla, sports injury physiotherapist. “When you are running in circles and taking quick turns, you are putting extra pressure on your muscles. Try a combination of other exercises like running on stairs and other cardio exercises,” says Nakul Butta, a running coach. 




‘Running indoors not sustainable’
Writer and runner Jonathan Gil Harris complained of a lower back pain after running indoors for 21km. “This is not a sustainable way of running. Even though I was running in clockwise and anti-clockwise directions so that there was equal amount of pressure on all muscles, you are taking so many turns and loops, it is not healthy,” he says.


I can do 5km and 8km runs indoors now: Namrata Joshipura
After being cooped up in the house for almost a month, marathoner and fashion designer Namrata Joshipura was desperate to get back to running. So, she cleared an area inside her home, from the balcony to dining room, which she discovered was easily a 50m space. “I began with small distances, and now, after more than a week, I can do 5km and 8km runs indoors. It takes longer than usual as you have to make frequent turns and that breaks your speed and consistency. It took me 31 minutes to run 5km,” says Namrata.
She shares that her staff is quite amused by her antics. “The first time, they stood with their phones, clicking my pictures and cheering me on, it was fun. Now it’s become quite a routine. I run twice or thrice a week,” says Namrata.

