Indore’s first Covid-19 death takes state toll to two
2020-03-27
INDORE/BHOPAL: Indore’s first Covid-19 death was recorded on Thursday when a 65-year-old man succumbed to the infection, hours before he tested positive for the virus. The Madhya Pradesh death toll is now two, with a 65-year-old woman from Ujjain dying on Wednesday. Neither of them has a travel history.

Six more patients tested positive for Coronavirus in the state on Thursday, four of them from Indore, including the one who died. Ujjain and Shivpuri had one patient each.

Indore seems to be turning out to MP’s Covid-19 hotspot with 13 cases detected in just two days – accounting for half of the state’s 26 cases.

Worryingly, on the same day, three Covid-19 suspects died in Indore and Ujjain. One of them later tested negative for Covid-19. The reports of the other two are awaited.

Thursday’s victim, a resident of Ranipura area, was admitted to MY Hospital, where he died in the afternoon. His test reports came positive for Covid-19 in the evening, CMHO Pravin Jadia said.

“This is the first death of a coronavirus patient in Indore. However, the man had a history of other co-morbid diseases,” he said, adding that the health department will send a team to his house. “His family will be isolated and their samples collected for tests,” the CMHO said.

The area will also be fumigated and isolated as part of the newly introduced containment plan by the district administration. The district collector ordered isolation of 3km area around the house of people who have tested positive, and earmarked buffer zones of 5km radius.

Earlier in the day, a 35-year-old Indorean, who was admitted to MY Hospital with cough and cold a few days ago, died. He tested negative for Covid-19.

Two coronavirus suspects in Ujjain also died during the day. One was admitted to a hospital in Indore, and the other in Ujjain.

One of them, a 60-year-old resident of Mohammadpura Bakhal area, was admitted to Madhav Nagar Hospital in Ujjain with cough and fever on Wednesday night and died on Thursday morning. Samples of his mucous and blood have been sent for tests.

The other victim, a 47-year-old, worked in a soya factory and was referred to MRTB Hospital in Indore from Ujjain Civil Hospital on March 25. He died in the wee hours of Thursday.

“Samples of his blood and mucus were collected for Covid-19 tests. The report is awaited,” said MGMMC PRO Dr Rahul Rokade. “When we asked him, he said he had not travelled abroad, nor to any other city before developing the symptoms,” Rokade said, adding that he had breathlessness, fever and cough. “He also didn't have any co-morbid conditions (like hypertension or asthma),” said Rokade.

The patient was initially treated with antibiotics and other drugs but his condition kept deteriorating rapidly. He was put on ventilator but succumbed to the infection, said Rokade.

