Rajasthan industry backs extension of lockdown at CM meet
2020-04-11
JAIPUR: In day-long video conferencing, chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Friday sought views of Rajasthan industry before he attends a virtual meeting of chief ministers with the PM on Saturday. 


The meeting with PM is likely to decide whether the ongoing lockdown would be extended or lifted.

Most of the 56 industry associations from various sectors of the economy, 36 leading companies and ministers of the respective departments participated in the deliberations spoke in favour of extending the lockdown up to April 30. Sources said tourism minister Vishvendra Singh opined for lifting lockdown which mirrored the views of some. “The corona problem is not going to end by April 30. Complete lockdown makes no sense. The government needs to open business in a staggered way. If that is going to happen after April 30, why not prepare for it now,” said an executive member of real estate body Credai.

But the chief minister said that saving lives is more important and all the measures have been taken to ensure no disruption in the supply of essential products.

“We have made it easy for companies and units producing essential goods. These companies need to approval to run their factories or mills. And I am happy that they have joined the government in fighting the epidemic while taking precautions of social distancing and maintaining hygiene at the workplaces,” the chief minister said.

However, leading industry bodies like CII and FICCI said they are in favour of a controlled opening up of the industrial units with adequate safety measures. 

“We are of the firm opinion that the economic activity should start in a phased manner with clearly laid out procedures and protocols. The backward and forward linkages covering the entire supply chain should be considered while planning the exit. Exporters and SEZ units with inventory and confirmed orders should be allowed to fulfil their export obligations,” Atul Sharma, head of FICCI-Rajasthan.

While presenting views on the lockdown, the industry body representatives also drew the attention of the chief minister to the problem of paying the wages of labour during the lockdown which all set to be extended. A representative from the jewellery sector said that they have to slash salaries of their workers because they don’t have any business. Responding to their concerns, the chief minister said that those who can pay they should do that and the government is thinking over the issue.

The video conferencing was conducted having multiple centres. While the chief minister along with chief secretary DB Gupta, and secretary to CM Kuldeep Ranka joined the live streaming from the CM’s residence, ACS industries and other officials were stationed at the CMO. Industry representatives participated from centres like secretariat, Yojna Bhawan, and district and divisional headquarters.


