Industries in Ghaziabad suffer loss of  Rs 3,000 crore due to lockdown
2020-04-08
GHAZIABAD/NOIDa: The industrial hub of Ghaziabad is estimated to have so far incurred a loss of over Rs 3,000 crore due to the Covid-19 lockdown. And with industrial production coming to a grinding halt, jobs of over two lakh workers are also at stake, say officials.

Though the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has extended help to Ghaziabad industrialists by offering them loans at cheaper rates to tide over the loss they have suffered, Virender Kumar from the District Industrial Centre said that “this might not be enough if the lockdown prolongs”. “Products meant for export worth Rs 1,600 crore are lying dumped in industrial warehouses and so are finished products worth Rs 1,700 crore. This is just a rough estimate but it gives us a glimpse of the magnitude of the problem in industrial sector that lay ahead,” said Kumar.

From pharmaceuticals to engineering products and garments, there are 27000 micro industries, 4,600 small-scale industries, 150 medium-scale industries and 45 heavy industries in Ghaziabad. These industries employ more than two lakh registered workforce, and we are to take into account unregistered workers,” Kumar said.

According to industry watcher Prof Sanjay Mishra, the prevailing situation has thrown things haywire. “Brace up for factories shutting down, which will have bearing on jobs and given the scale of the problem, the government will have to step in with stimulus packages for industries to salvage the situation,” he said.

The Noida wing of Indian Industries Association, which represents the medium and small-scale industries of the district, said while they are giving salaries to workers even when factories are shut, it may be difficult to pay in the months ahead should the lockdown extend. 

IIA-Noida chairperson Kulmani Gupta told TOI, “The export market has crashed. There is no production. We are paying our workers and we are also serving them meals. Now if production cycle comes to a complete stop, we don’t know for how long we will be able to do this.” 

Noida and Greater Noida together has 10,000 MSMEs, which employ about 10 lakh workers. The industry operators also said that the government should implement some relaxation to the small and medium scale operators.

“We will support the workers at this time, but industry also needs government support now and we seek a complete waiver of all utility service fees at this time, including water, electricity, land lease payments till June 30,” said Vipin Kumar Malhan, president of Noida Entrepreneurs Association.


