Industries to pay for ‘must’ Covid-19 test of workers in UTs
2020-05-22
SURAT: Next time you enter the union territory of Daman, Dadra and Nagar Haveli (DNH) and Diu to work in a factory or a corporate office, you will be required to pay for getting the Covid-19 testing done at the lone government laboratory in DNH.


In a first, the administration of Daman, DNH and Diu has started paid Covid-19 testing service for the people, especially those working in the industries and corporate offices. While the routine testing will cost Rs 3,000, the emergency or tatkal testing will be charged at Rs 4,500.

The directorate of medical and health services of the union territory issued a notification fixing the charges for the virus testing. 

According to the notification, the employees designated by the industries for test, corporate heads and its allied staff, self-testing for migration to other states, and any other person self-willing to undergo Covid-19 test in the union territory, will be required to pay charges stipulated by administration. 

Barring a lone Covid-19 positive case in DNH, the union territory of Daman and Diu have been successful in keeping the global pandemic at bay. Relaxation in lockdown norms has resulted in influx of workers to the union territory, which houses more than 6,000 industrial units, employing over 3 lakh workers, mostly from Gujarat state.

Talking with TOI, Dr VK Das, director, medical and health services of union territory said, “For the employees, owners and workers of the industrial units in UT, Covid-19 test is mandatory and it is chargeable. It is the industries and corporate offices who will have to bear the cost of testing and not the administration.” 

The laboratory in DNH is conducting about 500 Covid-19 tests per day. 

Dr Das added, “The charges have been fixed as per the government protocol. Since a large number of industries are present in the territory, we can’t bear the expense of Covid-19 test of huge number of workers and employees.” 

However, the decision has irked the industrial unit owners who will have to cough up huge amount for testing of their workers. 

“It is a costly affair for the industries to pay Rs 3,000 and Rs 4,500 per test. Without the Covid-19 testing, the administration is not allowing the workers and employees to enter. We are paying taxes to the administration and it is our right to get free facility for Covid-19 testing,” said an industrialist who did not want to be named. 


