Gujarat: Industries resume, then face lockdown aftershocks
2020-06-07
AHMEDABAD: Even though industries have resumed operations since over a fortnight in Gujarat, production has mostly failed to cross 50% of installed capacities across sectors. Shortage of labourers, triggered by the mass exodus of migrants from Gujarat, coupled with decline in demand from export as well as domestic markets, have hampered growth in production across industrial units.



30% textile processors resume

At Narol industrial estate, which houses a majority of the textile processing houses in Gujarat, barely 30% of manufacturing units have resumed operations. “Barely one-third of the units could resume operations in the textile processing sector since a week and that too at 40% production capacity. Even though industries were allowed to resume operations, most of their order-books have been affected by lack of demand. Industrial units will initially focus on clearing their existing stocks and then focus on fresh production,” said Nitin Thaker, president, Ahmedabad Textile Processors’ Association (ATPA).

Thaker said that restricted movement of people from other states to Gujarat due to the ongoing pandemic will also be a deterrent for demand and it is uncertain as to when these units will resume.


Dyes and chemicals fulfil pending orders; demand bleak

Similar is the situation with the dyes and chemicals sector, which is marred by dwindling demand from both export as well as domestic markets. “When the lockdown was relaxed, industrial production resumed partially to fulfil pending export commitments. Thereafter, industrialists continued to convert raw materials into finished products. However, since the past one week, production has gone down by 50% of what it was when the industries resumed,” said Shailesh Patwari, chairman, Naroda Enviro Projects Limited.

Patwari attributed the decline in production to lack of demand as other sectors have also not picked up production.

Yogesh Parikh, president, Gujarat Dyestuff Manufacturers’ Association (GDMA), also mentioned that export demand has completely taken a hit. “The domestic industries have not started functioning full-fledged, even as the lockdown has been eased. For instance, textile sector is yet to resume business wherein reactive dyes are consumed. At the same time, even export demand has taken a hit, with export orders either getting cancelled or renegotiated. We are still supplying the stock at lower prices to keep the business going but such orders are not in humungous volumes and thus, production at industrial units is pretty limited,” said Parikh.


More units working, but capacity utilization remains low in Morbi

With some migrant workers from Gujarat’s bordering states such as Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh returning to Morbi, the ceramic industry now has 250 tile factories operating, the number was just 120 two weeks ago. Morbi has around 900 ceramic tile producing units.

“Following exodus of migrant workers, around 25,000 workers were left in Morbi. However, workers have slowly started returning to work. As a result, 250 units have been able to resume,” said Nilesh Jetpariya, president, wall tile division, Morbi Ceramic Association (MCA).

The units are still operating at 20-25% capacity due to lack of demand from domestic and export market. “The situation is far from being normal. There has not been much improvement,” he added.


Production hit in engineering, packaging sectors

In the engineering sector, demand has taken a hit from automobile and auto-component sectors. Many manufacturing units for engineering goods are situated in Sanand Industrial Estate as well as Odhav Industrial estate, where units are operating barely at 30% capacity, said industry sources.

“As far as engineering is concerned, the demand is down as automobile manufacturers haven’t ramped up production. Moreover, purchase of new machinery has also got impacted because expansion plans and fresh capex investments have been stalled due to the lockdown. As a result demand is impacted,” said Prerak Patel, secretary, Odhav Industries’ Association.

The packaging sector, which is highly dependent on migrants, is also facing similar issues. “The migrant labourers have left the industry crippled despite good demand in market. As a result, some units have either not resumed or else are operating at a production capacity as low as 5%,” Patel further added.


