Karnataka: Baby’s case puzzles doctors as mother tests negative for Covid-19
2020-04-03
MANGALURU: The case of a 10-month-old baby boy contracting Covid-19 continues to baffle the health authorities here. While the child is undergoing treatment at the designated hospital in Deralakatte, the fact that the infant’s mother and grandmother, designated as primary contacts, tested negative for the coronavirus, has perplexed the medical fraternity. The infant is stable, and is recovering.


Dubbed P56, the infant was the sixth positive Covid-19 case in the district, that as on date has seen 9 positive cases so far. With no prior history of travel to Covid-19 affected countries, the authorities surmise that the infant contracted the disease when the family from Sajipanadu in Bantwal taluk, recently travelled to Kasaragod, a Covid-19 hotspot. The infant suffered from severe acute respiratory infection.

Deputy Commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh said that the infant is doing well in isolation, and doctors attending to the baby have maintained that the district’s youngest Covid-19 patient is stable. “We are following standard testing protocols for its mother and grandmother, and the child as well. The infant will be discharged to be placed under home quarantine for the remainder period of the mandated quarantine period, if its swab results come out negative,” she said.

A source in the health department said the infant, its mother and grandmother are healthy. If the mandated swab reports taken on the 14th or 15th day come out negative for Covid-19, the child will be discharged. The treatment protocol also mandates just as in the case of HIV positive cases of mother and child, that the infant stays with the mother for biological reasons, the source said. Health workers will follow up on the infant’s progress during the remaining quarantine period at home, daily.

On the possible reason for the infant’s mother and grandmother not contracting the disease, the source said it depends on an individual’s immunity. Describing this as a possible case of sub-clinical infection, where a close contact, despite exposure to a coronavirus positive patient (infant in this case) remains asymptomatic, the source said all Covid-19 patients in Dakshina Kannada are in a stable healthy state, and are being treated for their symptoms as per treatment protocols mandated by WHO. 


