Covid-19-infected UK national held at Kochi airport after going under the radar for hours
2020-03-16
KOCHI: A British national who tested positive for Covid-19, and 17 others from the UK, were stopped at Kochi airport on Sunday morning just prior to boarding an Emirates flight to Dubai after they jumped quarantine and attempted to flee the country. 



The 57-year-old foreigner and his group were stopped at security check when airport authorities were alerted by health officials in Idukki who realised only in the morning that the tourists had gone missing from KTDC’s Tea County Resort in Munnar, where they had been in home quarantine since March 11.


TimesViewAffected people playing truant – ranging from those not reporting their travel history to those fleeing quarantine, the latter mostly comprising foreigners – is becoming a problem in Kerala. The government has been quick to denounce this as ‘criminal’ but, in the same breath, claims helplessness with a “you know there are all kinds of people…” shrug. The individuals concerned are certainly at fault but what about the authorities themselves? In the Munnar incident, it is scandalous that 19 foreigners could just walk out of a major govt owned resort after one of them tested positive. The police are now interrogating the resort manager and will, in all likelihood, make him the fall guy, but did the man even know that a foreigner in his premises had tested positive? Odds are that he didn’t, given the extremely miserly manner the state government divulges information on the Covid-19 pandemic – the health minister and CM make evening appearances to announce details of how many more cases are under observation or in isolation wards, the kind of information best left to a junior bureaucrat to disseminate. Looking at timelines, if the right information was available to the right persons at the right time, the infected foreigner could have been prevented from leaving Munnar or, at worst, apprehended long before he reached Kochi airport. Transparency is the key here. Why hasn’t the government thought, for instance, of a dedicated website that updates crucial info in real-time? 
Besides the Britisher, a doctor in Thiruvananthapuram who had gone to Spain for a short-term course was tested positive for the virus on Sunday, taking the number of positive cases in the state so far to 24.

Sources said the the 57-year-old foreigner and his team had left the resort around 10.30pm on Saturday after health officials left the hotel. The Emirates flight (EK 531) on Sunday morning was denied permission to take off following the intervention of district collector S Suhas. The tourist team from the UK was detained while the other passengers were screened for symptoms. The flight later departed with 270 passengers at 12.47pm while the UK national and his wife were shifted to the isolation ward at Ernakulam Medical College Hospital. The other 17 tourists were shifted to a private hotel in Kochi, where they will be quarantined. Another passenger, a Keralite, who opted not to travel on the flight, has been asked to stay in home quarantine.


ON TRACK: A child tries her best to stay safe at Kozhikode railway station. Southern Railways is removing curtains from coaches and has stopped providing blankets in order to contain the spread of Covid-19


‘Patient and wife had no direct contact with others’
Airport officials said the patient or his wife had no direct contact with the other passengers and flight operations at the airport were resumed after a massive disinfection drive. Agriculture minister V S Sunilkumar, who convened a review meeting at the airport, said all staff, including security officials who frisked them and had direct contact with the UK national, were identified through CCTV footages and asked to remain under self-quarantine.

Devikulam sub collector S Premkrishnan said the 19-member team had reached Munnar on March 10 and they were asked to remain in home quarantine at the resort after the 57-yr-old man developed symptoms of the infection. He was taken to Kottayam Medical College Hospital on March 11 for collecting his samples and returned to the Munnar hotel on March12.

The team left in a tempotraveller arranged by a Thiruvananthapuram-based travel agency and reached Cochin international airport around 3.30am. “The Tea County manager failed to inform health officials when they asked to vacate the hotel,” Idukki district collector H Dineshan said.

The matter came to light only when the doctor called the Tea County manager to know the status of the Briton around 8.30am on Sunday. “We alerted the Ernakulam district administration who blocked their travel. The 22 hotel officials, who had primary contact with them, are under home quarantine at Tea County hotel,” he said.

