Infection scare, lockdown drive people to despair
2020-04-18
COIMBATORE: The novel coronavirus scare and lockdown seem to have pushed many people to the brink of nervous breakdown. And they are increasingly turning to mental health professionals, who are available for tele-counselling sessions, to overcome the anxiety and depression. 


The tele-counsellors said more than half of the calls were from people who did not have any depression or anxiety issues until recently. According to them, more than 65% of callers was suffering from anxiety issues, while the remaining were cases of depression that was caused by loneliness or those struggling with alcohol withdrawal symptoms. 

Dr NS Mony, a psychiatrist with Balaji Neuro Psychiatrist Centre, said, “As the number of Covid-19 positive cases and the resultant deaths are on the rise across the world, people are scared of getting infected. Their anxiety is nothing but reflection of their fear.” 

He said people were in general aware of how the virus would transmit and ways to prevent infection. “Despite that, a throat dryness or mild sore throat worries them a lot and that leads to anxiety.” 

The psychiatrist said some of the callers have had questions like whether they would get infected just because they had spoken to someone from the containment zone over phone or because they have been getting Covid-19-related dreams quite often. 

Dr D Srinivasan, a psychiatrist with Kovai Medical Centre and Hospital, attributed the increase in anxiety among people to their relentless tracking of Covid-19 related information. “Avalanche of information is also a reason for the anxiety, which is the outcome of uncertainty. The situation that we face now is unprecedented and people are not certain when this will end or how the post-pandemic situation will be. Anxiety is a natural response to such a situation.” 

According to Dr Pavithra Mony, consultant psychiatrist with Royal Care Hospital, most of the callers start their conversation saying they were having sleepless nights. “It is only when we probe further, they would reveal they are worried about certain things, which are their talking points.” 

She said with the talks of job cuts doing the rounds, people were a worried lot. “They would constantly think about things like what would happen if they lose their job and their financial situation and spend their nights without sleeping. It in turn results in anxiety.” 

N Suresh Kumar, secretary, Tamil Nadu Association of Clinic Psychologists, said, while they were able to allay the fears of some callers in a single sitting, there were a few who required constant follow-up. “People who were having anxiety issues earlier are the most affected.” 

With a number of professionals, Tamil Nadu chapter of Indian Psychiatric Society and Tamil Nadu Association of Clinical Psychologists are providing free telephonic counselling to people to help them overcome their anxiety issues and depression. 


