Covid-19 precautionary measures at Delhi airport: Infrared temperature guns to screen flyers
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: At Indira Gandhi International Airport, additional infrared temperature guns have been provided to each airport health organisation (APHO) official to deal with the high influx of flyers, to complement the already installed thermal-screening machines to screen passengers for the novel coronavirus.


Earlier, passengers arriving from 12 countries were screened, but with the new government direction issued on Wednesday, any passenger arriving from abroad will have to fill a self-declaration form and undergo screening. The airport operator, Delhi International Airport Ltd (DIAL), said hand sanitisers were provided across the airport and the dos and dont’s pasted at several places.


 Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

The airport staff have also been given masks and gloves. We are making use of social media to inform passengers about the precautions and the process of undergoing the thermal-screening. The space required by APHO for carrying out these tests has also been adequately provided,” said an official.

While only three bays were open for screening, more are now being utilised, the official said, adding that no passenger can reach the immigration counter unless they have undergone screening and filled the self-declaration form.

An APHO official said while there were hiccups on Wednesday, the process was relatively smooth on Thursday. “Some airlines did not provide passengers with the self-declaration form. This meant that there were long queues at the airport. We have asked all the airlines to ensure the passengers fill the form onboard,” said the official. While one copy of the self-declaration form is kept with APHO, the other is provided to them for further clearance, he added.

The official said people showing any symptoms of Covid-19, including cough, runny nose, fever and nausea, along with a travel history in the last 14 days were shortlisted and could even be shifted to quarantine for a fortnight.

Meanwhile, the CISF officials at the airport said its staff were already provided with masks and gloves. “Frisking thousands of passengers poses a great risk, so we have provided special instructions to all our personnel and asked them to follow best practices,” an official said.


