Inmates happy at quarantine centres
2020-05-09
COIMBATORE: Hours after videos of protests at the quarantine facility at the Chennai Trade Centre went viral on WhatsApp and Facebook, health and revenue department officials inspected all the four isolation centres in the district to ensure all basic facilities were in place. At least 42 people are in quarantine at these facilities.

The district, meanwhile, didn’t report any new Covid-19 case for the fifth consecutive day on Friday.

The district had earlier converted two schools, a college and a lodge into quarantine facilities with individual rooms, fans, adequate bathroom, and beds with new cots and clean sheets. Food is served to them by a known catering service provider in the city.

While Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said they hadn’t received any complaints regarding amenities so far, a revenue department officer said general issues with isolation like loneliness and boredom might be there.

Selvin, who is in quarantine at Perks School, said he and three others had returned to the city from Maharashtra, where they were working, on Thursday. “The food is good, and we have spacious individual rooms, which are probably classrooms. Though it is hot, we manage because there are fans. The centre is not crowded and there are only four of us. Since it is a large campus, we get to go out for walks and enjoy fresh air.”

The inmates had requested for some toiletries, which the city corporation officials have promised to arrange.

While the rooms are cramped and stepping out for walks is not possible in some quarantine facilities like the lodge in Mettupalayam, the inmates are happy with the provision of individual rooms with fans and televisions.

The deputy director of public health said, “We didn’t have any complaints from the Tablighi Jamaat conference delegates either. The schools and lodges have enough facilities for them to charge their electronics too, so that they can stay in touch with their families.” 


