Jaipur: Inmates of Sanganer open jail join fight against pandemic
2020-03-30
JAIPUR: On usual days, the inmates of Sanganer situated open jail are allowed to go out and work as mechanics, tailors or other random jobs with a condition that they will get back to jail at 6pm. However, during the ongoing lockdown while they were not having their usual jobs, the jail authorities have roped in a private company for which the inmates are manufacturing and packaging 5,000 litres of sanitisers every day. With this initiative, at least 80 inmates with their families are able to earn Rs 350 per day in this tough time as well. Inmates, including convicted prisoners had earlier prepared 4,000 masks.


Sanganer open jail in Jaipur is for prisoners who have a very good conduct. At this jail they are allowed to live with their families in different quarters. They are allowed to move out of jail for various small jobs.

“After lock down was announced, they were sitting idle. Though we have engaged them in some other work, still there was a need to channelise their energy in some work. A private company involved in manufacturing of sanitisers came to us since they witnessed a problem of short staff. So, we asked them to bring their machines and raw materials and provided them our men,” said NRK Reddy, director general of police(Jails).

Also, inmates would be working in shifts and work for 24 hours for this job. 49-year-old Ram Naryan, who is convicted in a murder case and serving life imprisonment, is happy to be into this job. “We too will think that while country is facing a crisis, we are contributing with our ways and means. It is a wonderful idea by authorities,” he said while talking to TOI over phone.

He said that authorities started the work on Friday and will continue. “Everyday, about 60 to 80 inmates are involved in manufacturing and packaging of sanitisers in 100 ml to 500 ml bottles. This has provided us a source of earning,” he added.

The idea to involve the inmates into such kind of work struck into mind of Vikas Kumar, inspector general of police (Jail) when he was asked by an inmate about how can he contribute to the society in this tough time. “It touched me. Apart from sanitisers, we have so far made 40,000 masks. Some of them have been distributed among the inmates and our staff,” Kumar added.

Jail authorities are also mulling over giving manpower to agencies and NGOs who are into distributing grocery items to the poor people. “We are in touch with some agencies. In a day or two our manpower of inmates will also start packing of grocery,” he said.

