Institutional quarantine must for all those coming from high-risk states
2020-05-31
DHARWAD: As South Western Railways commences Mumbai CSMT-Gadag Passenger service on Monday, the Dharwad district administration and the health department have made elaborate arrangements for the screening of passengers arriving from Maharashtra.

This will be the first train post-Lockdown 4.0 to carry passengers from the “high-risk state”. The number of positive cases in Dharwad district was under control till relaxations for travel were made during Lockdowns 3.0 and 4.0. Nearly 70% of the positive cases in the district have a travel history of coming from Maharashtra.

To ensure that there is no steep rise in the number of positive cases after the launch of the passenger train between Chhatrapati Shivaji MaharajTerminus (Mumbai) and Gadag via Hubballi, Dharwad DC Deepa Cholan has put the health staff and the police on the job.

Deepa told STOI that the state protocol for Covid-19 is clear. “Anyone arriving in Karnataka from high-risk states should compulsorily undergo institutional quarantine for seven days and home quarantine for seven days. Maharashtra, Delhi, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu are tagged as high-risk states following a spurt in positive cases there,” the DC said, adding that the passengers arriving at Hubballi station from Maharashtra will be screened at the entrance. 

“They will be directly sent to institutional quarantine, where they will be housed in facilities depending whether they are symptomatic or asymptomatic. No passenger can walk scot-free. So the people of Dharwad need not panic,” Deepa said. 

Those coming to Hubballi on 2-3day business trips have to carry a medical report from their district, declaring that they are fit and fine and are asymptomatic. Such persons will be allowed to undergo home quarantine till their trip is over. For others, institutional quarantine is a must, she added.

43 people discharged

 While two more tested postive on Saturday, 43 people who were infected and have recovered were discharged from hospitals in Kalaburagi. 

A 42-year-old man, P-2832 resident of Kalamandargi village in Kamalapur taluk in the district, who recently returned from Mumbai tested positive on Saturday. 

He was immediately shifted to the Covid-19 ward at ESIC hospital. 

Another 32-year-old man P-2833, a resident of Venkatesh Nagar in Kalaburagi, also tested positive. 


