‘Institutional quarantine not for all entrants’
2020-05-05
KOLHAPUR: The civic administration has decided to develop facilities at schools, public halls and hostels with a total capacity of 10,000 beds so that those coming from outside the city can be put in institutional quarantine. 

Civic chief of Kolhapur Municipal Corporation (KMC) clarified that not everyone coming to the city would be put in institutional quarantine. “Firstly, those coming from outside will be screened at the district borders by a team of doctors. Those having high temperature or symptoms related to Covid-19 will be mandatorily put in institutional quarantine. Those who do not have adequate space at home will also be put in institutional quarantine,” said Kalshetti.

The clarification comes after many people willing to return to the city sought to know whether they will be put in institutional quarantine after arrival. The applicants feel that they can wait till the end of lockdown instead of spending two weeks in quarantine.

“We are receiving applications from a large number of people, mainly students and migrant workers who are stranded in other parts of the state. The data will be analysed by two officers based on the urgency, location and number of people travelling. The data of the applicants will be provided to the ward-level committees which will decide whether to put the person in institutional or home-quarantine,” said the municipal commissioner adding that people would be stamped for identification purpose.

Kalshetti said that he has directed the ward-level committees to find out the infrastructure available in their respective wards. The beds and sanitation facilities will be set up in the quarantine facilities with provision for food. “We are taking steps to ensure those wanting to return to their hometown travel in batches and not in one lot.”

Kalshetti said that he had received a request from 48 migrant workers from Nejdar Colony area, who want to return to their hometown in Karnataka. He said that their health status would be checked and be allowed to travel only if they could arrange for their own transportation without violating social distancing norms. Private cars are allowed but not more than three people, including the driver, will be alllowed. 


