Institutional quarantine made mandatory for returnees in Dharwad
2020-05-13
Dharwad: After nine people who had returned from Ahmedabad and were quarantined at the University of Agricultural Sciences (UAS) in Dharwad tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday, the district administration is not willing to take any chances, and has made it mandatory for all those returning from any part of the country, to the district, to undergo institutional quarantine. “There is no question of symptomatic or asymptomatic, everyone who has come from outside has to stay in government quarantine, and they have to undergo throat and nose swab tests thrice during their quarantine period,” said deputy commissioner Deepa Cholan.

The people of Dharwad district had heaved a sigh of relief after Dharwad had come into the orange zone from the red zone, but now they are in a spot of bother, after nine migrants who returned to the district from Gujarat, tested positive on Tuesday.

Though, the district had fared well in containing the spread of infection, due to some stringent measures being enforced and random checking, the spike in positive cases after the lockdown was relaxed, has sent shockwaves among the people.

The district had 10 active cases before the lockdown was relaxed, but it has now surged to 21. The only good news is that seven people have been cured and discharged.

Deepa said those entering the district from other states prefer to stay in hotels, which have been turned into government quarantine facilities, and that they have to bear the charges. Those preferring to stay in hostels or government schools which have been turned into institutional quarantine facilities, need not pay anything, and the district administration will pay for their food.

324 migrants return

Officials at the reception counter at UAS, Dharwad, said that the return of stranded people from other states into the district started from May 7, and so far 324 migrants have returned to the district, and have been quarantined.

All of them have availed e-passes from the Seva Sindhu portal, and have undergone screening. Of the people who have returned, 127 have been home quarantined, while 197 are in institutional quarantine.

A majority of people have come from Maharashtra, which is a Covid-19 hotspot. So far, 109 people have come from Maharashtra, 73 from Goa, 44 from Gujarat, 33 from Telangana, 43 from Tamil Nadu, 13 from Rajasthan, seven from Andhra Pradesh and two from Kerala.

Over 100 more people have registered on the Seva Sindhu portal to come back to the district, but are not too happy with being quarantined, and are hence reluctant to return, said an official.

The travel history and medical status of the migrants is being monitored at six centres opened here,which is working round-the-clock. Dharwad superintendent of police Vartika Katiyar and the police department are working to ensure that the attempts made by people to enter the district illegally are foiled.


