Institutional quarantine must for returnees from red zones
2020-05-31
Nashik:The district health department of the Nashik Zilla Parishad has decided to put every person, who is returning to the rural parts of the district from the red zones, in institutional quarantine to contain the spread of the infection. 

More than 1,100 people from across the district have been infected with Covid-19. Health officials said that 159 cases were found in the rural district until May 29. 

District health officer Kapil Aher said that the cases have increased after people started arriving from Mumbai, Pune and other Covid affected areas.

Aher said that on the instructions of ZP CEO Leena Bansod, every person coming from a Covid-19 hotspot would be put in institutional quarantine.

On the backdrop of this issue, the district health department has decided to increase the bed capacity at Covid Care Centres which have been set up at the primary health centre (PHC) level. 

30,000 people have returned 

to Kolhapur district so far

Around 30,000 people from Covid-19 hotspots have returned to Kolhapur since May 3, after certain relaxations were announced.

So far, throat swab samples of 17,500 people have been collected and the test reports of 3,220 people are pending.

District collector Daulat Desai said, “Most of the Covid-19 patients are the people who were infected at their location before May 3. We are reviewing the cases post May 3 and it primarily shows that the role of the village and ward-level committees is the key to stop the spread.”

“The ones who have returned from covid affect areas should be kept in isolation. The committee has to ensure that the home quarantined people follow social distancing,” said Desai

 Desai also said “For graduate doctors, Rs 2,000 per day will be given and to specialists or the postgraduate doctors Rs 3,000 will be given. The doctors will get insurance cover and free treatment if they get infected in spite of the use of protective gears.” -Inputs from Kolhapur


