Covid-19: Wayanad’s tribal community under close watch
2020-05-18
KOZHIKODE: Insulating the highly vulnerable tribal population has emerged as the critical focus area for Wayanad district administration after around 30 tribespeople from four hamlets have figured in the contact list of the 36-year-old Covid-19 patient who ran a grocery shop at Panavally near Thirunelly.

Adding to the concern is the relatively high disease burden among the tribal community, and prevalence of malnutrition and comorbidities could make them more vulnerable to the disease. Also, the infrastructural constraints in tribal hamlets as impediment of effective home quarantine is also a cause for worry.

The district administration, which declared the Kolli, Gundara, Sarvani and Russelkunnu colonies with a total population of 409 residents as containment zones on Friday, has shifted 24 primary contacts of the Covid-19 patient from Panavally to institutional quarantine at Thirunelly. Seven people have been asked to remain in their homes and seven others from the colonies have been shifted to the Mananthavady district hospital for observation.

The 36-year-old Covid-19 patient from Panavally is the son-in-law of the truck driver who tested positive after returning from Koyambedu in Tamil Nadu. He runs a grocery shop at Panavally and tribespeople from the four colonies used to visit the shop to purchase essentials.

The health department is monitoring the residents in the four colonies in Panavally region round the clock.

According to district medical officer Dr R Renuka, 40 persons from the colonies above 60 years of age and 28 with lifestyle diseases are under observation. “Also, there are two cancer patients, three antenatals and three sickle cell patients in three colonies and they will be closely monitored,” she added 

Health inspector and Asha workers have been deployed for intense surveillance of each resident’s health. A total of 62 samples, including those of general category, have been sent for testing.

District collector Adeela Abdulla said that aggressive steps have been taken to make the tribal colonies Covid-19 free and 24-hour surveillance is in place in the Panavally tribal belt.

The collector said that two police personnel and a junior health inspector have been posted in the colonies to ensure containment and health surveillance of the inhabitants and nobody from outside will be allowed into the colonies.

A five-member team of doctors are camping in Thirunelly to oversee the Covid-19 measures in the tribal pockets and Asha workers will conduct daily fever surveillance. Those in high-risk category, who cannot undertake home quarantine due to infrastructural constraints, will be shifted to Covid care centres in Thirunelly.

