Bihar: Internal tourism to get priority post lockdown, says principal secy Sanjay Kumar
2020-05-24
PATNA: Principal secretary of tourism department Sanjay Kumar on Saturday said attracting people from within the state to visit different tourist sites in Bihar would be given priority once the coronavirus-induced lockdown is lifted.

“The focus will gradually shift to foreign and domestic tourists,” Sanjay, who was at the forefront of the government’s fight against coronavirus till May 20 before being shifted to the tourism department, said.

He said the tourism sector in Bihar would also prove to be a boon for lakhs of migrant workers who have returned home from different parts of the country. “On an average, around 8% of the world’s employment is in the tourism sector and we want to leverage the same in Bihar too. There’s no doubt that tourism sector is extremely important for the economy of the state,” he said.

Sanjay said though Bihar has many archaeological and historical sites, the number of people from the state visiting these sites is not up to the expectation. “For instance, Pawapuri doesn’t receive the kind of attention it deserves. Hence, my focus will be on attracting and encouraging people from the state to visit the historical and religious sites,” he said.

Even as certain relaxations have been given to several sectors, the tourism and hospitality sector is still under strict restrictions. Tourism in the state, which has been totally shut ever since the lockdown was imposed on May 24, was already hit by the outbreak of Covid-19 in China in December last year. 

The major tourist places in Bihar, including Rajgir, Bodh Gaya and Nalanda, where Buddhist pilgrims and tourists from China, Vietnam, Thailand and Hong Kong visit in large numbers, were witnessing a drop in footfall since January. 

“Even though the tourism sector has been badly hit by the Covid-19 crisis, we need to revive it once the lockdown is lifted,” Sanjay said.

Meanwhile, experts in hospitality sector said lockdown has left disastrous effects on the tourism sector in the state, rendering tens of thousands of people jobless. Bhola Singh, manager at a luxurious hotel in Bodh Gaya, said the revenue went down from Rs 30 lakh- Rs 35 lakh per month to zero in the last two months.

Rakesh Ranjan, general manager of a resort in Rajgir, said, “As Rajgir is a Buddhist site, tourists and pilgrims from at least 16-17 countries used to visit the place. We actually saw the crisis coming in February, but never expected such a situation,” he said. 

