Int’l Buddhist body for shifting of quarantine centre from Bodh Gaya
2020-05-18
GAYA: International Buddhist Council, the body representing more than 50 Bodh Gaya-based foreign monasteries, has demanded shifting of the proposed quarantine centre for foreign returnees to some other place from Bodh Gaya as it poses a health hazard to the locals and may even affect the tourist/pilgrim services in the days to come. 

The Council has also threatened to resort to peaceful protest outside the main Buddha shrine if the quarantine centre is not relocated.

In a letter addressed to chief minister Nitish Kumar, Bhikku Pragyadeep, general secretary of the International Buddhist Council also said that monastery rooms do not conform to the SOP norms prescribed by the Union health ministry. Moreover, being spiritual persons, the monastery managers are ill placed vis a vis Covid management.

The letter says that being reserved for religious chantings and practices, “The purity and sanctity of the monasteries will be contaminated if it is made a quarantine centre.”

The letter also referred to official claims that proper screening of the returnees will be done after their arrival and only such persons would be sent to quarantine centres who do not carry any symptoms, the letter said that ‘home quarantine’ for such returnees will be a better option.

Referring to the threat to take action against monastery managers if they fail to comply with official orders, the IBC general secretary letter said that such threats were uncalled for and thoroughly unwarranted. 

Issuing threats, on the basis of mere presumptions and conjectures is not a healthy practice said the IBC general secretary. The Magadh division commissioner Asangba Chuba, it may be recalled threatened action if the hoteliers/monastery managers did not obey official command in respect of quarantine management.

The two-page-long letter ends with a polite threat that “if our humble request are not heard, all the international monks will come out for a peace protest in front of Mahabodhi Temple.”

Meanwhile, 54 Hotels, 54 guest houses and 56 monasteries have been officially notified as quarantine centres for foreign returnees. An estimated 8000 Biharis including tourists and other visitors would be evacuated under the ‘Vande Bharat Mission’ in the days to come and all those arriving by AI special flights will be put on 14 days mandatory quarantine on payment basis in Bodh Gaya-based hotels, monasteries and guest houses. 

The first batch of about 200 persons stranded in UK is arriving on Monday evening. Altogether 4,170 rooms, nearly half of them super deluxe and deluxe rooms priced Rs 1600 and Rs 1000 respectively per day have been ear marked for the returnees. Meals will be charged separately. “There is no paucity of rooms as the returnees would not be coming in one go,” said DM Abhishek Singh. 


