Covid-19 in Bihar: IRCTC takes precautionary measures for meals on trains
2020-03-07
PATNA: Deadly coronavirus (Covid-19) has partly impacted catering services on the running trains. Most of the passengers travelling by long-distance trains either originating from Bihar or passing through the state seemed to have preferred vegetarian meals to non-veg due to Covid-19 fear.

Public relations officer (PRO) of Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), Siddharth Singh, told this newspaper over phone that railways has taken various preventive measures while cooking meals as well as serving them to passengers on running trains. “Since coronavirus spreads through human contacts, IRCTC has ensured that meals served to passengers are fresh and hygienic,” he said.

IRCTC, which looks after catering services across the country, has its main base kitchens at Rajendra Nagar Terminal in Patna, New Delhi, Allahabad, Mumbai, Jammu and other places to prepare and serve meals to passengers either on running trains or at food plaza kiosks, Singh said. About 150 trained staff work round the clock in each base kitchen, he said and added that IRCTC has installed CCTV cameras at each base kitchen to keep a close watch on meal preparing process.

Railways has made available plenty of masks, hand gloves, aprons, sanitizers and other preventive mechanism at each base kitchen as well as in pantry cars to ensure foolproof safety to passengers during journey. Besides, meal packets served to passengers on running trains have now QMR (quality management representative) seals to show quality of food and base kitchen from where meals have been prepared. In view of Covid-19 fear gripping the country, IRCTC has set up a centralized control room in Delhi to keep a tab on meal quality and better service to passengers, he said.

According to East Central Railway’s chief public relations officer (CPRO) Rajesh Kumar, Railway Board chairman V K Yadav has put each zonal railway on high alert and asked them to launch a massive awareness drive and preventive measures too. 

Yadav talked to ECR officials through videoconferencing on Thursday about their preparedness to meet the Covid-19 challenges, he said adding the chairman directed ECR to maintain proper cleanliness in each coach.

Kumar said ECR additional general manager Arun Kumar Sharma also held a high-level meeting with its five division officials on Friday and directed them to display banners at each major station about preventive measures required to keep the virus at bay during journey. 


