Coronavirus: Is John the ‘super spreader’ in Noida? UK man says he is healthy, has no symptoms
2020-03-30
NOIDA: John Humphreys, a 71-year-old auditor from the UK whose visit, health department officials suspect, set off the chain reaction of the novel coronavirus infection among employees of the Sector 135 company, is healthy back home and has not shown any symptoms of coronavirus yet.


Humphreys spoke to TOI over the phone and said he did not feel the need to get himself tested after his return from India because he had not shown any symptoms yet. “If anything, I’m scared now that I may have contracted the disease from the company, factory and its sites,” he said.

Humphreys is an external auditor who had visited the office of Sector 135-based Cease Fire earlier this month. Soon after he left, an employee who was in primary contact with Humphreys tested positive for Covid-19. The employee’s wife also had the infection.


More on Covid-19


  
   Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
   21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
   How to quarantine yourself at home
   Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
  
Humphreys said he had landed in Delhi on March 11 and taken a flight directly to Dehradun. From there, he had to visit the town of Selaqui, where Cease Fire manufactures its fire safety equipment. From Selaqui, he had come to Noida on March 15 and left for the UK four days later. “While in Noida, I visited their office on March 15 and another site where special fire safety equipment was being installed. The next day, I visited another site — a Chinese restaurant — to check a kitchen suppressant system. I would have directly met about 10-20 people in the office during meetings. But there were more people whom I had met at the factory in Selaqui,” Humphreys told TOI.


Coronavirus lockdown: Live updates

Health department officials in Noida had earlier said they had information that Humphreys was symptomatic. “Employees of the company had said he had fever and cough when he had come to Noida,” Dr Anurag Bhargava, the chief medical officer, had said.

Humphreys, however, said he was fine in Noida and the cough may have been because of food he didn’t like. “The food in Noida wasn’t really good and may have made me cough a bit. But every time I entered the hotel, the thermal gun showed my temperature at 96 degrees,” he said.

Asked if he was aware of the infection chain being linked to him, Humphreys said he wasn’t, but added: “It’s very similar to what happens in our country. If anything goes wrong, we blame the foreigners.”

While Humphreys’ visit to Cease Fire remains the period they are focusing on, there are other employees in Cease Fire who had travelled abroad. “There are three persons with recent travel history in the company, including the man from the UK. The MD (who has tested positive) also returned from the UK on March 1 and another employee returned on March 7. Though it has been some time since their travel, any of the three could be the source,” Bhargava said.


