‘Island strategy’ devised for Covid hotspot Limbayat
2020-05-08
Surat: Cases of coronavirus continue to surface from Limbayat zone in Surat city with as many 14 more reported on Thursday. Out of the total 782 Covid-19 cases in the city, 308 alone are from Limbayat zone. Thus, Limbayat accounts for about 40 per cent of the total cases in the city.

“Limbayat zone is a major hotspot. We have decided to adopt an ‘island strategy’ for Limbayat zone. Entry and exit points of Limbayat zone will be sealed and people entering and exiting the zone will be monitored. It will be treated as an island,’’ municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani said on Thursday.

“We will launch a massive door-to-door health surveillance in Limbayat zone in the next two to three days. We will adopt an APX surveillance system under which letter A will be written on the front wall of a house where we find cases of acute respiratory infection or any other symptoms among members of the family. We will write P if there are elders with co-morbid conditions in the house and X if nothing is suspected,’’ Pani said. 

He further said from Friday late night, Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APMC) will be shut and that no vegetable vendors and shops will be allowed to do business across the city until May 14. 

“Some vegetable vendors had tested positive for Covid-19 in different parts of the city and coronavirus cases were also reported from AMPC. This is why this decision has been taken. I request citizens to help us contain the virus,” Pani said.

On Thursday, 29 more Covid-19 patients were discharged in Surat. A total of 376 Covid-19 patients have been discharged so far in Surat.

“On Thursday, 14 patients were discharged from New Civil Hospital (NCH) and 15 from Covid Care Centre at Samras Hostel. City’s recovery rate has been increasing day by day,’’ the municipal commissioner said.

Meanwhile, the city witnessed highest single day spike of 40 Covid-19 cases and death of two persons due to the infection on Thursday. Premji Lakhani, 63, a resident of Ashwani Kumar Road, succumbed to the deadly virus on late night on Wednesday. He was a heart patient and admitted to NCH on May 1.

Mussir Shaikh, 53, a resident of Navsari Bazaar, passed away at Seventh Day Adventist Mission Hospital on Thursday. He was suffering from diabetes and admitted to hospital on April 29. This took coronavirus death toll in the city to 36.


