Isolation care for Covid-19 patients in Lavale facility
2020-03-19
PUNE: The newly established Symbiosis University Hospital and Research Centre and Symbiosis Medical College for Women (SMCW) have volunteered to isolate and treat patients of Covid-19 infection on their premises. 


The office bearers have approached the authorities for approval. This is the only hospital in Mulshi taluka in rural parts of Pune covering 143 villages. 

The move is 'much-needed' because going by the mathematical projections of the epidemiologists, cases are likely to rise in the next few days if social distancing is not properly practised by the citizens. 

The 300-bed hospital in Lavale in Mulshi taluka began operations in June 2019 and its attached medical college will begin from August 1, 2020. 

“We have already approached the divisional commissioner to allow us to isolate and treat patients of Covid-19 infection. We have the infrastructure and expertise to handle all patients exhibiting minor or severe symptoms. We have offered to support the government health machinery in the larger public interest,” public health expert Rajiv Yeravdekar, dean (health sciences) Symbiosis International (Deemed University) told TOI. 

Cardiothoracic surgeon Vijay Natarajan, chief executive officer of the hospital, said, “Financial constraints will not be a handicap for a patient to get the isolation care and treatment. Even for the affordable class, we will be rendering isolation and medical care at charges at par or even less than Central Government Health Scheme.” 

Other medical institutions like D Y Patil Medical College, Bharati Hospital and Medical College, Navale Medical College have already been roped in to offer medical services if the need arises.

“There are 11 medical colleges in Pune including ayurveda and homeopathy colleges. They have already been told by the authorities to reserve a few beds for isolating and treating patients of Covid-19 infection if the cases go up. But volunteering when not being asked to is a noble gesture and is much needed in the fight against Covid-19,” spine surgeon Ajay Chandanwale, dean of B J Medical College attached Sassoon General Hospital, said.

Pubic health expert Jitendra Bhavalkar, dean of D Y Patil Medical College in Pimpri, said, “The government authorities have told us to keep a certain number of beds reserved for patients with Covid-19 infection. We are following their directives.”


