It affects mind more than body: Doctor who beat virus
2020-04-06
NEW DELHI: The psychological effects of Covid-19 are harder to fight than its physical manifestations, Dr Vivudh Pratap Singh, an interventional cardiologist who recovered from the disease recently, told TOI.

Singh, who works at Fortis Escorts Heart Institute, had gone to Paris in February to attend a fellowship for an advanced cardiology course. However, with the Covid-19 crisis building up globally, he decided to return. He underwent thermal screening at IGI Airport on arrival, but didn’t show any symptoms. Therefore, he was allowed to go home.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

However, because he had a travel history, the 40-year-old cardiologist quarantined himself in his house at Kaushambi, Ghaziabad. “I locked myself in a room and maintained a distance of six feet with everyone in the family, including my two-and-a-half-year-old daughter. I also ensured that everyone followed the six steps to wash hands, something doctors are used to,” Singh said.

Three days later, the doctor recounted, he started feeling pain in his tonsil and got a sore throat. Later, he developed fever and extreme levels of fatigue, which are symptoms of Covid-19. “I got the test done and it confirmed my worst fears. I had Covid-19,” he added.

The doctor was admitted to Safdarjung hospital. “Dr Nitesh Gupta, who heads the Covid-19 management team, nurses and other staff at the hospital were very cordial. They were patient and dedicated in their work. Looking at them, I felt proud to be a healthcare professional,” said Singh.


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

The biggest worry of the cardiologist was his wife and daughter and other family members having contracted the infection from him. However, their tests came negative. “When you are down with a disease that is wrongly projected as equivalent to death, you feel stressed, something similar to post-traumatic stress disorder. You feel as if you have no control over your life. You worry whether you will be able to meet your near and dear ones and then a vicious cycle starts inside the mind, which you have to break. One has to be spiritually and emotionally strong to tide over the negativity,” the 40-year-old said.

When Singh was in hospital, he said some people in his neighbourhood spread rumours about his wife testing positive too. “But there were many others who supported us. Social support and family support is the most important to get out of tough situations like this,” the doctor said.

The cardiologist said sometimes it’s better to switch off from social media, which is full of fake news. “Always remember, 80-85% Covid-19 patients have mild symptoms and recover on their own. Just 10-15% require symptomatic treatment and 5%, mostly the elderly, require advanced care,” he added.


