IT companies allowed to work with 5% staffers during lockdown
2020-03-24
NAGPUR: Amid Covid-19 prevention drive, IT industries have secured permission to work with 5% of the workforce by getting the sector included under ‘essential services’, which are exempted from the lockdown. The order was issued by district collector Ravindra Thakre. Even some of the units in Mihan-SEZ, which mainly cater to exports, have continued operations apparently by availing this exemption.


The manpower presence was down, however. The general order on lockdown exempts IT industries catering to essential services.

Some of the employees in this sector had also protested against the move. Photos and videos posted by employees of Ascent, a company having a unit at Mihan-SEZ, had gone viral on social media. In one such video, a person said despite the lockdown employees of this company have not been allowed to work from home, and nearly 150 staffers were present at Ascent’s campus.

The man in the video appealed to authorities to take action against the company as the staffers were susceptible to catching the infection. Insiders said the company has branches in IT Park and Mihan. The employees were insisting on leave but were not granted it. The low numbers were because employees themselves did not come. 

A senior official in Maharashtra Airport Development Company (MADC), the agency which manages the SEZ area, confirmed that Ascent had continued operations but the number of employees was scaled down, and the company had permissions. The company offers medical transcription services to foreign clients, he said.

Even TCS (Tata Consultancy Services) had continued operations with fewer staff, the MADC official said. The company kept its operations going to cater to clients in banking and insurance sectors.

Lupin Pharma’s unit in the SEZ was also running as pharmaceutical industry too is in the exempted list. Air India’s aircraft maintenance repair and operations (MRO) depot is also running partially, the source said.

The letter issued to Vidarbha Association of Software Exporters (VASE) by the collector says that considering the request by the association, the establishments have been allowed to work with 5% workforce. However, the companies must take adequate measures to prevent Covid-19 infection to the employees. On failing on this front, the employer will be liable for action under Section 188 of Indian Penal Code, which deals with violation of government orders.


