​​Coronavirus alert: Telangana and Andhra Pradesh enter lockdown mode
2020-03-16
HYDERABAD: Amid the coronavirus outbreak, IT companies in the city have started giving their employees an option to work from home and started screening their temperature and as a precautionary measure to keep workplaces safe.


Coronavirus outbreak live update

Companies are also implementing measures to maintain high levels of hygiene at the workplaces by making hand sanitizers available for every employee and are creating awareness by putting up posters and distributing booklets on symptoms of Covid-19.

 
 

Bharani Kumar Aroll, vice chairman, Society for Cyberabad Security Council (SCSC) said, “Industry bodies like Hyderabad Software Exporters’ Association (HYSEA), Cyberabad Security Council, NASSCOM have all come together on one platform and are trying to work with the nodal officers by getting regular health bulletins. Depending on that, we are taking measures and keeping the communication channel open with all the companies.”

“We are also trying to contain the panic. People working from home may happen soon and it doesn’t really impact the overall business as such. Anybody who has high temperature or any of the symptoms of Covid-19 are being educated not to come to the office and to keep themselves them isolated for a few days. We have also distributed booklets that talks about the whole process,” he said.

Meanwhile, a few companies such as Google Hyderabad have started screening the temperature of its employees. 

“They have started checking the temperature of all the employees at the entrances of the office using a device. We also have an option to work from home if needed,” an employee said. 

Speaking to TOI, Srikanth Srinivasan, Head Membership, NASSCOM said, “We have put out an advisory saying that the employees should exercise abundant caution. We have also enabled all necessary permissions for work from home, but are leaving the decision to the wisdom of the organization based on the situation.”

“Some organisations have already been doing temperature checks and slowly others might start following,” he added.

