IT sector continues with self-imposed lockdown
2020-06-02
Hyderabad: Two weeks after Telangana allowed offices to operate with 100% workforce, the IT/ITeS sector seems to be in a self-imposed lockdown, with most companies sticking to the work from home (WFH) model. The result: Most offices in Hyderabad’s othewise bustling IT hubs like HiTec City and Gachibowli wear a deserted look as they are operating at below 10% capacities.

Industry sources said low office occupancies may continue through June and even later if need be, given the recent spike in the number of Covid-19 positive cases with the opening up of the economy.

“Most IT companies are playing it safe. They feel employees have settled into the new normal and operations are stable. Bringing employees back to work in uncertain conditions may shake up their delivery process. There’s no point in upsetting the applecart,” said HYSEA president Bharani Kumar Aroll.

Nasscom’s national GCC chair V Laxmikanth said most GCCs are adopting a cautious approach to return to the work place as it is prudent and keeps the health and safety paramount. “Irrespective of whether the government is allowing 100% operations, due to the surge in virus case, curfew related problems and lack of public transport, the rest of June will see most companies continue largely with WFH. Our office too is just operating at around 2% and we have no plans to ramp up,” said ZenQ CEO Murali Bollu. 

And those ramping up are doing so very cautiously. “We are ramping up office operations, but cautiously and systematically while taking all precautions. We are identifying the bottlenecks and pain points, like critical projects that did not allow WFH due to client permissions or those where productivity was very low due to bandwidth or adjustment issues,” said Cyient executive chairman BVR Mohan Reddy.

Former CII Telangana chairman V Rajanna, said more than 90% of Telangana’s over 5.8 lakh IT professionals are still on WFH as employee wellbeing is of utmost importance. “Industry is being very judicious and bringing as minimum a number of employees as possible to operate from office, especially those who can’t work from home for various reasons like accessing labs which are established in the industry campuses,” he said.“For now, everybody will continue to work from home. We are closely tracking the situation,” said Vipul Singh, divisional VP and head of HR, ADP.


