Italy & Austria follow Spain in easing curbs, but France extends lockdown
2020-04-15
With cases of the coronavirus nearing the 2-million mark, and over 1,20,000 dead, the pandemic remains a potent threat around the world even as some countries begin to take careful steps to lift restrictions intended to halt the virus spread. 


 Spain allowed some construction work to resume and a few factories to reopen on Monday. Austria and Italy followed with a gradual easing of restrictions that allowed some small shops to reopen. But there are still strict guidelines in place, with shoppers in Austria required to wear masks and in Italy, a country brutalised by the virus, an even-more stringent lockdown continues until May. 

 Denmark will allow children under 11 to return to schools and nurseries later this week, after a month of closures. Poland plans to begin to "slowly start unfreezing the economy," the country's health minister said on Tuesday. 

 But even as nations weigh loosening restrictions, the IMF on Tuesday issued a stark warning on Tuesdaythat the global economy this year faces the worst downturn since the Great Depression, projecting that the global economy will contract by 3% in 202 0. 

 The WHO said the number of new cases was easing in some parts of Europe, including Italy and Spain, but outbreaks were growing in Britain and Turkey. "The overall world outbreak, 90% of cases are coming from Europe and the US of America. So we are certainly not seeing the peak yet," WHO spokeswoman Margaret Harris said . 

 Some Spanish businesses, including construction and manufacturing, were allowed to restart. Shops, bars and public spaces are to stay closed until at least April 26. Spain was flattening the curve on the graph, representing the rate of growth of the outbreak, health minister Salvador Illa said on Tuesday. The overnight death toll from the coronavirus rose to 567 on Tuesday from 517 a day earlier, but the country reported its lowest increase in new cases since March 18. Total deaths climbed to 18,056. 

 Some workers expressed concern that the relaxation of restrictions could trigger a new surge. But for Roberto Aguayo, a 50-year-old Barcelona construction worker, the restart came just in time. "We really needed it, just when we were going to run out of food we returned to work," he said. 

 In Italy , which has the world's second highest death toll of 21,067, bookstores, stationary stores and shops selling baby clothes and supplies were allowed to open nationwide on Tuesday, provided they could maintain the social-distancing. But there was no coherency to the openings, with some regional governors and individual shop owners deciding to keep their doors shut. 

 The Czech government will gradually reopen stores and restaurants from April 20. 

 Thousands of shops across Austria reopened on Tuesday, but the government said it was "not out of the woods". Austria acted early to close schools, bars, restaurants, non-essential shops and other gathering places about four weeks ago. Austria has reported 384 deaths in total . 

 Britain has the fifth-highest death toll globally. The death toll in British hospitals rose to 12,125 on Monday and foreign secretary Dominic Raab has said there would be no easing of lockdown measures when they come up for review this week. The Times newspaper said he would extend them until at least May 7. 

French President Macron late on Monday extended a virtual lockdown to May 11. The Covid-19 toll in France rose to 15,729 on Tuesday as the spreading of the virus in the country appears to be stabilizing. National health agency chief Jerome Salomon said France registered 762 deaths over the past 24 hours in hospitals and nursing homes. 

 Russia might need to call in the army to help tackle the crisis, President Vladimir Putin said. Moscow warned that the capital may run out of hospital beds in coming weeks. Health ministers from the Group of 20 major economies will speak by video conference on Sunday to address the outbreak's impact. Agencies 


