Coronavirus in Jaipur: Italian shows recovery signs, may be taken off ventilator
2020-03-14
JAIPUR: The condition of the Italian tourist, who was the first positive case of Covid-19 in the state, is improving day-by-day. 

The oxygen saturation level without the BiPAP and other equipment is been maintained by the patient at regular intervals. Doctors treating him are now mulling over removing the lifesaving equipment if he continues to show similar signs in the coming days. Likewise, there was no further deterioration in the condition of the 84-year-old Indian who was tested positive when he arrived in Jaipur from Dubai. Till Friday, Rajasthan has registered three positive cases and 370 negative cases. 

Health officials said the situation is under control and many who were quarantined have been discharged. “There is a patient from Jodhpur, whose reports are also negative. Also, the Italian tourist is gradually improving as per the doctors. His wife has already been shifted to the Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (RUHS) Medical College since she was tested negative on Thursday,” Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (ACS), medical and health, told TOI on Friday. 

Now, the state has only two patients undergoing treatment as coronapositive cases — the Italian tourist and an 85-year-old Indian who returned from Dubai.

About the clinical condition of the Italian tourist, Dr D S Meena, superintendent, SMS Hospital, said, “We are removing his BiPAP mask on and off for two hours. He is showing very good signs of improvement as his oxygen saturation is properly maintained while his mask is off. If he shows similar signs of improvement, we may remove the BiPAP and other equipment.” 

He added that the 84-year-old Indian who came from Dubai and was tested positive is also showing signs of improvement. “His condition is stable. He is showing signs of improvement. A team of doctors and paramedical staff is treating him as per guidelines,” a senior doctor at the SMS hospital said. 

Meanwhile, the ACS, medical and health, spoke to health officials of various districts via video conferencing to take stock of the measures taken in the wake of corona scare. “So far, we have identified 482 people who came in contact with those who were tested positive. These are the ones who are under observation at their respective homes by the paramedical staff and doctors,” Singh added. 

“We have 23 patients admitted in the isolation wards, including 11 at SMS, five at RUHS, two in Kota, three in Jhunjhunu and one each in Jodhpur and Udaipur,” he added. 


