Italian beats Covid-19, dies of heart attack in Gurugram
2020-04-10
GURUGRAM: She came to visit India with some fellow Italians, fell ill during the trip, survived a five-week-long battle against the novel coronavirus, but tragically, died of a heart attack on Thursday, two days before heading back home.


Marrela Ferillo, a 79-year-old woman from Rome, was among the 14 Italians who were admitted to Medanta Medicity on March 4. The tourists, who had returned to Delhi after a trip to Rajasthan and three other states, were among the first reported cases of Covid-19 in the country.

Ferillo was the last patient left to be released from the hospital.

“We had discharged 11 Italian patients on March 23 and another two on April 1 after they recovered. Ferillo had turned negative for Covid-19, after which we decided to send her home by an air ambulance on Saturday. However, she suffered a heart attack on Thursday morning and passed away at 11.55am,” said Dr Sushila Kataria, an intensive care expert who leads Medanta’s Covid response team.

The senior doctor said the Italian woman’s lungs had been badly damaged. Moreover, she had also developed bacterial infection in the blood after suffering from coronavirus.

“We tried really hard to save her but could not due to her age and poor lung condition. My team members and I are saddened by her death. We were working day and night for her recovery,” Dr Kataria.

The Italian is survived by two daughters (one of them is a doctor in Rome), a son and her grandchildren, all currently in Italy, Dr Kataria told TOI.

“She used to teach politics in Nigeria and stayed there for 10-11 years. She was educated and well-read. She would often apologise for ‘bringing the virus’ to a hugely populated country like ours,” the doctor said.

Ferillo had arrived in India on February 20. This was her first visit. After spending over a month and a half in the hospital, she had been looking forward to returning home, Dr Kataria said.

“She was on ventilator for the past 24 days. A day before she passed away, I made a video call to her son and daughter. Ferillo looked at them and her facial expression changed. It was a tough time for the family,” the doctor said. 

Ferillo’s last rites will be conducted in Delhi by the Italian embassy, which will hold a mass on Sunday, she added.


