Italian coronavirus patient being treated with HIV, swine flu & malaria medicines
2020-03-05
JAIPUR: With limited options available for treatment of coronavirus, the doctors at SMS Hospital are providing drugs used for treatment for malaria, swine flu and HIV to the Italian patient with coronavirus (Covid-19). The 69-year-old patient is undergoing treatment at ICU of Isolation Hospital attached to SMS Hospital. 


"We are providing him treatment while keeping him in isolation. We are providing him tamiflu (oseltamivir) which is effective in treatment of swine flu. We are providing him chloroquine which is an effective drug in treatment of malaria and two drugs used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS. These are four medicines which we are providing him," said health minister Raghu Sharma.

He clarified these drugs are not 'officially announced' drugs for treatment of Covid-19 but it can minimise the problem which he is facing. "As of now, there is no treatment available for Covid-19 according to the World Health Organisation guidelines. There is no treatment available for Covid-19. Also, the vaccines have not been developed yet. According to the SMS Medical College official report on treatment of Italian patient, it mentions, "As per new guidelines following two drugs IV remdesivir/lapinavir and ritonavir have been tried in various studies out of which remdesivir may not be available in India. We would like to procure remdesivir or any new drug which has been tested for therapeutic treatment so far, through the concerned embassy. Meanwhile, we are treating him by IV antibiotics, chloroquine and oseltamivir."

However, doctors have also started lopinavir/ritonavir a protease inhibitor combination used to treat HIV.

"The doctors who are the first contact with diseased corona patients are waiting for clear directions from government of Rajasthan. In the meeting, it was discussed. They asked for protocol based treatment and guidelines for covid-19 for all doctors of private or government for Covid-19," said, Dr Tarun Patni, president, Jaipur Medical Association.

The Italian patient is on ventilator and is battling for life. The doctors have put him on bipap machine. Wife of 69-year-old Italian tourist, is suffering from fever, running nose and cough as she has also been tested positive for coronavirus. She is undergoing treatment at Isolation hospital of Sawai Man Singh medical college along with her husband. "She is fine and her condition has not deteriorated. We are giving her symptomatic treatment. However, her husband's condition is stable, it has neither improved nor deteriorated. He is undergoing on ventilator support," Dr DS Meena, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital said.


