‘It’s local spread, but 143 units with 10k beds ready to tackle Covid’
2020-04-30
Amravati divisional commissioner Piyush Singh is heading coronavirus control drive in the division having five districts — Amravati, Akola, Yavatmal, Buldhana and Washim, of which four are in red zone save Washim. In an exclusive talk with TOI , Piyush Singh speaks about plans to tackle the Covid challenge. Excerpts:

Q: Deaths are being reported from different localities, specially in Amravati and most deceased don’t have any travel history. So, is it a local or community spread?

A: It is a local spread. The first three cases of Yavatmal had Dubai travel history, while most of the other cases are linked to a single source.

Q: Corporation and district administration have claimed that they have conducted door-to-door survey of thousands of people. Still deaths are being reported. Is this a failure of the survey?

PS: Door-to-door survey was done in containment zones in all five districts. It enabled us to identify primary and secondary contacts of confirmed cases. Deaths were reported before the survey and after that also. Due to awareness generated by this exercise, people themselves came forward with vulnerable cases. It is a continuous process. 

Q: More than 100 samples from Amravati, including that of a deceased woman, were not properly collected. Who is at fault for this?

PS: The samples are sent to either Nagpur or Akola. During this process, maintaining cold chain during transportation, proper volume of sample and availability of kits at the lab level also play a role in the outcome. Report can be inconclusive due to a variety of reasons and no one can be blamed for it. 

Till date, 3,047 samples have been sent from Amravati division for testing, a majority from Amravati and Yavatmal districts.

Q: Is contact tracing being done properly?

PS: Contact tracing exercise is done perfectly. We are able to trace 100% contacts of Covid confirmed cases across the division. 

Q: Source of infection for most of the deceased is still untraced.

PS: The first three Covid positive persons in Yavatmal came from Dubai, so it is clear they got infection there. For remaining cases, they are high risk close contacts of a single source.

Q: Are institutional quarantine facilities enough? Thousands of people are being home quarantined, but there is no data available about institutional quarantine.

PS: We have set up 88 Covid care centres (bed capacity 6,276), 35 dedicated Covid health centres (bed capacity 2,179) and 20 dedicated Covid Hospitals (bed capacity 1,735) in the division. It is in these facilities suspects are kept in institutional quarantine till their test reports come. As on April 29, 447 persons are in institutional quarantine.

Q: Those who are home quarantined can be asymptomatic carriers. Administration/police are expected to keep check on their movements.

PS: For every confirmed positive case, we identify high and low risk contacts. Both these contacts are shifted to institutional quarantine as suspect cases and their samples are sent for testing. Once the report comes, further action is taken. Positive persons are treated in isolation ward, while negative persons are sent home for 14-day quarantine. Therefore, we cannot say those who are in home quarantine are asymptomatic carriers.

Q: What is the strategy to bring Amravati, Akola, Yavatmal and Buldhana out of the red zone?

PS: In Amravati and Yavatmal, cases have come from one containment zone only from where we have picked up all high risk and low risk suspects and kept them in institutional quarantine. All the positive active cases are asymptomatic. We have also further tightened up lockdown.

In Akola, new cases have come from outside the existing containment zones. Accordingly, new containment zone has been created and contact tracing has begun. Samples of high risk contacts are sent to lab, while samples of low risk persons will be taken after five days.


