Coronavirus scare: It’s better to be scared than sorry
2020-03-11
CHENNAI: Covid-19 aka novel coronavirus was officially born on Chinese government records on January 14. And it took hardly a month to travel across the globe to Africa and the Americas.


Tamil Nadu has reported one positive case and has more than 1,000 people in home quarantine. Tamil Nadu is one of the few states to have two testing labs for the virus and quarantine wards in hospitals across the state. Yet, the state has not put in place certain public health safeguards that some neighbouring states have adopted.
Kerala, which reported eight new cases on Tuesday, is working on a war footing. It has suspended all school examinations up to Class V. The Sabarimala Temple Board has advised Ayyappa devotees not to visit the hill shrine for the monthly puja from March 14 to 18. Theatres have been closed till the month-end.

For nearly three weeks now, Kerala airports have been screening both incoming domestic and international passengers. Karnataka government was the first to declare early holidays for primary schoolchildren. In both these states, inter-departmental collaboration is evident.

Tamil Nadu, meanwhile is treating Covid-19 as an exclusive concern of the state health department, hospitals and doctors. Many departments in the state have either not taken this seriously enough, or have decided there is nothing they can do. As WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus put it, this isn’t a drill. “This is not the time to give up. This is not a time for excuses. This is a time for pulling out all the stops.”

Tamil Nadu cannot sit pretty in the comfort that “only one case” has been reported. It cannot afford to be caught unawares. We are in the middle of a board examination season when 23 lakh students take annual tests. There are no hand sanitisers or liquid soap or awareness posters at exam centres. Except a circular on Monday, making biometric attendance optional in schools, the education department has been mostly silent.

Every Friday, people throng theatres to watch new movies. The first IPL match this season in Chennai is slated for March 26, when some 37,000 are likely to jostle in the stadium. There has been no analysis of the risk. The ongoing Tamil month of Maasi is so auspicious, not a day goes without a temple festival or a family function. When asked, an official of the Hindu religious and charitable endowments (HR&CE) said there is no advisory to temples.

Chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami has convened meetings with officials, good. But that is not enough for a viral strain that has challenged the best medicare systems and protocols known to the world and infected more than 1 lakh people, killing nearly 4,000 of them so far.

It is time to put together a multi-disciplinary swift response unit with public health professionals, doctors (and they are not the same), health workers and experts from all possible fields. Public awareness – as much to avoid contracting the virus as to behaving responsibly by volunteering to be in quarantine if needed – is the first shield against the contagion. It won’t be out of place to think of penalties to people who willfully break the quarantine protocol.

We are not asking for panic. We are advocating preparedness, though sometimes it’s better to be scared than sorry.


