It’s ‘Mission Begin Again’ for Maharashtra as states plan to unlock in phases
2020-06-01
NEW DELHI: Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Telangana on Sunday extended the lockdown till June 30 even as other states like Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh released a roadmap to restore normalcy after 68 days of shutdown to fight Covid-19 by announcing that malls and restaurants will open and buses and cabs will operate from June 8.




Even as the Maharashtra government extended the lockdown for another month, it announced a phase wise ‘unlocking’ of the restrictions in red zones like Mumbai from June 3 under ‘Mission Begin Again’, that would allow, among other things, outdoor physical activities like walking, jogging in open spaces and society grounds between 5 am and 7pm in the first phase.

Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray announced that from June 3, self-employed personnel like plumbers, technicians and electricians will be allowed to resume work with the necessary health and safety protocol in place. Garages and workshops to mend vehicles will also be allowed to operate with prior appointments.

All government offices except those that provide essential services will begin working with 15% capacity or 15 staff members, whichever is more. Thackeray announced that door-to-door delivery of newspaper will be allowed from the coming Sunday. From June 5, the second phase of relaxations will be applicable, in which all shops, market areas and markets will be allowed to function on alternate days. Also, from June 5, taxi and autos with just two passengers will be allowed to ply for essential services. From June 8, which will mark the beginning of the third phase, private offices can function with 10% capacity.

In UP, the Yogi Adityanath government allowed government offices to open with 100% attendance from June 1. But they will have to operate in three shifts to maintain social distancing. Also, school and colleges will remain closed till July 20. 


The Tamil Nadu government, while announcing the extension of the lockdown till June 30, said curbs will remain for inter-state bus transport and Metro and suburban train services. Telangana announced the extension of lockdown in the containment zones till June 30 but said there would not be any restrictions on inter-state travel.


