Telangana: It’s Eid, but celebrations muted, hugs missing as coronavirus looms
2020-05-25
HYDERABAD: EId-ul-Fitr 2020 will go down in history as a ‘no contact’ festival where the traditional hugs, embraces and handshakes are a strict no. 

Traditionally, no Eid or Muslim gathering is complete without shaking hands and hugging each other thrice and placing the right hand on heart. With social distancing being the norm to fight Covid-19, EId-ul-Fitr celebrations will now be limited to ‘distant greeting’ or a virtual ‘Eid Mubarak’.

While there will be no public Eid prayers on Monday in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh due to lockdown, or Eid Milap functions in the week that follows, the spiritual charm and the spirit of charity will, however, remain the hallmark of the celebrations.

Eid-ul-Fitr in Hyderabad and other parts of Telugu states this time is different from that of earlier years on more than one count. Idgahs and mosques are closed. The fasting month of Ramzan that preceded the Id did not witness any Iftar party. There were no community dinners and mass poor-feeding programmes. The Ramzan favourite dishes such as haleem, dahi bade, cooked chana dal and juicy Hyderabadi kababs were conspicuous by their absence. 

The traditional Sehriwala, who would go around streets beating duff and singing hymns to wake up Muslims for the Sehar or pre-dawn meal to begin the fast, was conspicuous by his absence due to the night curfew. He was taken over by a new breed of Muslims creating awareness about the importance of following the lockdown norms and avoiding crowded shopping, said Najaf Ali Khan, grandson of Nizam VII Mir Osman Ali Khan.

Taking a cue from the advisory for safe Ramzan practices issued by the World Health Organisation (WHO), Muslim religious leaders in Hyderabad cutting across sectarian differences, have called on the community members to follow a strictly ‘no contact’ Eid this year. They have urged Muslims to greet each other from a distance.

“Eid is not just a spiritual celebration. It is also beyond charity and alms-giving. In Hyderabad Eid-ul-Fitr and Ramzan have always been an occasion to bring people of all communities together. It’s all about nearness, get-togethers, embraces and sharing of love and affection. It’s all about human contact. But this Eid social distancing has snatched away the Hyderabadi Tehzeeb customarily linked to Ramzan for four centuries,” said Fazil Hussain Parvez, expert on Hyderabadi culture.

Also, this Eid, everything temporal associated with celebrations, is missing. Apart from no shopping for new clothes and accessories, traditional seviyan (vermicelli) stalls on the roadside were not seen this time. The Lad Bazaar, near Charminar famous for its lac bangles and fashion accessories, that has remained the symbol of womanhood and wedlock (Suhag) for Hyderabadis for four centuries, remained closed for most part of the month.


