It’s #quarantinefashionweek for these models
2020-04-21
They are not able to sashay down a ramp due to the lockdown, but that has not deterred the glamazons of the fashion world from ramp-walking online. Supermodels and fashion choreographers from Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata have been participating in #quarantinefashionweek on social media. No, they are not cat walking for clothes as expected, but for household chores.


Fashion show director-choreographer Achla Sachdev was one of the first to initiate something like this. She says, "I did the jhaadu dance on Facebook one day as I wanted to amuse myself amidst housework. The comments were encouraging, so I decided to ramp-up the masti by making it a glam circle and several models decided to participate. The idea was to enjoy doing the mundane with grace and in style."


So, let’s have a dekko at how the models did their daily chores...


Cleaning dishes in style like Candice Pinto
Supermodel Candice Pinto even makes cleaning dishes look glamourous. She shares that her “isolation schedule” keeps her busy the whole day. It includes “reading, cooking, cleaning, washing, working out, video chatting with family and friends, and spending time with my husband.”


Power dressing like Alesia Raut for online classes
When model and fashion choreographer Alesia Raut is not conducting online classes, she’s cherishing the stay-at-home order. “This has given us an opportunity to be with our families. I’ve been brushing up my culinary skills and they are the guinea pigs,” she quips.


Look, Akshitaa Agnihotri’s got a new fashion prop
According to model and actor Akshitaa Agnihotri, you can take away the ramp from the model, but she will still find a way to pose. Calling the online fashion week a fun way to stay “connected with fashion”, she adds that it also helped to showcase models as “today’s women, who handle 
their household work with the same ease as fashion weeks.”


Sucheta Sharma James adds a touch of spice to her routine 
Model Sucheta Sharma James has had no time to think of fashion matters during the lockdown. But when given a chance to spice up her domestic routine, which is running after her “15 month-old son, cooking and fitness training with husband (Harrison James),” she does it with a knotted tee, hot pants and loads of attitude.


Lokesh Kori’s healthy platter
Model Lokesh Kori is all peaches and smiles while cooking in the kitchen. “Fashion is not just wearing good clothes, it’s about the way of living a life,” he says.


Reha Sukheja takes fitness up another level with yoga and window cleaning
Supermodel Reha Sukheja captioned her picture of wiping windows while doing yoga as: "My mom is wondering why window cleaning is taking so long." She says, "As much as I hate routine, quarantine-life has become just that. I am into yoga, books, playing the piano, watching movies and trying new recipes. I even burnt a cake, but I'm not giving up." 


All boring tasks have became fun for Madhabilata Mitra
Madhabilata Mitra, Kolkata-based model and mountaineer, is excited about the online fashion initiative. She says, "This has brought a smile back to my face. All my boring tasks have become fun now. Living with family in the middle of a pandemic has made my bond stronger with them." 


This has been the best stress buster for Sandhya Shetty
Model, karate champ and motivational speaker Sandhya Shetty says, "This online fashion-week initiative is a great way of showcasing that models are as hardworking and normal as anyone.It has been the best stress buster for me."

