Coronavirus in Kerala: It’s a stress test for small traders too
2020-03-20
KOCHI: With the coronavirus outbreak in the state, small businesses in the city too have been scrambling how to deal with difficult times. Tailoring shops, shops selling designer clothes, footwears, jewellery and other accessories at Convent Junction, for instance, have been witnessing fewer footfalls for the past few days. With customers keeping away, they do not have enough funds even to meet operational expenses. Even when businesses are under strain, the traders have to foot electricity bills, pay salary to staff and meet other miscellaneous expenses. “It has been really tough for us ever since Covid-19 cases began to be reported in the state. Many traders have been struggling to meet both ends meet. Under such circumstances, some traders are even planning to close their shops. It is a voluntary decision,” said an owner of a boutique at Convent Junction. He said that shop owners would follow the evolving situation around the coronavirus. “Based on the developments, traders will take a decision on how to go forward. If situation improves by the weekend, we will open the shops,” he added.

Convent Junction has been a favourite shopping point for people across the state. The area attracts hordes of tourists as well. The shop owners allow customers to try out the merchandise put up for sale. Be it clothes, designer jewellery or footwear, customers touch them or check them out by wearing them. “There is body contact. Even employees help customers. It is impossible to stop people from touching the merchandise and do business. And customers from everywhere come here. If people from Covid-19 hit regions come, it will not be possible to prevent them from entering the shops. We feel it is better to close down the shops for a few days than ending up suffering in the long run. The traders have to protect their health as well as that of their employees,” said a designer jewellery shop owner.

Meanwhile, on the adjacent TD Road and Jew Street, dealers in iron and steel, hardware, furnishings and electrical goods said there has been a 50% dip in their businesses. The attitude of customers has changed, and they have been spending only on essential commodities.

“There is no spending. No new works or projects are being taken up. Only those works which have to be completed by March-end are progressing,” said Jithesh Shenoy, a hardware dealer on TD Road.


