Covid-19 in Tamil Nadu: It’s their call to quell panic from going viral
2020-03-22
Hunched over a computer, Muruganandam looked drawn and tired. His headphones firmly over his ears, he wearily takes a 108 call from Tirupur.

The hosiery hub has a high number of labourers from across the country. Muruganandam straightens in his chair at the Emergency Management Response Centre (108 ambulance service) in Chennai to quickly fill up an online form on the screen even as he talks reassuringly to the caller. She’s a staff nurse of a public health centre (PHC) in Tirupur asking for an ambulance.

A 25-year-old woman, who was taking care of a relative, a textile mill worker from Jharkhand suffering flu-like symptoms and admitted to the Tirupur PHC, is showing similar symptoms and needs to be shifted to the local government hospital.



 

Muruganandam tells the nurse an ambulance is on the way, and hangs up. The next call is from Theni.

The 108 helplines never stop ringing, keeping the pressure on the 60 people cooped up in cubicles with red tack boards who field calls from across Tamil Nadu. 

"It’s a massive task," GVK EMRI Tamil Nadu head M Selva Kumar tells TOI. 

"We get around 450 calls every day. Most of them suspected Covid-19 cases. At least 25 seek counselling and another 20 calls are from Indians abroad seeking information on whether they can fly in," he says. 

As the country prepares to lockdown on Sunday, the 108 ambulance service and the Covid-19 emergency operation control room at the Directorate of Medical Services campus in Chennai are in battle mode.

In the Covid-19 control room, more than 200 health workers, delegated to eight desks, and administrative staff work in tandem with authorities and police in the districts to identify potential virus carriers. 

They coordinate with airports, seaports, other states, collate information from other countries, monitor patients on ventilators, patients in isolation wards and in quarantine. 

Those on the home quarantine desk work hard to keep conversations going with people to ensure they complete the two weeks compulsory ‘home stay’. 

"We bond with them. Clarify their doubts and ensure they stay home for two weeks without exposing themselves to the very young and the old and vulnerable," says Dr Esakki Prasad, a member of the desk.

In the nearby 24/7 call centre at the DMS, 15 doctors man phones that ring constantly. "There is no respite. Every minute we get a new call. People ask about symptoms, causes, precautions and preventive measure. They ask if their neighbour, who may have returned from travel abroad, has been screened," says Dr Praveen Shankar, during a brief break. 

Emergency management technician Prabhu has an unenviable task. He’s the one who sits beside the 108 ambulance drivers as they careen across city roads in response to calls for help from suspected Covid-19 cases. 

"Every day, we are called to transport at least five people with suspected Covid-19 symptoms to isolation wards in hospitals across Chennai," says Prabhu.

There are now 54 people with Covid-19-like symptoms who are in isolation wards in hospitals across the state. At least 895 are home quarantined and 229 quarantined in hospitals in Tamil Nadu.

But for these health warriors, the vigil continues.


