Bareilly: IVRI plans to develop Covid-19 vaccine for pets
2020-06-02
BAREILLY: In a welcome development for animal lovers, Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) is planning to work on developing a vaccine, diagnostic kits and study the transmission dynamics of Covid-19 in pets and wild animals. There were recent reports of many abandoning their pets amid fears that they could be “Covid-19 carriers”.

Notably, no animal species in India has been found Covid-19 positive so far. But, there have been cases of a tiger at Bronx zoo in the US and a few pets - particularly cats and dogs - in Hong Kong and some other countries testing positive for SARS CoV-2 – the virus which causes Covid-19 infection.

On Monday, IVRI director RK Singh told TOI, “On the direction of director-general of Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR), we are contemplating to work on developing a vaccine for Covid-19 for domestic and wild animals. We are planning to make diagnostic kits which can be used in the laboratory as well as the field.”

IVRI is one of the few institutes in the country which has been testing both human and animal samples for Covid-19.

According to scientists, in case Covid-19 spreads among the domestic and wildlife species in the near future, the virus will undergo genetic changes to better adapt to these animals and "may cause disease in them".

"So, our efforts are also directed towards study of the transmission dynamics of SARS CoV-2 in domestic and wild animals and control its spread among them. Active monitoring has to be done in different animal species and preventive measures should be put in place to control its spread. For such measures, surveillance tools have to be developed - which include diagnostic methods/kits – to detect infected animals and vaccines to prevent the infection,” a scientist explained.

Besides, IVRI in collaboration with IIT-Roorkee has been given permission for a project with an aim to find an effective antiviral drug against SARS-CoV-2 from Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, under a special drive called 'Intensification of Research in High Priority Area' (IRHPA).

The main objective of this project is identification of structure-based potential anti-viral against SARS-CoV2. The study intends to search for small molecule inhibitors targeting some of the most important viral replication enzymes.


