Coronavirus in Delhi: Satyendar Jain inspects quarantine facilities, tells officials to ensure all basic amenities
2020-03-22
NEW DELHI: State health minister Satyendar Jain on Saturday visited three hotels in Aerocity where AAP government has provided quarantine facilities for passengers arriving at IGI airport from coronavirus-affected countries.


Jain, along with New Delhi DM Tanvi Garg and other officials, visited IBIS and Red Fox hotels and Terapanth Bhawan where the government has arranged 92, 54 and 36 rooms, respectively, at a daily tariff of Rs 3,100 that is paid by the beneficiary.

Jain said the facilities at these hotels were good and those straying in quarantine were getting all meals, water and medical attention. “The hotel staff are regularly talking to the quarantined people through phone and posting small videos on the local network to keep them motivated,” the health minister said.

He also spoke to a few people on the phone and sought information about their health condition. Those availing the hotel facility get three meals — breakfast, lunch and dinner — two bottles of mineral water per day, tea and coffee and other facilities such as Wi-Fi and TV.

Officials said the hotels have been asked to ensure that laundry of the guests in quarantine is not mixed with other people.

According to the orders issued by Garg, the meals to such guests are served in their rooms in disposable plates/containers. “The plates/containers used for this purpose should be disposed of as bio-medical waste ensuring due protocol. Security personnel should ensure that the movement of these guests is restricted to confined areas. The management shall also observe the movement of these guests through CCTVs in their control rooms,” the order stated.

Meanwhile, following complaints of black-marketing of masks and hand sanitisers, government teams raided several commercial establishments and took action against offenders. A team led by DM (central) Nidhi Srivastava found at least three pharmacies that were selling masks above the MRP. Officials said strict action would be taken against establishments violating the government orders and indulging in black marketing.

