Panic in Agra after member of Italian group tests positive for coronavirus in Jaipur
2020-03-03
AGRA: Panic spread in Agra on Monday evening after one of the members of an Italian group of 20 tourists, who arrived here from Jaipur on Sunday night, tested positive for coronavirus in Jaipur and was detained there. Though the remaining 19 members of the group left for Delhi early on Monday, the news about one of their members having tested positive for the virus caused considerable concern among tour operators and hoteliers. 

Agra chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said that their department received the information on Monday afternoon from Lucknow office and they immediately alerted all the officials concerned in the tourism industry. According to him, by the time they identified the Italian group, they had left for Delhi by road. “We are trying to locate the tourist operator of that group,” Vats said. 

Confirming the arrival of the 19 Italians, a senior executive of a well-known hotel chain said the group arrived at their hotel at 2 am on Monday and left for Delhi around 8 am. He said that before their departure, they had visited the Taj Mahal. He added that they were not aware of any one from the group having tested positive for coronavirus. 

Meanwhile, two employees of a local shoe exporter, who returned from Italy recently, were quarantined in the district hospital due to symptoms of fever and their samples have been sent to Lucknow for test, the CMO added. 

On Monday evening, Agra tourism department officials issued an alert to the travel and hospital industry operators, Archeological Survey of India (ASI), Agra circle, and Agra Development Authority (ADA) informing about the group of 19 Italians, whose member was affected by coronavirus. They urged them to immediately inform the health department or the district magistrate’s office about their visit for the safety of other tourists and residents.

The CMO told TOI that another group of 19 Italians arrived Agra on Monday evening and they have all been screened and they had no symptoms of coronavirus.


