Jaipur girl, 13, in hospital for stomach ailment, tests Covid-19 positive at death 3 days later
2020-04-16
AGRA: A 13-year-old girl whose family took her away from Agra’s SN Medical College in a critical condition and against the doctors’ recommendation died and tested positive for Covid-19 at another hospital in Jaipur. The girl was admitted at paediatric ward of the medical college in Agra on April 6 after complaint of intestinal perforation. Doctors there had planned a surgery to save her once “she became stable”.


But, her maternal uncle took her away after filling Leave Against Medical Advice (LAMA) form.

The girl had come to Firozabad at her maternal grandmother’s home from Jaipur. When she fell ill, she was rushed to the Agra hospital. But, the family members wanted her to be treated in Jaipur, where her father, a labourer, worked and lived with the rest of the kin.

So they took her to Jaipur’s JK Lone hospital where she died on April 11. The next day, on Sunday, her tests revealed that she had contracted the novel coronavirus.

Head of paediatric department of Agra Medical College, Dr R Dayal, told TOI, “She was admitted in the ward in a critical condition and doctors recommended surgery only after stabilising her as an immediate intervention could have been life threatening for her.”

“But, the patient’s relative wanted to take her to Jaipur for surgery despite doctors’ advice against it,” the doctor added.

He said, “They gave us in writing that they are taking her on their own will.”

The girl had no travel history or known contact with any Covid-19 patient when she was admitted to the ward, suggesting that she may have contracted the virus after the admission or during the travel to Jaipur. Her father and other family members are quarantined now. 

She was tested for Covid-19 in Jaipur prior to her surgery. “But she passed away on April 11 morning,” said the deceased’s father on phone. The man said he could not even bury his daughter, as health workers did not allow him to touch her. He told TOI that their first test for Covid-19 was found negative and he wants to be with his three minor children, who are alone at his house. “I have three more children, including two sons and a daughter, who is 8-year-old. They all are alone,” he said.

