Jajmau tanneries start production, asked to strictly follow Covid-19, anti-pollution norms
2020-05-23
Kanpur: Tanneries in the Jajmau area of the city on Thursday started removing dust and greasing their machines as the district administration at its meeting held on Wednesday night granted them permission to operate their units.

The district administration has made it clear to representatives of the leather industry that except in the containment, red zone and buffer zones, the tanneries could start production in their units from Thursday with certain conditions.

District magistrate Brahmadeo Ram Tiwari, who presided over the meeting, said the leather units would have to strictly follow the standards and take precautions of Covid-19.

Earlier, the district administration, as per the requests of owners of leather units, had given permission to as many as 125 tanneries to run the units manufacturing essential commodities and the general items. 

Around 261 tanneries ,which were in operation before the lockdown, had to close after sudden lockdown imposed on March 23. The raw material worth around Rs 250 crore which was in the process has decomposed which might cause infections.

The district magistrate has asked the leather units to follow the anti-pollution rules and instead of discharging the effluent into Ganga should treat it properly. The representatives assured the administration that they would follow all the instructions and control pollution in their units.

Besides Sarveshwar Shukla, joint commissioner industries and Vivek Srivastava ADM (city) and officials of the pollution control board, those represented the leather industry in the meeting included Javed Iqbal, chairman, Regional Council for Leather Export, Asad Iraqi, general secretary, Leather Welfare Association and Rizwan Khan Arshi. 

Asad Iraqi said that as the leather industry had suffered a lot, now it is s a time for it to re-establish itself. “During the last 18 months, the tanneries came down on knees due to the government orders followed by the lockdown. In this period, the industry suffered huge losses and failed to fulfill its commitments in the international market”, he said.

SB Franklin, regional pollution control board officer, talking to TOI said, “The leather industry was given permission to start production due to unprocessed and or semi-processed stock lying in the units which had reached the rotten state and might create some other problems . The industry representatives have been asked to work on zero pollution principle, especially the river pollution else legal action will be taken against them”. 

He said that 125 export oriented units were already operating and now the remaining units would commence their operation soon.


