Jam-packed JCTSL buses raise coronavirus scare
2020-03-18
Jaipur: Though the government has banned gathering of over 50 persons, people are still using public transport in the city, thus risking the spread of coronavirus. Besides, Jaipur City Transport Service Limited (JCTSL) staff are yet to begin sanitizing the buses where thousands of people travel every day.

People, who can’t afford cabs, public transport is the only option for them. Low-floor buses run by Jaipur City Transport Service Limited (JCTSL) are still packed with people commuting to different places.

A few commuters could be seen wearing masks but most of them are not using masks at the bus stands and inside the buses.

Ramesh Aggarwal, a daily passenger said, “I understand the risk but not everyone can afford cabs. I have to travel to Walled City as my shop is situated there and no matter what we all have to earn our livelihood.”

Fear of virus is widespread but JCTSL authorities are yet to begun sanitizing the buses where thousands of people travel every day. Veerendra Verma, officer on special duty at JCTSL, said they have already issued directions to the drivers and conductors. “We will start the process to spray disinfectants in the buses from Wednesday. Masks and gloves will be provided to them. We are taking all precautions,” said Verma.

There are hundreds of private mini-buses plying on the streets of Jaipur that are not under control of any government agencies. Mini-buses are known for rash driving and overcrowding that makes people vulnerable to disease. None of the mini-buses have been disinfected yet by any authority. President of Rajasthan Mini Buses Association, Prashant Meel assured that they are taking necessary precautions. “We have made the drivers aware about the impact of virus and its prevention. Masks have been distributed among the drivers and conductors. As the fear of coronavirus has closed down colleges, universities and offices, there is 50% decline in our number of commuters so buses are not as crowded as they used to be. Our passengers in safe hands,” said Prashant.


