Jamaat attendee discharged after testing negative twice
2020-04-27
Kolhapur: A 30-year-old Covid-19 patient was discharged from Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya — the civil hospital in Kolhapur — after his throat swab samples taken after the completion of the 14-day isolation period tested negative twice for the contagion.During his discharge, staff members at the civil hospital greeted the man with flowers. Right from the doctors and hospital staff, everyone clapped and cheered for him without forgetting to maintain social distancing from each other. The man too thanked the hospital staff for their continuous care during his time at the isolation ward.Dean of CPR hospital and Rajarshi Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj Government Medical College Minakshi Gajbhiye said that the man was discharged after he successfully completed the 14-day isolation course. Gajbhiye added that the man’s mother had cleared the first test conducted post isolation but had tested positive in the second test. She would be kept at CPR hospital for another week. “A fresh test will be conducted after a week. The woman will be discharged only after she tests negative for the second test,” she said. The man had attended the Tabligh Jamaat programme at Nizammuddin in Delhi last month. He had left Delhi on March 14 and reached Kolhapur on March 16 by train. He took a private vehicle to Malkapur on March 16 and stayed at a religious place there. He returned to his hometown in Uchat village on March 18. After getting to know about his travel history, the district administration placed him in institutional quarantine at Panhala on April 1 along with several others who attended the Tabligh Jamaat programme. The man tested positive for Covid-19 on April 9. The district administration started finding out all those who had come in contact with the man and identified 144 people during the contact-tracing exercise. Fortunately, of the 144 high-risk contacts, only two people tested positive, including his mother. Gajbhiye said that a woman from the Kasba Bawda area, who had contracted Covid-19, had tested negative for the two tests conducted after the isolation period. However, she was showing symptoms of pneumonia and was currently undergoing treatment for the same. 