Jamnagar’s Guru Gobindsingh Hospital makes own Covid ‘Kavach’
2020-04-23
RAJKOT: Guru Gobindsingh Hospital in Jamnagar has become the first state-run hospital in Gujarat to design and manufacture personal protection equipment (PPE) for its staff. 

Considering the shortage of PPE kits despite the raging coronavirus outbreak, the doctors took up the task of designing this safety gear and customizing it as per the requirement. 

The PPE has been christened ‘Kavach.’

GG Hospital has been designated as Covid hospital has 700 beds and it requires 2,000 PPE kits for the 200-odd staff that includes doctors, paramedics, nurses and others. All patients with flu-like symptoms are being treated here as also Covid-19 suspected patients.

A team of doctors comprising Dr. Maulik Shah, Dr. Sneha Vadhvana, Dr. Namrata Makwana and Dr. Mehul Khakharia designed this kit by testing various technical criteria to protect the body. Senior doctors of the hospital have approved the final design. 

Talking to TOI, Dr. Maulik Shah said, “This PPE kit different from the existing ones in the market. We examined all the models available and modified it with the need and experience of the doctors. The basic aim was to increase the safety of the person who wears it and easy of wearing for doctors and nursing staff while treating the patient. After the opinion of all the doctors, we finalized one design.” 

 A local garment maker has agreed to make these PPEs at his unit. 

“We are looking at 500 pieces per day to begin with as the production starts in a couple of days. However, we are getting inquiries from other civil hospitals and private doctors who need these kits.” 

Dr. Nandini Bahari, superintendent, GG Hospital said, “This is a commendable effort by our focused, innovative and enthusiastic team. We have sent it for third-party approval and certification to to South India Textile Research Association (SITARA), Coimbatore.”

The hospital has sufficient PPEs, but this is an advance preparation in case there an outbreak like in Ahmedabad and other cities. “If sudden need arises, Jamnagar hospital will be self sufficient and will be able to help other hospitals too,” said Dr Bahari.

The hospital has got several donors who will help cover the manufacturing cost. However, the production is on no profit no loss basis. The hospital also plans to provide this kit to ambulance staff and policemen.


