Janta curfew done, Nagpur braces for 9-day lockdown
2020-03-23
NAGPUR: After an extremely positive response to janata curfew on Sunday, Nagpurians now have to brace for a nine-day lockdown due to imposition of Section 144 till March 31.


Commissioner of police BK Upadhyay said the strategy and deployment of the bandobast would be retained till March 31. “There would be no changes in the plan of action of police till the last day of the lockdown,” he said. 

Commute by public transport comes to a virtual standstill with the government now upping the ante in the fight against coronavirus. From Monday, no city buses will ply at all thus freezing local commute. Even metro rail has announced suspension of services from Monday till further orders. Private autos and cabs have already been grounded since the district authorities implemented the shutdown. State transport buses too will cease operations till further orders.

Indian Railways has already announced shutting down all passenger trains with immediate effect till March 31. Only those trains, which started their journey prior to 4AM on Sunday will run till their last stop. For Nagpur station, Kerala Express arriving on Sunday night, going towards New Delhi, will be the last passenger train to halt till at least March 31. Freight trains will continue to operate as per schedule.

Air travel is another sector bracing for the impact as all international arrivals at Nagpur airport have been stopped as per Central government’s directions. Domestic routes will continue to operate though the frequency of flights is likely to be reduced.

All private establishments in Nagpur, except those dealing in essential items/services, have been ordered to remain shut till March 31. Only those providing essential services or goods will remain open. But since every such outlet will work with very few workers, Nagpurians are advised to avail their services only in case of emergency. MS Lamba, a petrol pump owner, said, “We too are working at reduced staffing levels. I urge people to fill up the tank completely so they don’t have to worry for quite a few days.”

Government and semi-government offices will work with just 5% strength to maintain essential activities from tomorrow. Energy minister Nitin Raut announced physical meter reading won’t be done and an average bill will be generated. No bill payment counters will be open. MSEDCL workers will be on duty to attend to repairs and breakdowns.

All religious placed have been requested to close down for public, though daily prayers can be offered by the priests. Gurvinder Singh Dhillon, president of Baba Deep Singh Nagar Gurdwara, said they had shut the langar service. “We will support the government completely and since crowds have to be avoided, langar service has been stopped. We are however thinking of distributing foodgrains to daily wage labourers in the vicinity,” said Dhillon.

Industries and other commercial establishments, except those engaged in businesses covered under the essential commodities’ list, are expected to remain shut. Pratap Motwani, secretary of Itwari Grain and Seeds Merchants Association, said the grain traders have been specifically asked by the district administration to keep their establishments open so there is no shortage.

Rajesh Chabrani, former director of the agriculture produce marketing committee (APMC) at Kalamna, said firms trading in all other commodities except fruits will continue business. The fruit vendors guild has, however, decided to keep business shut for three days.

Industry associations too have decided to keep the manufacturing units closed. Nitin Lonkar of Butibori Manufacturers’ Association said all the units except those engaged in food processing business will remain shut during the lockdown.

Bullion traders have decided to extend the closure till Monday. However, the association is yet to take a decision on full lockdown, said a source. Atul Pandey, the former president of Vidarbha Industries Association, said there was no question of cutting workers’ pay for the 15 day period. “I am sure every industrialist will rise to the occasion,” he said.


