Janata curfew procession: Over 50 booked for violating lockdown
2020-03-24
Indore: A day after enthusiastic Indoreans ruined the purpose of ‘janata curfew’ by coming out in large number and taking out processions at Rajwada and Patnipura square, police have booked around 50 people under Section 188 of IPC. They have been booked for violating the order under Section 144 of CrPC that prevents processions and gatherings. 

Police said in a release that the accused are being identified. They had allegedly taken out procession in Patnipura area. The action was taken after district administration on Monday issued order to book the participants of the processions for violating orders promulgated by a government servant. 

While Prime Minister Narendra Modi had made a call of ‘janata curfew’, urging people to stay at home for 14 hours between 7am and 9pm to break the chain of Coronavirus spread, the administration had already enforced Section 144 of CrPC banning public gathering in view of spread of Covid-19.

On Sunday, Indore wore a deserted look as people follow the appeal till 5pm. But, after that, many people came out and gathered outside their houses. Rajwada and Patnipura square witnessed people in large number taking out a procession and celebrating (as if we have succeeded against the virus).

Following this, collector Lokesh Kumar Jatav issued the order, instructing police and RTO officials for identification of the violators through viral videos and cancel their driving licence.

“Besides, if a person involved in the public gathering was found having any criminal case registered against him, action under section 188 of IPC will be taken against him,” collector told TOI.

The incident has already been criticised at nation-level. While Delhi deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia called people coming out in large number as ‘real Corona for society’ and emphasised for their treatment first then the infection, Prime Minister Narendra Modi asked state government to ensure proper implementation of such initiative in public-interest.


