Rajkot woman admitted with suspected coronavirus infection
2020-02-09
RAJKOT: A 21-year-old medical student from Jetpur was admitted to the isolation ward of Rajkot civil hospital following suspicion of coronavirus infection late on Friday night.

The woman, who studies medicine at Nanchang University in China’s Jianxi city, has been suffering from cough and throat pain ever since she returned to India on February 1 following the outbreak of the deadly virus.

The hospital administration has sent her blood sample to B J Medical College in Ahmedabad for testing and results are expected on Sunday. Besides her, 62 others from Rajkot district, who have returned from China in the past 15-20 days, have been kept under observation.

Giving details of the woman’s medical history, district development officer A R Ranavasia said, “She had arrived in India on February 1 and has been under observation since then. However, after she told us that she was suffering from cough since January 25, we advised her home quarantine.

“But her condition did not improve and coughing continued along with throat pain. We, therefore, advised her family to shift her to the isolation ward of Rajkot civil hospital.” 

The woman had landed at Mumbai airport on February 1 and thereafter she went to Surat for a day before coming to her hometown Jetpur.

Rajkot district medical officer Manish Bhanderi said, “We don’t want to take any risk. She has mild symptoms of the deadly virus as she is continuously coughing with no improvement. We had to convince her family members to get her admitted in the isolation ward.”

The district administration has received list of persons returning from China or those who came to India via China from the union health ministry and the ministry of external affairs. The majority of arrivals from China are students and businessmen.

Rajkot Municipal Corporation (RMC) health officer Dr Pankaj Rathod said, “We have 53 people in Rajkot city under observation. We will observe them for 14 days and ask their family members to maintain social isolation.”


