Jhajjar, Sonipat see Covid spike as Delhi mandi chain spreads
2020-05-02
GURUGRAM: Jhajjar reported 10 fresh Covid-19 cases on Friday, continuing on an upward spiral the district has been on over just the past two weeks during which it went from zero to 35. In the same period, Sonipat went from eight to 26. The two districts are now Haryana’s new hotspots and the state’s biggest worry.

All of Jhajjar’s 35 cases go back to Delhi, and 25 of the patients had been to Azadpur mandi, Asia’s biggest fruits and vegetables market and an emerging hotspot, recently. After a trader at the mandi died last week, there was considerable alarm. The market, however, continues to operate. Sellers from the Jhajjar and Bahadurgarh markets would buy their produce from Azadpur. Those in Sonipat, in turn, would buy from the Bahadurgarh market. The cases reflect this pattern — six people who tested positive in Jhajjar worked at the town’s vegetable market, and 20 from Jhajjar and 16 from Sonipat worked at or were associated with the Bahadurgarh market.




“As essential service providers, vegetable suppliers and labourers at these markets were allowed to move between the Azadpur mandi and the towns during the lockdown. That pushed the number of cases up,” said a senior official from the Jhajjar district administration. 

The administration has conducted random sampling of 500 at the Bahadurgarh market and 500 others at the Jhajjar market.

Sonipat, too, has stepped up surveillance. “We are screening everyone at the border since this surge began. We are keeping vegetable vendors under surveillance. All new cases are in the age range of 25 to 45 and 16 Covid-19 patients are commission agents at the Bahadurgarh market,” Sonipat chief medical officer BK Rajora said.

The other cases with Delhi links that led to the surge are of people engaged in essential services — healthcare and police personnel. 

“There were many Delhi Police personnel and those working with health services on the other side of the NCR border who would be allowed inter-state movement. That added to the cases,” the Jhajjar district official said. Like a staff nurse from Luharhedi village whose husband works at a Delhi hospital. Or a Delhi Police personnel from Sulodha village who has tested positive, along with his parents, wife and daughter. Or a pharmacist at a private hospital in Delhi who lives in Vivekanand Nagar, Bahadurgarh.

Sonipat witnessed the same. “Three Delhi Police constables, two staff nurses at a Delhi hospital, and a doctor from another Delhi hospital and his wife tested positive. Of the 26 cases we have, 22 have a Delhi connection. We are tracing their contacts, have sealed the border and not allowing anyone to visit Delhi,” Rajora said. Jhajjar, too, has sealed the border and created 15 containment zones. “The health department is conducting door-to-door screening ... There is no need to panic,” Jhajjar deputy commissioner Jitendra Kumar said.


