Jharkhand doctor delivers medicines at doorstep of patients during coronavirus lockdown
2020-04-05
JAMSHEDPUR: At a time when the fear of coronavirus spread has kept most private doctors indoors in the Steel City, shutting their clinic doors to even regular patients, there are few who think in this hour of crisis the motto of "duty first, self last" must be followed.


Dr Kumar Sarosh, 42, a dental surgeon, who runs a private clinic in Adityapur in adjoining Seraikela-Kharsawan district, is not only attending the patients at his chamber, who need immediate clinical attention, he also delivers medicines at patients’ doorstep.

Talking to TOI on Thursday Sarosh said:"If any patient wants to pay a visit to his clinic, he first ensures that he/she does not have any travel history to any foreign country in the last two months."

He added: how can a doctor just refuse to attend his patient, as many in the city and adjoining areas had done, terming it to be unethical.

The dentist, who graduated from Manipal, said senior citizens can not bear the dental pain for long and if they do not get treatment it can be fatal too.

He pointed out that all precautions are being taken so that infection does not spread through his clinic.

The Good Samaritan along with three-four volunteers, mostly in the age group of 20 to 40 years, help to supply medicines free of cost to patients at their doorstep in this lockdown, as they are not supposed to venture out.

The medicines are supplied at a 10% discount of MRP, said the doctor.

Sarosh said the orders are received through the helpline he has floated -- 9308240019, 7004922281, adding on an average he receives 10-12 orders per day.

The orders are done from the medicine shop adjacent to his clinic.

The doctor said due to shortage of helping hands he is at present confined to Adityapur and nearby areas but if he gets more manpower the delivery service can be extended to all parts of Steel City too. He ensures that senior citizens get first preference in this system.

Replying to a query on the road blocks he is facing now, Sarosh said:"The medicines in bulk have to be collected from stockists in Jugsalai, Bistupur and Sakchi, as they are often unwilling to deliver the orders arising due to transportation problems."

He goes to these places on his bike to collect the medicines. The doctor complained that even after several requests to the district administration, they have failed to give him a pass for free movement in this lockdown as a result often he has to face volley of question from the cops at the naka bandhis (check points).This does not deter his zeal to serve people.

The doctor said he and his boys wear masks and gloves and use sanitizers when they go out to deliver the medicines.

