Jharkhand records 73 new cases, Covid-19 count reaches 1,103
2020-06-08
RANCHI: A total of 73 fresh Covid-19 cases were detected in Jharkhand on Sunday, taking the total number of cases in the state to 1,103. This is the third-largest surge in the state after 95 cases were recorded on Friday and another 92 cases were detected on Saturday. A total of 17 patients also recovered from the viral infection on Sunday.


Among the new cases reported from across 16 districts, Simdega recorded a maximum of 13 cases followed by Lohardaga with 11 cases. Jamtara, which had its last positive case on April 29, saw an abrupt surge with eight fresh cases. East Singhbhum and Dhanbad also reported seven cases each while Ramgarh detected six cases. Gumla recorded four new cases. Three cases each were also detected in Latehar, Garhwa and Hazaribag. Ranchi and Koderma reported two cases each while Bokaro, Khunti, Saraikela and West Singhbhum recorded one case each.

Of the total 1,103 total cases, 605 are active and 491 have recovered while seven have succumbed to the viral infection.

In Ranchi, the two new cases are primary contacts of patients who have tested positive in the last two days. A district official said, “The younger brother of a kidney patient, who had tested positive on Friday, was one of the two cases. He was in the isolation ward of Rims along with his mother after his elder brother tested positive on Friday. The result of his mother is still awaited. The second positive case is a female and a resident of Khelgaon area.” 

Meanwhile, seven micro containment zones in Ranchi district were declared free of Covid-19 on Sunday after no positive case was detected from the areas in the last 21 days. The seven areas are Pipartoli in Argora, Chiltoli in Mandar, Tetartoli in Bariatu and Childag, Lalgarh, Kamta and Kherwakocha in Angara block.

Ranchi DC Rai Mahimapat Ray said, “We have decided to lift containment tag from these areas. All procedures, including door-to-door medical screening and testing of symptomatic suspects, were carried out before the tag was lifted.”

