Jharkhand may extend lockdown till April 30, cabinet to decide today
2020-04-13
RANCHI: The Jharkhand government may resolve to extend the lockdown in the state during Monday’s cabinet meeting as the number of positive Covid-19 cases have begun to rise. Since March 31, a total of 17 confirmed cases have surfaced from Ranchi, Bokaro, Hazaribag and Koderma. The state has also recorded two deaths due to the virus, the latest being on Sunday from Ranchi’s Hindpiri area.


Congress, a key alliance partner in the Hemant Soren-led alliance government, on Sunday said that they are in favour of an extension of the lockdown, but with certain relaxations in rural areas. In Monday’s cabinet meeting, ministers from Congress is expected to support the extension proposal, said party office bearers. 

Talking to TOI, Congress’s senior leader and spokesperson Alok Dubey said, “The party is in favour of an extension with certain relaxations in rural areas and for farmers. We shall submit a proposal to the government in this regard tomorrow (Monday) so that cabinet can take it up. We shall also demand a parole for former Bihar CM Lalu Prasad.” Congress has four ministers in the 11-member cabinet.

State Congress president Rameshwar Oraon, who is also the state finance and food and public distribution minister, had earlier aired his support for the extension of the lockdown. He had said, “It must be increased in places, mostly in the urban pockets, to contain the spread of the disease. In rural areas, the lockdown needs to be relaxed so that farmers can begin harvesting rabi crops, sell foodgrains and other produces to initiate economic activities.”

Senior JMM leader and state transport minister Champai Soren also spoke in favour of an extension. “The cabinet will finally take a call on Monday, but I think that we should continue with it for at least two more weeks to be able to stabilise the situation. Also, at the same time, the government is concerned about lakhs of people who are stranded outside the state on how to smoothly facilitate their return after being effectively screened. A slight negligence to allow reverse exodus may put us in an uncontrollable situation.”

Bleeding severe losses amid the uncertainty, Jharkhand Small Industries Association (JSIA), an umbrella outfit for medium, small and micro enterprises on Sunday appealed the Union and state governments for a lighter lockdown to enable industries to resume work in the interest of economic activities. JSIA secretary Anjay Pancheriwala said, “We have appealed for industries to be allowed to function in the non-hotspot regions with a host of regulations in place. We are ready to follow all safeguards. The entire MSE sector here is virtually bleeding for life vis-à-vis high recurring expenses and zero income. While the governments have appealed not to slash wages of employees, but where will industries bring the money from when there is no business activity?”

However, opposition BJP has appealed the government to extend the lockdown till April 30 with extra caution. BJP’s leader of legislative party and Dhanwar MLA Babulal Marandi said, “Lockdown extension has become imperative for Jharkhand’s in light of the increasing number of cases. Giving any kind of relaxation would mean compromising with safety precautions.”

