Jipmer to treat its students with Covid-19 symptoms
2020-03-21
Puducherry: Jawaharlal institute of postgraduate medical education and research (Jipmer) has decided to treat its students and residents with symptoms of Covid-19 infection using a video-conferencing software application. The institute evolved a standard operating procedure to prevent the students or residents with Covid-19 symptoms from approaching the out-patients' department. It decided to offer them medical advice and to assess their condition through zoom cloud app installed in their devices. 

If required, the students and residents will be quarantined at the rooms in the old Jipmer guesthouse. They must install the zoom cloud application in their devices and log into the application for online assistance and consultation. The institute will inform their parents and identify their caregivers. The caregiver will also be quarantined along with them. The institute will deliver essential supplies to their rooms. Both the student/resident and caregiver will not be allowed to move out of the guesthouse for 14 days. 

If hospital admission is required, they will be admitted in the students' sick room or according to the arrangements made by the medical superintendent, Jipmer. The institute has banned group activities or social gathering inside the hostel/campus. 

The institute has made changes in the patient flow and outpatient management from Thursday to minimize the risk of Covid-19 infection to the patients. All the patients approaching the institute will be screened before they enter super speciality block, women and child hospital, regional cancer centre and OPD. The patients entering OPD zone must use hand sanitizers before entry and at the exit. Only one attendant will be allowed to enter with a patient. The patients with a history of fever, cough, breathing difficulty and history of recent travel abroad within the past 14 days will be sent for evaluation to the Covid unit. 

The institute has directed all clinical departments to defer admissions for elective interventions, surgeries and investigations to safeguard the inpatients from the risk of Covid-19 infection.

 It has also directed the patients standing in the queue or sitting in waiting rooms/corridors to maintain as much distance as possible (ideally one metre) from each other. 

Jipmer is one of the testing sites for Covid-19 infection in the country. So far, only one Covid-19 positive case has been reported from the Union territory of Puducherry, which is spread in four different geographical locations - Puducherry, Karaikal (Tamil Nadu), Mahe (Kerala) and Yanam (Andhra Pradesh). 


