Coronavirus lockdown: Delhi could use Jawahar Lal Nehru stadium to shelter labourers
2020-03-31
NEW DELHI: With Covid-19 cases in the national capital on the rise, Delhi government has stepped up its fight against the pandemic by turning the city’s biggest sports arena – the Jawahar Lal Nehru (JLN) stadium at Lodhi Road – into a quarantine facility with “immediate effect” to house affected people.


This is the second instance and first in the city where a sports facility is being used to quarantine suspected coronavirus patients. Earlier, Sports Authority of India (SAI) had handed over its boxing training facility in Rohtak to the Haryana government to set up an isolation facility. SAI’s five stadia in the city can provide quarantine facilities for around 900 people.

On Monday evening, the office of the district magistrate (DM) of South East Delhi issued an order to the secretary SAI, directing him to immediately hand over the possession of the stadium to the district administration of the South East. The order – a copy of which is with TOI – signed by DM Harleen Kaur, who is also the chairperson of the District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA, South East), stated: “It has been considered necessary to requisite premises of JLN stadium complex under the provisions of section 34 of DM Act, 2005 for utilising the same for the purpose of creating quarantine facility to house the persons/people.”

The order empowered the SDM (Defence Colony) to take possession of the JLN premises by Tuesday morning.

According to sources, the Delhi government took this urgent step after the city reported a spike in the number of confirmed cases, with Sunday alone witnessing the highest single day increase in the number at 23. As per the latest data available with government agencies, Delhi has 53 confirmed Covid-19 patients with two deaths.

Sources believe the move was necessitated to house thousands of migrant labourers and get them quarantined at a single place after they thronged the capital streets and assembled in large numbers at the Anand Vihar bus terminus over the last few days to reach their home towns in distant parts of India, especially Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.

The Delhi government, as directed by the ministry of home affairs, could possibly use the JLN stadium for sheltering these thousands of workers. 

The JLN stadium has 150 beds at its hostel facility located indoors. There are also some beds at its non-operational athletics academy. However, the authorities will face a before they take over the possession of the facility – to get the offices of National Anti-Doping Agency (Nada), MHA (ministry of home affairs) and Income Tax department vacated.


