Navi Mumbai: Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust starts screening foreign crew for coronavirus
2020-02-09
NAVI MUMBAI/MUMBAI: Since the outbreak of the Novel Coronavirus (nCoV), the port health officer of the government of India had begun screening crew members of cargo ships from foreign countries at JNPT. The JNPT administration has provided a thermal scanner to the officer and the screening reports are sent to the Union government daily.

The Central government has directed all states to follow a set protocol for scanning of the crew of cargo ships that dock at major and minor ports. The Centre has asked major ports such as JNPT to be in a quarantine mode. For quarantine, these ports must immediately set up an isolation ward in each of their in-house hospitals. Throat swabs will be collected by the district authority. 

Captain Amit Kapoor, deputy conservator at JNPT, said, “As per the directions of the Union shipping ministry, crew members onboard cargo ships entering JNPT are being screened. The screening for nCoV-infected persons is the mandate of the port health officer (PHO) from the government of India. The JNPT administration has provided the thermal scanner machine, which JNPT had procured during the outbreak of SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) Coronavirus (SARS CoV) in 2003 and had then provided it to the PHO for screening process. Since then, the PHO uses it whenever there is an outbreak of any deadly virus.”

Kapoor further said, “We have already stopped entry for cargo ships and vessels from China. Though no Chinese national or Chinese crew come directly to JNPT, they may come via Malaysia, Singapore and Colombo. Hence, as a precautionary measure, the crew of all cargo ships and those onboard container vessels are being screened at the JNPT port.”

Meanwhile, a cargo ship has been docked one hour away from the Redi port in Sindhurdurg following a scare that the crew members were Chinese. District authorities said the vessel had sought medical clearance for all its crew members when it left Mumbai port two days ago. The 22 shipmen were tested by state health as well as port officials and showed no symptoms of any infection. “They had left China over three months back, and they were not going to enter Redi village,” said state health director Dr Archana Patil.


