Job offers: Bits, IIIT-Hyderabad buck Covid-19 impact
2020-04-30
HYDERABAD: The ongoing downturn in economic activity due to Covid-19 is not likely to have any adverse impact on the students of top premier technical institutes in the city as most campus recruiters have assured to stand by their offers made to students from institutes such as International Institute of Information Technology (IIIT) Hyderabad, Birla Institute of Technology & Science (BITS), Pilani and Hyderabad, among others.

The placements officers of these institutes confirmed that there has been no negative impact as most of the students are hired for research & development and emerging technologies profiles, which will continue to be in demand.

“To date, not even a single company has revoked offers given to our students. Most of the students are offered research-oriented jobs and Covid-19 or not, there will always be demand for such courses,” said a source from the IIIT Hyderabad adding that, however, when it comes to internships offers have slowed down. When it comes to BITS, Pilani, Balasubramanian Gurumurthy, chief placement officer, India and Dubai, confirmed that three companies have withdrawn their offers until now. 

“We are expecting that 2.5 to 3.5% of the total offers might be revoked due to Covid-19. But, the situation is not alarming. Further, our regular campus recruiters assured to hire these students,” said Gurumurthy adding that a total of 1754 students from all four campuses of BITS have received offers this year. 

A representative of another premier institute, which has three campuses in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, and Karnataka said that campus recruiters said that the onboarding of students will begin post-lockdown. “Our students have nothing to worry,” said that representative adding about 5-10% of students who did not secure placements or are looking for a job due to change in plans will have an opportunity to sit for placements post-examination, which will be conducted after the lockdown is lifted.

For those students, who are yet to be placed, they advised them to prepare for online interviews as recruiters might not be in a position to travel to the campus even after the lockdown. “Virtual interviews will be the new normal. If a student is interested in securing a job through placements post-lockdown, it would be wise if they prepare for online interview as travel restrictions might be in place even after the lockdown is lifted,” said a placement and training officer of a top institute.


