Covid-19 scare: Jobs on the line as Indians cannot enter Doha
2020-03-11
PANAJI: Qatar’s temporary suspension of entry to travellers from 14 countries, including India, from March 9 onwards has left several Goans in a lurch.

The advisory, issued as a preventive measure due to the spread of coronavirus worldwide, came as a shock to Goans working in Qatar who were on holiday and emergency leave in Goa.

A food and beverage supervisor, Ainslie from Margao, who arrived from Qatar in Goa last week to get his medicals done for his new job now fears losing the once in a lifetime opportunity with a handsome pay package. “I’m in shock. I didn’t expect this to happen. I would have never made the mistake of leaving the country so soon had I known,” he told TOI.

“Police clearance is done, and our visas are ready too. The company is only waiting for our medicals. Now I’m afraid I’ll lose my job. If the suspension continues, they may just decide to leave us out and hire locals instead. I hope this doesn’t happen,” he said, adding that his visa and work permit have both been cancelled.

Goans in Qatar have also had to shelve their plans to visit the state, some for business and others to be reunited with their families.

A mother of two working in Qatar who was set to spend time with her husband and two children in Mapusa next week has decided not to take the risk of getting stuck in Goa and losing her job.

“I broke the news to the children. They can’t express their feelings, but you can tell from their faces. They always look forward to their mother coming down, bathing them and tucking them into bed at night,” the father told TOI.

He added that his wife recently got her unused annual leave sanctioned by her company in Qatar to travel to Goa to be with the family. “She is now forced to take the leave and sit at home in Qatar, away from family,” her husband said.

A long-time resident of Qatar scheduled to travel to Goa for three days this week to buy real estate had to postpone his trip after the advisory was issued. “Everything was set but now it will have to be postponed. Luckily the selling party said they will wait for me,” he told TOI from Qatar.

In addition to India, Qatar temporarily suspended entry for those travelling from Bangladesh, China, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Syria and Thailand.

The statement from the Qatar government adds that the decision affects all individuals intending to enter from these countries, including visas upon arrival, those with a residence or work permit, and temporary visitors.


