Jodhpur guesthouse owners seek govt help to beat coronavirus crisis
2020-05-11
JODHPUR: Guesthouse owners of the Walled City of Jodhpur have sought a relief package from the state government in the face of the bleak future of tourism and the loss sustained since March due to Covid-19 pandemic.


They have also sought relaxations like exemption from electricity and water bills from March to July, switching bills’ category from commercial to domestic, licence of selling beer from excise department on discounted rates and bank loans on competitive interest rates.

A memoranda to this effect was submitted by the Jodhpur Guest House Association to chief minister Ashok Gehlot stating that the corona pandemic had spelt doom for their business not in existing period but for future also.

“Given the threat of Covid-19, we do not hope that the tourism industry would be recovering from this lingering shock and regain its sheen as earlier for a long time to come,” said president of the association Poonam Chand Gaur.

He said that almost all of these guesthouses in the city are family run entities, which attract foreign touristsin large numbers.

“Thus, these families are fully dependent on tourism and are set to lose their business and hence livelihood abjectly,” Gaur said.

Vice-president Manish Lodha said that these guesthouses provide boarding and lodging to the tourist at highly competitive prices and offer them a first-hand experience of the Indian culture by allowing them to mingle with the families running the guest houses.

“Ours is a major role in tourism economy. But now it is quite obvious that next few months are disastrous for us. Even the foreign tourists would stop travelling for many months until this Covid-19 threat is mitigated,” said Lodha. There are close to 100 guesthouses in the Walled City of Jodhpur with an average of five rooms each. All these rooms are lying vacant and the owners of these guesthouses do not see any recovery in the sector before July 2021.

