Joy of resuming office overshadows virus fear
2020-06-02
Kolkata: Responding to calls from their employers, several anxious employees set out from the safety of their homes to head to office on Monday.

While a section of employees — under pressure over the security of their jobs, especially with news of large-scale retrenchment coming from almost every sector during the lockdown period — are relieved to join work, there are many who are worried as they spending long hours in office and getting exposed to infection while commuting to and from home. But for a majority of those heading to office, the fear of contracting the virus has been overshadowed by the fear of losing job.

New Barrackpore resident Dipankar Dey Bhowmik, who had not received salary for April and May, was struggling to make his ends meet when he got a call from his employer last week, asking him to resume office from Monday. “More than the fear of contracting infection, the sheer joy of getting back to workplace made me relieved. I had survived on loans and foodgrains from local ration shops for the last two months and was finding it difficult to run my family. But thankfully, the struggle will come to an end,” said Bhowmik, an accountant at a private firm, who plans to cycle from his home to BT College, then take a bus to reach Ballygunge Phanri and walk for 15 minutes to reach his office on Hazra Road.

Pharma executive Avijit Roy, who had barely left home for work unless emergency during the entire lockdown period, was also on his way to office on Monday. “It was getting claustrophobic. It is depressing to stay at home all this while. But I am also concerned about the spread of infection. I have already charted out a list of precautions to maintain and that includes taking medicines to increase my immunity, use gloves and sanitizers and avoid socializing at office,” said Roy.

Behala resident Anirban Bose, who has already resumed office, said he struggled wearing full-sleeve shirts, masks, gloves and head caps but was adjusting to the discomfort as that was the call for the situation. “We have already had a massive paycut. Since I am into marketing and sales, I practically had no work from home and hence no salary last month. I was just dying to get back to work. There is always a fear of contracting the disease while travelling in public transport, so I borrowed a scooter from a neighbour, who is still working from home, and headed office on Monday,” said Bose, a senior sales executive with a cement company.

But those who were heavily reliant on public transport had a tough time on Monday. “I had been to office even last week but with so many people out on the road today and buses too few and too crowded, I couldn’t manage to board a bus even after standing in the heat for two hours from 8am till 10am. I went back home and tried again at noon but the situation was worse. I finally had to call office and inform that I won’t be able to make it to office on Monday. They agreed for the day but I can’t skip office every day with the same excuse,” said Lopamudra Bag, a resident of Bhowanipore who works at a private firm in Maniktala.


