Covid-19: Delhi's Saket court judge in isolation, alarm bells ring
2020-05-12
NEW DELHI: A judge coming in contact with a Covid-19 positive person, who was produced before him at a court, has set alarm bells ringing in district courts across the city.

On May 10, district and sessions judge Neena Bansal Krishna, in a circular, said a Saket court judge, who is the wife of the central district judge, had gone on a self-imposed isolation for 14 days. The judge of the Saket court said her husband, who presides over a magisterial court in Central district, came in “contact with a Covid-19 patient on May 6, who was produced before him to record his statement under Section 164 of CrPC”.

Following the guidelines from the central government, the judge thereafter isolated herself for 14 days at home.

A separate circular revealed that a junior judicial assistant working in the court of one of the civil judges at Saket court had tested positive on May 9. Owing to judicial work, the staffer came in contact with another employee, a stenographer, on May 4. The stenographer has been directed to remain in “self-quarantine” for two weeks.

To minimise further spread, judge Krishna directed that “in-charge of care taking branch, Saket courts, take immediate steps as per the government’s norms, with the help of authorities and staff concerned”.

The incident comes at a time when courts across the country are shut for regular work. “Only very urgent matters are being taken up, that too through videoconferencing. This just shows that judges, court staff, police officers and advocates shall have to be very careful when courts open for normal function,” advocate Manish Makhija said.

The advocate also pointed out that while those who had come in contact with the patient were at a greater risk, others had to ensure social distancing to make sure that the decision to open courts — as and when taken — was not subjected for a review. “Being the capital, Delhi courts are visited by lakhs of people from all walks of life. I am certain that if we work together, we could ensure a safe environment in courts at all times,” Makhija explained.

