Juhu resident back from Wuhan, epicentre of novel Coronavirus, quarantined
2020-01-29
MUMBAI: A Juhu resident with a travel history to Wuhan, the Chinese city that is believed to be the starting point of the novel Coronavirus (nCov) outbreak, was quarantined at Kasturba Hospital, Chinchpokli, on Tuesday. A total of nine patients, including five in Mumbai, three in Pune and one in Nanded, are under isolation across hospitals in the state. Overall, 18 travellers in Maharashtra are under observation.


Sources said the 49-year-old Juhu man was in Wuhan between January 14 and 20. He returned to Mumbai on January 21 and is believed to have been symptom-free. He developed fever and cough on January 24, though. On Tuesday, his relatives said he had travelled to the Chinese city for business. “We didn’t want to take chances, so we brought him here. We are sure he doesn’t have the infection or any symptoms resembling it,” said a relative, refusing to comment further.


 
State officials said the man’s samples have been sent for tests to Pune’s National Institute of Virology (NIV). “We will be carrying out more tests locally to study a lung patch. Overall, his condition is stable,” said an official. 

Civic officials have confirmed of the five patients currently hospitalised at Kasturba, four have tested negative for the virus in the first round of tests. The four, though, including a 31-year-old Nalasopara woman, a 36-year-old Kalyan man, a 65-year-old British national and a 36-year-old Tardeo resident, will be discharged if the second set of tests is negative too. Some reports are expected on Wednesday. Travellers will be under observation for 28 days.

State officials said a 51-year-old and a 30-year-old are among the three isolated at Pune’s Naidu Infectious Diseases Hospital. The 30-year-old had travelled to areas close to Wuhan but is currently not showing significant symptoms. TOI has learnt both have tested negative for the virus in the first round of tests. The sole person quarantined in Nanded is a 50-year-old man, kept in isolation at the Government Medical College.

Nearly 4,000 travellers arriving from China have been screened at Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA). 

“We are following up with the 18 travellers daily telephonically. We have told them to self-report in case they develop any symptoms,” said Dr Pradeep Awate, the state’s epidemiologist.

Meanwhile, the union health ministry tweeted that four more laboratories at Alleppey, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Mumbai will be activated to test samples in addition to Pune’s NIV that is processing all the samples now. State officials said the lab gives the reports in less than 24 hours.


