Jump in Covid-19 cases sets alarm bells ringing in Munger
2020-04-25
PATNA: The sudden rise in coronavirus positive cases at Sadar Bazar under Jamalpur sub-division in Munger district has set alarm bells ringing in the district headquarters. On Friday, 31 people were tested positive for deadly virus, taking the total number of Covid-19 patients to 62 in the district at the time of going to press.


While one person had died earlier, six others were discharged from the hospital after their test reports came negative. Several people from Sadar Bazar locality had contracted the virus from a man who had participated in a religious congregation at Nizamuddin in New Delhi last month.

The residents Sadar Bazar, the hotspot of Covid-19 in the district, have been directed not to venture out of their houses which have been sanitized. They have been asked to maintain social distancing at all costs. The officials have also warned that FIRs would be lodged against those defying the lockdown.

Munger divisional commissioner Vandana Kini reviewed the preventive measures taken by the district authorities for the fourth consecutive day on Friday. She asked DM Rajesh Meena to complete the door-to-door survey work in blocks within two days.

The DM later told media persons that localities in the radius of 5km from Sadar Bazar have been sealed and movement of residents completely restricted. “Strict vigil is being maintained in and around the hotspot,” he said, adding additional personnel have been deployed in the area.

DIG of Munger range Manu Maharaaj said 50 jawans of women’s battalion, 22 personnel of quick response team and around 1,200 policemen have been deployed to maintain round the clock surveillance in containment zone in Munger district. Special focus is on Sadar Bazar area, he said.

Sources said the first case was reported from the district on March 22. However, the number of positive cases again started increasing from April 15. Altogether 21 cases — eight men and 13 women — were reported on Friday.


