Junior doc of SNMC tests positive for Covid-19
2020-04-19
Agra: A junior doctor of Agra's SN Medical College (SNMC) tested positive for Covid-19 late on Thursday. So far, eight cases of health staffers working in different departments of the government hospital has surfaced. There were three junior doctors and five supporting staff, including four ward boys. The health department is collecting samples of all the staffers of SNMC now. 

Chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats told TOI, “The latest case of a junior doctor getting infected is under investigation. Our contact surveillance team is working on it. The junior doctor was not serving in the isolation ward or quarantine facility for Covid-19. He may have got the infection outside the college. But, health staffers getting infected is a major concern. We have asked the SNMC administration to collect samples of all the health staffers for lab testing. We are also focusing on training of all the staffers on the standard operating procedure to deal with corona patients. Besides, we plan to conduct testing of all the patients admitted here." 

“We are ensuring that necessary safety tools, such as masks, gloves, goggles and PPE kits, are available in sufficient numbers. SNMC administration has been asked to ensure that no health staffers work without the proper safety gear," he added. Notably, three Covid-19 infected patients also having other health issues died at the SN Medical College. 

Meanwhile, a two-member team comprising of senior doctors of King George Medical University (KGMU) sent by the state government reached Agra. 

The team has been tasked to find out reasons behind the increasing number of Covid-19 positive cases in Agra and health staffers getting infected. 

Apart from SNMC, a private hospital on National Highway-2 and a private clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality are the two major Covid-19 hotspots in the city. At least 35 Covid-19 cases linked to these centres have surfaced, so far. The vicinity around both the centres have been sealed by the police. 

On Friday, 27-year-old daughter of an automobile dealer who was tested Covid-19 positive on March 27 and admitted in SNMC's isolation ward was declared "cured of the infection" and discharged from the hospital. She had returned from the UK on March 17. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “So far, 172 coronavirus cases have been reported in Agra. Out of these, 157 are active cases. Total 13 patients have been cured and discharged. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being identified and screened. The area around their houses are being sanitised. We are doing massive sampling to identify all the infected people and send them to institutional quarantine." 


