Ahmedabad: ‘Junk hospitalization rule for Covid test or face contempt’
2020-06-07
AHMEDABAD: City-based doctors’ body Ahmedabad Medical Association (AMA) has sought explanation from the state health department over its order on Covid-19 testing dated June 2. The AMA wrote a letter to Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health) on June 5, requesting again to revise the condition that a person needs to be hospitalized if he/she wants to be tested.


In a new notification on testing issued on June 2 by Dr Prakash Vaghela, additional director, health, it was mandated that any patient being tested for Covid-19 should be admitted to a hospital, ‘keeping in mind the possibility of infection.’

‘The doctor would discharge patients only after the test turns out to be negative. If the result is positive, the treatment protocol for Covid-19 must be followed,’ added the directive.

The new rules came into force after the Gujarat high court directive on testing and also exempted six categories from prior permission for testing at private laboratories.

Dr Mona Desai, president of AMA, in the letter to Ravi wrote that she had written a letter on the same date requesting the authorities to revise the condition. She also had a word with Ravi who had said that she would ‘consider it.’

‘The honourable high court in its order has nowhere stipulated that for Covid-19 testing one needs to be hospitalized/ admitted till the report is received,’ stated the letter. 

‘The non-deletion of this condition from the above-mentioned government order is a clear attempt to defeat the very purpose of the honourable high court’s direction and hence you are again requested to delete the provision of hospitalization/ admission for Covid-19 testing immediately failing which we will be left with no other option but to file a contempt application in the high court.’

“We are still to hear from the state government on the issue,” Dr Desai told TOI. “Several doctors have complained to us that the practice is putting Covid negative patients who need a confirmation test in danger of coming in close contact with Covid positive patients.”

Dr Bharat Gadhvi, president of Ahmedabad Hospitals and Nursing Homes Association (AHNA), said that their association has already sent a letter to Ravi on Friday on the same issue echoing the concern. 

“Why is the state government going against the tide and insisting on controlling the conditions of testing when all leading countries and states are not mandating permission for the same?” asked Dr Gadhvi. “When the state and city are experiencing a surge in case numbers, quicker identification and treatment is the only way to ensure flattening of the curve and of reducing fatalities.”

