Just 1 attends burial of Telangana's first Covid-19 deceased
2020-03-31
HYDERABAD: The body of the first Covid-19 victim in Telangana was laid to rest at a graveyard in the city with only one relative attending the funeral rites.


All the close family members of the victim are in quarantine and thus, they could not witness the last rites. The 74-year-old man had attended a religious gathering in Delhi where he developed cold and fever. Though he went to a couple of private hospitals, doctors did not suspect that he was carrying the deadly virus.

 
 

 That he was a victim of Covid-19 became clear only after his death. That the funeral rites were conducted in isolation with only his brother attending it has trigged a debate on how to dispose the body of a Covid-19 victim. Since this is a new disease it is not clear whether the body will continue to harbour the virus after the death, and if so, for how long.

 The World Health Organisation (WHO) has a clear protocol to deal with the bodies of people, who die due to cholera, Ebola and Marburg. But it has no formal guidelines to deal with Covid-19 bodies. However, the WHO on March 24 came out with interim guidelines on “Infection prevention and control for the safe management of a dead body in the context of Covid-19”. 

These interim guidelines are valid till a more specific protocol is announced after studying the infection chances etc. “This interim guidance is for all those, including managers of health care facilities and mortuaries, religious and public health authorities, and families, who tend to the bodies of persons who have died of suspected or confirmed Covid-19. 

These recommendations are subject to revision as new evidence becomes available,” the WHO official statement said. As this is a new virus whose source and disease progression are not yet entirely clear, more precautions may be used until further information becomes available, it added.

According to Muslim religious scholars, funeral prayers in absentia can be performed in several cases of infectious diseases like cholera, plague, Ebola and now Covid-19. They also point out that regular religious formalities can be waived of to avoid spread of infection.

