Kabootar baazi helped Covid-19 fly to Parvati Ngr
2020-05-11
A group from one area challenges another from the other area. The amount of bet is finalized. Two members each from both groups reach the other’s area for verification. Then both groups let their pigeons fly. The group whose pigeon is first to land loses.

Welcome to the world of ‘kabootar baazi’, popular sport in some slums of the city. It came into focus when a 22-year-old football player died at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Tuesday and he tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday.

Preliminary investigations by the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) revealed the deceased was in contact with a group engaged in kabootar baazi at Parvati Nagar. They also revealed that members of the group had visited Mominpura, city’s second Covid-19 hotspot, several times in last 15 days.

Police probe revealed the group, including the deceased, had also travelled to Satranjipura, city’s first corona hotspot, a few days ago thus establishing the game’s link with spread of coronavirus in city.

TOI talked to many in Parvati Nagar and Mominpura to discover the game and passion around it. Shockingly, the game has continued unabated despite lockdown and Mominpura being a containment zone since April 4.

Four more persons from Parvati Nagar have tested positive after the death of the youth. Among them, one is said to be part of a kabootar baazi group.

Dr NV Kurkure, director (research) of Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University (MAFSU) told TOI, "Breeding of pigeons is not prohibited but betting on them is not allowed." 

Corporator Dayashankar Tiwari, who lives near Mominpura ,said, "Kabootar baazi is a severe addiction and many are affected. High stakes betting is done. It is going on at many areas in Mominpura as well as a few slums like Hansapuri, Jalalpura, Bajeria, Cotton Market etc. A week ago, I informed Tehsil police station about kabootar baazi in the premises of NMC school in Hansapuri khadan area. Police came and dispersed them and all were from Mominpura."

Unfortunately, Covid-19 emerged during the kabootar baazi season.

TOI talked to a former kabootar baaz from Gandhibagh who quit sometime ago. "The season begins from mid January and ends with monsoon. It is not played in rainy and winter seasons. It is being played now. People are waiting for this season and they can’t stop," he said.

He stated pigeons are in air for five-six hours. Sometimes, they do not return and might die due to heat. In such case, the group whose pigeon lands first wins.

Tiwari added, "People wait for hours watching the sky. Youths even chase the pigeons on two-wheelers and bicycles to see the flying area. They can identify the breed even when pigeons are in the air," he said.

TOI saw some videos of pigeons in Mominpura on social media. Mominpura is major centre for breeding of pigeons. People get breeds from other states that can fly higher or longer.

One breed is named after Nagpur. They identify the breed by colour of eyes, nose, wings, tail etc. A market used to operate at Lakadganj where pigeons used to be sold every Sunday. Since lockdown, it has been stopped.

Those indulging in kabootar baazi also get addicted to other harmful substances, NMC and police probe has revealed.

The day samples of deceased’s reports came positive, the so called ‘kabootar khana’ of Parvati Nagar disappeared. "We learnt about all this and went to check on kabootar khana. But it was gone," an NMC official said.

The game is played between two groups or individuals. People breeding the pigeons undertake several practice sessions for their birds. They also give them special diet to help them fly longer.

Though not as popular cock fighting, kabootar baazi traces its origin to Mughal period. Therefore, it seems more popular in Muslim majority areas.


