Kannur cops to take cue from Kasaragod  to rein in Covid spread
2020-04-22
KANNUR: Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Tuesday urged the people in the district to stay indoors even as the police were mulling over replicating the Kasaragod model to prevent the further spread of coronavirus.

The district currently has 54 people (including a man from Kasaragod) undergoing treatment, and so far, 104 cases have been reported.

On Tuesday, 10 people tested positive in the district, prompting authorities to tighten the restrictions in the district. Those who returned from abroad between March 12 and April 22 should report to authorities and go into quarantine. Samples from high-risk contacts of the foreign-returned people would be collected.

The chief minister said all local bodies have been asked to seal the borders of the district’s hotspots. Only medical stores will be allowed to function here. All essential commodities will be delivered at home.

Meanwhile, the district police were also strictly enforcing the lockdown. “We are working out the finer details of the places so that it could be effectively implemented,” said north zone IG Ashok Yadav.

Police and other officials would identify all localities that need strict lockdown measures. If required, ‘triple lockdown’ would be enforced, as in Kasaragod, he said.

Triple lockdown in Kasaragod was part of a multipronged strategy introduced to prevent Covid-19 spread. After the first phase, the measures were strengthened, which was termed ‘double lockdown’ and in the third phase, it was called ‘triple lockdown’.

In the areas under triple lockdown, drones were used to identify lockdown violators. Flying squad and motorbike patrolling were strengthened in those places. Further, a policeman each was assigned to monitor a cluster of 10 houses in Covid Containment Zones. Those violating the lockdown were shifted to government-controlled Covid Care Centres, and around 300 people ended up in such centres in Kasaragod.

Yadav expressed hope that strict implementation could bring the situation under control in two weeks.

Currently, three IPS officers have been tasked to restrict movements of people and vehicles in the district. On Tuesday, however, large number of vehicles were seen on the roads.

Despite restrictions on the opening of shops, and just one entry-exit point in local bodies identified as hot spots, police had a tough time in managing the crowd on Tuesday. Police requested the support of local residents and voluntary groups to enforce the lockdown.

(With inputs from Thiruvananthapuram bureau)

