Kannur reaping benefits of testing high-risk category
2020-04-24
KANNUR: Though there was a spike in the number of Covid-19 positive cases, thanks to the decision to test more people in the high-risk category, things are slowly settling down in Kannur and there is not likely to be any major spike now, said district collector T V Subhash, who said the percentage of people tested for Covid here is much higher than the state average. On Thursday, no positive case was reported from the district. 

“We conducted 2,546 tests, which means 965 per million, which is much higher than the state average of 550 and national average of 331. This way, we were able to identify many positive cases though there was no symptom,” he said. Now the results of 45 people who came from abroad and around 100 primary contacts are awaited and there is not likely to be any major increase in the numbers, said the collector.

Of the 111 positive cases reported in the district, 80 did not have any major symptoms. A total of 19 of the 89 people who came from abroad tested positive after 28 days and 14 tested positive between 14 and 28 days, he said. Why they did not show the symptoms should be academically studied, said the collector, adding that there is no possibility of them contracting the disease from here, as they were under home quarantine and also there is no other source of infection.

At the same time, the stringent surveillance measures would continue, said the officials.

Two days after police strengthened the surveillance and started enforcing triple lockdown in 24 places identified as hotspots, the measures have been streamlined now. 

Meanwhile, a three-member squad would be deployed to ensure the high-risk cases on home quarantine are adhering to the regulations, said the collector.

Apart from the normal lockdown measures, the houses of the Covid patients and their primary and secondary contacts are under special surveillance and they are not permitted to step out.

Police have also started installing the Covid safety mobile app in the cellphones of the people under surveillance in the hotspots or Covid containment zones, where there is triple lockdown. “We are in the process of installing the safety app, as we did in Kasaragod, so that we can clearly trace anyone who comes out of their houses and actions can be taken,” said North Zone IG Ashok Yadav.

