Kanyakumari reports first Covid-19 death
2020-05-12
Madurai: A 65-year-old cancer patient died at the Kanyakumari Government Medical College hospital on Saturday, but samples taken from him tested positive on Monday, making it the seventh death in south Tamil Nadu. With 14 fresh cases on Monday, the total number of Covid-19 cases in the southern region climbed to 571.

The man had stage 4 carcinoma pancreas and multiple metastasis and was admitted to the hospital on Saturday. He died at 9.40pm the same night and his body was preserved in the mortuary as per standard protocol and his samples were sent for Covid-19 test. As his samples tested positive, his body was cremated on Monday.

Trained Nagercoil Corporation sanitary workers wearing personal protective equipment took the body to the corporation crematorium, where his last rites were performed. It is the first Covid-19 death in Kanyakumari.

More than 140 Kanyakumari denizens, who were stranded in Maldives and were brought to Kochi by ship, reached the district by buses and were taken to quarantine facilities.

Four people including a 23-year-old pregnant woman and an 11-year-old girl tested positive in Ramanathapuram on Monday taking the total count to 30 in the district. 

“Three of them are those who returned from other places and were under quarantine for 14 days. Two of them had come from Chennai and one from Ariyalur. The only other positive person is a pregnant woman who has a history of travelling to containment zones,” district collector K Veera Raghava Rao said.

Madurai district reported four fresh cases on Monday, including one among the migrant workers who returned from Maharashtra. Sources said that out of the 15 migrant workers who returned from Maharashtra, a 35-year-old woman tested Covid-19 positive. 

The three other cases, all with contact history, were a 54-year-old man and a 43-year-old woman from Goripalayam and a 23-year-old man from Thodaneri.

Three new cases in Tuticorin district are men aged 65, 27 and 24 years. All of them are contacts and this takes the total positive cases in the district to 33. In Virudhunagar district, a 60-year-old man tested positive. He is the 40th Covid-19 case in the district.

Dindigul district too reported one more case as a 23-year-old man tested positive for Covid-19.


