Karnataka’s 1st Covid-19 case, Bengaluru techie tests positive
2020-03-10
BENGALURU: A 41-year-old software engineer working with an MNC in Bengaluru has tested positive for Covid-19 in Karnataka’s first confirmed case, the government said on Monday.


On February 28, the engineer left Austin for New York in the US. The next day, he boarded a flight to Dubai and reached India on March 1. According to officials in Karnataka,

 
 
he had come in contact with 2,666 people on his journey back home. Three teams have been formed to trace all those who were exposed to him at workplace in Bengaluru and his east Bengaluru apartment.

The engineer has been admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD), Bengaluru. His wife, daughter and a colleague, who flew with him from the US, too have been admitted to RGICD. They are said to be showing symptoms; their test results are awaited. The infected man’s driver, his wife and their two children have been placed in home isolation. They have not shown any symptoms so far.


Software engineer responding to treatment, says doctor
Co-passengers seated two rows ahead and behind him and as well as on his either side on the Emirates flight to Bengaluru have been traced, along with the crew. All of them are under surveillance, Dr K Sudhakar, medical education minister, told reporters on Monday. Sixteen people who flew with the infected engineer are under home isolation.

The software engineer attended work in Bengaluru on March 2 and 3. After he developed Covid-19 symptoms on March 4, he visited a private hospital in Bengaluru on March 5 where he was treated as an outpatient. He was admitted to RGICD hours after he tested positive on Sunday. “A confirmatory test was done. His blood and throat swab samples were sent to the National Institute of Virology, Pune, and the results confirmed it,” a health officer said.

“He is healthy, responding to the treatment. He is not on ventilator,” RGICD director Dr C Nagaraja said. The infected techie is being treated with Tamiflu, he added.

Wisened by its past experience, the health department has taken extra measures to protect the identity and other details of the infected techie and the company where he worked.

Last week, when a Bengalurubased Telangana techie tested positive for coronavirus, details of his employer and residence were leaked. Soon, the information became the grist for social media, triggering a panic of sorts in south east Bengaluru.

The government reiterated that it has strengthened surveillance and containment measures against the possible spread of the virus. So far, 982 persons have been identified for observation in the past 2-3 weeks. “Of them, 266 persons have completed 28 days of observation and 700 are on home quarantine. These include persons who have travelled to virus-affected countries and contacts of positive cases,” a bulletin released on Monday read.

“Arogya Sahayavani (a health helpline) has reserved 20 lines for receiving calls on Covid-19. Till date, 12,455 calls have been received and we provided them necessary guidance. We received 1,335 calls on Sunday,” the bulletin read.

Additional chief secretary Jawed Akhtar said screening of all passengers started at KIA on March 5. “The engineer from the US wasn’t screened at the airport on March 1 since the guidelines prevailing then didn’t cover all passengers,” he said.

