Karnataka’s fight against pandemic hit as ministers not on same page
2020-04-03
BENGALURU: Senior BJP ministers and officials overseeing Covid-19 crisis in Karnataka appear to be not in sync with each other. They seem to be working in silos, giving out different numbers on a daily basis, leading to utter confusion and chaos.


The chief minister’s office, and departments of state health and family welfare, medical education, home and IT-BT have been part of the taskforce formed to fight the pandemic, but there appears to be a complete lack coordination among these departments, thanks to ego clashes and one-upmanship among senior ministers.

The latest Tablighi Jamaat crisis is a classic example. Hours after medical education minister K Sudhakar said they have identified 45 foreign nationals who had arrived in Karnataka after attending the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi, health minister B Sriramulu tweeted that as many as 62 have been tracked and quarantined. The home department later clarified that only 50 foreign nationals were tracked and 12 had left for their home countries.

In another goof-up, hours after Jawaid Akhtar, additional chief secretary, health and family welfare department, said the Centre shared a list of 1,500 people, who attended the Nizamuddin Markaz from Karnataka, the home department maintained that only 391 people have been identified and quarantined.

Chief minster BS Yediyurappa reiterated the same on Thursday afternoon. But later in the evening, state health commissioner Pankaj Kumar Pandey said 1,000 people of the total 1,500 linked with the Tablighi Jamaat at Nizamuddin were screened and more than 200 swabs sent for testing.

The minority welfare department, which has been tasked with identifying Tablighi Jamaat members, is only adding to the confusion, working on its own and coming up with different numbers.

“If you ask 20 different people then you will get 20 different facts. Whose job is it to identify foreign nationals? It is the police. How can a health minister have details about these numbers without us sharing it with him?” shot back a top police officer, when TOI contacted him to seek clarity on the numbers.

It may be recalled that Yediyurappa recently relieved Sriramulu of the responsibility of handling all matters relating to the pandemic following ego clashes between him and the medical education minister on the issue.

The CM later formed a taskforce and included home minister Basavaraj Bommai and deputy chief minister CN Ashwath Narayan in it hoping to see better coordination, but it only led to more politicking and confusion.

While initially, the CM decided to have a taskforce under chief secretary TM Vijay Bhaskar, he was forced to change his plan reportedly under pressure from Sriramulu, who wanted to be made the chairman of the group. But with Sriramulu reportedly failing to work “in sync with other ministers and officials”, Yediyurappa was forced to hand over charge to Sudhakar. Now, Sriramulu seems to have taken upon the responsibility of “breaking the news” only on Twitter.


