Karnataka’s Covid-19 fight is on right track, says CM BS Yediyurappa
2020-04-08
BENGALURU: The coronavirus outbreak shut down Karnataka even as it grappled with unprecedented floods last year and financial crunch due to reduced share of central taxes. On Tuesday, chief minister BS Yediyurappa said the road ahead is difficult but the state government’s effective steps very early on halted community transmission and kept a check on Covid-19 cases. Excerpts:



How has the government tackled Covid-19 in the state?

The government has done well so far. We were the first state in the country to lock down. We initiated early measures like identifying dedicated Covid-19 hospitals and setting up fever clinics and these helped us contain the virus spread.


Many claim the low number of positive cases is because of limited tests and supression of information..

We’ve been transparent about number of cases; these are actual numbers. There’s no reason for the government to misinform people. The number of tests and patient numbers are not linked. The tests are conducted as per ICMR protocols. We’ve been testing all suspicious cases. In any case, we cannot test all 6.5 crore people in the state.


How is the government preparing for post-lockdown challenges?

The Centre and Prime Minister will come up with a plan. We have a limited role as the Centre is managing the pandemic. I’ve directed officials to prepare a plan anway. A committee has been formed to advise us.


Tablighi Jamaat and Nanjangud clusters are adding to the number of positive cases every day. How will you arrest further spread?

We’ve taken all possible steps. We’ve quarantined all those who participated in the Delhi congregation and all workers of Nanjangud pharmaceutical unit.


Closure of liquor shops is causing different kinds of problems..

Till lockdown ends, there’s no question of opening liquor shops. We may open liquor shops for a short time during the day as alcohol withdrawal cases and suicides are increasing. We may not consider this if Covid-19 cases spike.


You’ve drawn flak for allowing the Karaga festival. Were you under pressure from the community and some MLAs?

There was no pressure, but I felt we shouldn’t break an age-old tradition. However, we decided not to allow it following a High Court direction.


The government has proposed to buy ventilators, PPE kits, masks and other items for frontline healthcare workers. However, they’re not easily available...

We have 53,040 PPE kits and placed orders for 10,05,000 more. We have 2,39,483 N-95 masks and placed an order for 18,33,040 more. We have 6,93,414 triple-layer masks and placed orders for 54,00,000. We plan to buy 50200 litres of sanitiser liquid. There is a supply issue but we’ll ensure the safety of frontline healthcare workers.


Health experts are not convinced about setting up dedicated Covid hospitals as it needs huge investment...

We received central clearance notifying the order for exclusive Covid-19 hospitals. We will begin work soon and set up quickly. We have reserved 740 ICU bed ventilators for new patients; these are in 234 government and 506 private hospitals. We have placed orders for 324 ventilators. We’ve set up 17 dedicated hospitals in the state, including three in Bengaluru. 


The state's revenue collection has taken a huge hit. How will you put the state's economy back on track?

After the lockdown ends, we’ll discuss measures to revive the economy quickly by taking inputs from officials and economists from the state.


There’s no co-ordination among cabinet colleagues tasked with handling Covid-19. Why is the education minister briefing media about a public health issue?

There is no truth in the allegation. All ministers, legislators and MPs are working as a team. Suresh Kumar has been briefing media only because B Sriramul and K Sudhakar are busy in the field.

