Karnataka: Foreign fund row, Manipal lab can’t test coronavirus
2020-02-24
MANGALURU/BENGALURU: The Manipal Institute of Virology (MIV) that played a pivotal role in testing Nipah virus cases in 2018 is nowhere in the scheme of things in preventing the spread of coronavirus in the country.

 
 

While the laboratory was dropped from the list of viral research and diagnostic laboratories (VRDLs) maintained by the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) since July 2019, the ministry of home affairs in January this year suspended its Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) 2010 account alleging it had carried out Nipah virus research using foreign funds.


ICMR sanctioned funds for Nipah virus research: Lab
The lab played a big role in 2018 when the Nipah Virus (NiV) disease broke out in Kerala. ICMR and Union health ministry appreciated the lab in 2018 by for diagnosing the virus and working on its surveillance. The lab tested 367 persons and found 18 of them positive. All cases were from Kerala.

MIV began as Manipal Centre for Viral Research (MCVR) in 2010 and was the first private lab to be supported by ICMR for establishing Grade 1 Virus Diagnostic and Research Laboratory. MIV is part of the Manipal Academy of Higher Education .

With MCVR removed from ICMR’s list of viral research & diagnostic laboratories, no samples of suspected coronavirus cases are being sent to it.

The lab’s travails began in April 2019 when ICMR said the Nipah Virus Disease (NiVD) was a biosafety level-4 pathogen and Manipal lab was only a biosafety level-2 lab and it should not be eligible to collect, store and test suspected NiVD samples.

Denying the latest allegations from the home ministry that it had carried out Nipah virus research using foreign funds, MIV director Dr G Arunkumar said MAHE had, in its reply to the ministry, clarified that only ICMR funds were used and they have all letters and transactions to support their claim. “MIV has not received any response and the account continues to be suspended,” he said.

“MAHE has responded to the government stating that we have not used any foreign contribution for Nipah virus testing. Every 15 days, the university has filed a report on foreign fund transactions. None of these will stop us from doing good work. We are not doing anything to do with bioterrorism,” said Dr Arunkumar. He said ICMR sanctioned specific funds to MIV for conducting the Nipah virus diagnostic testing and outbreak investigation on May 28, 2018.


‘ICMR chief cleared tie-up with US entity’
ICMR had last year directed that MIV restrict processing of pathogens specific to biosafety level 2. However, Dr G Arunkumar, director, MIV, said coronavirus testing is under bio-safety level 2.

ICMR also took objection to the lab’s collaboration with the United States-Centre for Diseases Control and Prevention (US-CDC). “No research activity funded by foreign funding agencies like CDC should be undertaken without approval from ICMR, health ministry screening committee,” it said.

“The collaborations with US-CDC were reviewed every quarter by a committee cochaired by the director general of health services and the director-general of ICMR, under the Global Health Security Agenda in the ministry of health and family welfare, government of India,” Dr Arunkumar said.

An ICMR official dealing with MIV matters did not respond to calls from TOI.

