Karnataka tourism tipped to collapse amid COVID-19 scare
2020-03-19
One of the biggest casualties of the state government’s Covid-19 precautionary shutdown order, and travel restrictions in and out of the country, was tourism, with hot spots remaining out of bounds for tourists and the hospitality industry registering a massive slump in bookings. Mysuru, one of the state’s biggest contributors to the tourism industry, has been severely impacted by the shutdown. Popular tourism spots like the Mysuru Palace, Krishna Raja Sagar Dam and Brindavan Gardens, Hampi, Gol Gumbaz, Badami, Aihole and Patadkal and jungle safari destinations like Bandipur and Nagarahole national parks are now closed for tourists. 


Steady decline of footfalls even before shutdown
Before the Mysuru Palace was closed for visitors, registered footfalls were on the decline, owing to the corona scare. In the first 12 days of March, the number of tourists who visited the Palace was 68,308, a decline of close to 10,000 in comparison tho the same time period last year (78,108). The situation is no different at the world heritage site Hampi and UNESCO recognised Badami, Aihole and Pattadkal. As per the statistics provided by the Archaeological Survey of India, on average, Gol Gumbaz gets 2,200 tourists, including foreigners, in the month of March, but that number was down to 1,444 even before entry was barred for visitors. Deputy Director of Tourism Department, Mallikarjun Bhajantri, says, “The closure is only for a week. We will reassess the situation to see if we can allow visitors to these tourist hot spots in the coming days.” 


Hotel bookings down 80% 
Nearly 40% percent of Mysuru’s local economy is dependent on tourism, not only because it is home to a number of must-visit spots, but also because it is an ideal stopover for tourists heading to Ooty and Madikeri, among others. Stakeholders were eagerly looking forward to the summer vacation setting in from April, given that it bumper business time for them, beside the Dasara season. But with positive cases of the coronavirus being reported in the state and citizens choosing to be better safe than sorry, there has been a massive slump in business. President of the Mysuru Hotel Owners Association, C Narayana Gowda, says, “Nearly 80% of hotel bookings have been cancelled, as tourists have been barred at hot spots. Any recovery from this slump can only be made at the end of the year, during Dasara, provided the current scenario clears up by then.” Given the situation, the Mysuru Travel Association has requested Tourism Minister CT Ravi to waive off quarterly tax and allow grace periods for repayment of loans on commercial tourist vehicles. 


Tongawallahs, taxi drivers and tourist guides in quandary
The period from April to May was also usually good for tongawallahs in Mysuru. President of Shah Pasand Tonga Association of Mysuru, Fayaz Ahmed says, “We used to earn up to `800 in a day during the summer vacation period. But with no visitors coming into Mysuru and residents not our clientele, we have no means to eke out a living.” Yellappa Reddy, a tourist guide in North Karnataka adds, “Just before the shutdown, a steady stream of tourists was coming into Hampi from Goa. But that has come to a complete standstill. Guiding tourist is our only source of revenue. And with no one coming, we have no money even for day-to-day expenses.”


