Karnataka to adopt 14-day home quarantine for all barring those returning from Maharashtra
2020-06-04
MANGALURU: Karnataka is all set to do away with institutional quarantine and will ask returnees to be in home quarantine with better use of technology, from the village to the city level, to combat the pandemic, said K Sudhakar, minister for medical education. Home quarantine for 14 days will be the new norm, and tests will be carried out only for those who are symptomatic. This is the view of medical experts as well as those who have batted for home quarantine, he said.


Those coming into the state from Maharashtra will be an exception to this new SOP, said Sudhakar, who added that they needed to produce a negative Covid report and undergo 14 days of quarantine, including 7 days of institutional quarantine. “Chances of cross-infection in home quarantine is less. If a person turns symptomatic, he will be tested, and those who test positive will be shifted to the designated Covid care centre. In such cases, individual houses will be sealed, against the earlier practice of having a containment zone of 100-metre radius,” he said.

The state government will release a detailed SOP in this regard shortly, said Sudhakar, who reviewed the Covid-19 preparedness in Dakshina Kannada and Udupi on Wednesday. 

This step has been taken to reduce pressure on hotels, community halls and educational institutions that the state government had requisitioned under the Epidemic Diseases Act, to quarantine people, he said. This is also partly in line with the direction that the Supreme Court has given to states to accommodate its residents without any restriction, the minister said, adding the state government is duty-bound to comply with this directive.

To ensure strict compliance with home quarantine, the state government will form a task force, right from the village level to the ward level in cities, and also use technology to the fullest extent, to ensure that people do not flout the same. The minister reiterated the warning that chief minister B S Yediyurappa gave in this regard, stating that FIRs will be registered against those breaking home quarantine norms.


