Karnika, Marella sailors say no to quarantine in Corona-hit Mumbai
2020-04-20
PANAJI: While the government is talking about bringing home seafarers from international waters with all its complexities, over 150 Goans on two cruise vessels in domestic waters — so close yet so far away from home — feel the government has let them down.

“If the government cannot help us, when we are so close, how will they bring back those from other countries,” asks a 35-year-old on board cruise vessel Karnika.

He is among 93 Goan seafarers and those from other parts of India and the world, who have been stuck in domestic waters since March 12 after the vessel disembarked all passengers in Dubai. On March 31, all crew from Maharashtra were signed off.

“None of us are infected or have shown any symptoms. Our temperature is checked twice a day. The company is taking good care of us and wants us to sign off. But the government is creating hurdles. It’s better not to vote in the next election. For almost 40 days, we have been only eating and sleeping,” he told TOI.

He and his colleagues don’t mind being quarantined in Goa, but are against being quarantined in Maharashtra, where Covid-19 cases are still on the rise.

“It’s too risky for us. We don’t want to be quarantined in Mumbai. We are fine with being quarantined in Goa, but we are not going to pay for it,” he said, referring to the government’s plan to set up paid quarantine facilities.

The same sentiments are shared by the crew on board Marella Discovery, which is anchored off Mumbai’s coast and has been in Indian waters since mid-March. Around 65 Goan sailors on board are also tired of waiting for the government’s permission to return home. The cruise ship disembarked its passengers in Thailand before they proceeded to India. 

There are crew from other parts of India, and also foreigners on board. They too say the company has been taking good care of them and checking their temperature twice a day with none of them showing any Covid-19 symptoms till date.

“We are going crazy stuck here in the middle of the sea. It’s safer for us to be on the vessel, but the company wants to disembark all Indian crew as soon as possible. We don’t mind travelling from Mumbai to Goa but we don’t want to stay in Mumbai. We are all Covid-19 negative at the moment. If we are made to stay in Mumbai we could get infected,” a Goan crew member on his fifth contract with the company told TOI.


