Covid-19: Karnataka urges migrants to stay back, halts trains
2020-05-06
BENGALURU: Karnataka on Tuesday put on hold further inter-state movement of migrant workers by train hours after CM BS Yediyurappa held a meeting with builders and stressed resumption of businesses, construction and other industrial activities and the need to control “unnecessary travel” of workers.


Earlier in the day, the state government had requested South Western Railways (SWR) for two trains daily for five days to Danapur in Bihar. “Since the train services are not required from tomorrow the letter cited under reference above is withdrawn,” said a late-night letter from N Manjunath Prasad, nodal officer for inter-state travel from Karnataka, to SWR.


Lockdown 3.0: Latest updates

Responding to a query on Twitter on how migrant workers could return to Patna, secretary in the labour department Capt Manivannan said, “Now, they can go only after the lockdown is lifted. Let them stay put. We will take care of them.”

The state chief secretary issued a corrigendum to a previous government notification permitting movement of migrant workers, pilgrims, tourists, students and others stranded to go back to their place of residence. The corrigendum says the words ‘one-time, one day one-way passes’ in the earlier order should be read as ‘one-time two-way passes’. Though officials were not available for comment, the corrigendum appears to provide migrant labourers an opportunity to return to Karnataka.



More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Lockdown 3.0: What's allowed and what's not in the three zones
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news


Builders miffed by migrant workers returning home

In their meeting with the CM, the builders are learned to have expressed displeasure at sending migrant workers from the city. Following the meeting, the CM tweeted: “Directions were given to the ministers to convince the labourers to refrain from returning to their home states”.


4/4The labourers should not heed to the rumours and avoid unnecessary travel.5. Issues relating to the weavers w… https://t.co/gzb9ypY1dz— CM of Karnataka (@CMofKarnataka) 1588677909000

The SWR, along with state government, had operated eight trains since Sunday and ferried 9,583 workers. SWR has so far ferried workers to Danapur (three trains), Bhubaneswar, Hatia, Lucknow, Barkakana and Jaipur. Several lakhs of migrant workers from other states are still stranded here and waiting to go back home.


