Karna​taka: How 29-year-old on ventilator beat Covid-19
2020-04-26
BENGALURU: He was the youngest patient on a ventilator in Karna
taka. After three days of a grim battle for life, healthcare professional at a private hospital Sandesh (name changed) has recovered and is now in home quarantine.

The 29-year-old man said: “On March 28, a patient in my locality came to the hospital where I work. He claimed he didn’t have fever, but his body temperature was high. I moved him in a wheelchair and also held his hand while checking the medical records. He was referred to a government hospital for tests. Two days later, I developed symptoms. The test results showed I was Covid-19 positive.”

Interestingly, the man who had met Sandesh tested negative. “This is a unique case. The senior citizen may have been in touch with a person with travel history,” said a senior health officer. The senior citizen was treated in a private hospital but passed away due to pneumonia. On April 1, Sandesh was rushed to the same hospital as he needed oxygen support.

“As my condition didn’t improve, I was put on a ventilator for three days. On Day 1 of being admitted, I couldn’t walk more than four steps. Though I was quite fit earlier, the virus took a heavy toll,” he added. It’s the first time he was an in-patient and hospital authorities picked up the tab. As a precautionary measure, the private hospital where Sandesh worked was temporarily shut down by BBMP. The senior citizen’s death left Sandesh broken. “I have no regrets of helping him. But I’m sad he didn’t survive. His son apologised that I had to suffer too,” said Sandesh, who is still in touch with the family.

While it was a pain to be in the hospital for 15 days, Sandesh kept in touch with his concerned siblings and parents via video calls. “After I got better and was off the ventilator, I started watching movies on my cellphone,” he said. His favourite film, ‘Hum Aap Ke Hai Kaun’ starring Madhuri Dixit and Salman Khan, gave him much solace. 

He was discharged on April 15. Sandesh’s case is a mystery for the health department, as the patient he was in touch turned out to be Covid negative. Officials are now looking for clues to explain how he contracted the disease

