Coronavirus: Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences orders 300 cloth masks for postgraduate doctors; staff upset
2020-03-16
HUBBALLI: Rising demand for protective masks has sent their price skyrocketing, and given the gap in the supply chain, it does not look like the rates will fall in the near future. Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) in Hubballi has decided to tackle the problem of a crippling shortage of masks for its staff by itself, thus freeing itself from the fluctuations of the market. KIMS has ordered a tailor to stitch 300 masks for the students pursuing their postgraduation at the hospital.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


KIMS superintendent Dr Arunkumar and resident medical officer Dr Siddeshwar Katkol confirmed to the media that they had placed an order for 300 cloth masks. However, members in the medical fraternity are not chuffed about the move. They are wondering if KIMS is faced with a dearth of funds, while also questioning the choice of cloth masks, which many said was not very effective in protecting those who donned it.

Many doctors at KIMS pointed out that cloth masks were not in the least effective against the novel coronavirus. “We have been appealing to the hospital administration to provide us with N-95 masks to all the doctors, nurses and all staff at the hospital. But our demand has remained on the paper,” said a KIMS doctor. 

Another doctor said that the cloth masks could not be worn for more than four hours, since they grew wet, and grime accumulated very easily on them. “N-95 masks are effective to prevent contracting of infections when we are treating or consulting,” the doctor said.

Many doctors, frustrated with waiting for KIMS to provide protective masks and wary of continuing to work without them for long, decided to spend money from their pockets to purchase the gear. They said that KIMS was providing each department with just 500ml of hand sanitiser, which was woefully inadequate, given the sheer number of patients that each received.

A senior doctor expressed outrage with suggestions of those working at hospitals not needing masks. “We are working in conditions where risk is very high. One never knows when one will encounter a Covid-19 patient. From the security guard to doctors, all of us must wear masks for self-protection. We are all at risk,” he added.

KIMS director Dr Ramalingappa Antartani, however, refuted charges of the hospital facing a shortage of N-95 masks. “We have 870 N-95 masks, 12,000 triple layer masks, 370 bottles of hand sanitisers. This is sufficient for 20 days,” he said.

However, when TOI requested access to the hospital’s storage facility so as to confirm the stock of safety equipment, the administrative staff at KIMS refused, citing chief minister BS Yediyurappa’s impending visit on Sunday.

Biometric attendance system still in use

Notwithstanding directions issued by the state government prohibiting biometric system of attendance following the outbreak of Covid-19, the practice is being continued at KIMS. The staff at the hospital want the management to take cognisance of the risk that this entails, and want the practice suspended for the time being.

