Coronavirus outbreak: Kasaragod to shut down for a week
2020-03-21
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The state witnessed the largest number of Covid-19 cases being reported in a day on Friday with 12 positive cases. With this, the total number of Covid-19 positive cases reported in the state has gone up to 40. Five cases have been reported in Ernakulam, six cases in Kasaragod and one in Palakkad. 


With the threat of novel coronavirus spreading looming large over Kasaragod, the state government has decided on a total shutdown in the district for a week. Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said that a person, who had come from Dubai and had skipped all kinds of screening processes, had turned positive, and has now become a major source for spreading the disease.

 
 
Of the six cases reported in Kasaragod, two are relatives of the person who skipped screening processes and two others who came from Dubai. The details of the remaining two persons are being collected.

The chief minister said the person, who arrived at Karipur airport on March 10, had stayed in Kozhikode for a day and then travelled to Kasaragod by train. Before he was tested positive he had attended several functions, including a football tournament. “Two of our legislators had also met him. Now, these MLAs have also gone on home quarantine,” he added. 

All places of worship have been asked to shut down for two weeks. Shops and other establishments, including bars, have been directed to open only between 11 am and 5 pm for a week. All clubs will be closed down for a week. 

In Ernakulam, the reported positive cases are the UK nationals who stayed at a resort in Munnar and had tried to fly back from Kochi airport. This was a group of 19 people of which one person was detected positive earlier. All the group members are now under quarantine. 

The chief minister said the state would support the ‘Janata Curfew’ called by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday. The government has decided to suspend the services of all public transport, including Kochi Metro, on that day. The government has decided to follow the directives issued by the Centre in combating the spread of Covid-19.

The chief minister said the state has 22 private medical colleges and they have 4,400 single rooms which was being used for their hostel facility. The management of these medical colleges have agreed to convert them into corona care centres. 

The industry department has been asked to ensure the supply of masks, sanitizers and oxygen cylinders to government hospitals. The public works department has been asked to identify buildings which can be converted into isolation wards. 

The total number of people under observation in the state has gone up to 44,390, of which 225 are in the designated isolation wards. The number of people admitted to various isolation wards on Friday was 56. So far, 3,436 samples have been sent for testing, of which 2,393 tested negative. 

