Kasaragod on a mission to detether its Covid-19 hotspots
2020-04-10
KOCHI: The authorities in Kasaragod are attempting to emulate the Bhilwara model of Covid-19 containment by ensuring a total shutdown campaign for the past three weeks. The entire district of Kasaragod has come to a standstill.

Seven villages – Eriyal, Chengala, Vidyanagar, Thalangara, Melparamba, Bekal and Mogral – have been converted into Covid-19-containment zones (CCZs). Officials describe the CCZs as ‘open prisons’ where police are donning the role of delivery boys.

“Bhilwara had around 30 cases while we are dealing with 157 cases,” said Kochi (city) commissioner IG Vijay Sakhare, who has been deployed as Covid-containment special officer at Kasaragod.

“We have created seven landlocked islands to restrict possible spread from these locations. I believe that we will have turned it around by the end of lockdown. I am expecting the numbers to be below 200. We were able to stop the spread at the secondary stage,” he added.

The process began with heavy police deployment and roadblocks at hotspots around Kasaragod town and areas such as Madhur and Chengala.

“When I was sent here on 23rd (March) night, Kasaragod was a place without lockdown. So, we formulated a strategy and first shut the borders to Kannur and Karnataka. Then we identified 110 places in the district and erected roadblocks to separate village from village and town from town,” said Sakhare.

After blocking the entry and exit to CCZs, the police flew drones and anyone found violating lockdown was arrested. “We ensured that essential commodities are delivered to home of residents by our force so they won’t have to step out, unless it is for a hospital emergency, that too only if online consultations were not enough,” said Sakhare.

And police took to the delivery system like pros. Sakhare claimed the policemen have been delivering essentials faster than regular delivery agents.

“We started delivery service at the containment zones a week ago and now we have extended it to the entire district. There are two numbers: 9497935780 and 9497980940, you simply have to send the list of items you need as an audio, video or text message and the police will bring it to your doorsteps. Rest assured, ‘Amazing Kasaragod’ Police Home Delivery Service is faster than that of any delivery giant,” he said.

As a result, lockdown violations have reduced drastically. “If 100 persons were out on day one, we managed to bring it down to five in two days. Later on, we brought the delivery service and now the lockdown is complete, except for those with a medical emergency,” added the senior cop.

