Kerala: Kasaragod records four new coronavirus cases; Kannur, three
2020-04-08
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Nine more fresh Covid-19 cases were reported in state on Tuesday, taking the total cases in Kerala to 336. Among the nine, four came from abroad, two had attended the Nizamuddin prayer meet and three were infected due to direct contact. Four cases were reported in Kasaragod, three from Kannur and one each from Kollam and Malappuram. On Tuesday, 12 patients tested negative. At present, 263 patients are undergoing treatment in isolation wards of various hospitals.

The number of persons under observation has come down further. At present 1,46,686 people are under observation of which 752 people are admitted in various hospitals. Till date 11,232 samples of suspect cases were sent for testing, of which 10,250 came as negative. 


MP Fund: Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan has urged the Centre to allow MPs to use their funds for Covid prevention activities in their constituencies.

"It is unfortunate that Centre decided to scrap MP funds for two years. Already, a few of our MPs had utilized their funds for various Covid prevention and related healthcare activities. Now, this will be hit," he said.

MP funds are meant for development activities in respective constituencies. People benefit from this fund and hence Centre should immediately reconsider the decision and such a move goes against the federal structure of the country, he said, adding that the fund allocated to state by Centre for Covid prevention activities is insufficient.

The MLA fund can be used for purchasing hospital equipment. Already V S Achuthanandan, P J Joseph, Raju Abraham, Mons Joseph and PT Thomas have expressed their willingness to contribute their funds for purchasing equipment for hospitals in their constituencies. Medicines, ventilators, PPEs, masks, etc will be purchased using the funds. Finance department has given special sanction for this move. The chief minister said this is a model that all MLAs can emulate. 

On the border issue, the chief minister said based on the Supreme Court verdict, Karnataka government has agreed to allow people who want medical attention to cross the border. They have assured that a medical team will be set up at Thalappady which will certify the patients crossing the border.


