‘Kashe aahat tumhi’, DCP asks cops on lockdown duty
2020-05-12
Nagpur: ‘Hello, Mi DCP HQ boltoy. Kashe aahat tumhi?’ (Hello, I am DCP Headquarters speaking. How are you?) This is how DCP Vikram Sali greets after calling constables deployed across the city to enquire about their well-being and their needs on duty.

The initiative ‘DCP-to-constable call’ is a high priority for the police department. Several cops across the state are getting exposed to coronavirus infection while on duty. The state police department has seen a spurt in cases, including few deaths in the last few weeks. 

Sali, in-charge of headquarters and traffic, is making random calls at least 20 constables per day after getting their numbers from the office list. He aims to take the number to 100 constables per day to ensure their needs do not get ignored. 

The DCP said that following the guidelines of CP BK Upadhyay and Joint CP Ravindra Kadam several welfare measures are being undertaken to help police personnel on the field. 

Sali said that around 700 cops from headquarters and another 300 from traffic are on duty across city at different checkpoints, quarantine centres, containment zones and toll nakas. 

“I just pick up any mobile phone number and speak to the constable to ask him whether he is wearing mask, having sanitizers, face shield or other precautionary kit as per his duty requirements,” he said. 

Sali, an M Tech in irrigation engineering, said he immediately contacts the officer in-charge concerned if any constable shares any problem or requirement with him for redressal. “Around 10 constables have so far shared their requirements in the last couple of days. We have ensured that his or her issue is resolved. We have rushed masks, sanitizers, face shields and such things whenever needed,” said Sali. 

The DCP also said that he has also been asking constables about their health issues and inquiring about any help required. “Our men are working round the clock under strenuous duty hours. Hence, there is need to boost their morale and also look after their health issues,” he said. 


