Kashi Covid tally crosses 100 mark, 9 new cases in adjoining districts
2020-05-19
Varanasi: With the detection of five new cases of Covid-19, Varanasi tally crossed the mark of 100 while nine more infected persons, including four in Mirzapur, two in Azamgarh and Sonbhadra each and one in Jaunpur district, were detected on Monday.

After getting 168 test reports from Banaras Hindu University lab, district magistrate Varanasi Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “Five persons have been tested positive. With the addition of these cases, total tally of district has reached to 101. Of them four had died between April 3 and Monday, while 65 had been cured. Now active cases in the district has become 32 while number of hotspot areas increased to 41.”

A 40-year-old man and his 24-year-old brother of Garkhada village in Sindhora area, were found positive, he said adding, a 35-year-old youth of Chiraigaon, a 32-year-old mobile mechanic of Madhavpur Harahua in Badagaon and a 30-year-old youth of Bhartharakala in Chaubeypur area were tested positive. They all had returned home from Mumbai on trucks on May 13.

In Mirzapur, brother of an already infected youth, who had returned from Mumbai on truck on May 12, of Maheva village was tested positive. Other youth of Kachhwa Road, who is currently dwelling in Imarti village in Padari area, had also returned from Mumbai on May 12 and his sample had been collected on May 14. 

A 25-year-old woman of Pacherva village in Chilh area, who had returned from Noida with her husband on a truck on May 11, was also found infected. A 20-year-old woman of Khajuri village in Dehat kotwali area, who suffered cold and cough, has also been found positive. CMO Mirzapur Dr OP Tiwari said that with four fresh cases total tally of district has reached to 19 of which three had been cured. All new cases were sent to isolation ward.

In Sonbhadra, a migrant labourer from Bahraich and other from Firozabad district were found Covid-19 positive, said CMO Sonbhadra Dr SK Upadhyaya. First case of Covid-19 positive in the district was found on May 10. All these three labourers had reached Sonbhadra from Mumbai by train on May 8. Now total cases in this district are three.

In Azamgarh, a migrant labourers of Barva area in Mehnajpur and other of Jamalpur in Nizamabad area were tested positive. DM Azamgarh NP Singh said that these two had returned Azamgarh from Mumbai by truck on May 11. Both of them were sent to isolation ward of government hospital. Total number of positive cases in Azamgarh reached 15, of which one had died and nine had become cured. Now, the number of active cases in the district is five.

In Jaunpur, a youth of Ahiyapur in city area was tested positive. DM Dinesh Kumar Singh said this youth had returned from Mumbai recently and his sample was taken on May 13 for laboratory test. He was shifted to Varanasi for treatment.


