Gulab Chand Kataria defied lockdown, needs quarantine: Congress
2020-05-16
UDAIPUR: Congress Working Committee (CWC) member and former MP Raghuveer Singh Meena tendered a written objection to the Udaipur collector on Friday against leader of opposition Gulab Chand Kataria getting a registry done of 15-bigha land in his name at the registry office in Jhadol (Phalasiya), some 50km away from Udaipur, during lockdown.

Meena asked the district collector to keep Kataria and all those who came in his contact during the registry process in quarantine. He also demanded a case be taken against the legislator under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, for disobedience of government orders. Offering his explanation, Kataria said being the leader of opposition he has access to movement as he keeps travelling between Jaipur and Udaipur.

“I spoke to the officials at Jhadol two days in advance to know whether there is any problem to get the registry done and when they had no objections, I went there taking all precautions of social distancing and sanitisation,” Kataria said.

Congress leader Meena, however, said, “At a time when Udaipur is a hotspot for coronavirus and the entire municipal zone is declared a containment zone, it is shocking that a senior leader like Katariaji defied the lockdown and went to Jhadol on May 14 for a petty thing like registry. In my knowledge, not a single registry had been done in the past two months in Jhadol and so the former home minister is answerable to the people, what was the urgency to perform the registry now.”

He said the permission of movement is granted only for essential work and registry does not fall in this category. He said many people would have come in contact with the MLA at the registry office including the tehsildar, clerks and witnesses who executed the task which could have been avoided until the lockdown had been lifted. “Katariaji went to the rural area from a contaminated zone and hence he and all others who were in his contact should be quarantined,” Meena said.

“A staggering number of cases have been registered in the state against common people under IPC Section 188 for disobeying the law. Everyone is equal before law and Katariaji is no exception,” Meena said. Meanwhile, Udaipur collector Anandhi and SP Kailashchandra Bishnoi did not respond on being asked for any action on Meena’s letter. 


