Keep ready lockdown exit plan, Andhra Pradesh CM to officials
2020-05-15
VIJAYAWADA: Chief minister Y S Jaganmohan Reddy has asked the state administration to get ready with the lockdown exit plan.

During the daily review meeting at his Tadepalli camp office on Thursday, the officials told the chief minister that there are 290 containment clusters in the state, where the lockdown norms are being strictly implemented.

They said that no new cases were reported in 75 clusters during the last 28 days. These clusters will be denotified and relaxations would be extended to them if no new cases are reported till May 31, the officials said.

The officials also told the chief minister that there are 22 containment clusters in the state where the number of cases is more. In such clusters, the lockdown restrictions will continue for 500 meters outside those areas.

There are 103 clusters which have reported less than 10 positive cases, the officials said and added that the lockdown restrictions would be implemented in 200-meter radius of such clusters. The officials said that 90 dormant clusters were also identified and if there are no new cases for the next 14 days, the lockdown relaxations would be given to them.

The chief minister told the officials to prepare action plan for post-lockdown in the state keeping in view the number of cases reported in the clusters. He told them to have a plan to maintain theatres, educational institutions, restaurants and markets. The lockdown exit plan should be ready at the earliest, he said.

When the officials referred to him about the migrant workers on the road, the chief minister told the officials to provide food and drinking water to them. 

CM writes to Centre to extend CS term by 6 months

Meanwhile, the chief minister has written to the Centre seeking extension of chief secretary Nilam Sawhney's term by another six months. Sawhney is due to retire on June 30. Citing the crisis arising out of Covid pandemic, Jagan sought an extension to her term to ensure continuity of the measures she has initiated. Sawhney, a 1988 batch IAS officer, succeeded LV Subrahmanyam on November 13 last year to become AP’s first woman chief secretary.


