Coronavirus lockdown: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal warns offenders of strict action
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: With a large number of people continuing to move around the city in violation of Delhi government’s lockdown order, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Monday warned offenders of stringent action.


Kejriwal urged Delhiites to grasp the seriousness of the crisis and said the lockdown had been imposed to save them and their families from the novel coronavirus outbreak. “Delhi government does not wish to make the lives of people difficult, but we are doing this to tackle the crisis,” the chief minister said. 

He said that from Tuesday onwards, if anybody was seen violating the lockdown order, the government would be forced to take strict action against violators. “The government will have to take strict action to make Delhi safer,” Kejriwal added.

In a joint press conference with lieutenant governor Anil Baijal on Sunday, Kejriwal had imposed total lockdown in the capital till March 31. The government had earlier shut all educational institutions, cinema halls and shopping malls, suspended Delhi Metro, cabs and autorickshaws and banned gathering of more than five people to prevent the spread of Covd-19.

However, with the situation taking a serious turn across the country, the government imposed a complete lockdown exempting only those involved in essential services.

In a digital press conference on Monday, the CM said 30 cases had been reported in the city, of which 23 were those who came from affected countries while seven had been infected through local transmission.

Citing Italy and US as primary examples, Kejriwal said Italy only had 100 cases of Covid-19 till February 23, which increased to more 40,000 cases with over 5,000 already succumbing to the disease. “United States on February 29 had only 68 cases with one death, but now the number has gone up to 35,000, with 418 deaths reported,” he added.

The chief minister said India was fortunate that it got enough time to learn from other nations and take precautionary measures. “The situation in Delhi is under control but this is not the time to cheer up. We have to follow restrictions because if we don’t, then the disease will spread and the situation will become very tough,” he claimed. “This virus doesn’t see gender or class of people. Therefore, complete lockdown is mandatory.”

Kejriwal also announced the distribution of packaged mid-day meal at the homes of the beneficiary children and anganwadi workers. The frequency of state-run buses, the CM said, will be increased by 25% from Tuesday to ensure those who are involved in essential services do not face problems. “I have received complaints from people who work in essential services of problems they faced in traveling. Therefore, from tomorrow, 50% of the total buses will run in the city,” he added. 


