Coronavirus outbreak: KEM Hospital, Haffkine Institute to start tests today, up Mumbai’s capacity to 300 samples a day
2020-03-19
MUMBAI: Testing capacity for Covid-19 will double from 150 to 300 in the city on Thursday, with authorities making arrangements for tests at KEM Hospital and Haffkine Institute, apart from Kasturba Hospital’s molecular laboratory at present.


The capacity will jump to 1,000 Covid-19 tests a day within a few days if the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) gives permission to more government as well as private laboratories. The WHO has recommended scaling up testing facilities in India to confirm the extent of the virus’s spread. India is currently testing barely 

BMC commissioner Praveen Pardeshi said Kasturba and KEM hospitals would jointly test around 300 samples a day. KEM on Wednesday tested samples which were reconfirmed by the National Institute of Virology, Pune, and the results were found to be definitive, the BMC said. Additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said KEM will start testing swab samples from Thursday. “They will share Kasturba’s load that has been single-handedly testing samples from Mumbai and MMR,” he said. KEM may be able to handle 150-200 samples a day. 

On Wednesday, Pardesi held discussions with private labs and hospitals, including Metropolis, SRL, Thyrocare and Hinduja Hospital laboratory, for testing facilities. The BMC has asked these laboratories to share their details with ICMR to get the mandatory permission to conduct tests. “Once they get the permission, they can also conduct around 1,000 tests a day,” said Pardeshi.

Meanwhile, earlier in the day, state health minister Rajesh Tope visited NIV in Pune and said eight new laboratories, including at Pune’s B J Medical College, would be allowed to conduct tests for Covid-19. The Centre will provide 10 lakh more kits for Covid-19 testing, he added.

Currently, the infrastructure at Kasturba allows for 150 samples to be tested daily. 

The BMC is now ramping up the facility and will add new equipment that will allow 250 samples to be tested daily from Friday, said civic officials. “Kasturba laboratory currently has six trained personnel to conduct the tests. The BMC is now recruiting more professionals for the increased number of tests,” said BMC officials.

The state-run Sir J J Hospital, Byculla, which has a state of the art molecular laboratory to test for tuberculosis, will also provide Covid-19 testing facilities. 

At Haffkine Institute, said Tope, two new laboratories will be added in the coming four days.

NIV will provide equipment in Dhule, Aurangabad and Solapur to set up Covid-19 testing laboratories. BMC officials said Aurangabad corporation has reached out to the BMC to train its personnel to conduct tests.

“The state is ready with 700 ventilators and 600 isolation beds. It is mandatory for all private hospitals to provide isolation beds,” said Tope.

He added NIV is networked with over 50-60 laboratories around the country. (Inputs by Sumitra Deb Roy)


