Kerala, Tamil Nadu differ over listing Covid-19 death
2020-04-16
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Ambiguity in the protocol of listing patients, who travelled to other states for treatment, has led to the non-inclusion of a Covid-19 patient from Palakkad in the list maintained by Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The person died in Coimbatore.


Tamil Nadu government officials are claiming that since he came from Palakkad to Coimbatore for treatment, he couldn’t be included in their state’s records. However, state health department is not ready to account his death since ‘he became positive while being treated at a Coimbatore hospital and died there’.

This logic was not applied when a 71-year-old resident of Mahe died of Covid-19 in Kannur last week. Health department didn’t record the death in Kerala’s list and the case was included in Puduchchery’s list as the man from Mahe had reached Kannur only for treatment. Though he was originally included in the list of positive patients in Kannur, it was later rectified by removing his name. 

The man from Palakkad went to Coimbatore for treatment on April 3 and he tested positive on April 8. Following this, his family was quarantined at Palakkad government hospital. He died on April 10 in Coimbatore and was cremated near Athupalam in Coimbatore that day. The man with acute breathing and renal problems had a cardiac arrest at the hospital. His samples tested positive twice. 

The man was running a hardware shop in Palakkad, residing there with his immediate relatives. "The protocol for people who are travelling to other states for treatment and getting affected there has to be verified," said a senior official about the situation and why the man’s death was not accounted in state.

As per the official version, only two deaths were recorded in state due to Covid-19. The first one occurred in Ernakulam and the second in Thiruvananthapuram.

Tamil Nadu authorities made it clear that the man would have to be counted in the list of deceased in Kerala as he lived in Palakkad with relatives and reached Coimbatore only for treatment.

The question – why Kerala adopted a contradicting stand in the death of Mahe and Palakkad residents – was not answered by health minister KK Shailaja and health secretary Dr Rajan Khobragade at the time of going to press. 


