Kerala doctors, nurses to help in Mumbai’s Covid fight
2020-05-26
KOCHI: Doctors and nurses from Kerala may go in phases to work with Covid-19 patients in Mumbai. As cases continue to surge there, the Maharashtra government had written to Kerala health minister KK Shailaja requesting 50 specialist doctors and 100 nurses to manage the 600-bed Covid care centre coming up at Mahalaxmi Race Course.

Kerala government’s success story in handling Covid has drawn praise world-wide. Recently a team of doctors from two private hospitals in Kochi was sent to UAE on the request of Dubai Health authority to work in Covid hospitals there.

Dr Santosh Kumar SS, vice-president, Doctors Without Borders, said, “We have reached out to the private sector doctors here. Already 20 doctors and 45 nurses have shown willingness to go to Mumbai. We will be sending them in batches.”

On Sunday, Dr Kumar, who works with Thiruvananthapuram Medical College, sent out a request to doctors to be part of “Mission Mumbai”. He had headed the team of doctors and nurses sent to Kasaragod to set up Covid centre at the yet-to-be-inaugurated medical college in the district when it had the largest number of Covid cases in the state

In his message, he said, “The situation in Mumbai is a bit alarming. We express our solidarity with the people who are suffering. We are organizing a medical team for Mumbai. We need doctors and nurses as volunteers.” It was also clearly mentioned that doctors and nurses from government services need not apply.

“The registration details of those who are interested to serve in Mumbai have been collected and we will soon send it to the Maharashtra government,” said Dr Kumar.

Sources said that the state government has not yet taken any decision on sending an official team to Mumbai. However, IMA, Kerala, and government medical colleges alumni association are supporting the initiative.

The letter was written by Maharashtra’s medical education department head Dr T P Lahane, after holding discussions with Doctors Without Borders for healthcare workers. Maharashtra government has assured specialist doctors will be given a monthly remuneration of Rs 2lakh, MBBS doctors Rs 80,000 and nurses will be paid Rs 30,000, besides all other facilities. The volunteers will be flown to Mumbai. 


