Coronavirus: Kerala lost chance to make 'wonder drug'
2020-04-09
KOCHI: The high ranges and Wayanad regions of Kerala and the Anaimalai Hills of Tamil Nadu could have perhaps boosted world’s fight against Covid-19, because these areas had cinchona plantations that had been producing 45,000kg of quinine annually by 1880s. Chloroquine, a synthetic derivative of quinine, an antimalarial drug, is being touted as the ‘wonder drug’ in treating coronavirus-infected patients. 

Sadly, these plantations were wiped out during the last few decades as synthetic chloroquine and its lighter form hydroxychloroquine gained huge market share as a cheaper alternative to quinine. “If these factories were working now, treatment against coronavirus might have been more effective,” said D Aravindakshan, former MD of Kerala State Drugs and Pharmaceuticals, Alappuzha. He said if there is dearth of hydroxychloroquine, it could be derived from the original natural source—quinine—through a synthesis process called chlorination. 

“Initially, you derive chloroquine from quinine. As it is a very strong medicine, there is a possibility of four in every hundred patients die as chloroquine affects the working of their heart. Hence, to lighten the medicine, drug manufacturers add a hydroxy radical to it, producing hydroxychloroquine,” Aravindakshan said. 

Cinchona, a tree native to Peru, was well-known for centuries for its medicinal power against fever. The first plantation in the country was set up in 1860 at Doddabetta, near Ooty by East India Company. The second plantation came up at Naduvattam. Realizing cinchona’s monetary value, the Travancore government opened a plantation at Peermade, in 1862 and another one was set up in 1878 in Munnar. Though India was growing cinchona, its bark from which quinine is extracted, wasn’t processed locally initially. Factories were set up at Naduvattam and West Bengal. 

Kerala also lost its chance to synthetically produce hydroxychloroquine in the state using ingredients from China or Europe. A project by a firm to produce capsules at a facility in Palakkad got into legal troubles and the case is now before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 

