Kerala government suspends IAS officer who violated home-quarantine
2020-03-28
LUCKNOW/KOLLAM: IAS officer Anupam Mishra, who violated home-quarantine instructions after his return to Kerala from Singapore and left for his native place in UP’s Kanpur district, was suspended from service pending a departmental inquiry.


Health officials in UP’s Kanpur and Sultanpur districts had been looking for Mishra, a Kerala cadre officer who had been booked by the Kerala government for not adhering to the mandatory quarantine prescribed to al travellers, and finally tracked him down to his grandfather’s house in Sultanpur, UP. Violating the quarantine, Mishra, who belongs to Kanpur’s Swaroop Nagar Colony, had returned to his home from Kerala four days ago.

When health officials in Kanpur reached his residence, they learned that he had moved to his grandfather’s place in Sultanpur on March 23 to participate in a puja.

Sultanpur CMO CBN Tripathi, who tracked down Mishra, said: “He and six members of his family have been isolated in their home.”

According to an official statement by Kollam district magistrate Abdul Nasser, “Newly-wed Anupam Mishra and his wife returned from Singapore on March 19 and were advised home-quarantine for two weeks. Instead of staying at his official residence, he left for Bengaluru with his wife the same day. Now we know that he has gone back to his hometown in UP.”

Nasser told TOI that though Mishra did not show any symptoms, the protocol says every traveller should be quarantined. “The point is that he left without informing anyone,” he said.

Sources said Mishra and his wife could be quarantined in Kanpur and their contacts would also be traced. “The officer went to Bengaluru and met his relatives. He then took a flight, which means that people in the flight are also to be tracked and tested. Besides, his family members in Kanpur will be screened for infection,” an official involved in surveillance said.

The bureaucrat fraternity, at least in Kerela, is not happy about the way Mishra behaved, saying it was irresponsible and the government should act tough.

A senior police officer in Kerala said, “Kerala is among the worst-hit states in India. It also has a high number of people with travel histories. If someone from the government takes orders lightly, the general public is bound to follow. Action must follow to establish that no one is above the law.”

TOI tried to contact Mishra but he was not available for comment.

(With inputs from Faiz Rehman Siddiqui in Kanpur)


