Kerala fishermen stranded in Iran after Covid-19 curbs
2020-03-02
Thiruvananthapuram: Indian embassy in Iran is taking stock of the situation of a group of Indian fishermen, including Malayalis, are stranded. Iran has imposed curbs with regard to Covid-19.

According to reports, around 200 fishermen, including 17 from the southern coast of Kerala, are stranded in Iran as the Covid-19-hit country has clamped severe restrictions on the movement of people. 

Union minister of state for external affairs V Muraleedharan said the Indian embassy in Iran is assessing the gravity of the situation there and would take appropriate steps to ensure the security and welfare of Indians stranded there.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan also wrote to Union minister for external affairs S Jaishankar urging him to direct the embassy there to take steps to help the stranded fishermen. 

A video shared by one of the trapped fishermen on Facebook on Sunday morning claimed the situation there as very serious as the fishermen who reached Iran as workers in a fishing company were running short of food and medicine since they were not allowed to step out of their lodgings. Their sponsor too had expressed helplessness and advised the fisherfolk to get in touch with the government authorities here, the video claimed. 

State fisheries minister J Mercykutty Amma said the government was taking all possible steps to ensure that fishermen stranded there don’t run short of basic facilities, including food and medicine. “We are not sure about how many Malayali fishermen are actually stranded in Iran. According to reports, they account to hundreds. How many are stranded there would be known only after their relatives here share their details with Norka. Once such details are with us, we would hand over the same to Union ministry of external affairs for further action,” she said said.

However, unconfirmed sources said 17 among the fishermen caught up in Iran belong to the southern coast of Kerala, especially Vizhinjam and Pozhiyoor areas. “What we can do is to ensure that their basic needs are taken care of. Since they are in a foreign country that fights the coronavirus outbreak, those stationed there now will have to comply with the rules and restrictions that country imposes,” the minister said. “I am not sure about evacuating them now as all flights have been cancelled,” she said. The minister also appealed to the media not to create a scare about the crisis. 

The Tamil Nadu government had taken up the issue with the Union government on Saturday. Reports say that majority of fishermen stranded there belong to Tamil Nadu.


