Kerala’s coronavirus patient passed via Kolkata last week
2020-02-01
KOLKATA: India’s first and only confirmed patient of the novel coronavirus (nCoV) — a student from Thrissur in Kerala — had travelled through Kolkata airport on January 23, four days before she showed signs of flu. She tested positive for the virus on Thursday. On Friday, Kolkata airport officials said the woman had not shown any symptom of nCoV when she was screened at the airport, but they had warned the Kochi airport about her upon learning that she was coming from Wuhan and was heading to her hometown via Kochi.

 
 

“We had screened her with thermal guns and did all the necessary checks, but she had not shown any signs of infection at that point. But we alerted Kochi airport to keep tabs on the woman,” said a senior official of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International airport.

According to records maintained by Kolkata airport, the woman came to the city on a China Eastern Airlines flight from Kunming on the night of January 23, the day the Wuhan airport was locked down. She had apparently come out of Wuhan along with some other Indian students the night before and was among the last batches of Indian nationals from Wuhan who could come back on their own. China Eastern Airlines has a direct flight between Kunming and Wuhan, but they suspended services on January 23.

From Kolkata, she took a direct flight to Kochi on January 24, and then travelled by road to her hometown at Mathilakam. At Kochi airport, she was advised by officials to report to the nearest health centre if she showed any symptom of flu. She was asked to stay at home for the next 14 days, maintain personal hygiene and wear a mask.

On January 27, she developed symptoms of flu and contacted the state health department, which sent a team of officials to her home and moved her to an isolation ward at the Thrissur General Hospital. Her body fluid sample was sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, the same day and on Thursday morning, the NIV informed that the case was positive.

Following the first case, the Centre announced that all persons who have come from China after January 15 need to be tested for the virus as it has an incubation period of 14 days. It has also prescribed a 14-day home isolation procedure and advised citizens to avoid trips to China.

“There could be scores of symptomless patients since signs of the virus take a week to 14 days to manifest. So, every individual who has travelled through the affected regions should be quarantined immediately after they reach India,” said Fortis Hospital’s internal medicine consultant Joydeep Ghosh.

At Kolkata airport, passengers from China have to undergo thermal screening to check body temperature. Officials said that so far, 5,700 persons have been screened, but none have showed any alarming symptoms. The immigration and other staff members at airports have been sensitized and dedicated ambulances have been placed at ports. Drills to check preparedness and management of possible cases have also been practised at Kolkata airport and medical and para-medical staff have been kept on standby for emergencies. 

“However, no matter how rigorous the screenings are, we have to rely on self-declaration by passengers. We can never know if they visited Wuhan unless they declare it. But most passengers have been co-operative,” said Kolkata airport director Kaushik Bhattacharya.


