Coimbatore: Kerala man from Malaysia admitted to coronavirus isolation ward
2020-03-10
COIMBATORE: A 35-year-old Kerala native has been admitted to the ESI Hospital’s coronavirus isolation ward after he approached the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH) on Sunday evening complaining of a cold.


The man, a resident of Thrissur, is working in Malaysia. He had landed in the Trichy airport and was travelling home, when he realized he had a cold. Instead of proceeding to his hometown, he stopped in Coimbatore and approached CMCH for treatment.

A throat swab taken from the man was sent to the King Institute for testing, deputy director of public health Dr Ramesh said. “He came to CMCH at 7.15pm. Doctors, who had coronavirus test kits, collected throat swab, and sent him to ESI Hospital’s quarantine ward,” he said. “He had landed in Trichy on Sunday. If he tests positive, we will trace everyone he was in contact with, including drivers of vehicles he travelled in and people who served him at hotels.”

Officials said the man, who was travelling to Thrissur from the Trichy airport alone, was told by his family not to come home. “When the man told them he had a cold, his family asked him not to come home, prompting him to seek treatment in Coimbatore,” said Ramesh. “The panic seems to have stemmed from the fact that six people, including a child, tested positive for the virus over the last three days in Kerala.”

The department has allocated an exclusive 108 ambulance to transfer patients showing coronavirus symptoms to the ESI Hospital and CMCH. “We clean the vehicle using Lysol after transferring each patient. The staff have been trained in handling coronavirus testing kit,” Ramesh said.

The animal husbandry department, which is wary of the avian influenza outbreak in Vengeri and Kodiyathoor in Kerala, has begun stopping poultry brought to the state from Kerala and is also spraying disinfectant on the vehicles carrying the birds to the neighbouring state.

Meanwhile, Coimbatorians Vanitha Rengaraj and her husband continue to be quarantined in cruise ship A Sara that has docked in Luxor on the east bank of the Nile River. Though tested negative for the virus, they have to remain quarantined for 14 days.

