Kerala: 14-day home quarantine for returnees' family and contacts too
2020-06-07
KOCHI: With new Covid-19 cases in the state reaching three-digit figures in the past two days, the health department has asked even local contacts and relatives of returnees from abroad and other states undergoing home quarantine as well as those travelling from containment zones in the state to "avoid community/social contact" for 14 days. 

The spike in coronavirus cases in the state has coincided with relaxations in lockdown while people returning home from Covid-affected places are increasingly sent to home-quarantine. The health department is looking to ensure that the coronavirus infection doesn't spread in the community through contacts of those violating room quarantine, as it has already been alleged that people are violating room quarantine in several places.

The department's guidelines on Covid-19 testing and quarantine/isolation, updated as per the situation in the state, say the local contacts and relatives of returnees undergoing home quarantine should also "practise strict adherence to mask use, practice personal, cough, sneeze and hand hygiene". 

At the ground level, employees in panchayats and municipalities are being trained to sensitise them on the matter.

Focus should also be on local contacts

As we go ahead, the focus has to be not just on returnees but also their local contacts. However, unlike returnees against whom cases are registered for violating home quarantine, there is no plan to register any case. The whole effort is to sensitise them,” said Dr B Mohammed Asheel, executive director, Kerala Social Security Mission.

Health department officials said a previous infection is responsible for any new Covid case and people should take necessary care to reduce the spread of the infection.

“As people are increasingly returning from highly affected areas, the probability of them testing positive is high and therefore other persons in the family also have to be very careful to reduce the risk of spreading the infection,” principal health secretary Dr Rajan N Khobragade said.

The Kerala unit of Indian Medical Association has welcomed the move. It had earlier opposed home quarantine for those coming from abroad and red zones in other states in view of the risk involved.

“It is important that family members of those in home quarantine don’t go out and mix in the society,” said Dr Gopikumar P, IMA (Kerala) secretary.


