Kerala to be on lockdown till Mar 31
2020-03-24
Thiruvananthapuram: With 28 more people testing positive for Covid-19, Kerala government, on Monday, declared a total lockdown of the state till March 31. The lockdown would be effective from Tuesday morning onwards.

Public transport vehicles would be off the roads during the entire period. Private transport would be allowed, subject to restrictions. Only shops selling essential commodities will remain open from 7am to 5am.

 The measures would be stricter in Kasaragod district where the maximum number of Covid-19 positive cases has been reported so far. Shops selling essential commodities would be open from 11am to 5pm in Kasaragod. 

Terming the situation as extraordinary, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said the state government was resorting to total lockdown as part of stepping up the vigil against the spread of Covid-19. “Lockdown is to effectively ensure social distancing. There won’t be problems in the availability of essential goods. Unnecessary crowding will not be allowed anywhere. Those sent on quarantine will have to strictly adhere to it,” he said. Temporary isolation facilities would be set up for those who can’t observe it effectively in their homes.

All road entry points to the state would be sealed, but movement of goods won’t be hampered. All those who come from other states will have to undergo a mandatory 14-day home quarantine, the chief minister said. The government, he said, has taken all steps to face any medical emergencies and would be bifurcating hospitals based on the patient’s need — expert care and where symptomatic people would be treated.

Media has been included in the list of essential services and the government would provide all support to it during the lockdown, Vijayan said. In malls, sections that sell groceries and vegetables would be allowed to function. Petrol pumps and beverages outlets would remain open. The decision to keep the beverages outlets open was taken in view of the peculiar circumstances, the chief minister said. 

“Hotels can function, but customers are not expected to take seats and savour food inside the hotels. Hotels can deliver parcels,” he added.

Government is in talks with telecom companies to constantly track the mobile phones of those under home quarantine to ensure that they adhere to the guidelines. Neighbours of people under quarantine would be informed and they would too will watch out for any irresponsible movements of the quarantined and inform the authorities, he said. Those who violate the guidelines would have to face serious consequences, including arrest, he added.

The government would ensure supply of essential goods to the needy, said the chief minister. Traders and merchants’ associations have agreed to make arrangement for home delivery of goods on the basis of requests from neighbourhoods. “Since most people have access to social media, it won’t be difficult to place orders for home delivery of goods,” he said.


