Kerala braces for post-lockdown influx
2020-05-04
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The state has formulated detailed guidelines for receiving persons returning to Kerala from other states and for allowing stranded persons, other than guest workers, to travel outside the state.


Besides, around 15 IAS officials and police officers led by principal secretary Biswanath Sinha have been appointed as nodal officers to make the arrangements and coordinate with officials concerned in other states for the transit of stranded persons.
With the suspension of passenger train services till May 17 in the country, the state government has designated six entry points for receiving the people travelling to Kerala. The entry points are Inchivila in Thiruvananthapuram, Aryankavu in Kollam, Kumily in Idukki, Walayar in Palakkad, Muthanga in Wayanad and Manjeshwaram in Kasaragod.

 

According to the detailed standard of procedure (SoP) for facilitating the inbound movement of persons, the respective district administration has to provide various facilities at entry points, including a lit up parking area on both sides of roads, facilities for disinfecting vehicles and an all-weather temporary structure to accommodate not less than 500 persons at a time with ample waiting area having chairs, lights and fans.

These entry points should have drinking water supply, separate restrooms for men and women, required IT infrastructure with proper support at the desks, provision for health check-up cubicles (can be arranged in open area also adhering to Covid-19 containment protocol), office space/rooms with washroom facilities for officials, ambulance with paramedics, wheelchair facility, dedicated vehicles for taking symptomatic passengers to pre-quarantine designated centres for testing/sample collections, PPEs as per requirement, standby power for entire area, display facilities for information for waiting passengers, food counters on payment basis, proper waste management and spot registration facilities for serving unregistered inbounds.

As announced, priority will be given to those from neighbouring states seeking medical aid in Kerala, pregnant women with family, family members including children separated due to lockdown, students, senior citizens with family members and persons who lost job.

Besides appointing Sinha as state coordinator, the government has also designated senior IAS officer Sanjay M Kaul as additional state coordinator and ADGP Manoj Abraham as the police representative for supervising the inbound/outbound movement of people.

Meanwhile, Rajan N Khobragade, principal secretary (health) said the task ahead would not be an easy one.

“It will not be like screening passengers at the airports like we did. Now, we must take care of the railway stations and our borders once the lockdown is lifted. We need to be more cautious,’’ he said.


