Kerala: Two new Covid-19 cases in Thiruvananthpuram
2020-04-30
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Barely 24 hours after the district attained Covid zero status, two persons were admitted to Medical college after being tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. With no evident foreign travel history, both cases are suspected to be of local transmission and the epidemiological investigation team has begun tracing of contacts and travel history.

The patients hailed from Brahmamkodu in Neyyatinkara and Melpala in Tamil Nadu. One of them is 48 years old and another person is 68 years old. The person from Brahmamkodu is employed with PWD. On Monday, he had reportedly collapsed in the house and vomitted and was taken to a private hospital at Moonalumoodu from where he was referred to a private hospital at Neyyatinkara. He was admitted to ICU in the hospital and his swabs were taken for testing. The results came coronavirus positive on Wednesday and he was shifted to medical college. He hadn't shown any signs of disease till Sunday, according to officials.

The 68-year-old man from Tamil Nadu was presented with stomach ache and fever on Monday midnight at Parassala taluk hospital. He was admitted in the hospital and after he showed signs of viral pneumonia, he was referred to medical college hospital. However his relatives took him to private hospital at Neyyatinkara, where he was admitted on Tuesday. His samples were taken for testing and when his results came positive, he was shifted to Medical college.

Initial investigation showed that both of them had no foreign travel history. The 68-year-old man lived with his wife, son, daughter in law, grand children and wife of the eldest son, who is in Middle East. However, the eldest son hasn't travelled to India in recent times, the officials have learnt.

Eight patients, who were admitted in the ward at the time of admission of the Tamil Nadu native, have been isolated. 29 contacts, including hospital staff, have been identified and quarantined. The ward and hospital premises were also fumigated.


