Kerala confirms 2nd coronavirus case, patient stable
2020-02-03
ALAPPUZHA/THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Kerala reported the country’s second novel coronavirus case on Sunday, with a male student of a university in Wuhan admitted to Alappuzha medical college hospital testing positive for the virus. The first case, that of a woman medical student who is undergoing treatment, was reported in Thrissur on Thursday.


State health minister K K Shailaja told reporters after a meeting in Alappuzha that the second person who tested positive — one among four admitted to the isolation ward at Alappuzha medical college hospital — had returned to Kerala on January 24. “Three of those admitted were studying in China while the fourth person is a relative of one of them. We are waiting for test reports of the others,” she said.

Shailaja said there was no need for panic as the condition of both patients was stable.

 
 

The health department received the test result of the infected person from National Institute of Virology, Pune, on Sunday afternoon. “Neither of the two patients has developed any serious complications. There is nothing to panic but we need to be vigilant. The department is strictly monitoring the situation so that the virus does not spread from them,” Shailaja said.

The Kerala health department has put 1,924 people under observation at their homes and 75 have been admitted to isolation wards in various hospitals. Till now, 104 samples of suspected cases have been sent for tests. Of these, 36 results have been received and two tested positive. In Alappuzha, four persons have also been admitted to the general hospital.

All those coming from China are under health department surveillance. “The only request to people is that if anyone who has come from China recently has not reported to the nearby health centre so far, they should immediately do so,” Shailaja said.

The Union health ministry and the India Council of Medical Research have permitted the Kerala unit of National Institute of Virology in Alappuzha to conduct tests for coronavirus. “Though we have facilities, we were not supposed to conduct the tests. There was a delay in getting test results from Pune NIV,” Shailaja said.

Wuhan in China is the ground zero of the virus outbreak which had infected over 14,500 people and led to 305 deaths till Sunday evening. Despite strong measures to contain the outbreak, including the Chinese government locking down Wuhan and adjoining cities in Hubei province, the virus continues to spread rapidly.

Apart from China, the virus has been detected in at least 21 countries, including India.

Amid mounting fear of a wider spread, the Union health ministry has asked hospitals across all states and Union territories to prepare isolation wards.


