Kerala unites to prevent community spread of coronavirus
2020-03-20
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan and opposition leader Ramesh Chennithala urged people’s representatives in local bodies to set aside adifferences and take vital steps at local-level to prevent Kerala from entering the ‘community-transmission phase’, ‘which the state is likely to enter in a couple of weeks’ time’.

In a joint video conference, addressing all the ward members of panchayats, municipalities and corporations on Thursday, the leaders said it was the prime responsibility of local administrations and people’s representatives to ensure that people are following restrictions and ban to keep the dreaded phase at bay.

“There’s a big possibility that the virus may spread unexpectedly in Kerala (a second phase of community spread). A local-level screening system must be ensured by local bodies and people’s representatives. They should check and see if restrictions are being followed,” said Vijayan.

Chennithala said Kerala - ‘considering the experience of other countries and experts’ - may enter the ‘community transmission phase’ in the next 10-15 days, ‘during which sources might go untraced and the number of cases might double everyday’. “We should remain united irrespective of our political differences and brace up to face such a phase, and survive,” he said.

Stressing on the need to remain alert every second to keep the situation under control, the chief minister said society should stay united even if Kerala takes unusual preventive measures. 

“We were able to contain the outbreak to a certain extent, thanks to our integrated prevention activities. But, continuous intervention of local bodies, political leaders and every citizen is required now to achieve a total containment,” he said.

Pointing out that almost 30,000 persons were under observation at their homes, Vijayan said their protection and requirements were major responsibilities of the respective local administration.

 There shouldn’t be denial of basic requirements, and LSGs and ward members should ensure a normal life for them as they are in ‘care centres’ and not detention, he said. Vijayan directed local bodies to act tough on those hoarding food items, provisions and medicines and to ensure their availability in the market through repeated raids and inspections. “LSGs should also involve migrant workers in prevention activities after creating the required awareness,” he said.

Chennithala, in his address, called for proper preparations at panchayat (block and district) levels to contain Covid-19. 


