Coronavirus outbreak: Key post for preventing contagions lying vacant
2020-02-08
PUNE: The state government is yet to appoint the full-time joint director of health services for prevention and containment of epidemic-prone diseases, considering the threat of novel coronavirus infection.



 
For now, an officer of family welfare department has been given an additional charge of this post. 

“The office of the joint director of health services monitors epidemic control programme in Maharashtra. However, this crucial post has been lying vacant since January 1, 2020. An officer who is already overburdened in training medical officials in state’s family welfare programme has been given an additional charge of such an important post,” medical practitioner and activist Abhijit More said.

He said the joint director, who is the technical head of the state, was responsible for surveillance of epidemic diseases, control of epidemic and reduction in such cases and casualties. “In the prevailing situation, when the threat of the novel coronavirus is looming large, how can the state government keep such an important post vacant? It should be filled on an urgent basis,” More said.

A senior health official said purchasing N95 masks and other protection equipment and kits were not enough to overcome challenges posed by outbreaks like the one in China. “Filling up the key vacant posts and also posts of ground staff are the key to prevent and contain spread of viruses and communicable diseases,” he said.

Another official said there was absolute lack of understanding at the highest level of policymakers and health authorities. “What they are interested in is patchy work. There is no long-term plan, vision and preparedness. Once the prevailing scare is over, things will be back to as they were,” he said.

“If we look at what is happening in China. Similar situation in Pune will require 1,000 ICU beds in government’s public health sector alone. A key post of a joint director can mobilise resources and bring in coordination between various government heath agencies in providing critical care in emergency situation. Currently, there is no one to take such calls,” said another health official.

When contacted, public health expert Archana Patil, director of the state health department said, “We have already initiated the process of filling the post of the joint director (epidemic prone diseases) at state health department.”


