Key market village ups guard, ensures effective lockdown
2020-04-04
Kolhapur: A village, barely 20km from Kolhapur city, has formed teams to keep a watch on its four entry points so that the lockdown and social distancing norms are strictly followed.

Sangrul village, with its 16,000 residents, is a key market place for the surrounding forty villages. It is also the junction through which residents of these other villages have to pass.

The village gram panchayat, however, passed a resolution to form teams and start vigil at the entrances after the first positive case was reported from Kolhapur city. The village has around 105 residents with home quarantine instructions, who have returned home from Pune and Mumbai.

Sadashiv Khade, sarpanch of village, said the committee named ‘Corona Dakshata Samiti’ has about forty people, who have volunteered to do the service.

“The teams are closely monitoring all those instructed to follow home quarantine. They are are not allowed to mix up with their family members also till fourteen days gets completed. After every two days, our committee members visit the homes of these quarantine members and check for their well-being and if they need anything. The family members are also advised not to come out of their houses,” he said. 

Gram sevak of the village, Pandurang Bidkar, said that they are making sure that no person is allowed to enter or exit the village without any valid reason. The people, who try to enter the village for no reasons, are stopped and told to return. Every person entering or leaving the village is asked to use a hand sanitizer before moving ahead.

The village teams are also keeping an eye on the emergency service vehicles by noting their registration numbers and keeping an eye on their movement in the village.

“We don’t want coronavirus to enter into our village. People have voluntarily joined the committee. This includes ex-army men, retired police personnel, doctors, CA, engineers, farmers and other professionals,” Bidkar said.

The teams are effectively using social networking apps to stay in constant touch of each other and informing about the entry, passage of any essential service vehicle or people in the village. 

Nitin Patil, who is a member of the committee, said, they had created a whatsapp group and all the group members sitting on four entry points are inter-connected. “The village is a junction village for around forty villages in the region and one has to pass through the village to commute other side. If a person gives reason like medical emergency while entering the village, then a voice message is sent on the whatsapp group about the person and the vehicle number so that the other check post members are aware about it,” he said.

The committee has also formed a mobile team which keeps roaming in the village to keep an eye on those who enter the village and to urge villagers against stepping out.

The committee has also asked Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) workers to take up a door-to-door survey of the village so that even a normal cold or cough patient will be found and treated immediately. 


