Coronavirus in Lucknow: KGMU junior doctors complain about protective kits
2020-03-24
LUCKNOW: The association of resident doctors at King George’s Medical University (KGMU) on Monday wrote to the vice-chancellor, saying that doctors were “scared” and “concerned” as they did not have protective equipment such as masks and gloves while treating patients of coronavirus. 


The Resident Doctors’ Association (RDA) said its members had not been provided with personal protective equipment (PPE) kits required to prevent them from the infection. 

KGMU authorities, however, said that PPE kits had been provided to all those deployed in the isolation ward. They said the ones who were attending to patients in the flu and fever clinic had been asked to maintain required distance from patients.

“It has been brought to our notice from senior and junior resident (SR/JR) doctors of various departments that residents attending to suspected and confirmed Covid-19 patients are working without PPE gear. This exposes us to community spread of the disease,” RDA president Dr Rahul Bharat wrote in the letter to VC Prof MLB Bhatt.

“We are scared of such working conditions causing emotional and psychological stress. We request you to provide PPE gear for proper functioning without any threat of infection,” the letter adds.

Over 150 resident doctors, mostly students of postgraduate and super-speciality courses form the backbone of the university’s healthcare system.

Dr Bharat claimed that PPE kits are not available in isolation ward as well, while masks are not being given to doctors working in flu and fever OPDs. 

“Ideally, all nursing/paramedical staff working in these wards and OPDs should also be given N-95 or triple-layered masks,” he said.

He also claimed that residents of pulmonary, anaesthesia and cardiology OPDs were provided sanitisers on Monday after RDA’s letter reached the VC.

However, KGMU authorities refuted RDA’s claim. Chief medical superintendent Prof SN Sankhwar said that PPE kits are being provided as per guidelines of Indian Council of Medical Research to those who come in direct contact of suspected and confirmed cases in the isolation ward.

“As of now, 100 PPE kits are being used in the isolation ward where corona patients are admitted and in microbiology lab where tests are done. We maintain a permanent back-up of 600 PPE kits. We also have the required number of masks,” he said. 

Prof Sankhwar also said, “At the flu and fever clinic, all patients undergo infra-red thermal scanning done by a paramedic from a safe distance of 5 feet. Those with fever and dry cough—the signs of coronavirus—are sent to the isolation ward immediately, hence, there is no direct contact with the patient. Patients with flu, including those suspected to have swine flu, are attended to by doctors wearing masks and gloves.” 


