Covid-19: Khairatabad and Charminar areas top containment zones’ charter
2020-04-19
HYDERABAD: As much as 69% of the total 146 containment zones (hotspots) in Greater Hyderabad limits were set up in two municipal zones alone.


Officials said Khairatabad has the highest containment zones in the city with 51 hotspots followed by Charminar, which has 49 clusters as on April 17. While Khairatabad, Mehdipatnam, Karwan, Jubilee Hills and Goshamahal circles fall under Khairatabad zone, Charminar, Malakpet, Falaknuma, Santoshnagar, Chandrayangutta and Rajendranagar come under Charminar zone. Among the six municipal zones, LB Nagar has only two hotspots, with least affected Covid-19 positive cases.

 


“Of the total containment zones, 12 places are most vulnerable as they had reported more than six cases in a zone. Charminar zone has eight such places of 12, three in Khairatabad and one in Serilingampally zone. While 85 hotspots have reported only one case, 49 hotspots have reported two to five positive cases in one containment zone,” a senior official of GHMC told STOI

An additional commissioner said once quarantine period is over and the infected persons are discharged, GHMC is withdrawing containment zone restrictions. “Fifteen zones have been withdrawn in the last three days. For instance, some containment spots in Charminar zone have been lifted and five more added due to new cases,” he said.

 Apart from the ministers and top officials, chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao himself is reviewing the situation in Hyderabad as more than 60 coronavirus cases had been reported from Greater Hyderabad jurisdiction.

Among urban local bodies other than GHMC, Nizamabad has 17 containment zones in the district with 11 in Nizamabad municipal corporation limits, while the rest of the zones are spread out in Bodhan, Armoor and Bhimgal. The second biggest city in Telangana, Warangal has 15 hotspots, while Rangareddy district has 10 (other than GHMC) hotspots. 

The government has also declared five locations in Jalpally, one each in Manikonda, Turkayamjal, Tukkuguda, Bandlaguda Jagir and Narsingi as containment zones.

The government has clearly directed the municipal commissioners and zonal commissioners to ensure that people living in these containment zones stay indoors at all times. 

Municipal administration minister KT Rama Rao has directed officials that essentials such as milk, vegetables and medicines should be delivered at the doorsteps of residents.

