Khalsa Aid donates robotic food trolley for quarantine centres
2020-05-28
Ludhiana: Seeking to help health officials and those undergoing quarantine at isolation centre in Ludhiana’s civil hospital, Khalsa Aid has donated a Robotic Food Distribution trolley to the district administration. The trolley is being used for contact-less food delivered to those admitted in the isolation centre there. 

Civil hospital officials said that a single person could operate the food trolley through remote. 

Additional deputy commissioner (development) Amrit Singh said they (Khalsa Aid) were in touch with them and they donated the remote controlled operated food distribution trolley. She added that the same was donated on Tuesday and it was put to use at the isolation centre of the hospital the same day.

“It will be of great help in serving food in the isolation centres. As there is one such trolley, it can be used at one place and that is the civil hospital itself,” said Amrit Singh. 

Amarpreet Singh, director, Asia Pacific, Khalsa Aid, said, “We always go by the teachings of our Gurus and believe in ‘manas ki jaat sabhe ekai pehchano (That the human race is one) and thus serving the community in these trying times comes first.” Khalsa Aid said they had donated one such trolley in Ludhiana and two others in Rajindra Hospital in Patiala. 

Meanwhile, civil hospital authorities said such a machine would be handy in serving the patients at the isolation centre. Senior medical officer (SMO) at the Civil Hospital, Dr Geeta Kataria, said the trolley would be handy in the sense that it would decrease the risk for health workers. She added that it would also ensure that proper distancing was maintained with the patients during food distribution. 

“As it is a remote guided machine, the trolley can be stopped in front of patient and then he/she can take food from it. So, the staff need not go to patients and can operate machine from a distance,” she added.

Meanwhile, social activists have appreciated Khalsa Aid for the act. “Khalsa Aid has been doing such work for humanity. Hope that the machine serves its purpose and decrease the risk to the health workers serving Covid patients. Also the (patients) don’t have to go to collect food and the same will be served near their beds,” said Narinder Singh, a social activist.


