Khichdi becomes khaas: How lockdown is helping us rediscover the joys of home cooking
2020-05-03
The current crisis has forced us to relook at many aspects of our life – be it work, travel or relationships. And it seems to have driven home one point – let’s get back to basics. In a sense, it has brought out the romantic in us, people are posting and raving about the blue skies, the sighting and chirping of birds and, this almost brings a lump to my throat, the goodness of dal-rice. It’s like people have realised that the most intimate relationship we share is with food and it remains central to our lives, especially to our quarantine life.

In a sense, it took a pandemic for people to see that food is much more than a sum total of carbs, fat and protein. The macros that matter are safety, survival and sustenance. The panic shopping, even at the risk of getting infected, is a testament to just that. For the first time in the 20 years of my career, I am asked questions about immunity-boosting foods. Till now it was only about what can I do to accelerate fat burning. I am enjoying this interest, celebrating it.

It’s wonderful to see people return to basics, to discover that when you are short on time and other resources but still need to eat to stay strong and secure, it is the khichdi that comes through not the smoothie. The question though is that will the learnings of the #lockdown stay with us? Will the love for home-cooked food and virtuosity of jhadu-pocha transition into our real lives once things are back to normal?

Well, I am a skeptic. In the early 90s when Cuba faced food and fuel shortages due to the US embargo, Cubans lost weight and rates of heart disease and diabetes dropped. But when the economy picked up in the new millennium, weight and related diseases rose and medical journals called the shortage period a man-made disaster. Long story short, disasters or emergencies may throw up a few good things but they don't make for a life-long learning. Not when it’s forced.

So once life is back to normal, actively re-initiate your love for home cooked food. What you are doing right now is a one-night stand but it's worthy of a long-term relationship, pursue it once the lockdown is over.


Diwekar is an author and a well-known dietician

