Kidney patients hit hard by lockdown
2020-04-03
Kochi: Scores of underprivileged patients across the state who had undergone kidney transplant and are dependent on immunosuppressive drugs have been hit hard by the lockdown and subsequent shortage. Because of their medical condition and current concerns over the pandemic, it is riskier for them to venture out..

Community pharmacies they depend on, under the Kerala Medical Service Corporation Ltd, are experiencing a shortage of some commonly used medicine brands and it has become impossible for them to procure it. 

Shajahan Kaithakkal, a resident of Othukkungal in Malappuram said Karunya pharmacies in Manjeri and Tirur do not have the medicines. "We need to go to either Kozhikode of Ernakulam to get them which looks impossible now," he said. Shajahan who underwent transplant surgery four years ago needs medicines worth Rs 14,000 every month. "If these were available from Karunya the cost would not be more than Rs 8,000," he said. 

"When the lockdown started, I bought medicines for 10 days. Many of us buy them from Ernakulam because they are not locally available in the price that we can afford," says Sumesh T R who needs medicines to the tune of Rs 10,000 every month. 

Ever since the lockdown began, Sumesh who stays at Pindimana near Kothamangalam, couldn't go to work. 

"These medicines are costly and I can't buy them in bulk. Since Rengraf was not available doctor advised me to buy a substitute," he said. 

Harish S, who underwent kidney transplant five years ago says he prefers Rengraf which is in shortage now. 

"I went to Arogya pharmacy last week they said they don't have stock. Someone got me medicines for five-six days. I am not sure whether I would get medicines now," he said. 

They are also worried about hopping from store to store in search of medicines. 

"We are like magnets when it comes to getting an illness. Many medicines like Immutil and Rengraf are not available ever since the start of lockdown," says Mujib Ali, state president, Kerala Kidney Transplant Family Trust with around 100 members across the state. 

Mujib Ali himself is on immunosuppressants ever since he underwent a kidney transplant. 

Ali said though he had called the police helpline number - 112 - to deliver life-saving drugs, there was no response. "I have now written to the health minister to take steps to deliver the medicines to 

Officials with KMSCL said though substitute brands like Pangraf are available they had been facing difficulties in procurement because of the lockdown.


