Kids in Covid-19 hotspots face risk over delayed immunisation, warn experts
2020-04-24
Belagavi: The state government on Thursday resumed routine immunisation activities, that were hampered during the nation-wide lockdown across the state, barring Covid-19 hotspots. 

According to a government notification, routine vaccination drive, which was halted in the state on March 23, will be carried out in the state barring containment zones or Covid clusters. According to the available data, there are 337 containment zones where children will not be administered immunity shots.

Although the government officials cite possible infection from exposure as the reason behind continued suspension of immunisation drive in containment zones, it appears lack of clarity in policy may be the actual reason.

Speaking to TOI, B N Rajani, deputy director, immunisation, health and family welfare department, said: “We admit that delay beyond three weeks between two doses is not advisable. The programme was hampered for over three weeks due to Covid-19 situation.” 

“It is impediment to further suspend the programme at Covid-19 hotspots as we cannot expose children to infection. The government has to come up with a new set of guidelines and until then no vaccination except shots for newborns will be administered at Covid-19 hotspots,” she said. 

Delhi-based public health activist and advocate E Premdas Pinto said, “There are several undernourished children who are prone to diseases which these vaccines can prevent. The government has to go by principle of proportionality while dealing with public health system. We cannot ignore our other responsibilities. Barring hotspots from the programme is simply irrational and illogical.”. 

Premdas said immunity issues may not show up immediately. “Immunity building takes time and children are at risk in the long term. The government has to come up with solution for these zones,” he added. 

Sylvia Karpagam, a doctor and public health researcher from Bengaluru, said, “The guidelines are discriminatory. Every child is entitled for vaccination and we cannot deprive the children of their right. The move clearly shows that they lack planning for these clusters. 

“The government should provide PPEs to health workers, designate places and allow people come to come for vaccination drive. It is not that difficult,” said Sylvia. 

What are the vaccines?

Most of the vaccines are administered to children between 0 to 1 year. They are given BCG at birth. Other shots are IPV, HIB vaccine, Triple Antigen, Hepatitis B and Varilix. At the age of five OPV and TD vaccines are administered.


