Lockdown heroes: Kids open piggy banks, donate little savings
2020-04-04
AHMEDABAD: Inspector D R Gohil was surprised to see 6-year-old Ishita Sharma comw into his office at the Vatva GIDC police station with her piggybank, saying that she wants to donate the money in it to fight the coronavirus.

Gohil said the little girl said she had wanted to buy a cycle and had saved the money for it but now wants to give to the police to help poor people.

“When I asked that how she will buy a cycle, she would start saving money buy the cycle later, but helping poor is important,” said Gohil.

Gohil said, he told Ishita that the government does not need the money now but he will call her when it does. “I told her that for the moment she should buy the cycle with the money and when we need money for the poor we will call her. She went away happy,” Gohil said. 

Children in Gujarat are emptying their piggy banks and donating their little savings to help fight the coronavirus, crisis and provide relief to people affected by the lockdown.

They have joined celebrities and business tycoons in donating to the PM-CARES Fund and also aiding direct relief measures for the poor.

While a four-year-old girl from Ankleshwar town in Bharuch donated Rs 11,200 to the PM-CARES Fund, three boys from Ahmedabad walked into a police station to give away their combined savings of Rs 5,500 to feed migrant workers, whose lives have been upended by the lockdown.

Four-year-old Paris Vyas won the hearts of millions when she told the media she is donating whatever she had in her piggy bank to fight the crisis and provide succour to the poor.

It turned out that her fancy piggybank had coins and currency notes worth Rs 11,200.

“I am donating whatever I have saved in my piggy bank. I saw on the TV that many famous people are giving money to fight the coronavirus.

“If they can do it, I can also give my money. I am giving away all my savings. Everyone should donate money to help the government fight the coronavirus,” she said.

Two days ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi's nonagenarian mother Hiraba, who lives in Gandhinagar, donated Rs 25,000 from her savings to the PM-CARES Fund.

Inspired by her gesture, a family in Gandhinagar decided to donate Rs 1 lakh to the fund after being prompted by their 13-year-old son, Rudra Patel.

“I have decided not to celebrate my birthday this time. At my request, my parents decided to donate Rs 1 lakh to the PM-CARES Fund,” Rudra told a news channel, proudly holding up the cheque.


