Kin of mild Covid-19 patients to be administered hydroxychloroquine as precaution
2020-06-03
HYDERABAD: Family members of mild and pre-symptomatic Covid-19 patients will be administered hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) dose as a precaution to test the risk of coronavirus spread. 


Till now, only healthcare, municipal and police personnel were being given HCQ tablets. 

The latest guideline circulated for treatment of mild and pre-symptomatic patients of Covid-19 who can be treated at home stipulates that HCQ will be administered to these category of patients as well.

Based on the guidelines of the Union ministry of health and family welfare, the guidelines circulated to the medical health authorities say that family members can be given a homecare kit, including HCQ, and a list of do’s and don’ts.

After the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has issued instructions to the states that mild patients can be treated at home, the health department said if members of a single family are infected they would be treated in their home. 

“If the patients do not have a separate room and bathroom for isolation in their homes, they can be shifted to a government quarantine centre or a hospital,” an official said.

According to Dr Kiran Madala, head of the anaesthesia department, Nizamabad Government Medical College, details of HCQ use by countries are few and far between. 

Dr Kiran, who was involved with research studies conducted by the World Health Organisation, said more than 3,000 independent organisations are looking forward to WHO’s expertise on HCQ.

He said studies had shown that 8% risk of Covid-19 patients had come down with HCQ dosage. “Oxford University in England has initiated a big research by conducting HCQ trials on one lakh people. The results are still awaited on its efficacy,” he said.

When contacted, a health department official on condition of anonymity said that WHO-prescribed dosage was different from the dosage recommended by ICMR. 

“The medical staff who were given HCQ dosage did not complain of any side-effects. ICMR has given clear instructions to administer the dosage to only family members of mild patients of Covid-19,” he added.


