Kin of Covid-19 deceased share harrowing experience, AMC says will check their plaint
2020-05-17
Aurangabad: Two families who lost their loved ones to Covid-19 spoke out about their traumatic experiences while getting the bodies and the way different agencies dealt with them.

After the death of a 58-year-old Covid-positive man on April 5, the family members were left to fend for themselves from arranging the ambulance to carrying out the cremation. “We arranged for the ambulance and conducted the last rites without any PPE,” a family member said.

The family of a 94-year-old woman, who died at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on May 12, said even when they took her to the hospital, nobody was willing to touch her. They themselves took her to the various departments for check-ups and swab collection. She died a few hours later and the family members took the body to the mortuary. The family members were told to go home and return the next day, by when, the Covid-19 test result was expected.

“At 11pm, Chikalthana police entered our lane sounding sirens and told us to go to the GMCH. In a few minutes, a van from the Satara police station also came. At 11.56 pm, we got a call from the hospital asking us to take the body immediately,” the woman’s relative said.

The next day, the family had to run between the GMCH and Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) to get the death certificate and get their own swab tests done.

“The AMC officials told us that they don’t have the manpower. They handed us two PPE kits and asked to get the cremation done ourselves. After making a few calls, finally, two men were deputed to us. It was a traumatic experience,” the relative said.

When asked, GMCH deputy dean and head of the department of forensic science Kailash Zine said the hospital informs the AMC about the Covid deaths immediately. “Like in Pune and Mumbai, in Aurangabad too, it is the responsibility of the municipal corporation to arrange for the ambulance, manpower, PPE kits and disinfectants for cremation or burial of the Covid-19 deceased,” Zine said.

When asked, municipal health officer Nita Padalkar told TOI that the civic body has roped in an NGO to take care of providing hearse, workers and PPE kits for relatives of Covid-19 casualties. “The NGO is to ensure that the dead body is disposed of as per the government guidelines. Their contact number has been shared with the GMCH too. However, if the patient's kin were denied assistance, then we will look into the matter," Padalkar said.


