King Institute takes the lead in TN’s fight against Covid-19
2020-04-20
CHENNAI: The state has so far tested around 40,000 samples for coronavirus, more than one-fourth at the King Institute of Preventive Medicine in Chennai.

The 122-year-old institute in Guindy, which played a key role in controlling small-pox, cholera and even the devastating Spanish flu of 1918, is again spearheading the fight against a disease outbreak. Begun as a public health laboratory in 1897, it soon became a full-fledged vaccine manufacturing and testing unit and helped officials of Madras Presidency perform a staggering 12 lakh vaccinations in the early 20th century.

After Independence, it played a key role in almost all major disease outbreaks including of dengue, encephalitis or H1N1. "The institute is yet again playing a key role and staff have again risen to the challenge by working round the clock," said P Gunasekaran, former director who headed the state’s fight against H1N1 in 2009.

"It (work) never ends", said a current employee, requesting anonymity. "Just when we think the day’s work is nearing completion, we get calls saying more samples have arrived. Once technicians get inside labs, we can’t step out for the next 6-8 hours and don’t get enough time to even have food properly."

A recent visit showed dedicated rooms to collect samples in thermocol boxes, sort them out and conduct tests. In the labs, samples are tested using Real Time - Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) method. Though rapid testing kits have arrived, their results are only indicative. They can confirm presence of antibodies. Standard RT-PCR continues to be the primary diagnostic tool.

"On an average it takes 2-3 hours to test one round of samples, said Ram Rajasekaran, head of TN Central University’s Microbiolody department.

Technicians require higher concentration levels and can’t tend to get diverted, particularly while placing samples in well plates. Else the results will become inaccurate and the entire process has to be restarted, he added.

Health secretary Beela Rajesh said senior virologists at the institute were facing tough challengers as the virus was tricky. "Test results too are not always consistent. Sometimes, a patient, who tests negative in the first test, turns positive the second time round," she added.

Despite the odds, the institute has successfully tested thousands of samples and continues to act as a mentor and reference lab for many other labs in the state, said health minister C Vijayabaskar.

It is, however, facing several serious problems. There is no proper compound wall to stop entry of outsiders rusted pipelines can be spotted all over and bins near labs overflow.A sum of Rs 2.07 crore was allocated in 2019 but little has changed.

When contacted, K Kauveri, director, refused to comment.


