Kit shortage delays rapid antibody testing in Maharashtra
2020-04-12
PUNE: The state’s plan to start antibody testing to step up the fight against coronavirus has been hampered by shortage of kits. 

The kits have been ordered from abroad, but have been delayed. They were supposed to arrive on April 9, but senior health officials said they have no idea when they would be available. 


 


At the moment, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests are being done. PCR requires throat swabs and 5-6 hours for the results. Rapid antibody testing kits are quicker to get early results by using. The results will be available in 15-30 minutes.

With the state registering 1,652 positive cases and a 5.5% mortality rate, state health minister Rajesh Tope said that these tests can help improve surveillance.

Dr Subhash Salunkhe, technical adviser to the state government on pandemic control, told TOI that there has been an unnecessary delay of these kit. “Our dependence of kits from abroad have delayed the entire process,” he said.

Another government official, on the condition of anonymity, said the initial consignment allotted to the country had some quality issues and that a fresh consignment was been ordered, which accounts for the delay. 

The Indian Council of Medical Research recommended rapid antibody testing for Covid-19 in high containment zones on April 2, but no state governments has procured the kits so far, said health officials. “The kits were supposed to reach India on Wednesday. However, it was delayed after other countries express concerns over the quality of these kits,” an official said. 

The ICMR earlier this week said it had ordered 5 lakh kits. The kits were “on their way”, the Union health secretary assured all the states on Friday.

Government officials said local companies have the capacity to manufacture these kits, but were not given permission over quality concerns. “While some companies have the approval from NIV for efficacy kits, they do not have the import licence from the drug controller, and some companies do not have both,” an official said. 


Bhilwara pattern for cluster management 

Baramati has replicated Bhilwara’s “ruthless containment” model following six positive cases and one death. “The model involves sealing clusters that have seen a spike in cases, identifying each infected person, isolating them and reducing their interface and the interface of all those they might have come in contact with. This has helped in preventing the spread,” said Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram. They have readied 44 zones and appointed officials and ward marshals in this regard.


