Kitchen hacks to keep your plants pest-free during the lockdown
2020-04-29
Garden pests are a common problem around this time of the year. While under normal circumstances, plant lovers would protect their potted beauties with pesticides and other disinfectants, given the lockdown, these resources have been limited. Experts recommend that simple and quick DIY solutions can help keep your green patch at home pest-free.
“To get rid of Aphids, one of the most common pests that reproduce at a fast rate take over a plant, plant owners can go for a soapnut cleaning solution. This homemade remedy immobilises the pests and limits their spreading,” says Anoop Kumar CP, Bengaluru-based organic farming consultant.
Adding to that, Rajendra Hegde – Chairman and Managing Director of Biological Research Innovation Centre and Solutions LLP and agricultural entomologist – says that we can control the growth of insects such as mealy bugs and aphids using ingredients from our own kitchen during lockdown. “These easy-to-make solutions do not kill the insects, but protect your plant from them. The smell of these solutions turn the bugs away from your plants, following which they either die of starvation or leave the plant,” he explains. 


Green chilli, garlic and ginger to your rescue
One of the easiest home remedy that one can prepare during lockdown is by mixing the 3Gs – green chilli, garlic and ginger. Together, they should weight about 50 gms. Pound them into a coarse paste. Add a cup of water to it and let it rest overnight. The next day, strain the solution and add one litre of water to it. Spray this solution, and not pour, on the plants. 


Neem oil for the protective coating
Add 10 ml of neem oil to one litre of water. Also, add a few drops of shampoo to it. Avoid using a liquid detergent, as they may tenderise the shoot and leaves. Spray this on your plants. If you do not have neem oil, just a few drops of shampoo dissolved in water also will do the trick. 


A dose of hing and buttermilk
Asafoetida or hing can be helpful to tackle curling of leaves. Add 5 gms of hing in a litre of sour butter milk and spray it on the plants. 


Turmeric trick
Another home remedy that one can try is by properly dissolving 25 gms of turmeric powder in water, and spraying it on plants.


Soapnut solution
Soak one soapnut in 200 ml of water and leave it overnight. Next morning, squeeze the pulp of the soapnut and filter it. Add more water to this, so that the solution measures about one litre. Spray this solution on the plants. Soapnut water coats the aphids and crushes their eggs. Whatever is left is consumed by the ladybirds.

 

 


