Uttar Pradesh: Kitchen gardening on terrace helps beat lockdown anxiety
2020-04-29
AGRA: Four years ago, when Vijay Nagar-based Vibha Gupta (65) started gardening on her terrace, growing some vegetables and fruits, her neighbours and relatives were not sure if it was a good idea as the task demanded constant care and labour.

However, today amid the corona scare lockdown, Gupta's garden is inspiring others to follow suit and enjoy the fruits of their labour in time of scarcity,

 


“I started it as a hobby, but today, my rooftop garden is the only source of green vegetables and some seasonal fruits for my four-member family. The quality and taste of the home grown vegetables and fruits are way better than those brought from the market. At least, my kitchen is not affected by coronavirus scare or the lockdown,” said Gupta.

Like her, Hindi poet Ramesh Muskan and his wife, Renu Sharma, have turned their terrace into a kitchen garden, toiling over it over the past five years. Today, this couple, who lives at their Pushpanjali Garden Estate-based house, hardly buys vegetables for their joint family of 14 members. 

 


“Our terrace has seasonal vegetablea round the year. Currently, we have ladyfinger, tomato, spinach, capsicum, broad beans and green onion. Our garden has inspired our neighbours to take up gardening. Today, in these trying times of the lockdown, this hobby has come as a boon to us and our acquaintances," said Ramesh (45).


 


In neighbouring district Firozabad, a railway guard, Amit Pal, posted at Tundla railway station, too, has turned his 1,350 square foot terrace into an organic farm. “Last year, I had grown 5,550 kg of tomato and this year, I have grown 10 quintals of baby corn. All this fetches me good amount of money apart from regular vegetable supply for my kitchen. In my absence, my wife, Rachna Singh, takes care of our terrace garden. I have passed on my skills to at least 150 farmers of Firozabad, which has benefited them during the lockdown.”

Prashant Pacheriwala, 40, an Agra-based farming entrepreneur, who takes classes of terrace gardening, said, “The concept is still spreading in Agra and neighbouring districts. A mere outlay of Rs 3,000-Rs 5,000, can help any family to have round-the-year vegetable supply for their respective kitchens.

“In terrace farming, we don’t use soil, but organic manure, coco peat, drip irrigation system to grow seasonal vegetables and fruits, which are much better in quality and taste as compared to market products. Amid the lockdown, we have also supplied vegetables and fruits to the local market," said Prashant, who owns 153 acre of farming land and also has a terrace garden at Tanishq Rajshree Estate.


