Covid-19 in Kolkata: KMC closes swimming pools till month-end
2020-03-16
KOLKATA: As a precautionary measure against the spread of novel coronavirus, the Kolkata Municipal Corporation on Sunday suspended activities at 10 swimming pools that operate on KMC land till the end of this month. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Debasis Kumar, member, mayor in council (parks and gardens), said, “The novel coronavirus is a global crisis and the government is taking all necessary precautions. Although the swimming season starts from April, some clubs have started activities at their pools. As part of precautionary measures, we have decided to close down the pools till March 31.”

 
 

According to doctors, the infection generally does not spread in the chlorinated water of a pool. However, it is safe to avoid being in close contact with several people in small gatherings before and after getting in the pool. 

“Coronavirus doesn’t get transmitted in water, especially in swimming pools that have a heavy amount of chlorine in it. But before getting in the pool, the members are generally exposed to a large gathering in a small space where the virus can spread,” said Arindam Biswas, consultant at RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences.

Kumar, who is also the chairperson of Bengal Amateur Swimming Association, the nodal body of all private swimming clubs in the city, added, “I can’t take decision on behalf of private swimming clubs, but I urge them to discus and take a decision on whether they want to keep the pools open during this period.”

Bhowanipur Swimming Association at Puddapukur and the Hidco-run pool inside New Town Business Club have suspended swimming classes till the end of this month. 

“Yesterday we took the decision of closing all activities till March 31, including the pool, multigym, table tennis and dance training,” said Ujjal Basu, general secretary. 

Other multigyms at Puddapukur and Chetla Agrani Club have also suspended activities till the end of the month while a representative of another club said they were facing a decrease in footfall. However, they added that have taken precautionary measures. “We are implementing the use of sanitizers and not allowing anyone suffering from cough and cold to train at our gym,” said Sayantan Roy, owner of Evergreen Fitness gym at Haridevpur.

While Rush Fitness Club on Southern Avenue has assigned staff wearing gloves to clean equipment at regular intervals and made sanitizers mandatory at the front desk, gym floor and changing room, Body Shaper Gymnasium in Behala is promoting the use of masks among members.

