Covid-19: KMC, cops form team for high-rise visits
2020-06-12
KOLKATA: The KMC and Kolkata Police have set up a joint team to identify vulnerable senior citizens in high-rises and provide a list of dos and don’ts, both within the apartment and outside. With 70% of fresh cases being reported from south Kolkata high-rises in Bhowanipore, Ballygunge, Kasba, Golf Green-Jadavpur, Kalikapur, Gopalnagar and Paharpur in Garden Reach, the joint team hopes to stem spread through awareness campaigns.


On Thursday, Abhirupa Apartment in Gopalnagar, Eastern Plaza in Kalikapur and Metro Railway Officers Quarters on SP Mukherjee Road were added to the containment zones’ list. Chairman of the KMC Board of Administration (BOA) Firhad Hakim said random tests had failed to establish a direct link between the spread of infection in high-rises and markets.




The community wing of police, along with 700 teams of KMC are planning to visit the affected apartments and inform residents about quarantine rules and safe use of common passages.

“Among the common issues are the number of outsiders entering the campuses. Deliveries can be taken at the gate. Similarly, thermal checks can be conducted on vendors, helpers, and visitors at the main gate,” a KMC official said.

He also suggested that residents ensure elevators, handrails and equipment in children’s play area and gym are sanitized everyday. “We are advising that handwash facility and sanitizers be placed at the main gate and reception. All residents, staffers, helpers and visitors must sanitize their hands, both during entry and exit,” said a community policing officer.

Large portions of Alipore, Tollygunge, Ballygunge and Garfa-Kalikapur have been a challenge with as many as 27 new containment zones being declared from these areas in past 48 hours. “The moment KMC sends us the area list, we reach out to the locality and find out who had come in contact with the patient. We then explain to the apartment associations the dos and don’ts. We also help KMC carry out random swab tests of neighbours,” said an officer from south division. Commissioner Anuj Sharma has also asked all OCs to ensure strict social distancing at markets near Covid zones.


