KMC to help West Bengal health department fight against spread of coronavirus
2020-03-08
KOLKATA: On a day the country reported three more confirmed Covid-19 cases, taking the total count of infected to 34 in India, state health department officials and their civic counterparts met at the KMC headquarters on Saturday to chalk out strategies and enhance preparedness to fight the spread of coronavirus. There has been no Covid-19 positive case in Bengal so far.


The state health department is also considering to upgrade the IPGMER laboratory for testing swab samples of corona suspects if the need arises. Currently, all samples are being tested at ICMR-NICED.

 
 

From now on, KMC health workers will help the state health department in tracking the condition of flyers under home surveillance. Currently, as a precautionary measure, all international flyers arriving in the city are screened at the airport. While those with the slightest of symptoms are sent to the ID Hospital for isolation, those arriving from affecting regions are either kept under home surveillance or are enlisted for home observation. So far, the onus of keeping track of these flyers was on the state health department. 

According to plans, the KMC health department will gather information airport about the health of flyers and feed the addressed into their database. Based on the report of health officials, a team of KMC workers will visit the houses of the flyers for enquiry. The KMC health team will then prepare a report on their findings and send it to the state health department officials.

“We will help the health department by providing information about flyers under home isolation,” mayor-in-council member Atin Ghosh said.

This apart, the health department will ask medical officers on duty at KMC clinics to take care of patients with flu-like symptoms. KMC will also put up hoardings across the city as part of an awareness drive against coronavirus. As a precautionary measure, private hospital have started taking domestic travel history of cold-and-cough patients at the emergency or OPD.

On Saturday, a corona suspect was referred to ID Hospital from Kothari Medical Centre. The 67-year-old had returned to the city from Jaipur on Friday. He had gone to the Alipore hospital with complaints of diarrhoea, cold and cough. Even as he insisted that he was suffering from cold and cough even before visiting Jaipur, the doctors preferred not to take any chance. “We will keep him under observation in the isolation ward before our doctors decide on whether his swab samples need to sent for testing,” said ID Hospital principal Anima Haldar.

