KMC, cops to hit streets, fight coronavirus together
2020-04-18
KOLKATA: Top civic, Nabanna and police officers drew up a comprehensive containment plan on Friday and earmarked parts of at least 40 wards in Kolkata, where police would have the powers to stop people from venturing out on roads without any valid reason. However, both the KMC and Kolkata Police will keep an eye out for the elderly and the ailing in the restricted zones and extend all help.


Several pockets of north, central and south Kolkata, which have thrown up multiple Covid-19 cases, were cordoned off on Friday itself and police were deployed to restrict non-essential movements. Kolkata Armed Police personnel, including those from the Rapid Action Force (RAF), are likely to hit the streets from Saturday to enforce stricter vigil as civic authorities and health officials step up their door-to-door fever surveillance, contact tracing and sanitization drive to contain the spread of novel coronavirus. 

“The tendency to flout lockdown norms among a section of people in some wards has necessitated the strict watch. From Saturday, we have sought strict police action against those who will violate the rules. If necessary, RAF will be deployed in troubled areas,” said a senior civic official on Friday, when mayor Firhad Hakim held marathon meetings with the state, civic and police brass.

According to a KMC official, these zones earmarked as “sensitive”, include pockets in Dum Dum, Cossipore-Belgachhia, Narkeldanga, Jorasanko, Chitpore, Burrabazar, College Street-Bowbazar, Beliaghata, Entally, Elliot Road, Collins Lane and Tiljala-Topsia in north-central Kolkata, and Bhowanipore, Kalighat, Gariahat-Ballygunge, Kidderpore-Metiabruz and Garden Reach in south. Similar measures had been taken in some places off EM Bypass, an officer said. According to the plan drawn up by the civic and police brass, all entry points to the containment zones will be sealed.

“Containment measures have also been imposed on Belgachhia, Narkeldanga, Muktarambabu Street, Burrabazar, Chetla, Mudiali and Padmapukur, where Covid-19 cases were reported. KMC and health department are tracing primary and secondary contacts,” a senior police officer said. “Ten houses on the two sides of patients’ residences are being closed. Police will arrange for food for the families in those places.” At markets close to containment zones, shops will remain open for three hours a day and not more than five people will be allowed to stand in a queue. at a time. At the KMC-run large markets, police will man the entry points and restrict crowding inside and outside shops. 

Police pointed out that help from battalions might be sought for the exercise. If someone has an emergency, the OC, after informing his seniors, may allow him/her to step out and also make the necessary arrangements. All cops and KMC workers in the zones will wear PPEs. They will carry out thermal screening of everyone entering or leaving the zones. “No loitering will be allowed. No one can step out without a mask,” said a cop.


