Kolkata: KMC focus back on markets as Covid-19 cases shoot up
2020-06-04
KOLKATA: The anti-Covid squad of Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) has shifted its focus back on city’s markets that are witnessing a crowd surge in Unlock 1.0 and may have had a direct bearing on the increased corona cases. Oximeter tests will now be randomly done on people visiting the markets. Police are stepping up their vigil to break the transmission chain. 




Even earlier, KMC and cops had introduced several measures, like traders opening stalls on alternate days and curtailed time, but this time the authorities are stepping up the vigil a few notches.


Times ViewThe decision to focus on markets is correct; this is one place that has seen the maximum violation of social-distancing norms (before the start of commute by public transport). Every household should rationalise and reduce market visits as far as possible.
In the past two weeks, especially in the last couple of days, the number of red zones in the south and eastern suburban Kolkata saw a dramatic rise in Covid cases. This week, Kolkata reported 269 positive cases and statistics indicate that they were now being reported from apartments and standalone buildings.

Preliminary investigation in the the rise in containment zones linked it to a surge in footfall in markets, sources said. When cops and KMC officials begun collecting information from the affected areas, it became clear that local markets could have played a pivotal role in spreading the virus. “When we spoke to the patients, they said they had hardly ventured out except visiting the markets regularly,” said a KMC official.

KMC board of administrators chairperson Firhad Hakim has repeatedly conceded that the civic body was keeping a hawk’s eye on the markets in areas where the number of containment zones were rising rapidly. “Though I have asked the civic officials to locate the origin of infection, I feel the markets in the neighbourhoods could be the trouble spots,” Hakim said.

According to him, large areas of Beliaghata-Kankurgachi-Phoolbagan under ward 31 and Selimpur and Dhakuria in wards 90-92 were under fresh threat. Beliaghata Rashmoni Bazar, Maniktala market, Layalka makeshift market and the Jorabagan police station market are now all part of containment zones. Hakim has threatened to shut down the markets if fresh cases are reported from market areas.

The civic officials and cops are keeping a special watch on Karunamoyee-Siriti, Kudghat and Kalitala markets as fresh cases are being reported from these places. 

KMC has now decided to introduce oximeter tests in neighbourhoods located close to city’s major markets. “Our team would move around apartments close to markets and test people randomly. People with adverse heart and breathing conditions will be sent for further tests,” said a KMC official. With the result being instant, KMC will have a quick idea og f an area’s Covid status. 

Kolkata Police have stressed on oximeter tests after two traders in Baghajatin-Layalka and Behala Simultala markets tested positive. “We even had locals protest the reallocation of the Baghajatin marklet from the main road towards Layelka. With cases on the rise, we need to introduce random tests,” said an officer from south suburban police.

Lalbazar said that while it will not be possible to put cops on everyday rounds, there will be intensified patrolling at the markets. In addition, no one without masks will be allowed entry inside markets. Sanitization and cleaning efforts will continue under the supervision of market committees. “If severe violations are reported, the market will be shut down or timings drastically cut,” said an officer. 


