Knotty affairs: Coronavirus plays spoilsport in wedding season
2020-04-24
JAIPUR: The outbreak of Covid-19 has affected almost every business and marriages are no exception.


This year, though the number of auspicious days for Hindu weddings were more in the month of April, May and June, compared to previous years, majority of the weddings have either been postponed or downsized.

Due to the lockdown and uncertain future, kin of those whose weddings are postponed have not even planned these weddings for the upcoming winters.

Be it the wedding band groups, food caterers, people involved in light and sound, decoration and other components, everyone is sitting idle. They are regularly been called up by their respective clients to refund the money for the bookings.

“This year in the month of April, there were more number of sawa (auspicious days) compared to normal summers. During December 2019, we were aiming at a good business after seeing the trend of our bookings for summers. However, everything has been destroyed to an extent that we have to pay back our customers. And that too when we are not getting refunds for the marriage lawns and other bookings,” Mohit Sand, a wedding planner, told TOI on Thursday.

In April, as per the Hindu wedding calendar, there were eight auspicious days for weddings, in May, there were 10 days and in July there were six days. “People have not only cancelled their weddings in April, they have also asked for cancellations in May and June as well. It is a big loss,” said Siddharth Chaturvedi, another wedding planner.

Those involved in the wedding industry are praying for things to normalise by at least September this year so that they can get bookings for November, December, January 2021 and February 2021. “Even during the economic slump in 2008 and post demonetisation we did not see much dip in the business. It is simple zero at this time. I had a booking of at least 20 weddings for the month of April, May and June,” said Rajkumar Sharma, involved in food catering for weddings. 


