Kochi-Mumbai return fares dip to Rs 5k as virus spreads
2020-03-12
Mumbai: With a rise in Covid-19 positive cases in India, domestic travel by air and rail is being hit. 

Aircraft are flying with fewer passengers, train journeys are being cancelled. A sure indicator of low demand for air travel was low airfares, especially last-minute airfares or those on flights scheduled to depart in 24 hours. 

A route that witnesses high demand throughout the year is Mumbai-Kochi. But this week, you could fly to Kochi and back for only Rs 5,000. “A last-minute flight to Kochi generally costs Rs 6,000-7,000 one-way,” said a travel agent. Return airfares on Delhi-Kochi route began at Rs 7,200. Flights to Trivandrum were comparatively higher in demand with return airfares from Mumbai beginning at Rs 9,000.

Airline companies have slashed the airfares in the Gulf-Karipur sector as Covid-19 fears have led to a significant drop in demand.

For instance, the one way direct trip from Karipur to Dubai on budget airline Flydubai for March 13 costs just Rs 5,859 while the flight from Dubai to Karipur on the same date is cheaper still at Rs 5,214.

Travel industry officials said that the prevailing fares are much lower than the normal rates at this time of the year.

“Normally, the fares in the sector hover around Rs 8000-Rs 10,000 for the same period. There is a severe slack in demand and people are putting off travel plans due to concerns over possible travel restrictions,” P V Vijesh, manager of Al Hind Tours and Travels, said.

Also, Saudi Arabia’s decision to temporarily ban flights from nine countries, including United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Bahrain, has affected passenger traffic in the sector as many people depended on connection flights of Gulf based-carriers to travel to Saudi. 

Added to that is the ban imposed by Qatar and Kuwait on passengers travelling from India.

Other domestic destinations like Bengaluru and Hyderabad were cheaper, with Rs 3,800 return airfares for travel from Mumbai. From Delhi, cheapest airfares began at Rs 5,800 for Hyderabad and Rs 6,700 for Bengaluru return. 

On Tuesday, the cheapest Mumbai-Delhi return ticket for travel on Wednesday and return later in the week, started at Rs 5,000, that is, an average of Rs 2,500 one-way. 

(Inputs from Kozhikode)


