Kochi police launch app to track home-quarantined
2020-05-16
KOCHI: In a bid to ensure the adherence to restrictions by those under home quarantine, Kochi city police on Friday launched ‘Covid-19 Safety’, an in-house mobile application to track such people. 


Kochi city police commissioner IG Vijay Sakhare said that the application that played a vital role in controlling the situation at Kasaragod would be a handy tool for police to keep Kochi city safe as well. 

“We are using the application to understand the geo-location of the person under quarantine,” said IG Sakhare. “If he or she moves 50 metres away from the house, cops would receive an alert. Violating home quarantine is an offence and can invite penal action. Moreover, the returnees themselves should religiously follow it on their own. A mistake could put the lives of our elderly and friends at risk,” said Sakhare, who was the special officer at Kasaragod. 

He added that the application is safe and has been verified by cybersecurity experts. “The application is not available for public use. It is shared with those under home quarantine as an apk file and they are installing it voluntarily. Also, there is an SOS button in the app for those in home quarantine to request immediate assistance,” said Sakhare. 

On Friday evening, the commissioner took it upon himself to go on routine police patrolling to houses where people are staying in home quarantine. He talked to a family at Ayyappankav who had come from Karnataka. Standing outside, the IG explained to the family that was in the balcony, the importance of isolation. He showed them the functioning of a Swaraksha application by getting a doctor in for a video conference. 

“There are less than 1,500 persons here who came from outside while the city has a population of over 10 lakh. If we can ensure that these 1,500 stay at home, then we can keep the rest of the city safe,” said Sakhare.

Police personnel have been divided into units of two and assigned the houses of those in quarantine. The police visit these houses at least twice daily. “We have bike patrolling teams to conduct the visits. Drones are airborne in all police station limits to check on these houses as well. The app would be an added safety measure from now on,” said Sakhare.

