Kochi woman’s 4 co-flyers from West Bengal test negative for coronavirus
2020-02-05
KOLKATA: Swab samples of the Kochi woman’s four co-flyers from West Bengal tested negative for novel coronavirus. While three were admitted to the isolation ward at the Infectious Diseases & Beliaghata General Hospital (IB&BG) — the state’s nodal hospital for coronavirus — another person from north Bengal was under home isolation. The three have been discharged from the hospital on Tuesday evening.


“Till date we have given eight samples, out of which six, including the latest four, have tested negative. The results of two other samples are awaited,” said Ajay Chakraborty, director health services. 

Four more suspects turned up at ID&BG hospital on Tuesday, including one from Bhubaneswar. While three of them have been admitted to the hospital, the fourth person from Midnapore went back home. Swab samples of two undergoing treatment at the hospital have already been sent to NICED in Kolkata. 

“Three patients, the Kochi woman’s co-flyers, have been discharged on Tuesday. Currently, three other patients have been kept under observation,” said Ashish Manna, medical superintendent and vice principal, ID&GB Hospital.

The three, who have been released from the hospital on Tuesday, had flown to the city on January 23 from Kunming with the Kochi woman, a medical student, the first to have tested positive for the virus in India. 

While swab samples of the three were tested in NICED, the sample of the suspect from north Bengal was sent to NIV Pune. Doctors, however, advised them home isolation for a few more days.

A suspect from Odisha, who is currently in the isolation ward of the hospital, also travelled in the same flight. Another suspect from Hooghly, who came to the hospital on his own on Monday night, had returned from China a few weeks ago. A sailor, who reached the city in a vessel from Kochi on Tuesday, was brought to the ID Hospital after he was detected with fever with breathing distress.

According to sources in the health department, a research scholar from Midnapore, who works in China, had returned to the city a few weeks ago. He turned up at ID Hospital voluntarily, where the emergency doctors found no immediate symptoms. But when the man insisted that his samples be tested, he was told that he had to be in the isolation ward to undergo the procedure. But he refused and returned to his home town.

“We already have 25 isolation beds in two separate wards. We can increase beds, if the health department asks us to do so,” said Anima Haldar, principal ID&BG Hospital.

