‘Kodambakkam sari’ weavers hit hard as Maha markets reel under Covid-19 strike
2020-06-05
MADURAI: Decades ago, members of the Sourashtra community, known for their weaving skills, settled in Kodambakkam in Chennai and weaved what has come to be known as “Kodambakkam sari”. Later, when they moved to the south, the sari, also known as art silk sari, became popular not just among brides but also women in the coastal areas. Now, with Covid-19 severely affecting Maharashtra, their major market, around 12,000 families of these weavers are in dire straits.

The traditional sari, made of cotton and viscose filament yarn in equal measure, is donned in the madisar way thanks to its light weight and sweat-absorption qualities. Merchants provide raw materials required for looming with specifics of design to weavers with upfront payment. While the weavers used to earn about Rs 10,000 to Rs 12,000 a month working over 12 hours a day, their earnings have halved due to the slump.

What has come as a rude shock to them is the Covid-induced collapse of the marriage season in Maharashtra during February-May when sari sales peak. M V Gopinath, a weaver from CMR Road, said “I have been earning less than Rs 5,000 in the past couple of months with which I cannot feed my family of six, including two children. I had applied for the government dole for weavers, but didn’t get it,” he said. There are 6,000 weavers like Gopinath in Madurai city and nearby areas involved in dyeing and spinning yarn to fix in looms, designers and carpenters. The production capacity has shrunk to half and since consignments from merchants have not reached their clients yet, they are yet to receive payments. Raw material suppliers have started asking for payment, leaving the merchants high and dry. Their only hope now is Diwali sales. 

T R Saravanan of Jayalakshmi Tex said sari price ranges between Rs 1,000 and Rs 3,000 depending on the design. It is sought after in Maharashtra since it is used as koorapudavai (one worn during marriage). 

Traders are demanding interest waiver for three months time for the loans that they have taken to revive business. 


