Kolhapur salons start taking advance bookings for post-lockdown haircuts
2020-04-27
Kolhapur: Anticipating a rush of people in salons after the lockdown is lifted, hairdressers and salon owners have started taking advance booking for haircuts.Since the lockdown started, the salons have remained closed.Dutta Zende, a salon owner from Line Bazaar area, said, “Currently, we get requests to visit houses and give haircuts. However, we refrain from doing so as health is the most important thing. I do not want to get infected nor do I want to put somebody at risk.”“Instead I have started taking appointments on call for days after May 3. Slots are full for the four days after the lockdown is lifted, considering, one haircut will take one hour. Also, we do not know the guidelines to be followed while cutting the hair or shaving as we have to be in close contact with the other person,” said Zende.Many salon shops are small and cannot accommodate more than four people, especially at a time when social distancing has to be followed. In such cases, the salon operators have to ensure that limited people are in the salon at one time. They also have to make sure that the shops are disinfected along with the equipments they use.The central government has allowed the opening of shops, the state government is yet to issue the notification to implement it. However, shops like liquor shops and salons will remain closed, as per the central government directive.In some secluded places like distant farms in rural areas, hairdressers are providing their service. One such hairdresser said, “We have to do it for our survival. It is our bread and butter. The men can get their shave done at home, but usually does not take a chance with a haircut by themselves. Some people have tried giving themselves a haircut. Vishal Patil from Kasba Bawda said, "I watched it on how to get a haircut done on youtube and my younger brother helped me. However, the haircut had gone wrong and then I decided to go bald.”