Kolhapur’s quarantine units full, travellers shifted to other facilities
2020-05-18
Kolhapur: The institutional quarantine centres set up in the city, which can together take in 3,500 people, have exhausted their capacity.

On Saturday midnight, travellers bought for swab collection at the Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Hospital had to wait for almost the entire day. Eventually, after the complaints, the district disaster management staff decided to shift them to the quarantine centres in nearby towns.

Prasad Sankpal, the district disaster management officer, said, “The travellers are compulsorily bought to the covid care centres for screening and swab collection. They are not allowed to return to their homes till they test negative. We have a capacity of 3,500 people in the quarantine centres in the city, and we are all full now. Therefore, we have shifted over 300 travellers to the quarantine centres set up outside the city.”

Like at the CPR hospital, rush is observed in all the 12 other screening centres in the district. 

Recently, many people who had returned from Covid hotspots have tested positive. To avoid community transmission, the district administration has decided to compulsory carry out swab testing and quarantining of people coming from Pune, Mumbai, Satara, Karad and Solapur. People are being directed to the nearest screening centre from the district border checkpoints.

District collector Daulat Desai has written to the state police chief to order the police commissioners and superintendents of the hotspot cities and red zone districts to not allow people to travel to Kolhapur without an approval from the Kolhapur district administration. Without travel passes, many have been asked to stay at the district borders while those coming from neighbouring districts have been asked to go back.

The travellers lodged at the Shivaji University hostel, which has been turned into quarantine facility, also complained of poor treatment. Many took to social media stating that they are neither allowed to go home nor informed about their test results. 


