Coronavirus outbreak: Kolkata-China flights go off the radar
2020-02-04
KOLKATA: With the number of passengers travelling to China down to a trickle following the coronavirus outbreak in the country, airlines operating between Kolkata and different Chinese cities are either suspending flights or rationalizing them. Two Union health ministry advisories, the latest on Monday, asking people to refrain from travelling to China and adding that travellers on return from the country could be quarantined, has further aggravated the situation. 


While IndiGo has already announced suspension of its daily flight from Kolkata to Guangzhou from February 6, China Eastern Airlines that operated daily between Kolkata and Kunming will now fly only on four days from this week.

IndiGo and China Eastern operate Airbus A320 and Boeing 737-800 — with capacity of 180 and 162 respectively — on the sector, and airport sources said, passenger count was as low as 35-40 on some days last week. In fact, China Eastern had to cancel its February 1 flight due to low passenger count.

“From this week we will operate on Monday, Thursday, Friday and Sunday. The decision was taken after passenger load to China from Kolkata dipped significantly over the last few days. But we have no immediate plans to suspend the route as Kunming-Kolkata flights are still running near capacity,” a China Eastern official said.

The Chinese carrier’s move comes two days after IndiGo announced suspension of all its flights to and from China. IndiGo said in a statement on Saturday that it was suspending its Kolkata-Guangzhou flight from February 6 to February 25 “in line with the WHO guideline to contain the spread of coronavirus”. An airline official said the suspension was temporary and a purely precautionary measure. “We will refund the full amount to the impacted passengers,” he said. 


HK flights keep options open
Officials of Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon, which run flights to Hong Kong from Kolkata, said they are yet to take any decision on suspending flights but are keeping an eye on the situation and are prepared to rationalize flights as and when necessary.

“None of Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon flights out of India has been cancelled. We will rationalise our flights in keeping with the demand. In most cases, these decisions are taken well in advance to avoid any inconvenience to our passengers,” said an official of Cathay Pacific.

TOI had reported on January 25 that around 40% flyers scheduled to travel to China from the city in the last week of January and in February had already cancelled their journey following the coronavirus scare.

Industry sources said around 4,500 people travel to China from the city every month. “During this time of the year, the passenger count drops by around 25%-30% because most shops and stores in China are shut for two weeks for the lunar new year and spring festival celebrations. But because of the coronavirus scare, even Chinese nationals are skipping home visit this year. Also, the large number of Indian students sent back have been asked not to return till further notice. As a result, outbound passenger count from Kolkata has dropped drastically,” said a senior airline official.


