Kolkata: Truck on lockdown duty hits car, 2 killed
2020-04-12
KOLKATA: In the first major road accident since the start of the lockdown in the city, two persons were killed when a food truck rammed a car carrying an elderly patient on New Town Main Arterial Road on Saturday morning, killing the patient at the spot. Driver of the car succumbed to his injuries later in the day. Three other persons are still critical.

Police said with roads empty, the truck delivering groceries and vegetables to a government retail unit was speeding along the road and crashed into the Maruti Omni when the car came on the carriageway from an arterial road beside Axis Mall. The accident left both the cars damaged and lying on their side. Police said the truck had violated a traffic signal.

In the impact, the patient from Baduria, Zillur Rahman (50), who was suffering from chest pain, suffered severe injuries on his head and limbs and on being taken to Bidhannagar Sub-divisional Hospital, he was declared dead on arrival.

Four others in the car - Ajijul Haq (35), Raqib Mondal (25), Jalauddin Biswas (28) and Abdul Majid (55) - were also taken to the hospital from where three were shifted to other government hospitals in the city, while Majid was kept under observation at the Bidhannagar hospital. Mondal, who was the car driver, later died at NRS Hospital, police said.

The two other passengers - Haq and Biswas - were admitted to RG Kar Hospital and are still critical, said a senior officer of the traffic department of Bidhannagar City Police.

Police said the accident happened around 6.15am, when the city-bound food truck skipped a traffic signal and collided with the car. The private car carrying the patient and his relatives from Baduria in North 24 Parganas were on its way to SSKM Hospital. The car had a print-out stuck on its back saying "patient carrying vehicle".

Cops probing into the accident said the driver of the food truck fled the spot after the accident as police started a case under IPC sections 304A (death due to negligence), 279 (rash driving), 338(Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) and sections under Motor Vehicles Act for violation of traffic signal.

"It seems the driver of the truck is also injured as the vehicle was in a bad shape. We have got some leads and are in the process of arresting him as early as possible," said a senior officer of Bidhannagar Commisisonerate.

