Kolkata gets its sixth Covid-19 facility, now has 1,700+ beds for patients
2020-05-19
KOLKATA: The state government has designated KPC Medical College for Covid-19 treatment. This will be the sixth such Covid-19 hospital in Kolkata and the third in the private sector. Chief minister Mamata Banerjee announced the government’s decision on Monday. 


Even before the announcement was made, KPC Medical College administration had started doing groundwork and also had rounds of meetings with health officials. After thorough planning, a five-storey building block that has 206 beds, including 13 ICU beds, has been earmarked as the Covid-19 facility. The hospital has a total 750 beds. 



“At this hour of crisis, the government and private health sectors need to work as a unit. We have whole heartedly taken up the responsibility the health department and the CM have entrusted on us,” said Joydip Mitra, CEO of KPC Medical College. 

While the government will supply essential support like PPE, equipment like ventilator and portable dialysis machine, the manpower, including doctors, nurses and other healthcare workers, will be given by the hospital itself. The hospital has already formed a core Covid-19 committee and its medical team with senior faculty members from departments like medicine and critical care unit. 

The hospital, however, will continue services for general patients. All services, including OPD, emergency, surgeries and admission, in the remaining 500 beds will remain opened. “We have made the Covid unit in a totally different block with separate entry and exit so that there is no interface between general and Covid patients. We will continue services for non-Covid-19 patients uninterrupted,” said the CEO. 

The state has also assigned nodal officers and a team each for four Covid hospitals in the city to support surveillance and monitor the implementation of Covid management protocol. While tropical medicine specialist Bibhuti Saha and medicine specialist Jyotirmoy Pal have been designated as nodal officer for Medical College and Desun Hospital respectively, gastroenterologist Gopal Krishna Dhali will look after MR Bangur Hospital and AMRI hospital. 

