Kolkata: Coronavirus transmission by ‘silent carriers’ a worry
2020-02-03
KOLKATA: It was not enough to quarantine only those with suspected symptoms of the novel coronavirus since many could be ‘silent carriers’ — like the nurse from Wuhan, who had flown back to Kochi via Kolkata on January 23 — and their symptoms may show up later when they have already come in contact with others in the community and transmitted the disease, warned experts.


Even though the Indians, who landed in Delhi on Thursday night, will remain in isolation for 15 days, several may have already reached Kolkata from the affected countries. While one was suspected to have symptoms of the virus and was later released, the clinical report of a Thai national, who died at a private hospital last week, was negative.

It is important to study the history of a visitor’s travel and take steps accordingly, said virologists. If he or she has been to China or any other part of the continent, where there were chances of coming in contact with infected people, vigilance is a must, felt experts. “This strain of coronavirus spreads very fast unlike other common viruses. Other strains of coronavirus cause common cough and cold and the influenza viruses. It may take several days for the symptoms to manifest so the people, who have travelled through the affected regions, need to be screened for at least a fortnight. Or else, they may end up transmitting the disease,” said virologist Amitabha Nandy.

He added that a silent carrier increases more the chances of transmission and it could be difficult to control the spread of the virus, if one or two such carriers manage to sneak into the city. “Since the early signs of novel coronavirus aren’t different from other common viruses, it is difficult to detect it at the first stage. So, screening and isolation are a must,” said Nandy.

The virus may take up to 14 days to manifest itself through symptoms, said Fortis Hospital internal medicine consultant Joydeep Ghosh. “The majority of the infected people could remain without the symptoms for more than a week. But they are carrying the virus and pose a bigger threat since they are not being suspected and others come in contact with them. A fortnight’s screening is the only real full-proof measure to prevent the transmission,” said Ghosh.

It is, however, too early to assume that the virus is more lethal than other common viruses, said doctors. In fact, SARS that is also a coronavirus had a 10% mortality rate while novel so far has a mortality rate of less than 3%. “But these are still early days and we don’t know the real numbers yet. But going by the reports so far, it is highly contagious and difficult to contain,” said Biswas.

Severe breathing distress in young healthy people, diarrhoea with fever, cough and cold may indicate novel coronavirus, said AMRI Hospitals consultant Debashish Saha. “If a healthy person shows severe viral symptoms, there is a reason to be concerned. Since there is no medicine for coronavirus, it is better to get admitted to hospital. This will ensure isolation,” said Saha.

Any fast-spreading virus is bound to lead to deaths, pointed out Nandy. “Initially, people are not aware of this fact and tend to ignore the symptoms that lead to a delayed intervention and death. Those, especially elderly people suffering from low immunity, cardiac ailments, renal or kidney ailments, lung diseases are more vulnerable,” said Nandy.

Novel coronavirus could be fatal for the elderly with respiratory diseases since it affects the lungs and causes breathing distress. “It may lead to pneumonia that can be fatal,” said Nandy. But there are no early sings to distinguish it from other viruses, he added.

