Krishna likely to get another Covid-19 testing lab today
2020-04-12
Vijayawada: Krishna district is likely to get another coronavirus screening laboratory from Sunday. District collector A Mohammed Imtiaz held a meet with Covid-19 district-level task force here on Saturday and directed them to increase the pace of screening people for coronavirus. 

“We are equipped to test around 200 samples per day. Samples from West Godavari, Guntur, and Prakasam districts were also being screened here initially. All other districts except West Godavari have their testing centres. The new testing centre will help us perform at least 350 tests a day,” he said.

The district medical and health officer Dr Ramesh explained that the rapid testing kits and units have reached the Vijayawada Government Hospital and can test around 1,000 samples each day.

Imtiaz directed the health wing authorities to arrange a notice board at hospitals displaying the number of PPE kits and N-95 masks available with them.

Further, he directed municipalities across the district to continue spraying sodium hypochlorite and using bleaching powder, with the state government releasing around Rs 9 crore for such work. Imtiaz said that around 25,000 hand sanitisers have been made available to doctors, medical staff and sanitation workers across the district. 

Meanwhile, even as the first Covid-19 positive patient Guntur district has recovered and is set to be discharged from the hospital, the increase in number of cases has the district administration on their toes. On Saturday, Guntur collector Samuel Anand Kumar announced that a curfew was being imposed in the city on Sunday and people would not be allowed to come out of their homes even for essential commodities.

The collector further announced that henceforth, the lockdown would be relaxed on alternate days and appealed to people to buy sufficient groceries for one week at a time. 

Anand Kumar said that there have been 14 new cases in the district on Saturday, taking the tally to 71. He addedthat 12 places had been identified as red zones and Section 144 is in force in the district. 

The collector said that wearing facial mask has been made mandatory while going outside and that a fine of Rs 1,000 would be levied. 

He also warned of invoking PD Act on those repeatedly violating lockdown norms. He also added that permissions would not be given for religious congregations of any kind.


