Tamil Nadu: Krishnagiri sees two new Covid-19 cases, Salem one
2020-05-07
SALEM/KRISHNAGIRI/ERODE: Two people tested positive for Covid-19 in Krishnagiri on Wednesday, taking the total number of cases in the district to four. 


“We have two new cases from Mathigiri village in the district,” said S Prabhakar, Krishnagiri district collector. Both came from Maharashtra to Mathigiri on May 2, he said. 

As a containment measure, the Krishnagiri administration has sealed nearly seven km around Mathigiri. Sanitary workers and health department officials sprayed disinfectant across the containment area on Wednesday.

Similarly, Salem district registered one more new case on Wednesday. With this, the number of cases in the district rose to 35 from 34.

Residents in the containment areas in Sathyamangalam town in Erode, meanwhile, heaved a sigh of relief on Wednesday as the district administration removed the barricades, letting them come out and meet their personal needs after nearly 31 days.

A senior police officer said, “There are at least 1,894 families with around 6,100 residents in the containment zones. The areas were sealed on April 5.”

The district, which reported 70 positive Covid-19 cases so far, is now in the green zone as there was no new case in the past 22 days. The district administration has been relaxing norms in containment zones in a phased manner. They had initially taken the containment zones in Erode town out of complete isolation. On Wednesday, the district administration relaxed the lockdown rules in Sathyamangalam town. Subsequently, residents from Kongu Nagar, Sathya theatre road, Bazaar Street, Old Market, Vadampalayam, Bakiyalakshmi Nagar and Chinna Venkatachalam Pillai Street came out of their houses since 6am to purchase groceries and other vegetables.

S Venkatachalam, a resident of Kongu Nagar, said, “I came out to buy meat for my family as we hadn’t had that for more than a month now.” 

Police officials allowed them to go out only between 6am and 12pm. “They have to return to their house by that time. Those violating the rules will be booked,” a police officer said.


