Andhra Pradesh: Krishna district boosts coronavirus preparedness
2020-03-17
VIJAYAWADA: In a bid to scale up the fight against COVID-19, the district health officials have started a hunt for suitable locations to set up quarantine facilities in the district. Vijayawada, NTR College of Veterinary Science (Gannavaram), and Chinapandraka are among the places under consideration. Meanwhile, officials are planning to add 100 more beds in the isolated wards of various hospitals in addition to the existing 90 beds.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Speaking to TOI, Krishna district health and medical officer, T Srirama Murthy said the medical tests of all the five personnel, who were admitted to isolated wards with suspected coronavirus symptoms, have tested negative. “Even though the district has not registered a single positive case, we are planning to set up quarantine facilities to enhance preparedness and for containment of the virus. The number of beds in the isolated wards will also be increased to accommodate more suspected cases in case of emergency. Several measures have been initiated to strengthen the community surveillance, such as conducting a household survey through the village/ward volunteers to identify suspected cases and create awareness among the public,” said Srirama Murthy.

Srirama Murthy requested persons arriving from foreign countries to self-isolate for 14 days. “I request the public to avoid mass gatherings and refrain from non-essential travel, particularly the epidemic-hit areas, as of now. We have also been conducting social awareness programmes on ways to prevent the virus. We have put up hoardings and distributed pamphlets. Foreign returnees are specially being screened at the airport and they are kept under 14-day observation. Doctors and other medical personnel have been specially trained on the treatment protocols of coronavirus. Observing good personal hygiene, washing hands frequently, avoiding close contact with infected persons and social distancing will go a long way in preventing the spread of the virus” said Srirama Murthy.

Recently, the state government invoked the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 to enhance its preparedness and curb the spread of coronavirus. The state disaster response fund, constituted under Section 48 (1) (a) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, is now available with the state governments to respond to COVID-19, which has been declared a notified disaster.


