Karnataka seeks to import 1 lakh Covid-19 rapid testing kits from China
2020-03-27
BENGALURU: If all goes according to plan, Karnataka will soon start testing more samples. The state is in talks with a Chinese manufacturer to procure rapid testing kits. 

Dr CN Manjunath, director, Sri Jayadeva Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences and Research, and nodal officer for Covid-19 lab testing in the newly-formed task force, said the government is in touch with a Beijing-based manufacturer for the supply of 1 lakh kits.

“The idea is to test more persons. What we are currently doing is the polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) test. There is acute shortage of kits even at the ICMR level. What we are buying from China is the rapid testing kit called ‘SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Test Strip’, which will use the blood sample. It is validated and the accuracy is almost 96-97%,” he said. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Currently, the government is spending Rs 2,600 per test per person. Once the kits are available, the cost can come down to Rs 600-700. 

The rapid immune-based testing kit is used to detect Covid-19 coronavirus antigen. It was widely used in China to detect both immunoglobulin IgM and IgG antibodies, said Dr Manjuanth. In this technique, when the antigen and antibody combine, they leave a visible colour spot or band which confirms presence of the infection. 

“The rapid testing mechanism is to avoid the Covid-19 infection from spreading further. Thursday’s positive case of a Mysuru man who had no travel history and no contact with patients has raised questions on the virus behaviour. It’s showing signs of slipping into the community and has to be looked into immediately,” said a top-level official. 


Shipping a major hurdle

With flights to and from China having been suspended, procuring the kits will be a major problem. “We have discussed this with the director general of civil aviation and the home ministry. The only option is to send a chartered flight to China and procure 1 lakh testing kits. We also want to buy Personal Protection Equipment and masks in large numbers,” said Dr Manjunath. 


25k random tests in next 10 days
The government will start 31 fever clinics in Bengaluru on Friday to screen persons with Covid-19 symptoms. It will scale up tests to 25,000 in the next 10 days, in keeping with the ICMR mandate to conduct random testing. Medical education minister K Sudhakar said: “This is being done to ensure that if people with travel history develop Covid-19 symptoms, they should come to the fever clinics. This way, we can reduce the risk of community spread.” He said only 1,500 tests have been conducted so far. “We want to follow the example of South Korea,” he added. Random testing has started in Kalaburagi.


