Karnataka’s quarantine rule scares train passengers from Delhi away
2020-05-22
BENGALURU: The mandatory 14-day institutional quarantine in Karnataka appears to have forced people stranded in Delhi to put their travel plans on hold. The Delhi-Bengaluru train’s occupancy has shrunk by two-thirds in less than a week.


While 543 passengers reached KSR Bengaluru City railway station on the first Superfast AC Express train on the first day of the resumption of services on May 14, the number was 180 on May 20.

On May 14, chaos prevailed at the station after some passengers declined to go for institutional quarantine and 19 were sent back on an extra coach attached to the Delhi-bound train. Many claimed that they weren’t informed in advance about the mandatory quarantine facility. 

Shiny C, a passenger from Delhi, has postponed her trip. “I’ve to shell out premium train fare and stay in a hotel in Bengaluru at my expense for 14 days. I can’t afford that much during this crisis. So I might as well stay here and travel after the lockdown. I’m also worried that I may be vulnerable if I stay with others at a hotel and also the quality of food and room facilities. I wouldn’t mind if it’s home quarantine. In fact, travelling in AC train for over 34 hours is itself a risk,” she said.

South Western Railway officials too admitted the poor patronage. “One reason could be the quarantine protocol of the Karnataka government where everyone— even if asymptomatic— has to go for 14-day compulsory quarantine,” said an official.

The daily train has stoppages at Anantapur, Guntakal, Secunderabad, Nagpur, Bhopal and Jhansi. Another official, however, claimed that some passengers might have got down at stations en-route. “Many are from Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra and are travelling in this train so they may get down at their respective stations,” the official said. 


Demand for first-class AC tickets 
Most first-class AC tickets from New Delhi to Bengaluru have been sold out, but tickets of 2AC and 3AC are still available. “As the number of seats in first AC are very limited and people feel it is much safer compared to second AC and third AC,” said an official. 

The fares of New Delhi-Bengaluru Superfast AC Express train for first AC, second AC and third AC are Rs 6,255, Rs 5,075 and Rs 3,510, respectively. “Social distancing is not possible in third AC coaches so those travelling in long-distance trains for emergency are buying first-class tickets as a precautionary measure,” said a railway source. Each train will ferry an average of 1,076 people. 

