KTDC offers institutional quarantine at slashed rates
2020-05-26
Alappuzha: At a time when the state’s tourism industry is badly hit by the Covid-19 situation, the Kerala Tourism Development Corporation (KTDC) is showing its social responsibility. KTDC, a state government undertaking, has provided 21 of its properties to arrange paid institutional quarantine (PIQ) for returnees from abroad and other states. For this, the agency has also slashed the room rent, which is inclusive of breakfast, lunch, tea-snacks and dinner.

In Thiruvananthapuram, KTDC has allotted its four hotels and resorts, including premium property Mascot Hotel, for 14-day PIQ. “The rent for one room is Rs 3,700 per day, including breakfast, lunch and dinner at the premium hotel. Normally, the one-day rent for a room in Mascot Hotel is Rs 5,000 without tax and food. But for PIQ, we have fixed the rent as Rs 3,700, including food and tax,” said KTDC MD Krishna Teja.

Teja said that KTDC has voluntarily come forward to allot their properties for PIQ. “It is our social responsibility to provide our properties for PIQ and the stay in our properties will definitely be a wonderful quarantine experience,” he said.

In Kollam, KTDC allotted one hotel — Tamarind — as PIQ while in Alappuzha two hotels and resorts (Ripple Land near Alappuzha town and Suvasam at Thanneermukkom) were allotted. The other facilities provided for Covid-19 relief in each district are: Tamarind hotel, Changanassery (Kottayam), Tea County, Munnar and Tamarind, Peermedu (Idukki), Bolgatty Palace (Ernakulam), Tamarind near Indoor stadium and Tamarind and Nandanam, Guruvayur (Thrissur), Garden House, Malampuzha, and Tamarind, Mannarkkad (Palakkad), Tamarind, Kondotty, and Tamarind, Nilambur (Malappuram), Tamarind, Thirunelly, and Pepper Grove, Sulthan Bathery (Wayanad) and Tamarind, Mangattuparamba (Kannur). 

“We have a total of 29 properties in the state and of them, 21 have been given for PIQ. The properties in the forest area like Ponmudi and Thekkady and those under maintenance have not been allotted for the purpose. Of the 21 properties allotted, four are premium hotels and five are budget hotels. The remaining ones are economy hotels,” said KTDC marketing manager Rajmohan G S.

“The normal rent at our budget hotel is Rs 3,000 without food and tax, which has been reduced to Rs 2,400, including food and tax per day for PIQ. In case of economy hotels, the normal rent is Rs 2,000 without food and tax and such rooms can be used for Rs 1,500 for PIQ,” he added.


