Kumortuli beats lockdown blues, rises with hope post Amphan
2020-06-14
Usually, the lanes and bylanes of Kumartuli hum with a buzz of activity during this time of the year, as several skilled artisans get busy giving shapes to idols of Goddess Durga. But this year, the popular idol makers’ hub in north Kolkata wears a deserted look. These clay artists are yet to come to terms with the unprecedented loss caused by Cyclone Amphan and the ongoing pandemic. The idols that these artisans wanted to sell during Annapurna Puja, Basanti Puja and Poila Baishak had to be discarded. Now, they have no option but to pin all their hopes on Durga Puja orders.

Babu Pal, secretary of Kumartuli Mrit Shilpa Sanskiriti Samity, rued, “The artisans of Kumartuli are in a bad shape with no signs of improvement in business. About 3, 500 people work here, but hardly 50 people are working this year. They are unable to commute due to transport issues. If the state authorities don’t stand by us, we will die of hunger. We have been badly hit by the coronavirus pandemic and Amphan. Together, we have incurred a loss of about one and a half crore if not more. Artists are facing a huge problem in procuring soil from Uluberia. This soil is used with straws on the bamboo frame to give shape to the structure. So now, one has to depend on soil sourced from Diamond Harbour. But that soil is not good enough and has a tendency to crack. Earlier, soil used to cost us around `12,000 per vehicle, but now they are charging `15,000 for it. Then there are specialised labourers from Bihar and Jharkhand who prepare the mud and soil into a smooth paste, before a sculptor applies it on a straw model of the goddess. But these labourers got stuck in their hometown and we don’t know who should we seek help from. Previously, 24 feet bamboos used to cost around `150. Now, we got them `180. This year we made it clear that there will be no increase in the daily wage of labourers.” When quizzed, if there will be Ma Durga idols on corona, Pal said, “I don’t think people would like to see the goddess wearing a mask. This is not something we should celebrate. Also, I assume, there will be hardly any theme puja this year. People are happy with ek chaaler thakur.”

 

So far, these artisans have got not more than five local bookings. “We have got orders from Santosh Square, Pally Mongol Unnoyon Samity in Belur, Phoolbagan Durga Committee and some others. Also, the budget is all on the lower side,” informed Pal.

But despite all odds, these artisans are hopeful that things will look up after Rath Yatra, which is on June 23. Sujit Pal, another artist from Kumartuli, said, “Currently, I am busy making a Durga and Kali idol, which will be shipped to Glasgow. An idol has already gone to Melbourne. Locally, I got an inquiry from Phoolbagan Sasthitola Mandir and they will come to pay an advance. If I get orders on the Rath day, even on a low budget, I will have to send a transport to get my labourers. However, the advance money has to be 40%, as I made a huge loss during Annapurna and Basanti Puja due to the lockdown.” 

Kaushik Ghosh, who only takes foreign orders, said, “I have already sent an idol to Melbourne. The other one is ready, which will be shipped to Germany soon. Besides, one idol will be sent to Canada, one to Dubai and one to Singapore. We got three orders from the US as well. We have to figure out how to ship them. The order from Italy got cancelled due to the pandemic. I didn’t face much problem with labourers, as I started work in November. I work with fibre, so the procurement of soil and mud are also not an issue for me.”

Sankar Pal, who works in a shop that sells ornaments (thakurer saaj) for idols, said, “Every year we send craft materials to other states, but things have gone haywire this year. How can we make ornaments without the help of my labourers?”

