KVT suffered over Rs 5L loss per day due to lockdown
2020-06-05
Varanasi: Kashi Vishwanath temple, main earnings of which depend on donations in ‘hundis’ (donation boxes) and sale of tickets through helpdesk counters, has witnessed zero collections from these two sources during the lockdown period.

The temple could receive only around Rs 30 lakh as donations for its Annkshetra while it spent over Rs 15 lakh for distribution of food among needy and migrants by operating two kitchens.

At a time when the temple administration is gearing up to reopen the temple doors for devotees from June 8 with a new crowd regulation plan, TOI tried to take account of the temple’s exchequer on Thursday. 

Divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal said, “Through various means of donations, KVT receives over Rs 20 crore in it’s exchequer per year.” Providing further details, chief executive officer of KVT Vishal Singh said, “The temple receives major collections through hundis and helpdesk counters selling tickets for various rituals, aartis and other activities manually or online. Since the closure of temple in March the collection from both these sources remained zero.”

According to the temple authorities, the average footfall of devotees and pilgrims remains 10,000 per day while in festive period it goes above 20,000 a day. Singh said that, “On an average, the temple gets Rs 70 lakh from hundis and Rs one crore from helpdesk per month.” 

The temple meets all expenses including performing of regular rituals, internal maintenance, salaries of the priests, temple staff, Annakshetra and others, which ranges around Rs 15 lakh per month, with the same collection,”

During lockdown the KVT’s exchequer suffered a loss of around Rs 5.50 lakh per day, however it continued to get donations to keep Annakshetra operational, said the authorities. Rs 30 lakh were received for Annakshetra operations from devotees, said Singh. 

“Apart from the kitchen of Annakshetra, which was started to feed the needy, one more kitchen was started at migrants dispatch centre created near Rajatalab. Around 8,000 food packets were prepared at these kitchens per day for distribution. Temple has spent over Rs 15 lakh on operating these two kitchens so far.”

Singh said that while the lockdown has hit the temple’s income, but it has no financial problems in continuing its regular activities.


