Labourer in Kota turns lockdown into money-spinning opportunity
2020-05-11
KOTA: The adversity of lockdown amid Covid-19 pandemic has turned into an opportunity for 40-year-old Mamta Prajapat, a daily wage labourer. She has earned at least Rs 2 lakh sewing masks.


Mamta, who is also a member of a self-help group under the aegis of Deendayal National Urban Livelihood Mission (D-NULM) programme at Kota Municipal Corporation (KMC), used to earn less than Rs 100 by tailoring one or two blouses in a day. Now, like a proprietor of a trade unit, she has earned around Rs 2 lakh and paid another Rs 60,000 to 20 members of her SHG by making and selling 26,000 face masks within one-and-a-half months.

When the lockdown was enforced, Mamta was very distressed and worried over means of livelihood as her husband Manoj Kumar, also a daily wage labourer, was forced to sit at home. An advertisement on social media by NULM’s social development officer Hemlata Gandhi on demand for mask making came as an unexpected chance for Mamta. But, having no money to purchase cloth was another hurdle. Mamta borrowed Rs 1,500 from her daughter married in a neighbouring family, bought the cloth and made 600 pieces of one-layer masks.

“I sent 600 masks to Hemlataji on March 22. She informed me that masks prepared by me were up to the mark and paid me Rs 6,000 (Rs. 10 per mask) cash the same day. that really encouraged me, my family and group members,” Mamta told TOI on Saturday.

“The first thing I did was return the borrowed money to my daughter and served her homemade sweets. There has been no looking back at the adversity of lockdown,” she added. Mamta is also a terracotta artist and sells clay items in the fairs held in the city on various occasions but constant labour with clay has made her a PIVD patient that restricts her from sitting longer.

“I do only cutting and designing of the masks due to the disease while stitching and tailoring is done by SHG members,” she said, adding that her son, who studies in Class X, and her husband also help her in the task.

“Now, the environment at home is filled with positivity and enthusiasm as we are earning what we could never hope for earlier and I am very grateful to NULM and SHG,” she further added.

Order for another 10,000 masks is pending while other orders keep pouring in, he said. Impressed by her performance in mask-making, KMC commissioner Vasudev Malavat and deputy commissioner Ashok Tyagi on Friday visited her home and took stock of mask-making. “Not only me but my neighbours too were filled with enthusiasm and pride when the commissioner and dy commissioner visited my house as it was for the first time that some senior officer of KMC visited our area,” Mamta said trying to contain her joy.

