Lack of precaution to blame for spike in Covid-19 cases in Hyderabad, say officials
2020-05-14
HYDERABAD: Government officials have attributed the recent spike in coronavirus cases in the city to the non-adherence by locals to guidelines issued by the Union ministry of health. 


An internal study revealed that many who were in the pre-symptomatic phase did not take proper precautions such as isolating themselves nor did they have themselves tested. Officials say this could be one of the major reasons behind the rise of coronavirus cases by 205 in the past one week under Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) limits.

In one case, a seven-year-old child tested positive after an Unani doctor tested positive for the virus in Jubilee Hills area. Multi-disciplinary teams working in the area confirmed that the doctor’s family had visited the flat where the child resides. 

“The child had contracted virus from the doctor’s family. Now we have sent the security guard and other people living in that building for testing,” said a GHMC official. 

In another case, a GHMC sanitation worker from Amberpet passed on the infection to her husband. “When the woman had symptoms she should have immediately isolated herself, but she did not. As a result, her husband also tested positive for Covid-19. Eight sanitation workers have been sent for testing,” said another GHMC official. 

In Ziaguda market, a vendor who sells betel leaves is suspected to be the reason behind 60 cases in that area. The market has around 500 stalls selling vegetables, meat and groceries. 

“When the vendor fell sick, he gave his stock to a vegetable vendor. The latter sold betel leaves along with vegetables. He used to meet the betel vendor daily to give him the money earned from the betel leaf sales. Later, the betel leaf vendor tested positive for the virus. Had he quarantined himself after he had symptoms, there could have been fewer cases in Ziaguda,” said a state government official deployed in that locality. 

According to GHMC officials they are doing all that they could to control the spread of the virus. “Extensive fever survey is under way in parts of city. Multiple teams from various state government departments are probing the coronavirus patients, their primary contacts and secondary contacts,” said a senior GHMC official. 

“People should immediately approach government if they have symptoms and self quarantine themselves until they receive help from the authorities,” said an official deployed on Covid-19 duty in Jubilee Hills.


