Lack of test kits at IVRI delays Covid-19 test of big cats found dead in U'khand
2020-04-15
Dehradun: Uttarakhand forest department has decided to send samples of the leopard and the tiger, which were found dead in the state on April 11, to Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) in Bareilly for Covid-19 test. The move comes in the wake of concerns that animals too might catch the deadly coronavirus.

While the cause of death of the leopard in Rajaji Tiger Reserve remains undiagnosed, veterinarian Dr Rajiv Kumar who conducted the post-mortem of the tiger attributes it death to mutual fight. The need to conduct Covid-19 test of these animals was further triggered by the death of around 56 goats in Pauri Garhwal due to a mystery disease. SK Singh, chief veterinary officer of Pauri Garhwal, told TOI that the goats died due to seasonal viral fever as per autopsy report but added that their samples will also be sent to IVRI Bareilly for Covid-19 test.

However, the diagnosis of these animals is being delayed as IVRI doesn’t have testing kits. “We have recorded a leopard death recently. We will be sending its sample for Covid-19 test to IVRI after April 15 as they will get testing kits by then,” said Aditi Sharma, veterinarian at Rajaji Tiger Reserve.

According to a TOI source in the state forest department, testing kits haven’t been procured by IVRI due to fund crunch. “IVRI was awaiting funds from the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) to procure testing kits. The funds have been released recently. Hopefully, the kits would soon be available with them,” said a senior official of Uttarakhand forest department.

IVRI director Dr RK Singh also confirmed that kits aren’t available as yet. “We have ordered around 1,000 kits and very soon we will get them. And if required, we can also do testing by Real Time – Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR),” said Kumar. Notably, RT-PCR is a sensitive in-vitro method for detecting the presence of specific genetic material from any pathogen, including a virus.

However, a veterinarian says that conducting RT-PCR is unlikely at IVRI because the process requires a genome sequence of a positive case to compare it with that of the suspected samples. “In the RT-PCR method, genome sequence is tallied with the sample sequence of an already available positive case, which we don’t have until now. However, in the kit testing method, antibodies are detected with ease unlike the RT-PCR method,” said another veterinarian requesting anonymity.

It is worth mentioning that the CZA, on April 6, had authorised three institutes — IVRI in Bareilly, National Research Centre on Equines in Haryana, and National Institute of High Security Animal Disease in Bhopal — for conducting Covid-19 test of animals.


