Lucknow: Lack of proper safety gear, precautions put GRP personnel at high coronavirus risk
2020-05-29
LUCKNOW: The number of novel coronavirus cases among Government Railway Police (GRP) personnel has been increasing but, a TOI reality check at Charbagh Railway Station on Thursday evening found only few cops following safety protocol against the infection earnestly.

GRP officers said cops deployed to manage migrant workers have to maintain social distancing and wear face shield, mask and gloves and use sanitiser frequently.

Around 1,500 passengers arrived via a Shramik Special train from Mumbai at around 10.15pm. Around 30 GRP jawans were there on platform one to manage them.

The cops stood at a safe distance while migrants were deboarding with most of them wearing reusable face mask, while few had covered faces with gamcha. 

However, none of them had gloves, while only five cops had put on face shield.

Similarly, most personnel deployed outside station to help passengers board UPSRTC buses were not wearing safety kits.

And once the migrants were gone, social distancing took a back seat as cops mingled with each other without any precaution.

No one was seen sanitising hands, though most of them touched benches, pillars and other things at the station.

A GRP constable said they were provided disposable hand gloves and masks on Wednesday. He claimed that 16-18 constables are staying in barracks having capacity of 12.

An RPF constable said they have not been provided any safety kit.

When asked about the precautions, steps and gear to protect jawans, SP GRP, Saumitra Yadav said, “We have requested railway authorities to provide us space for expansion of barracks. We also sanitise barracks and mess twice daily. Besides masks, over 100 face shields have been distributed and discussions are underway with a few suppliers to provide reusable hand gloves for our force.”

Inspector, RPF, Dharmendra Rana, said there is no need to panic as jawans are following safety guidelines strictly.


