West Bengal: Lack of ‘non-essential’ items makes life under lockdown tougher for citizens
2020-04-06
KOLKATA: They don’t belong to the essential category of goods, but in the current situation, their absence tends to derail life and leave households topsy-turvy. The list of ‘non-essential’ essentials seems quite exhaustive, with people saying they are missing out on things they are used to. And many of these items are humble snacks and other things available with road-side vendors.




For instance, Ramen Sarkar of Parnashree has been desperately looking for a mop with a long handle ever since his domestic help has stopped coming. But he has failed to find one. “My wife cannot stoop because of a problem in the knee and I am getting exhausted after mopping my entire flat every day,” Sarkar said.


Times ViewWe tend to forget that several non-essentials, too, become essential items in times of crisis. So people tend to hoard stuff, leading to a temporary disruption in the demand-supply chain. It is a very difficult task to manage this but it should be on the radar of market-controllingagencies.

Forget mops or brooms, even garbage bags are not available anywhere. “On March 20, I was so overwhelmed by the idea of stocking the most essential items that the garbage bag just slipped my mind. Now I am regretting not paying attention to some of the non-essential items. People will any way get the essentials during an emergency, but the no so-called non-essential items are nowhere to be found,” said Badri Chatterjee, an architect.

Chatterjee is now scouting for a bag big enough to accommodate his kitchen garbage so that he can take it to the vat in the market every morning. “Big plastic bags are not a common thing in the morning market, even if we are ready to pay for it,” he added.

Samar Upadhaya, whose twin daughters have just been promoted to Class XII, has a much bigger crisis at home. “I got the book list on their school WhatsApp group two days after the lockdown was announced. Now I am finding it to be a real issue to get the books. Their school has already started classes online and non-availability of books has created a lot of tension in my family,” said Upadhaya, an automobile engineer with a big service centre.

Gouranga Basak of Chetla managed to bring the books for his ward in Class VIII, but he could not buy exercise books. “My wife has brought out my child’s childhood slate, but he is unhappy with that,” Basak said.

Urmi Sarkar, a student at South City College, is a phuchka fan whose evenings are incomplete without the snack. “It might be a non-essential item to most, including my parents, but it is essential to me. Life in lockdown is so horrible. And it is tasteless without phuchka,” she said. She said she had also gathered some funds to help her neighbourhood phuchkawala at Kalighat, but could not find him even after hours of search on successive evenings.


