Lakhs offer pongala in capital amid concerns over rise in Covid-19 cases
2020-03-10
Thiruvananthapuram: Amid concerns over more Covid-19 cases being reported from the state, lakhs of devotees offered pongala as part of the Attukal Bhagavathy Temple festival in the capital on Monday. Some devotees were also spotted wearing masks. Health department had informed that there was no need for healthy persons to use masks.

‘Don’t touch your mouth, nose or eyes. Wash hands frequently’. These two major instructions, which were issued by the health department and district administration in the backdrop of spread of coronavirus infection, were rarely followed by the devotees. 

The smoke emanating from hundreds of pongala hearths made the devotees wipe their eyes and nose frequently. Most of them were sweating profusely due to the heat and it was very difficult for people to refrain from touching their face. Amidst the busy rituals, devotees rarely washed their hands. 

Kunjumol and Usha, who arrived from Kadakkal in Kollam, hadn’t heard about coronavirus or Covid-19. Both are staunch devotees of Attukal Bhagavathy and came to the city as usual and found an ideal space at the road near Statue Junction to offer pongala. When asked about instructions on washing hands frequently, both said that they were unaware any such directions. 

Nirmala Kumari, who regularly offers pongala, said that she was aware of precautions against spread of virus as her daughter, a doctor, had warned her in advance. “I just washed my hands before offering pongala. I tried to get a sanitizer. Unfortunately, it was not available in shops,” she said. 

Bindhu Velayudhan, a businessperson who arrived from Dubai to offer pongala, said that she had taken enough precautions. “I try not to mingle with the crowd. But washing hands is not practical during the rituals,” she said, adding that she is offering pongala for 23 years. 

While instructions were given not to touch hand-railings, most devotees, including children, were seen touching it. Another rule which was ignored was the direction against going to crowded areas. As usual, there was a huge rush to visit the temple after offering pongala. People also thronged at spots were there was distribution of food and refreshments. 

When asked about facilities for hand washing in festival areas an official of Kerala water authority said that no such instruction was given to them. Devotees said that there were options to collect water, which they used primarily to cook. Sanitizers and soaps were spotted only at police control rooms.

Various medical shops, which functioned on Monday, reported shortage of masks and hand sanitizers. The RDO has issued a statement warning action against shops for selling masks at higher prices, following allegations that they were fleecing customers. 

On Sunday, district administration has issued a set of guidelines asking devotees with symptoms of cough, fever and breathing difficulties to avoid visiting the temple. There were instructions to use towels while they cough and sneeze.

Various medical professionals, including Kerala chapter of Indian Medical Association, had urged state government to avoid mass gatherings like pongala at the time of Covid-19. Considering the fact that there was no community spread in the district and last minute cancellation of the event would create confusions, government decided to go ahead with pongala.


