Bihar: Lament of a Bettiah Covid-19 warrior’s widower
2020-04-23
BETTIAH: A week is too short for the wound of bereavement to heal. It is thus natural for Reyazul Haque, 60, to be in a dazed void of mourning. A supervisor in the unorganised construction business, the daily wager has lost not only his soul mate. Alam Ara Khatoon, 56, was also the lifeline that sustained Haque’s family.

She, an auxilliary nurse-cum-midwife (ANM) was, in her last few weeks, a frontline Covid warrior. Deployed at the Indira Nagar sub-health centre under the Chanpatia PHC in West Champaran, Alam Ara would be dropped at her work station by her husband each day.

The battle against COVID took her to various home fronts to screen and detect suspected patients. “She would return fatigued,” he told this newspaper, adding, “ On April 14 she complained of chest pain...We took her to the MJK Hospital (and Government Medical College, at Bettiah).” Unable to overcome his personal loss, the economic uncertainties weigh heavy on the Haque family. The bread earning matriarch gone, Haque’s own lockdown unemployment is compounded with a jobless son and a young unmarried daughter to look after.

In grief, as a dark world enveloping him, Haque’s conscience is being nagged with questions. Answers evade him. “My wife suffered from hyper-tension, diabetes and heart ailment... Her request for a leave reprieve turned down, she took on her responsibilities in this corona ‘mahamaari’ honestly,” says Haque whose memory of his wife’s final hours are vivid, “They gave her an injection in the emergency (room) and transferred her to the Mahila ( Women’s) ward. She was put on Oxygen.”

Feeling slightly better in a while, Alam Ara – covid scare on top of her mind- panicked at the squalid condition of the hospital ward. “ Take me home... ai jaa ta infection ho jaiyye ( here, I’ll get infected),” Haque remembers heeding to his wife’s plea and taking her home. She passed away a few hours later. “She died of heart attack,” Haque shares his gut feeling.

And then his wailing questions surge: “She was not tested for Covid-19... the unhygienic hospital ward compounded her anxiety...” The widower in mourning further bemoaned that no one from the district health department expressed any condolence, leave alone participating in her final rites.

“I had conveyed the news of her death on the whatsapp groups ‘Corona Response Chanpatia’ and ‘SHC Chanpatia’. I had even conveyed the sad news on the official number of the Civil Surgeon,” Haque lamented.

“Yes, the department received the news of the ANM’s death,” West Champaran civil surgeon Arun Sinha told TOI. “Whether she was tested for Covid-19 or not can be answered only by the medical college hospital authorities,” he said. “ The patient was admitted for symptoms other than corona...She had chest pain... Only patients with covid symptoms are taken to the special isolation ward and tested,” hospital superintendent Dhirendra K Singh said.

“We have limited PPEs)....649 at the moment...and 178 VTMs (viral transport media)... the sample collecting equipment for transport to testing centres,” he said. Was a post-mortem performed? “I had informed (department) officials...No one came. We laid her to rest,” Haque said. “Only if family members complain of a suspicious death in case of a death at home, a post-mortem would be necessary,” the civil surgeon said.


