Bhopal: Landing home after two months of lockdown, a big sigh of relief for many
2020-05-26
BHOPAL: Flyers onboard an IndiGo flight, that reached Bhopal airport after 61 days of lockdown, heaved a sigh of relief as they landed at Raja Bhoj airport on Monday. 

Most of them had been waiting to return home. Shahran Ahmed returned to the city two months after losing his job in Delhi while it was a big day for Manipur’s Shaizafi who lost a family member during the lockdown. She avoided talking to the media, but only said “I am keen to meet my mother”. 

Passengers lauded the airlines for providing them with face shields, sanitisers and masks before boarding the plane. “It was a good approach by them. Several passengers reached the airport without carrying sanitisers with them. In fact, it is a good habit to keep a sanitiser,” said a traveller, Ashish. 

About the social distancing and other Covid norms inside the flight, passengers said that the cabin crew was very cooperative during the journey. “Everyone was concerned about the ongoing situation. During the journey, both passengers and crew were sensitive about wearing masks and following the guidelines,” said Sumedha, who was meeting her parents after two months.

Passengers also felt that there was a need to start more flights. “Several people are stranded in cities like Delhi and Mumbai. They want to come back. Flight is one of the best ways to reach home,” said another passenger Apoorva. 

A few passengers were not keen to interact with the media. “Is it necessary to talk with you? I am already in trouble as I was fed up after being stuck for almost two months in Noida,” reacted a traveller without wishing to be named.

A few passengers were seen carrying their babies. “I can’t take my a year-old baby by train. Travelling by air was the best available option for me,” said a mother on condition of anonymity. 

Passengers were happy to go through the thermal screening. “This is a good way to detect people who are suspected to be Covid-infected. Stopping them at the airport is a precautionary step taken by the authorities,” said another passenger. 

Passengers also welcomed the state government’s decision about allowing asymptomatic travellers to go home directly. “I was worried about what will happen to me once I land at Bhopal airport. I was told that several states have made it mandatory to be in isolation after reaching the home state. Thankfully, MP has not done it,” said Saurabh Sharma, a traveller. 

Friends and relatives reached the airport to pick up the flyers. As online booking of cabs is currently not allowed, a few were seen asking about vehicles to reach their homes. 


