Land sharks on the prowl as officials on Covid-19 duty
2020-05-15
HYDERABAD: Land grabbers are having a field day during the lockdown, especially in Hyderabad, Rangareddy and Medchal-Malkajgiri districts as many officials are engaged in Covid-19 duty.

Not less than a dozen instances of encroachment of government land have been reported in the last few days, forcing revenue authorities to swing into action and remove illegal occupation of the land. 

Not just open land, the land sharks are not even sparing lakes, nalas and agriculture land. A majority of the land grabbing cases have been reported in prime areas of the city such as Gopanpally, Miyapur, Shamshabad, Shaikpet, Jawaharnagar and Mangalpally (Ibrahimpatnam) where land rate continues to soar despite the spread of Covid-19 cases. At some of these places, the land grabbers have even removed ‘government land’ boards and tried to construct walls around it.

Revenue officials on Thursday demolished an unauthorised construction close to a temple (survey No. 34) in Gopanpally after unidentified people took over a stretch of government land by constructing a compound wall. 

Similarly, land sharks tried to encroach a 650 square yard land at Sravanthinagar in Venkatagiri area by removing the ‘government land’ board. Officials said the land is worth Rs 7 crore. Interestingly, officials were not even aware about the encroachment till it was brought to their notice by the local media.

“Whenever we are getting information, we are removing the encroachments. The mandal-level officers and land protection wing are busy in demolishing the illegal occupation of land. In some instances, we have booked criminal cases also,” Rangareddy additional collector S Harish told TOI.

In Chowdariguda in RR district, officials foiled a land owner’s attempt to lay a road by occupying nalas and made him re-construct the nala wall. In another encroachment in RR district, officials came across a land owner trying to construct an access road in Mangalpally of Ibrahimpatnam mandal by bulldozing the Nallacheruvu bund and foiled his attempts.

Sources said a farmland spread over 2.4 acres in Madanpally in Shamshabad mandal was usurped and the area also levelled. A former sarpanch’s name also cropped up in this land grabbing case, forcing the authorities to file a complaint with police. Curiously, the government had decided to allot this particular land to the Police Transport Organsation, it is learnt. 

“We have received around eight complaints of government land encroachment of small land parcels in areas such as Khanamet, Shamshabad, Mylardevpally, Gopanpally and Miyapur. We immediately took action by removing the encroachers and resuming the land,” K Chandrakala, revenue divisional officer of Rajendranagar, said. 

Sources said attempts to grab government land were made in Jawaharnagar also.

Meanwhile, some revenue officials have complained that they are not able to discharge their duties since they are being forced to work somewhere else. “The government has put us on Covid-19 duties at railway stations, airports and in identifying foreign returnees and migrant workers,” a tehsildar in Hyderabad district explained.

Another official said, “I have been given duty at the Lingampalli railway station to ensure that all migrant workers are leaving for their native places without any glitches. We are not getting time to look after revenue matters.”


