Last patients discharged, Mysuru walks into covid-free zone
2020-05-16
Mysuru: In its fight against Covid-19 pandemic, Mysuru has scripted a rare achievement—all the 90 people who tested positive for the virus till date in the district have been successfully treated and discharged. 

The last two patients were discharged on Friday, making Mysuru district free from active cases. 

Mysuru, which got into red zone owing to Karnataka’s only cluster case at Nanjangud, has achieved the rare distinction of zero mortality of covid patients.

The cluster case produced 74 cases and had endangered the public health, forcing the district administration to take a series of measures that have earned it accolades.

District incharge minister ST Somashekar attributed the success to the corona warriors, mainly the health workers. 

Deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar said they have come to zero with regard to covid positive cases but have to take precautions. “We have a lot of challenges but are prepared to tackle any emergency situation. People must cooperate with the district administration,” he said.

The first positive case was identified on March 20 and 56 days later, the district now stands free of any patients. However, this does not mean there won’t be any positive cases in future. Random tests are being carried out including in containment zones besides there are over 600 who came from different states undergoing institutional quarantine.

“With norms being relaxed in the district, everyone must be cautious and ensure that social distancing is maintained in public places. People should keep their hands clean and avoid touching face with bare hands. Care must be taken to protect vulnerable groups – senior citizens, pregnant, children, TB, HIV patients and people living with life–threatening diseases,” said the DC.

Institutional quarantine is a must for those coming from other states and countries. “As of now, we have only inter-state residents, nearly 600, and they’re lodged at government and paid quarantine facilities. There may be a positive case among those quarantined,” he said.

Inter-state passengers can’t pass through Nanjangud

Traffic restrictions at Nanjangud will continue though there are no positive cases in the area as of now. DC Abhiram Sankar said there are nearly a dozen containment zones but lockdown norms have been relaxed and essential services are allowed. Construction activities have been allowed and shops can remain open from 7 am to 5 pm but people must follow the norms.

Inter-state travellers will not be allowed to pass through Nanjangud till further orders as a precaution. This restriction will not apply to essential services. All passenger vehicles have to take detour via T Narasipura, as currently it has been, to reach Mysuru from Gundlupet. They will have to travel 35 km extra, the DC stated.

Dispose masks, gloves separately

MCC commissioner Gurudutta Hegde on Friday appealed to the public to dispose of mask they wear in separate cover and hand it over to garbage collectors. This is to ensure that masks are disposed off scientifically. Meanwhile, shop owners must ensure that shoppers maintain social distance near their shops.

Mysuru a model district: Minister

Medical education minister K Sudhakar said on Friday that Mysuru has become a model district in fight against Covid-19 in the country with all 90 positive patients being cured and discharged. Efforts of district authorities led by incharge minister ST Somashekar is commendable and has kindled a ray of hope in the fight, the minister said in Bengaluru.


