Last Covid-19 +ve patient discharged from hospital
2020-05-14
COIMBATORE: The last patient to test positive for Covid-19 in the district was discharged from ESI Hospital on Tuesday. 

Though the district has no more active Covid-19 cases, public health authorities say it does not mean the district is free of the virus. They say the district administration should continue testing all symptomatic patients and social distancing must be practiced. People however are relieved at the news.

While Wednesday was the 10th day that the district did not record a new Covid-19 case, it was also the last day it had an active Covid-19 case since March 22. The district administration confirmed that the 31-year-old pregnant woman from Karumbukadai who tested positive for the virus on May 2, but was asymptomatic, was discharged from the hospital after she tested negative for the virus.

However, the public health department said they will continue testing people for the virus—all patients coming in with flu like symptoms, pregnant women coming in for delivery and patients suffering from breathlessness. “We will also continue monitoring patients coming from abroad, from other states and districts,” deputy director of public health Dr G Ramesh Kumar said. “If we do get new patients, we will again put in motion our containment exercises,” he said.

Many Coimbatorians welcomed this news stating that they are finally seeing the rewards for strictly following lockdown rules. “It is a great feeling and relief that there are no Covid-19 cases in the district. Will help people come to work more confidently and industrial activity to resume,” president of CODISSIA R Ramamurthy said. “We thank all the officials, corporation, health department and IAS officers who worked tirelessly to contain the spread to this extent,” he said.

The public too felt that nil case is a huge psychological booster. “Now with offices asking us to return to work, our families are still scared. This figure will give more confident to return to our normal lives,” said R Vivek, a financial consultant. 

Public health experts however cautioned that just because a district does not have a known Covid-19 case, it does not mean that the perimeters are Covid-19 free. 

“There may still be asymptomatic Covid-19 infected people in the city who were not detected. There may also be undetected community spread that may show up later,” said infectious diseases expert, Dr Varun Sundaramoorthy of Kovai Medical Centre and Hospital. 

“All the more because epidemic’s peak has not even been reached yet in India,” he said.

Former director of public health Dr P Kulandaisamy also cautioned against people reducing their guard, especially in terms of practising hand hygiene, social distancing and wearing masks. 

“The foreign returnees were our first wave of infection, the New Delhi conference was our second wave, the third wave is the Koyambedu cluster and waves will keep coming. The speed at which the virus spreads will reduce only when we achieve herd immunity,” he said.

The other districts in the region who have no active cases are Tirupur and Erode. While Nilgiris also had no active cases for almost 10 days, it now has five cases.


