Latecomer corp faces hurdles in fight against virus
2020-03-25
Kochi: Kochi corporation, which has failed to act fast, is now unable to find places where sanitization facilities for the public as part of Break the Chain campaign can be set up. As per the decision, the local body should have set up the facilities at 50 places. 

The local body is unable to set up the facility even in 20 places. “At many places we identified for setting up the facilities, other agencies have installed it. Moreover, there is shortage of wash basins as well. Wash basins are being hired by many agencies,” said corporation health standing committee chairperson Prathibha Ansari. The plan was to set up the facilities at places like market, bus stations, railway stations, etc. Wash basins, soaps and sanitizers are being provided there. 

Another plan was to procure one lakh face masks and distribute it among vulnerable persons like vendors at markets who contact many persons every day, autorickshaw drivers, passengers heading to railway stations, taxi drivers, etc. But the local body is unable to procure adequate face masks. “Due to shortage of masks, we were finding its procurement very hard. Now, we have managed to procure an additional of around 25,000 masks. We are distributing them,” said corporation secretary Anu R S. Though the local body planned to buy two infrared thermometers, it could purchase only one. “We are using the thermometer for testing temperature of those visiting the corporation office,” Anu said. “As per the decision, we are distributing food packets to the needy,” she said.

Shortage of staff for cleaning and other activities as part of fighting Covid-19 is another hurdle faced by the local body. “Our health staff like junior public health inspectors are going to the streets and imparting awareness to the public,” Anu said. On Tuesday, corporation staff, along with fire and rescue personnel, visited an apartment complex where 43 persons have been quarantined. As part the efforts to prevent community spread, the entire apartment complex and its surroundings were cleaned using bleaching powder and phenyl. Fogging was also conducted in the area. “Shortage of staff for carrying out the activities in this regard is a problem for us,” Anu said. 

Corporation authorities said they are taking measures to ensure that public places like market are clean and hygienic. If a vendor is found to be adopting unhygienic practices, his or her licence should be cancelled. “We are doing the bare minimal work so far as our office administration is concerned. We have turned the entire focus on activities related to the measures to fight Covid-19,” corporation secretary said.


