Lawyers struggle to survive during lockdown in Bihar
2020-04-20
PATNA: The nationwide lockdown has financially hit lawyers and their assistants in the state hard as their earnings depend on appearance in the courts.


Though the high court and subordinate courts in Patna district have allowed e-filing of petitions and case argument through videoconferencing, very few cases are being taken up in order to main social distancing since the end of Holi vacation.

Sharing his problems, Akshay Ashish said he is unable to pay Rs16,000 as two months’ rent. “Though my landlord has agreed to demand rent after the situation normalizes, but I have no other income for other expenses and it’s not always possible to ask for money from parents,” he said, adding that the plight of clerks is also the same.

Another lawyer, who lives on rent in Danapur and didn’t wish to be named, said lawyers can’t even ask clients to pay in advance. “No client has turned up in the last two months — first due to Holi and then lockdown. I spent whatever savings I had. Parents are always ready to support me but my conscience does not permit to ask them for money,” she said.

“The problem is more with young lawyers who have no support. The Advocates’ Act also doesn’t permit us to practise any other profession for livelihood,” she said, adding that the situation is more critical for at least 15 of her colleagues who were living in hostels.

Meanwhile, high court lawyer Naresh Dixit said he had financially helped at least 15 juniors. “The junior lawyers are in real problem. The 15 juniors I had helped had run out of ration. I remember one of them is diabetic and he didn’t have money to buy the required medicines,” Dixit said.

Ashok Kumar, who practises at Patna civil court, said he had to take Rs15,000 as loan on 10% interest to bear the family expenses. “I could not pay rent for March and April. After much request, my landlord agreed to take rent later. At present we are surviving on my mother’s pension,” said Kumar, who lives with his family at Birla Colony.

Patna civil court public prosecutor Vijay Sinha said lawyers, either on government panels or in private practice, are just like daily wagers. “A government pleader can submit bills only after appearing in cases daily. It would be of great help if the government clears all pending bills of government pleaders and public prosecutors,” he said.

The chairman of coordination committee of all three advocate associations of Patna high court, Yogesh Chandra Verma, on Sunday urged CM Nitish Kumar to make available ration to lawyers through the Patna high court cooperative society at subsidized rates. “A letter has already been written to the DM on the issue, but there is no response yet. Large numbers of lawyers are running out of money and ration,” he said and added that the high court has around 7,500 practising lawyers.

Verma said Bihar State Bar Council had also written to district level bar associations to seek details about their financial status in order to help needy lawyers.

