Lawyers move U’khand HC, want Bar Councils to pay Rs 10,000 to each lawyer and Rs 5,000 to their clerks during lockdown
2020-04-20
Nainital: A group of lawyers have approached the Uttarakhand high court (HC) demanding that Bar Council of Uttarkhand and the Bar Council of India should pay Rs 10,000 to each lawyer and Rs 5,000 to their clerks as a relief measure during the ongoing lockdown.

A public interest litigation (PIL) has been filed in the HC that states that the lawyers are facing an unprecedented situation since most of the courts are only hearing matters of extreme urgency and they have almost no income. "The lockdown has deprived the lawyers from having any income from court work or client counseling… Extreme measures of social distancing and lockdown have left them without any source of income and opportunity of livelihood," read the PIL.

Speaking to TOI, Kartikey Hari Gupta, the counsel appearing for the petitioners said that the advocates pay a share to the Bar Councils each time they file a case. The Bars also maintain the advocates’ welfare funds which are to be used in cases of emergencies. "There are around 16,000 lawyers in the state that are registered with the Bar. The threat of the Covid-19 pandemic and the ongoing lockdown are the biggest challenges before all these lawyers at the moment. Therefore, we have argued that it is the duty of the Bar Council of Uttarakhand and Bar Council of India to release the funds," Gupta said.

The petition, which is likely to be heard by the court on Monday, also demands that the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) should form separate guidelines for lawyers now that both the HC and its subordinate courts have begun hearing urgent cases through video conferencing. "Many of the lawyers do not have high speed 2 mbps internet connections at their homes. Therefore, it is necessary that they travel either to their offices or the court premises to take part in the hearing. However, as the lockdown has restricted the movement of people, guidelines should be changed so that lawyers can travel without restriction to take part in the court proceedings," Gupta said.

Apart from seeking the release of funds, the PIL also demands waiver of rents for advocates, free medical aid, waiver of electricity and water bills for March, April and May, as well as waiver of school fee for their children.


