Leaked names bring grief for quarantined
2020-03-28
Panaji: Ever since the novel coronavirus became omnipresent, names of possible suspects and also those who had been asked to stay in home quarantine were being circulated on the social media.

Apart from Covid-19 patients, some fictitious names too made it to the list on the Whatsapp groups. In few cases, even mugshots of suspects were circulated. Many of them were ostracised.

Authorities denied of having any hand in leaking the names, but at least in two cases, they said they knew for certain that the information was leaked by the government staff.

A resident of a coastal village said that after information about him and his wife in quarantine became public, his neighbours and villagers maintained distance with them.

“My neighbours have stopped passing by my house though we have been tested negative,” he said. 

Epidemic Act which is in force allows the government to initiate action against those spreading rumours. It could not be confirmed if any action was taken against the rumour-mongers.

Health minister Vishwajit Rane did not respond to a query by TOI on initiating action.

Rajesh Pednekar who has been in quarantine, in a video message on Friday, said that fake news was spread about his family. They are all hale and hearty and has been under quarantine as a precautionary measure, he said.

“I request people not to circulate fake news as it will send a wrong message. Some even may get into depression or it may lead to some other ailment,” Pednekar said in a video appeal.

Last week, a letter by a health officer to the collectorate office went viral. The letter had names of travellers who needed to be put in quarantine and had been staying in the jurisdiction of the health officer.

The officer had named those who his staff could track and those, they could not. Somebody had the letter posted on the Facebook.

The officer said neither him nor any of his staff members had a hand in it. It was clear that some staffers, whether linked to his or Collectorate office, could be behind the leak.


