Goa: Learning to compost wet waste for sustainable lockdown living
2020-04-25
PANAJI: During the initial days of the the lockdown, everything came to a standstill in Goa, with not even the garbage collectors coming by to collect waste in most areas. This left some citizens determined to compost the wet waste generated in their household, reducing the burden on the state’s waste management systems.


The spare time at hand due to the lockdown also helped many make the shift towards what they call sustainable living. Ponda-resident Abhinav Apte, who began the ‘ComePost’ WhatsApp helpline with like-minded individuals in 2018, has already organised online workshops during the lockdown to initiate citizens into composting.

“We started this project one-and-a-half years ago in 2018 and our aim is to clock 1,000 active composters in Goa by December 2020. Today, we have 250 members in one WhatsApp group and 100 in another. During the lockdown period, we have had three sessions with experts, some even from outside Goa, over Zoom,” Apte said.

Margao-based entrepreneur Arti Nagvekar is among those who began composting wet waste generated at home during the lockdown. “Now the wet waste we hand to the garbage collector has reduced to zero. My sister-in-law used to compost her home waste and had been asking us to do the same for some time now. With the lockdown in force, we had the time to get down to doing it and also those like Abhinav, have time to answer our many queries,” said Nagvekar.

Of the various methods of composting, from using leaves to vermi-composting, individuals are initiated into the method best suited to their needs depending on the space available and the quantum of garbage generated .

“We do not push any one method, and allow them to take up the method they are most comfortable with. Many people buy online kits for composting and later realise that there are maggots in the compost bin and stench due to lack of guidance. The WhatsApp group helps guide the members on how to go about it. If done the right way, there are no maggots or stench, the compost actually smells good,” Apte. said Faculty at a private engineering college, Christina Baretto, also began composting wet waste at her home in Cansaulim during the lockdown period.

“I was out at work for long hours earlier, and now that I am at home I thought why not learn something new, which is a sustainable practice and good for the environment. Besides having the necessary time at hand during the lockdown, I don’t have to go out to get manure for our plants once the compost is readyUsually, we drive down to Margao to get manure for our garden plants,” she said.

It has been two-and-a-half weeks since she started and cannot wait for the 45 to 60 day period to be over to lay her hands on the organic manure generated at home from the composting. 

“Our wet waste has reduced considerably. It was easy to do it during the lockdown as we did not need to buy anything extra besides an old bucket from the house and dried leaves from the garden. I watched a youtube video by Devki Shinkre who was my classmate and I thought it was pretty simple. Also, during the lockdown, we are mostly eating vegetarian food, which is simpler to start composting with,” Baretto added. 

During the lockdown, one of the first things that affected neighbourhoods was the safai karmchari not being able work as usual, said Abhay Mishra, a co-founder of the parent organisation Ulti Ginti of #ComePost.

“We have been having composting workshops for more than a year now but only people from some pockets showed interest. Generally the eco-friendly clan would reach out to us. But suddenly we saw a change in attitude. People realised that now it is not some fancy term floated by environmentalists. This is something very basic. I had mostly seen women flock to our workshop, but after the lockdown was imposed, for the first time I had a batch of five men. People now want to learn composting as a life skill,” Mishra said.


