Coronavirus in Bihar: Leave of government doctors and health staff cancelled till March 31
2020-03-14
PATNA: The state health department has cancelled all leaves, including medical leave, of doctors and support staff of government hospitals till March 31 in view of coronavirus threat.

Sanjay Kumar, principal secretary of state health department, said an alert has been sounded in all districts.

Meanwhile, Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) medical superintendent Dr Bimal Kumar Karak said altogether three coronavirus suspects have been kept in the isolation ward of the hospital. “Of these, two have been tested negative and results of the third patients are awaited. Samples of more than 50 people from the state have been sent to National Institute of Virology for tests,” Dr Karak said.

Meanwhile, samples of a Covid-19 suspect from Samastipur, who was admitted in the isolation ward of PMCH, have been tested negative. “One more suspected patient from Darbhanga was admitted at PMCH on Friday,” Dr Karak said.

He added that PMCH has taken several precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the virus. “Even though no coronavirus case has been reported in the state so far, we are leaving no stone unturned to fight the outbreak. The isolation ward at PMCH was shifted from the emergency building to a cottage on Thursday. The first floor of the cottage, which has been converted into an isolation ward, has nine rooms with two beds each,” he said.

Meanwhile, a senior health department official said over 1.36 lakh passengers have been screened at transit points in the state till now. Besides, 19,095 people have been screened at Patna and Gaya airports. The official added that as many as 205 passengers who have returned from corona-affected countries have been kept in home isolation till now. Of these, 77 have completed 14-day quarantine.

State health officials said owners of hotels in all 38 districts, especially those in Gaya, Vaishali, Nalanda and Araria, have been asked to report any symptomatic case to the authorities concerned.


