Gujarat: Leopard forces lockdown in Dahod society, rescued
2020-05-26
VADODARA: A leopard had a free run in a residential society in Dahod town for almost a whole day on Saturday, keeping the residents as well as foresters on tenterhooks. 


The drama began with the wild cat entering the porch of a locked house in the Agrawal Society on the Mandava Road in Dahod in the morning. 


The leopard injured a woman in another nearby society first before it sought refuse in the car of a local resident.… https://t.co/tedVpkcXei— TOI Vadodara (@TOIVadodara) 1590294852000
However, soon it kept darting about nimbly in lightning acceleration keeping the rescue squad scurrying along behind it. 

Finally, after a lot of high drama and a few injuries too, it could be captured in the afternoon after tranquillising.

The leopard injured a woman in another nearby society first before it sought refuge behind a car in the porch of Kamlesh Agrawal’s locked up residence. Scared residents of the society, meanwhile, dialled cops and the forest department for help.

But not quite enjoying its stay in the locked house, the leopard decided to venture further and reached the Mandava Road. Here it came across a fruit seller who he tried to maul, but left before much harm and hid near the water tank of another house in the area. 

Then it went further to reach Malino Delo, located at a distance in the same area, and entered the compound of a school.

Priya Jain, a resident of the Agrawal Society said that it was the scariest morning of her life. “After injuring a woman of a nearby society on the street, it entered the compound of a house located right in front of our house. But sensing trouble, after volunteers and forest department officials gathered, it disappeared from the scene and kept playing hide and seek!” Jain recounted her horror to TOI.

Finally, the forest department officials and wildlife volunteers found the animal hiding on a tree and shot tranquillising darts at it. One hit the target, but the cat started running again. Not to be outdone anymore, a few volunteers lunged at it armed with a net. They could finally overpower it, but not without it inflicting injuries on nearly five of its captors. 

Assistant conservator of forests Rushiraj Puvar said that around five persons were injured in the bid to nab the leopard. “We have sent the men for treatment. The leopard will also be sent for treatment of any injuries it may have received,” he added.

