Let us go home calls grow louder at quarantine centres
2020-04-13
Nagpur: International flyers, Delhi returnees and local suspects put up at different quarantine centres were in a state of panic on Sunday morning after news broke about four persons at MLA Hostel and two at Lonara college testing positive.While those quarantined at MLA Hostel, Ravi Bhavan and Vanamati reiterated their demand of being allowed to go for home isolation at some centres, situation remained under control at Lonara as public health officials didn’t disclose the reason for taking away two persons in the afternoon to others.Dr Danish Iqbal, incharge from Public health department at Lonara college, said people were told that a retest was being done for the two. “It took a while for people to realize the two had tested positive through news coming on social media. But it didn’t create panic,” he said. Dr Iqbal said 114 samples were collected two days ago. “From these, the two tested positive,” he said.At MLA Hostel, the close contacts of Khamla positive patients created ruckus after the officials released those from Jaripatka containment zone.“Around 20 of us were released on Sunday. Some more from Jaripatka are there. Both groups from Jaripatka and Khamla have completed 14 days but only those testing negative are being released. People from Khamla were annoyed as their report didn’t come. Without a negative report, no one is allowed to go,” said one of the persons who came out. Cops deployed at the MLA Hostel took control of the situation and convinced people to go back inside.The Delhi returnees and Tablighi Jamaat members are quarantined in Wing II of MLA Hostel. The local close contacts are in Wing III.TOI has been reporting about the apprehensions of people who had returned to Nagpur over a month ago yet quarantined because of Delhi travel history. International flyers too were worried about their health when officials started putting up two persons in one room.At Vanamati, though all 81 samples came negative, people are worried since a cap seller having travelled to Delhi last month had tested positive. One of the two from Lonara who tested positive on Sunday is the cap seller’s close contact from Takia.At Ravi Bhavan, an elderly man and a cop were allegedly involved in a verbal duel after the former's son came to meet him. Some were also not allowed to return their used clothes and take fresh ones. They have also not been informed about their test results since April 2.“Suddenly, the rules have changed. Relatives were not allowed to give clothes or eatables. We are here since April 2. Each day there is a new rule. The health officials have stopped talking to us. It appears a big fraud is being played on us,” said a public sector official. Another person said, “We have decide to pack our bags and vacate the premises on April 15 when we complete 14 days.”Meanwhile, the canteen operator at Ravi Bhavan and MLA Hostel announced an insurance cover of Rs5 lakh for each of his workers engaged in house keeping and catering services. However, they too are scared as they are working without PPE kits.