‘Let’s act as if we have the virus and a mandate to protect others’
2020-05-17
The prolonged lockdown has helped reduce the spread of coronavirus and mortality due to it, but it has also brought all economic activities to a grinding halt. Stark economic consequences coupled with a grim realization that this new normal is no longer sustainable will force the government to allow a phased reopening of business activities. New hotspots of infection are mainly in the urban areas which are also hotspots of economic activities. Absence of a proven anti-viral drug and the non-availability of a potent vaccine in the near future means we are very much on the defensive against the virus. The only scenario that emerges is one in which the common man has to learn to co-exist with the virus, unhurt and strong.

The lockdown is equivalent of a crash diet, effective but not sustainable. Crash diets inevitably fail because they are not accompanied by a sustainable change in daily dietary patterns. Once the diet ends, we go back to digging into our chocolate cakes, pastries and gulab jamuns, instantaneously undoing all the gains we made over the past month. This is more true for the fight against corona. Unless we incorporate healthy living habits, basic tenets of social distancing, hand hygiene and use of masks in our daily routine, the hardships endured during the lockdown would have been in vain. 

Doctors protect themselves from infected patients while performing their duty. Similarly, teachers are responsible for the physical and mental safety of students. Security personnel are expected to enforce law and order to prevent lawlessness. This overt reliance on certain small sections of the society to keep the majority safe and under check is grossly inadequate in the current scenario. TV screens were recently filled with images of humungous crowds of migrant labourers at railway terminals and serpentine queues outside liquor stores. It was left to the local administration to vainly enforce social distancing between warring individuals. 

Self-preservation is the strongest and most primitive of all human instincts — a will to survive, at any cost. Historically, that has meant putting selfish interests over the general good of the species. In the past few months, we have learnt that it is easier and more meaningful not to infect others than to merely protect oneself from getting infected. 

We need to change our mindset. We have to act as if we have the virus and we have a mandate to protect others. We have to understand our social responsibility, an unwritten law that we have to take all precautions of observing cough etiquette, wearing masks and maintaining social distancing to protect others from getting infected. In doing so, we will achieve all we want for ourselves.

We, as a society, must realise that our selfish interests of protecting ourselves can only be achieved if we work as a collective group and not as individuals. We would be wise to follow the wisdom of our Shastras — “Paramarth hi param swarth hai”. As more and more individuals undertake and share this collective responsibility and understand that it is only through protecting others that they themselves can be safe, we may reach a tipping point in our fight against corona.

Our first step should be make the means available to the general public to fight this virus through universal distribution of three-layered masks. Home masks may be equally good but should be validated by scientific bodies before these are recommended for wider use. The Covid warriors who are putting service before self should be supplied with N-95 masks regularly. Vending machines could be installed for providing masks at most economical rates as well as for their disposal. 

We have to graduate from the concept of social distancing to the more effective one of social responsibility. Of course, for non-abiding citizens, we will need enforcement and penalties, like confinement at house for 14 days.

We must pledge that the basic tenets of social distancing, hand hygiene and universal adoption of masks are followed in their true spirit and not as a form of punishment inflicted by an authority. We should not require the presence of a police officer to pull our masks over our faces or to move back three paces from the person standing next in line. 

Patients coming to health care facilities should take the onus and make a conscious effort not to infect unsuspecting contacts and healthcare workers. Data suggests that youngsters are often asymptomatic and may become super spreaders. They can transmit the virus mainly because of their lifestyles and rapid mobility. It is time that we mentor the young.

We must be the change to bring about a change. It is only through protection of the community at large that the individual will become safe.


Dr S K Sarin, director, ILBS, heads Delhi government’s Covid-19 task force

