LifeInTheLockdown: Your thirst for alcohol can land you in trouble
2020-04-14
When the nationwide lockdown was announced, one of the worries that those with a thirst for a daily tipple had was about how they were going to get their hands on some brew. While those with well-stocked bars began to ration, others looked for means to procure more – by hook or by crook. With the lockdown now extended and no solid information on whether there will be relaxations for the sale of liquor, it is no wonder that Bengaluru has been reporting increased instances of illegal bootlegging and, in extreme cases, theft of alcohol bottles only. And if you too have been following messages from trusted sources on social media about ‘scoring’ a bottle or two, rest assured, you could get into trouble with cops who have picked up vigil on these illegal activities. 

Here’s a lowdown of what has been happening in namma city…

 


The alcoholic burglar

Bengaluru has seen some unusual break-ins over the past three weeks, what with these new-age burglars showing no interest in any valuables other than alcohol! "Burglaries are being reported, wherein the aggrieved parties have only stated alcohol as missing from their premises," says Sandeep Patil, joint commissioner of police (crime). 

 

The 'insider' buyers

Access to a bootlegger selling alcohol is easier said than done. You not only need to have some solid connections, who can get your message to one, but you should also be able to cough up quite a sum, as bottles are being sold for twice or thrice their MRP, if not more. And if that isn’t troublesome enough, getting the bottle is an operation that looks straight out of a thriller movie, involving a ransom drop off. "Bootleggers do not entertain requests from anyone other than a trusted source. Once the order is taken, a typically isolated location is picked, the bottle hidden well concealed, with some identification mark next to it for you to find it," says a source, on condition of anonymity, adding that only online payments are accepted.

 

The more your order, the lesser the asking price

A marketing professional, on condition of anonymity, reveals, "Once we realised that multiple people from the same locality or apartment complex were coordinating with a bootlegger, we decided to work out a deal. Instead of individual orders, we’s ask him for multiple bottles at a time and ask him to knock off a sizeable chunk from his profit margin.”



The highest bidder may just be a cop

On Sunday, a resident of Vijayanagar was caught red-handed by excise department officials when he was waiting for a customer. The man had posted a picture of a bottle on Instagram, quoted a price and then opened it up for bidding, assuring interested parties that the highest bidder could pick up the bottle from a designated drop location Tough luck for him, though.

 


Friends rely on barters and delivery apps

If it is not the neighbourhood ex-military uncle with his army quota, it is friends with well-stocked bars who are most in demand now. "I don’t enjoy whiskey, but have a few bottles that I picked up along the way. My friends, who have run out of booze, asked me to send a few across through a delivery service," says a software professional, on condition of anonymity, who only took the MRP in exchange. But even this is illegal, say cops. 

 


Meanwhile, 600 bottles seized in Bengaluru

Over the past three weeks, five individuals selling alcohol in black were arrested in the city and 600 bottles were seized.

 


No word on pleas to open liquor stores

Many states, including Karnataka, have had discussions on whether to open liquor stores for a small window daily. These have been shot down. In Kerala, there was buzz surrounding the idea of allowing those with a doctor's prescription to buy alcohol. But that didn’t take off either.

 

‘Any sale of alcohol by someone without a license is illegal’

Sandeep Patil states, "Right now, liquor stores and bars are shut. Any individual selling alcohol will be booked under the Excise Act, as no one is legally allowed to sell alcohol."


