#LifeInTheLockdown: Senior citizens get tech-savvy to connect with family and run day-to-day affairs
2020-04-23
When news of the coronavirus pandemic broke out, 74-year-old widow Sudha B knew that she had to step it up as far as use of technology goes, given that both her children lived in other cities. “Summer vacation is normally when I visit my children and they me, but with the lockdown in place, we are not sure when we can see each other again. In the past, my children and grandchildren have tried to teach me how to use video streaming, instant messaging and video calling on my cell phone, and it is only now that I am actively trying it. After a few hits and misses, I have even learnt to send voice messages and have been reconnecting with long-lost friends who live in other countries,” she says.


Internet has made connectivity easy and cheap
The fact that his two daughters live in areas hard hit by the coronavirus – Boston and Dubai – had 69-year-old Kadaba Nagraj on tenterhooks. But technology has ensured that he can see and talk to his extended family whenever he wants. "Earlier, the cost of international calls was a deterrent, but with all these voice-over-internet apps, you spend a fraction of that and have amazing connectivity.


Using technology to go cashless
Septuagenarian and former railway official Surendran Nair’s biggest challenge, though, was to switch to non-cash transactions. “After demonetisation, I learnt how to use a PayTM wallet, which my children would recharge. But now that most people are on other payment apps like GPay and PhonePe, among others, I have had to learn that too. I am not too comfortable making financial transactions on a phone, but times are such,” he says, adding, "With the help of a few friendly neighbours, I even downloaded grocery shopping apps and linked the wallet."


Helping with childcare from afar
"Since our daughters and sons-in-law are working from home, and need to be able to focus on official stuf, we plan our calls with the grandchildren accordingly and keep them engaged, by telling them stories, or singing bhajans to them. This allows us to feel connected and involved in their life," says Nagraj.


Catching on entertainment online
On her last visit to her children, Sudha had an OTT platform app downloaded on her phone. “My granddaughter taught me how to access episodes of some of the daily serials I watch. So, now, I have figured that I can watch it whenever I want,” she says.


Making online activity safe for senior citizens
- Do not click on links in text messages with promises of better connectivity, free internet, or free access to OTT platforms. You may end up installing malicious apps on your device. 
- Consult your family on the apps to download, based on where they live. A lot of instant messaging and video calling apps do not work in the Middle East, for instance.
-Download only those apps that have good user reviews and a huge number of downloads as this ensure that you are in the right direction.
 - Use strong passwords on your email or chatting app accounts. Do not use names of your family members, the place you work, anniversary and birthday dates as passwords. These are commonly known to others. Also, do not use the same password for all your accounts.
 - Do not join free-wifis unless you are sure of it. In public places or while commuting, always pay attention if anyone is shoulder surfing your phone or laptop.


(Source: Vijay Raj, Cyber Security Risk Evangelist)


 


