‘Life near normal despite testing positive’
2020-03-25
Thrissur: “I am leaving the hospital happily realizing that I had not been the cause of infection to anyone. All those who had come in contact with me have been tested negative.” These were the words of a 21-year-old Covid-19 positive patient who was discharged on Tuesday evening after he was tested negative for two consecutive times.

He had come from Qatar on the same flight which had brought the Covid-19 patients of Ranni in Pathanamthitta on February 29. He was in the isolation ward of the general hospital in Thrissur since March 8, when the passengers hailing from Pathanamthitta were tested positive.

He was also later tested positive.

Talking to the TOI over the phone just before leaving the hospital, he said he has been asked to continue home quarantine for 28 more days.

He said life was near normal even after being tested positive for Covid-19.

Even though he has been tested positive he had not developed any other complications.

“I was taking normal food and was able to sleep well, there was no temperature. I had some stomach pain and diarrhoea in the initial days, but I don’t have any problems now,” he said.

“I was getting excellent support from all sections, including doctors, nurses, staff, from the DMO office, and I am thankful to all of them,” he added.

From Cochin airport, he went to his home in Kodungallur. However, he was contacted by health officials soon after the patients from Ranni were tested positive on March 8. He was then brought to the general hospital and was put under hospital quarantine. He had gone to a mall and had also attended a marriage engagement in between.

“I was not at all aware that I have been infected, and that is why I was moving around freely,” he said.

What troubled him the most was that numerous fake news about him was being circulated when reports about him testing positive came into the public domain. “I was not able to deny those reports. That is why I decided to post a video on my condition on social media. Also, I wanted to send out a message of relief to people,” he said.


