Life out of tune: How musicians are battling the Covid crisis
2020-05-23
Dehradun: Birendra Thapa, 62, has been running a music band called ‘Doon Sargam’ for the last 35 years, performing at events, hotels and private gatherings. It helped sustain his family of four — his wife and two sons. But now, things are getting increasingly difficult. “The lockdown ended in cancellation of at least 12 shows lined up for April and May. My sons are still trying to build their careers and whatever little savings we have managed to survive on till now, are going to exhaust very soon,” Thapa told TOI.

The coronavirus outbreak and the subsequent lockdown derailed several businesses, music bands among them. A local band, comprising five members, earns anywhere between Rs 10,000 to Rs 20,000 per booking on a good day. A band usually gets around eight bookings per month, depending on the season, which translates to an income of roughly Rs 30,000 per month for each member. During the peak wedding season – April to June – bands get three times the bookings they usually do. During these three months, people from other states also come to Uttarakhand for destination weddings.

However, not only did the musicians’ income not triple this summer but bands are on the verge of bankruptcy, as there is no scope of holding an event during the lockdown and almost all advance bookings have been cancelled.

“We are losing out on our peak season. We usually have so many bookings in the summer that we have to stay in Mussoorie for three months straight. A lot of artistes are suffering because of the economic uncertainty and we want the government to step in and come up with some policy or financial relief for us,” said Ravi Gurvinder Singh, president of the Uttarakhand Musicians’ Welfare Society.

Lawrence Massey, lead vocalist of “Trishna the Band” said, “There are around 200 musicians in Dehradun district who are completely dependent on earnings from performances at weddings, clubs, hotels and private functions. Because of the lockdown, none of these events are taking place. The weddings in Mussoorie, which usually see large gatherings in the months of April, May and June, have stopped completely. Some weddings that are taking place don’t have enough guests and certainly no room for musicians.”

According to an estimate, 20 per cent of the musicians in Dehradun come from other districts of the state and stay in rented accommodation. Most of them are unable to pay rent now. The situation is no different for those who are from Doon. Some of them say they don’t even have the money to pay back clients they had collected advance payments from.

Sultan Sheikh, 25, had started “Doon Sargam” two years ago, inspired by his musician dad, who has a band of his own. The entity had started turning in a profit only a few months ago, when the lockdown erased all business prospects. “The lockdown cancelled 24 shows planned at various hotels, weddings and private parties. Now, clients are asking for their money back. I have paid back some of them, but can’t return what we owe the rest. Before we started the band, my friends and I used to earn from private music lessons. I think I’ll have to go back to that,” said Sheikh.

(With inputs from Abhijeet Singh)


