Life in a metro: Without home and means to fight the coronavirus
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: How do you observe janata curfew if you don’t have a home? This was the plight faced by the homeless on Sunday as they didn’t know where to go to remain safe.


Indulekha, her husband and five children were among those clustered under Nizamuddin flyover who didn’t have any masks or sanitisers to keep themselves safe. “We have been living on the streets for the past seven years, but have never felt so unsafe. We don’t have an option. The government should show concern about those who have no means to safeguard themselves,” said the woman who sells balloons to make a living. Sunday was a tough day for her as there was no one to buy balloons.

“It’s a double whammy for us. While we live on the streets, now there is the fear of our catching the virus. There is little we can do to protect ourselves. I’m not afraid for myself but for my children who are as young as three, five and eight. I don’t know how to protect them,” said 37-year-old Sumanti Devi, who lives on the streets of Karol Bagh.

Sumanti also feared for loss of livelihood. “We sell candy floss, but people have become wary of buying it. We feel so helpless. If not from the virus, we are going to die of starvation. I don’t have money to feed my family. My husband died after our third child was born,” she added.

After living on the footpaths for years across Delhi and UP, 68-year-old Surinder Singh started sitting outside Bangla Sahib Gurdwara three months ago. “Had the virus only been in Delhi, I would have moved to another city. Where should I go? I’m old and don’t have a family. I’ve heard the virus affects the elderly the most. I’m scared that if I or someone around me catches it, I won’t recover. This thought has been giving me sleepless nights,” he said.

There were many who had shifted to shelter homes fearing they would be more prone to the infection if they stayed outdoors. “I used to live on the streets with my family even during winter. But now we have shifted to a rain basera. We are trying to find a safe spot for ourselves,” said Kapil Kumar.

The shelter homes, which otherwise wear a deserted look round the year, now have full occupancy.


