Lifting the lockdown: What it means for Tamil Nadu
2020-05-06
With new clusters adding more than 2,000 cases in one week and medical experts predicting another surge in numbers after the lockdown is lifted, will Tamil Nadu be able to handle the influx of infected patients? Is lifting the lockdown worth the risk?

 

Medical experts and economists say the state should be able to handle a surge in infections if it lifts the lockdown while ensuring an effective surveillance system, community engagement, effective quarantine and isolation with good facilities, increased testing and contact tracing, to contain the spread.

 


"What we are seeing now in Tamil Nadu means the epidemic is growing," said virologist Dr Jacob John. "But I believe the state is confident because TN is number one in the country for its health management system, while it falters a little when it comes to crisis management where Kerala excels," he added. 

That nearly 80% of the cases are asymptomatic helps in handling the outbreak, Dr John said adding that high mortality rate among senior citizens in the 20% symptomatic cases means the elderly need to be ‘cocooned’ at home by ensuring social distancing and other measures.

"As more and more people get infected and become immune, the proportion of immune people will increase gradually. So one person will not be infecting the number that he would infect if there is both immune and non-immune in the population," he said.

T Sundararaman, public health expert and former dean of school of health systems studies, TISS, said engagement of the community, which includes counselling and encouraging them to get tested, which Kerala adopted, has been absent in Tamil Nadu. He said lockdown should be lifted after putting in place several measures like social restriction, better community quarantine and isolation, wide testing, social workers tracing, counseling, and a campaign against stigmatisation.

"The state did not look for non-contact symptomatics in the beginning. They built a story they went by known contacts till they found cases with unknown contacts and by then the mega Koyambedu cluster and others were found. After starting well, TN lost it because they did not suspect there may be more cases after the first big chain of transmission," he said. "I make no case for lockdown. Three weeks is enough. You need social restriction. If you have good data about which sections it is spreading in, then you can focus certain activities which are more associated with social mixing. All these restrictions on shops shutting early is only unnecessarily scaring people," he added.

K Jothi Sivagnanam, head of department of economics, University of Madras, said the lockdown has to be lifted immediately to both revive the economy and protect the informal sector of 415 million workers who live in urban areas. "Opening the economy is not like turning a switch on and off. Countries like the US announced a stimulus package in which wage guarantee is a part because they want to keep the system alive. Sadly, we do not have that type of thinking here," he said.


