Lift lockdown in gauged mode: CII tells govt
2020-04-13
Indore: Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) has recommended state government to lift the lockdown in a calibrated manner allowing business to open partly in pockets not affected much by Covid-19 following all safety norms. 

The industry body has also suggested to run a ‘messaging’ campaign to make people understand preparedness of government and industry for resuming operations after the lockdown. 

CII Madhya Pradesh state council former chairman Praveen Agarwal said, “Government needs to look economic health of the state as well. We propose that businesses in districts with negligible or very low cases of Covid-19 should be allowed to open up partly maintaining proper safety measures. In Madhya Pradesh, which is an agriculture dominant state, agriculture sector followed by allied activities should be opened up in phases starting April15.” 

CII suggested facilitation of business back on track with the help of e-passes and by arranging special transport. 

To ease movement of workforce to factories, the industry body recommended that special transport could be arranged from clusters from where large number of workers come following all safety protocols in place. 

There were incidences of trucks stranded on highways for days and poor availability of drivers. Looking into such cases, CII has suggested to allow dhabas on highways to open so that truck drivers en route get basic amenities. 

CII suggested all facilities re-opening should ensure social distancing, screening, sanitisation, etc. The fulfilment of norms should be on a self-certification basis with penalties for violating units. The industry body has also urged waivers and exemptions to aid industries.

Agrawal said, “Government should also look into needs of the industry on priority like waiving of minimum charges on electricity bills, deferment of electricity and all government payments for 3 months, etc as per the detailed submissions by CII and also similar measures taken by other state governments.” 


