Limit lockdown 4.0 curbs to infected areas, says Shivraj Singh Chouhan
2020-05-12
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that with the Prime Minister’s farsightedness, will power and skilful leadership, Team India will win the battle against Corona soon. In a video conference regarding COVID status with all the chief ministers of the country taken by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday, he said that lockdown 4 must be mixed with restrictions limited only to infected areas.

Chouhan said the Prime Minister has implemented a strong strategy against coronavirus in the country by consistently communicating and coordinating with the states in accordance with the honour and dignity of the federal structure, due to which we have gained effective control over Corona. The home ministry advisory is very clear and useful for the states.

Stating that the states are getting continuous support and guidance from the Centre, Chouhan said the team sent by the Centre visited severely infected areas in hotspots in the state and gave valuable suggestions. Similarly, the trains run for the labourers have proved extremely helpful in getting them home while the amount of Rs661 crore under MNREGA and Rs910 crore under NDRF sent by the Centre during this crisis has proved immensely useful. As many as 16 lakh labourers have been given work under MNREGA in the state.

He said that different types of economic activities have been started in the state and the states should be given packages for MSME industries.

Chief minister also talked about the bold reforms made in the labour law for maximum investment promotion keeping in mind the interests of workers in the state. Changes have been made in the Mandi Act to provide maximum value of their produce to farmers, under which farmers can now sell their crops from their homes through Sauda Patraks, in the mandi and also through e-tendering.

Chouhan suggested that to prevent the infection of Corona in the state effectively and to restore the economy, the fourth lockdown should have a mixed form. Strict action should be taken in the infected area, while in other areas exemption should be given so that economic activities can be resumed smoothly. The night curfew should remain unchanged from 7pm to 7am. Gradually, public transport should be started in a controlled manner. All celebrations must be banned, he said.

Health Minister Dr. Narottam Mishra, Chief Secretary Shri Iqbal Singh Bains, Additional Chief Secretary Health Shri Mohammad Suleman etc were present in the video conference.


