Liquor mafia, boozers having a field day during lockdown
2020-03-31
VARANASI: At a time when people are struggling to arrange even essential commodities during the ongoing nationwide lockdown in view of COVID-19 threat, the liquor mafia in the region as well as boozers are having a field day. 


Only in past four days, the cops in Varanasi and surrounding districts have not only witnessed the menace of liquor mafia pumping in huge consignments of liquor in the neighbouring dry state of Bihar, but also cases of black marketing of liquor and even theft in liquor shops have kept them on their toes.

On March 28 late night, a band of thieves breached the rear wall of a country liquor shop in Nandpur area under the limits of Kapsethi police station in Varanasi and fled with 20 boxes full of 180 ml bottles. After the matter came to light on March 30 morning the owner of building in which the shop is located reported the matter to the police.

Before it on March 27 SP Sonbhadra Ashish Srivastava led an operation of district police in which three smuggled liquor-laden truck were stoppd near Khairahi on Sonbhadra-Mirzapur highway. When the containers of trucks were checked secret cavities were detected. The liquor smugglers had hidden bottles containing 72,226.64 litres of branded liquor packed in 825 boxes in the cavities. 

Srivastava said, “Following their arrest the drivers of three truck including Rajesh, Jagmendra of Haryana and Shivnath of Bihar divulged that the liquor consignment had been given to them by some Sonu at Sonipat in Haryana to deliver at Muzaffarpur in Bihar.”

He said that apart from liquor three trucks and mobile phones of drivers had been seized.

Again on March 27, the Badagaon cops, who were patrolling Siswa fruit market to ensure proper enforcement of lockdown, in Varanasi caught a person engaged in black marketing of the liquor. A total of 19 bottles of liquor were recovered from his possession. 

District excise officer Varanasi Karunendra Singh said, ”With the promulgation of lockdown, a blanket ban is imposed on sale of liquor. The current financial year is ending on Tuesday, but due to lockdown since March 25 no process of counting of old stock could take place so far. We are waiting for the order of state government to initiate this process and also decide the timing for the regularisation of the shops for next financial year.”

He said that his department was also investigating the issue.


