Bihar: Little respite for truckers amid partial relaxation of lockdown
2020-04-21
PATNA: Even as the government offices resumed their functioning on Monday with stress on restarting development activities and construction work, the truckers maintained that their hands were tied and, in fact, they were not in position to transport the building materials.

Besides cement and iron & steel, the building materials also include stone chips and sand and a notification was issued on Monday for purchase and transportation of these items by trucks. The special secretary cum director of the mines and geology department, Arun Prakash, issued the directive. 

As per the notification, truckers have to purchase stone chips and sand from the licensed dealers, who store them for sale at their depots. The directive said that the truckers and the licensee have to follow guidelines regarding containment of coronavirus spread.

Further, the district mining officers (DMOs) have to periodically and personally inspect the sites where sand and stone chips are stored, the notification added.

However, Bihar Truck Owners’ Association (BTOA) president Bhanu Shekhar Prasad Singh said they were worried that the purchase of stone chips and sand from the licensed dealers might prove to be costly affair for them, as their stock might be empty, or short of the quantity required to fulfil the demand for the two building materials, in which situation their prices might be increased. “The mines department notification is only for government-related works in rural areas,” he said.

He demanded opening of JP Setu between Digha and Pahleja over the Ganga, as otherwise they would have to cross the river by taking a circuitous route from Patna or Gaya via Arwal, Ara and Chhapra to reach Hajipur and other north Bihar towns and Hajipur covering an extra distance of over 250km.

As Singh said, if the truck tyres got punctured or the vehicle required repair in the way, there would be no facilities for that by the roadside. To reach a technician to the stationary truck, one would have to get the technician from some distant town on small four-wheelers whose plying would require passes by the government official concerned.

Besides, the roadside dhabas have been closed due to the lockdown and their opening would take some time. In fact, their opening was dependent on the smooth flow of a large number of trucks. The state has around 4 lakh trucks, Singh said.

As a matter of fact, transport department secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal apprehended the constraints and accompanying problems. “The number of trucks plying on the national and state highways, as well as on other roads, would increase gradually once the demand for the supply and transportation of essential and non-essential increases,” he said.

“Even agriculture produce and heavy agriculture inputs (fertilizers and chemicals) have to be transported for sale and trade. Once the industries opened, not just in Bihar but in neighbouring and other states, they would require transportation of raw materials,” he said.

“As for Bihar, the most important factor is the construction sector, including the renovation of ponds under Jal Jeevan Hariyali campaign,” Agarwal also said, adding: “The unrestricted plying of trucks is a matter of time. It would pick up gradually.”

Today, the state has 4,917km of national highways and 4,253km of state highways. By one estimate, as many as 25,000 roadside dhabas and around 15,000 vehicle repair shops stand along them. The truckers have food and also serve their other natural concerns like wash, rest and sleep, at these hotels. 


