Madurai: Live telecast, N95 masks, sanitisers, wedding planners usher in new trends during lockdown
2020-06-01
MADURAI: Wedding planners in Madurai have come up with special packages suiting the lockdown restrictions and pricing them competitively in order to kickstart their activity after the lull. The two months have been tough for them as people had preferred to conduct marriages at their houses and nearby temples.


Live telecast through website and Youtube channels, thermal scanning, hand sanitisers, N95 masks and getting required permissions are the new additions to the package. With the government yet to allow more than 50 people for marriages, packages are kept as low as Rs 1.49 lakh inclusive of marriage hall. Wedding planners say that they could bring down package price as expenses towards food, thamboolam, electricity charges and time spent in hall will drastically reduce.

R Senthilkumar of Hello Events said that during lockdown people preferred houses and farm houses to conduct marriage, but now inquiries have started coming in to conduct marriages in halls. “To suit the needs of lockdown restrictions we are offering a couple of packages at Rs 1.49 lakh and Rs 1.99 lakh packages, which including hall, e-invitation, food, photography, videography, hand sanitisers, masks, thermal screening, live telecast and chair arrangement with social distancing,” he said. “Live telecast was introduced since many friends and relatives could not take part in wedding. Around 4,000 people can watch through our website,” he said.

They show an awareness video to guests before the function starts in order to sensitise them on how to be cautious to stay away from Covid-19 infections, said Senthilkumar.

S Suresh of MRP Mahal in SS Colony said that he earlier used to charge separately for food, halls and other services. Recently, he has come out with a package to attract customers. “There was no inquiry due to lockdown restrictions for two months. While people concerned about ‘moi’ have postponed marriages, those, who organized functions, also conducted them at houses and temples. There have been a few inquiries in the last few days after I came up with packages suiting lockdown restrictions,” he said.


