Living with fear: Nurse on Covid-19 duty narrates his experience
2020-05-03
CHENNAI: U Manikandan, 38, a senior nurse, entered ward 215 in Tower 2 building of the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital in Chennai with growing trepidation. Silence hung thick in the air, so did fear. In the donning room, he slowly put on the scrub suit, apron, shoe leggings, the air-tight metal cover over his mouth, PPE suit, cap, goggles, N95 mask and two pairs of gloves. Clutching the case sheet tight, he gingerly stepped into the isolation ward where Chennai’s first Covid-19 patient, a 44-year-old man from Kancheepuram, had been admitted the previous night. He had arrived in India from Muscat on February 28 and was admitted on March 7 when he tested positive. The previous night, Manikandan had watched the channels flash the news of the first Covid-19 case in the city. He could hardly sleep that night. His nursing superintendent had called asking him to start work 6.45am the following day.


“I have treated suspected Yellow Fever and Nipah cases. Never did I imagine that my wife and I would be nursing Covid-19 patients,” said Manikandan, second-in-charge of the coronavirus ward. For him, the 50-odd patients whom he nursed back to health and continues to do so, and the sole woman he watched die, will remain an experience he cannot easily define. He checked the patient for symptoms, gave him food, medicines and changed his soiled sheets. “The patient was anxious. Every 10 minutes, he would keep asking me if he was alright. He would say he had fever and that he had difficulty breathing. He would say he was terrified of death,” said Manikandan, sounding distraught and tired. The patient was treated for depression and eventually discharged after he was cured.

Manikandan nursed several Covid-19 patients, later housed in the third floor of the Rheumatology block. After working for 14 days in a row, he is quarantined for nine days in the hospital quarters when his swab is tested. He is soon back at the Covid-19 ward. “During work hours, from 7am to 1pm, we don’t drink a drop of water so that we don’t use the toilet and don’t waste our PPE suits,” said Manikandan. Separated from his family and scared of getting infected and infecting his two-year-old daughter, six-year-old son and his old mother, Manikandan and his wife, also a nurse, go through work and the mandatory quarantine with fear in their hearts and a prayer on their lips. “I talk to my children. My voice breaks as I talk to them. But my wife can’t control herself. She breaks down crying,” said Manikandan.

On April 6, as Manikandan was finishing his duty, a 64-year-old woman was admitted to the Covid-19 ward with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI). The following day, when he returned to work, he was informed she had died an hour-and-a-half after admission.

