Delhi: LNJP Hospital medical director tests coronavirus positive, one worker dies
2020-05-31
NEW DELHI: One more healthcare worker lost his life to Covid-19 in the capital, while several others, including the medical director of Lok Nayak Hospital — where the maximum number of Covid-19 patients is being treated — tested positive for the viral infection on Saturday.


The deceased was a senior technical supervisor at LNJP and, sources claimed, was going to retire next month. Earlier this week, a mess worker and a sanitation supervisor at AIIMS succumbed to Covid-19.

The director of LNJP has been quarantined after being confirmed positive for Covid-19. Hospital authorities said he is stable and doing fine. “As soon as the director tested positive, his contacts were traced and tested. Two staff members have also tested positive,” officials said.

The dean of University College of Medical Sciences, a medical college attached to Guru Tegh Bahadur Hospital in east Delhi was also been diagnosed with Covid-19, sources said.

Earlier this week, the dean of Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences, which is associated with Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, tested positive for Covid-19. Initially, he was under isolation at home but when his condition deteriorated, he was shifted to ICU of a private hospital for treatment.

“With the blessing of one and all, I am shifted back to general ward from ICU after undergoing plasma therapy and anti-viral therapy,” the dean of ABIMS posted on social media. The 62-year-old was looking after the management of Covid-19 workers at RML, a Centre-run hospital designated for Covid care.

“It is worrisome that senior doctors who are taking all precautions are also getting affected now. This tells us that there is scope for complacency with this viral infection and healthcare workers dealing with patients suffering from the disease have to keep their guards up,” Dr Vinay Aggarwal, past national president of Indian Medical Association, said.

