Load takes the burden off porters hit by lockdown in Delhi
2020-06-02
NEW DELHI: Donning a traditional bright-red shirt and a scarf wrapped around his neck and face which doubled up as a mask, 30-year-old Mohammad Burhan was busy bargaining with passengers lined up outside New Delhi Railway Station on Monday. For porters like him, there was a sense of cheer back again, seeing people rush to the station with their suitcases.


Burhan says he had not earned a single penny during the lockdown and had survived on his savings and meals provided by people. However, with railway operations back on track now, he will have enough money today to spend on food and groceries, he adds.

Even as the passenger rush kept on increasing, porters were in high demand. While they say business is not even half of what it used to be, they are happy to be out there again. “We did not earn anything during the lockdown and many porters left for their homes. Most are not likely to come back anytime soon. We were eagerly waiting for trains to start running again,” said Burhan.

Naaem, a 35-year-old porter, however, says that people are not travelling heavy and most passengers don’t require assistance. They are also apprehensive of another person coming in contact with their luggage. “Only passengers travelling alone and unable to carry their suitcases are calling us for help. Even when we approach people, most don’t want to take a risk,” says Naaem, adding that he was slowly getting accustomed to the new timetables.

Others say they have even stopped charging the entire amount, stating these are tough times for everyone. “I have earned enough today to buy food for my family. While our rate hasn’t changed, we are not charging the entire amount from people who cannot pay much,” said Mahadev, another porter outside New Delhi Railway Station.

Mohammad Badar says while competition in terms of porters has gone down, it may take a while for things to return to normal. “It is unlikely business will be the same again,” adds Badar.

