Michael Lobo hits back at Rohan Khaunte over ‘quarantine’ jibe
2020-05-23
PANAJI: Refuting accusations of promoting quarantine tourism in his constituency, ports minister and Calangute MLA Michael Lobo hit back at Porvorim legislator Rohan Khaunte, and clarified that only a few hotels have been used as quarantine facilities.

“I want to tell Khaunte to stop playing politics over Covid-19,” Lobo said. He was reacting to the former revenue minister who had claimed that hotels in Calangute have started a new concept of quarantine tourism.

“Tourists who arrive in the state are residing mostly in hotels or in their second homes in Calangute constituency. Lobo appears to have started this new concept called quarantine tourism in Goa and is busy entertaining the guests,” Khaunte had said.

Speaking to mediapersons on Friday, Lobo said that 100 hotel rooms have been utilised by Goan seafarers who recently returned.

The minister also said that as per guidelines of the ministry of home affairs and district collectors, all hotels in Calangute have ceased operations. “None of the hotels are open, except those being used as quarantine facility,” he said.

Those coming to Goa are kept for one or two days at these hotels, and once their reports are confirmed negative, they proceed to their homes, Lobo said.

Reacting to his jibe terming chief minister Pramod Sawant as ‘pappu’, Lobo reminded Khaunte of the time when Sawant had inducted him in the cabinet.

“Today, Khaunte claims Sawant has become a ‘pappu’. Tomorrow, if Lobo steps down as minister and Khaunte is invited to be sworn-in, would Sawant be a gentleman?” Lobo said.

He also said that if Sawant invites Khaunte to join cabinet, the latter would be the first to stand outside Raj Bhavan seeking entry.

The minister also countered Khaunte for terming BJP as ‘communal’.

“Khaunte first joined the BJP government under the leadership of former chief minister Manohar Parrikar and was re-inducted in the Sawant government. So at that time, the BJP wasn’t communal?” Lobo said.

