Local bodies a wasted force in grassroots fight against Covid-19
2020-04-21
CHENNAI: As India struggled to cope with a pandemic, co-opting its health and disaster management force, the battalion of local governing bodies were blurred dots on the Covid-19 horizon. Odisha chief minister Naveen Patnaik did the unthinkable and vested sarpanches in gram panchayats with powers of district collectors to fight Covid. In Kerala, its network of local bodies and women empowerment programme, Kudumbashree, took the state’s battle against the virus to the community level. Tamil Nadu’s local body heroes, however, were missing in action.


The state’s newly-elected councillors of rural local bodies appear to have either stepped back from the Covid arena or were kept back by the district administration. With 28 of the 37 districts identified as hotspots in Tamil Nadu, the struggle has been intense to screen, test and contain potential Covid positive cases. The local body councillors could have been an important cog in the wheel in creating awareness among the public on staying indoors, social distancing and helping the district administrations in throwing a security cordon around containment zones.

The timely elections to urban local bodies could have provided the government foot soldiers at the ward level, rather than leave all the work to overworked health teams. It is the politics of governance that’s proved a deterrent for the collectors. "Every district has an equal or more number of DMK supporters who are representatives in local bodies. It would have been difficult to handle the politics if we had roped them in," admitted a collector, seeking anonymity. 

In villages, panchayat heads are trying hard to make their presence felt. Chairwoman of the Chekkanoorani panchayat union in Madurai Kavitha Raja said they were doing their bit in creating awareness. "We have distributed masks and sanitizers to the people, especially sanitary workers, to protect them. But the local bodies are facing a cash crunch and most of the activities are being done with our own funds," said Kavitha Raja. Some say they had spent their cash reserves on the elections and are now stressed for funds.

The elected representatives say some of them are doing their might to be in the good books of the local ruling party leaders. "From distributing pamphlets and educating the public to stay at home and maintain social distancing, we have scaled up our efforts after our village was declared a red zone," said commerce graduate R Subhadra, 31, a first-time village president of Kakkalur panchayat near Thiruvallur. She created WhatsApp groups to ensure door delivery of provisions and employed vehicles to sell vegetables at doorsteps.

In the case of Tiruvannamalai district, enthusiastic village panchayat chiefs are doing their best in supporting the state’s efforts. But, some see it as a photo op. "Our district collector had admonished a few of them, who had not paid salaries on time to sweepers earlier in their panchayats. He has permitted people’s representatives to coordinate efforts, but insisted they don’t attract crowds," said an executive officer of a panchayat union.

In Ariyalur’s Unjini panchayat, the elected representatives barricaded the village borders to prevent outsiders from entering their village. P Kannan, the panchayat’s vice-president said they had sprayed a natural disinfectant solution made from a mixture of neem leaves paste and turmeric water in public places. 

But paucity of funds has indeed driven the elected representatives of local bodies indoors. "Unlike the urban local bodies, adequate funds are not available to us to roll out preventive measures," said P Kannan, vice-president of Unjini panchayat, Ariyalur district. The proactive measures taken up by his panchayat through his own spending, such as spraying natural disinfectants and distributing free face masks to the villagers, were not appreciated by the officials thus far, he said. "Perhaps, the officials in the district could have invited us for a meeting to discuss how we could contribute to check the Covid-19 spread in hamlets. We are tech-savvy. Video calls from our villages would have facilitated healthy discussions on preventive measures," said Kannan. Spraying a natural disinfectant made of turmeric and neem, and distributing Kabasura Kudineer may not kill the virus but such activities induce confidence and give hope to villagers, he said.

In Coimbatore too, local representatives felt left out. "At the rural level, we could have been involved in a better way in the containment efforts," said a panchayat president from the region.

Their presence could have made a crucial difference. But, with the district administration keeping them out of the Covid battle blueprint, the elected local body representatives may remain a wasted force.

(With inputs from V Mayilvaganan and Karal Marx)


