Local innovators and manufacturers lead the battle against Covid-19
2020-04-18
DEHRADUN: The state-owned Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited (BHEL) at Haridwar has successfully built and tested two devices that are expected to play an important role in India’s fight against the novel coronavirus outbreak.


The two products — an electrostatic disinfectant for indoor use and mass disinfectant spray machine for outdoors — have sensors that activate sanitizer sprays to disinfect and kill germs.

Rakesh Maniktala, DGM (corporate communication) at BHEL, said, “Our devices were built in association with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and were tested in Haridwar. Experts have monitored quality and efficiency checks before starting mass production for government hospitals and other establishments.”

“The electrostatic disinfectant can be kept in offices. It sprays a mist of disinfectant in measured quantity sufficient for a room. Its sensors automatically switch off after a preset time. In contrast, the spray machine works outdoors. It has a chamber and mist makers mounted on a truck, which sprays a disinfectant mist in the air as the truck is driven along a road,” said Maniktala. 

He added, “Since the outbreak, our team was given the task of making innovative products to deal with it. We conducted trials of the devices in Haridwar.” 

Another instrument which has already proved its utility with health workers is a thermal imaging device designed by Sanjeev Sehgal, an electronics engineer who owns a factory in Haridwar. Said Sehgal, “It took a week for my team to finalise the design and assemble the unit. Using thermal image, the machine measures body temperature and beeps to alert if anyone with suspiciously high fever is passing by. The first unit has been installed in Dehradun’s health department office.” The results are much better than handheld IR temperature reading devices, claimed Sehgal. 

Elsewhere, Rajat Jain, owner of a medical equipment start-up in Dehradun, has developed a full-face protection shield for frontline Covid-19 warriors. “It took us a week to design the full-face shield mask and get it testified by the state government. Now, two district hospitals are using it. Our core work is making medical equipment but our team also made the shield for corona fighters.”


