Covid-19 fear: Woman’s last rites opposed
2020-04-03
RAJKOT: Confusion, fear and stigma reined supreme at the crematorium on the banks of Bhogavo River in Surendranagar on Wednesday night, when a group of people opposed the cremation of a fearing she died of coronavirus.


According to police, the woman Meena Devipujak (46), a patient of tuberculosis and diabetes, was admitted to Gandhi Hospital on Wednesday after she complained of breathing problem and cough. She died during treatment on Wednesday night. 

News spread across the area that Devipujak died of Covid-19, though the reports were still awaited. Fearing that performing her last rites at the crematorium may spread contamination, people resisted the kin to go ahead. 

Surendranagar police said that cops went to the crematorium after receiving reports about the tension there. “We requested the deceased’s family members to take her body back to Gandhi Hospital,” said police.

“Before the death of Devipujak, as instructed to perform Covid-19 test on every patient with complaints of respiratory problems and chronic cough, we also collected her samples and sent them for test. However, we are still waiting for her reports,” said a doctor from the hospital.

Not satisfied with hospital’s explanation, people of Sonapuri locality allowed the kin to cremate the deceased at a crematorium near Dholi Dhaja Dam on the outskirts of Surendranagar, late on Thursday morning. 

Mahendrasinh Chawda, Dedadara sarpanch said, “A rumour spread that Devipujak had died of Coronavirus and that her kin were cremating the body clandestinely. This led to all the protest.” 

He further said that Devipujak used to live with her two sons in Mumbai. But after her health deteriorated, she came to her native in Dedadara of Wadhwan taluka and was living there for the past three months. Her sons too had shifted to Dedadara following lockdown. 

“We have not received any formal complaints in this regard. However, we have come to know that there was a protest by a group of people, who denied her kin to cremate suspecting her to be a Covid-19 positive case,” said S P Solanki of Wadhwan police. 


