Local bodies take steps to keep virus in check
2020-03-23
Kochi: Local municipalities have strengthened measures to keep Covid-19 in check. These include monitoring those under home quarantine and bleaching and cleaning roads.

Most local body offices have closed multiple entries, set up hand-wash booths and placed sanitizers at the single entrance, and arrangements have been made at each desk where public needs to visit.

Thrikkakara municipality has the largest number of persons under home quarantine – 216 persons. “We have a team, including ward councillor, Asha and anganwadi workers and government officials, to monitor these people. Most of the people are foreign-returned, mostly from official and personal trips,” said municipality vice-chairperson K T Eldho.

He said that all IT companies, including those inside Infopark, SmartCity and Special economic zone (SEZ), have suspended all outside travel and many have adopted work from home for some time now. “We had a meeting with all these company heads right after the first alert itself, said Eldho.”

In Aluva, the local body has been sanitizing junctions and markets using bleach and soap solution. “We have set aside Rs 1.5 lakh for the anti-Covid activities. “Manappuram has been closed long ago. We will now ensure that all parks, playgrounds, libraries and health clubs are closed,” chairperson Lissy Abraham said. “The number of vehicles and people on the roads have come down. We have not given instructions to shut down shops.”

Kalamassery municipality chairperson Rukiya Jamal said that 63 persons are under home quarantine and the local body keeps in touch with all of them to enquire about their requirements. “Five families have sought help and we provide food and provisions to them,” she said. Following Covid-19 alert, all marriage functions scheduled to be held in various halls in the local body have been called off.

Eloor municipality has called for a meeting of heads of all companies in the area to review the situation and the steps being taken by them to manage the crisis. “Every alternate day, we will be cleaning up all junctions, markets and bus shelters with soap solutions with the help of the fire force,” said municipality chairperson CP Usha. She said that instructions will be given to banks to sanitize their ATMs.


