Rajasthan: Locals protest quarantine centre in residential area
2020-05-21
JAISALMER: Amid preparations to quarantine more than 500 non-resident Rajasthanis coming from Gulf to Jaisalmer, the Hajuri community has protested against using their Seva Sadan as quarantine centre for the returnees. 

A large number of people residing near the Hajuri Samaj Seva Sadan gathered and protested on Tuesday night. They said the building cannot be made a quarantine centre as it is a residential area and the locals could get infected, as there are heart and cancer patients in the area. The community members submitted a memorandum to the district collector. 

Former municipal council commissioner Ashok Tanwar said that the building was given for corona warriors so that people can stay here, and that in nearby areas, there are a large number of people suffering from heart ailments and cancer, and there could be a risk of infection. The community, in its memorandum to district administration, has said that Hajuri Samaj Seva sadan at Talaria Pada in Jaisalmer has been made a quarantine centre for corona suspects, while the residential area is just 10 feet away from the building. A big part of the population of the city resides here and there are two RO plants near this building from where water is supplied to the entire city and this highly increases the possibility of infection. 

In this area, there are 11 banks, electricity and PHED offices, which are open even during the lockdown, due to which the danger of infection increases. Therefore, it has been requested to immediately cancel the decision. Meanwhile, a meeting was held with hotel owners on Tuesday regarding non-resident Rajasthanis being brought here from abroad, wherein hotel owners were imparted training on precautions to be taken, using PPE kits etc. 

Collector Namit Mehta informed about food, other arrangements at the hotels, and instructed about the necessary security standards. 

UIT secretary Anurag Bhargava informed about the arrival of these people at the airport, their reaching the hotels and their quarantine period etc. in detail. Jaisalmer block CMO Dr Lal Chand Devanda talked about using PPE kits and other precautions, and replied to the queries of the hoteliers. 


