Location and lockdown keep help out of Vavurla’s reach
2020-04-28
Margao/Quepem: Cut off as it is from the state’s mainstream owing to its geographical location and absence of any access road, the mountain-top village of Vavurla has resigned itself to isolation even during the lockdown. Or so it seems. 

For over a month, the 30-odd tribal families of Vavurla have been sustaining on the meagre resources of the village without a murmur of complaint — not that anyone cares to listen though. The self-sufficiency of the village — the locals grow paddy, some cereals, fruits and vegetables on their lands on a collective basis — helped them survive the 21-day lockdown.

It was only when the government eased some restrictions during the second lockdown that the villagers have been trudging up and down their naturally quarantined hilltop location located 1,600m above mean sea level to stock up on other essential commodities. The nearest location, which passes off as a market place for these tribals, is Gaodongrim in Canacona, some 16-18km away. 

“Nobody even inquired about our welfare all these days of the lockdown. It was only on Sunday, after over a month of lockdown, that a team from the South Goa district administration visited our village and provided all the houses with essential items, like rice, atta, oil, dal, tea powder and biscuit packets, for free. As always, the state government forgot about this village,” villager Raju Gaonkar told TOI. 

Deputy chief minister Chandrakant Kavalekar, when contacted, however, said that the government may have failed to reach out to them in time, but refuted charges that the village didn’t receive any assistance during the lockdown. The village lies in his constituency of Quepem.

“I don’t think there was any problem for the villagers. Though the villagers have sufficient stocks of food grains, I had arranged to make available essential goods through the Padi panchayat immediately after the 21-day lockdown came into force. During the next lockdown, I made arrangements to distribute essential items to the needy from all villages in my constituency for free. The locals there may be complaining about government’s delay in providing them assistance immediately, but personally I had made all necessary arrangements for supplying essentials to them,” Kavalekar told TOI.

On Sunday, South Goa nodal officer for food supplies, Hemant Kumar, accompanied by incident commander Santosh Kundaikar, Quepem deputy collector Rohit Kadam, mamlatdar Ramesh Gaonkar, and other officials trudged a distance of 4km to deliver the essential items. Kadam said that they will monitor the tribal area and make sure that regular supplies reach it. 


