Lockdown breathes clean air into Ankleshwar, Vapi
2020-05-17
Surat: With the commercial and private vehicles vanishing from the roads and most of the industries remaining shut due to the national lockdown, the two-most critically polluted industrial clusters of south Gujarat—Vapi and Ankleshwar--have shown significant reduction in the air pollution levels.According to the study on ambient air quality conducted by the Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB), the PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations in Vapi and Anleshwar reduced by 40% and 34% respectively, making the air breathable for the residents. Also, the Air Quality Index (AQI) has improved from 160 (moderate) to 79 (satisfactory) in Ankleshwar, whereas in Vapi it improved from 177 to 102. The GPCB carried out the study to find and evaluate the average value of air quality parametres data generated Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitority Systems (CAAQMS) stations located at Vapi and Ankleshwar for the pre-lockdown period—March 15 to March 21—and national lockdown period—March 22 to March 28. In Ankleshwar GIDC area, few essential services based industries were operational, while other industries were completely shut. Moreover, there was negligible movement of vehicles including commercial and private, which resulted in the improvement of air quality. In Vapi, the findings revealed reduction of 40.4% in PM10 and 34.9% in PM2.5. About 950 units were in operation during pre-lockdown period and once the national lockdown was imposed, about 46 industrial units comprising of pharmaceuticals, pesticides and disinfectants and sanitiser manufacturing units were in operation. GPCB study stated that the drop in average concentration values of coarse and fine particulate matter is due to the restriction on construction activities, less road re-suspension and curb on industrial combustion activities. “The reductions in values of ambient air quality parametres can thus be attributed to the complete restrictions on non-essential vehicular movement and commercial activities, the emissions from construction activities and industrial activities,” said the report. “The long term benefits of the air pollution reduction depends on whether the impacts are sustained or there are chances of reversal once the Covid-19 challenge ends,” added the report.