Lockdown struggle: Women juggle work from & at home
2020-04-30
Indore: As emotional and physical spaces shrink, it is a tightrope walk for women juggling domestic chores, family expectations and office work during lockdown. With no availability of house helps, working women are facing challenging times managing everything. For 28-year-old Diksha Patel, lockdown has doubled her work -- work from home and work for home. While it was easy to just give instructions to their helps and rush to work every day, it is now expected of her to cook, take care of the three-year-old baby and 60-year-old mother-in-law and also be presentable during official video calls. With the domestic helps not in picture, Diksha, who works in a multinational IT firm, has to wake up at 6am every day, two hours before her regular time, to clean the house, prepare breakfast and lunch and then login to work. Same is the case of Deepti Chauhan, a teacher, who has to manage her workplace tasks along with the house, without the support house helpers and daycare centres. “The socio-cultural norms where managing the households is still a woman’s responsibility still prevail in many households in the country,” she said. She said that since her husband and children stay at home, they demand a meal four times a day which includes tea-time snacks. “Since my husband is constantly on calls, it all comes down to me and it becomes my responsibility to take care of everything,” said Chauhan who lives in a nuclear family. Women living in joint families have some respite but domestic fights also become a reason for stress in such families. But unlike these cases, there are many families in city which have cracked lockdown living and are managing well during the pandemic. “I cook over the weekends and freeze the meals. Since my husband has started enjoying experimentative cooking while watching Youtube channels, he takes care of one meal of the day; second meal is cooked by me,” said Anjali Jain, a professional who added that her son helps clean the house. “We have divided the work and have also prepared rosters such that no one is stuck with one work for more than three days. While we don’t ask our son to cook, he gets to do dishes and mop and broom the floor,” she said adding that it is important to ease your own burden by dividing the chores and not feel guilty about making your partners work. 