Madhya Pradesh: Lockdown violators still a nuisance
2020-04-02
BHOPAL: Despite strict curbs in the state capital, residents are still violating lockdown, for no valid reason, say cops. 


Since March 22 — the day the lockdown order was issued by the collector — 199 cases have been filed for lockdown violation. On Tuesday alone, 57 cases were registered. Police said, people misbehave with cops when they are stopped at check points. “They do not understand that the stay at home order has been issued for their own safety,” said police, adding that many just come out to watch the empty roads. 

CSP Habibganj Bhupendra Singh said, when police stop those violating lockdown orders, they get angry and make excuses. Cops are allowing people to go to medical shops, grocery stores but they will not allow a person living in Hoshangabad Road to go and purchase grocery from a shop in Lalghati, he said.

Police said, recently they booked a person who returned from Dubai and was advised to quarantine himself for 14 days roaming in MP Nagar. 

Singh added, cops are on duty for over 12 hours and have to stand on roads to ensure that no one breaks the lockdown, people should understand that we are doing this for their own safety. All senior police officials and SHOs are working for 15-16 hours, he said adding that cops have been asked to isolate themselves from their families, as a precaution. 

He told TOI that he washes his clothes in hot water and takes a bath as soon as he reaches home and washes his own utensils as a safety measure. 

SHO Koh-e-Fiza Sudhir Arjaria said, he has been on duty for 12-18 hours daily since lockdown. He takes a bath and washes his clothes as soon as he reaches home. He said, police are taking all this trouble to ensure that Covid-19 does not spread but people are violating the orders endangering their own lives and that of others. 

He said, police are looking after the migrant labourers coming from other districts. He said, a fund was set up by the Koh-e-Fiza police, and any cop from the station is free to help those in need from the fund. 

