Patna: Lockdown revives indoor games and family bonding
2020-05-04
PATNA: The nationwide lockdown has forced most of the people to remain indoors. As the television channels have been running their old daily shows and the online streaming of movies and serials have proved too much for many of us, the residents are spending more time with families, playing ludo, carrom, trump cards, chess, housie and antakshari and solving jigsaw puzzles.

For the 35-year-old Sudhanshu Shekhar, it is like reliving his childhood days again. “Who would have thought that we would again play such games, which this generation called outdated. Nowadays, we spend our evening playing board games or even chit games like raja-mantri and name-place-animal and thing,” he said.

Khushboo Sinha (27) of east Lohanipur said she cleaned the old carrom board and uno cards that her parents had put in the storeroom with other toys and things of her childhood days. “There are few cards missing from Uno, but it is still fun to play the card games with family,” she said.

“Indoor games have become popular means of entertainment for us to beat the lockdown blues. The entire family watched few television series in the morning hours. But the main fun for us is to play dumb charades, antakshari or carrom,” said Rohini Priyam (38) of Nala Road.

Indoor pastimes such as carrom and cards are otherwise considered risky as the chances of transmission of Covid-19 virus are high. But, people are seen playing various kinds of games with their children on their rooftops.

Vinay Kumar Singh of Rajendra Nagar said he plays the indoor games while maintaining social distance. “It is the time to strengthen our family bonding. My kids are now spending more time with their grandparents. For us, evening time is to play games and night is for storytelling. My parents narrate many good stories to us, which I had forgotten,” he said.

Many people who couldn’t find board or card games at their homes, switched to online games and challenging friends on social media. “I have created a game room in which I play chess and ludo with my friends. It is quite a fun,” said Shalini Dubey (25) of Boring Canal road.

