Lockdown effect: Air quality improves across Andhra cities
2020-04-01
Vijayawada: It been a week since the nation-wide lockdown was announced and Andhra Pradesh has already witnessed a huge improvement in terms of air pollution. 

The difference has been particularly noticeable in urban areas like Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada, Tirupati and Velagapudi areas, where the Air Quality Index (AQI) values have dropped below 50, marking the present status as ‘good’.

In Visakhapatnam, the AQI value stood at around 121 on March 1 deeming it ‘moderately polluted’. A day after Janata Curfew on March 21, it fell to 45 and entered the ‘good’ category. 

Speaking to TOI, BV Prasad, junior scientist of Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board (APPCB) said the air quality in Vijayawada and elsewhere in Andhra Pradesh earlier was satisfactory (AQI between 51 and 100) before the lockdown. 

“During the lockdown in most of the cities it is good. (AQI below 50). However, air quality will return to its original quality of satisfactory AQI, once the lockdown is lifted,” Prasad told TOI. 

AQI dropped to its lowest, 31, after the lockdown in Tirumala. The most prominent pollution parameter across the urban areas in the Andhra Pradesh happens to be PM10 and PM2.5 particles. The lockdown has been most effective in improving the air quality in Vijayawada. The capital region of Amaravati, too, saw a massive improvement with the present AQI value falling down to 36. AQI of Rajahmundry is at 50, which is categorised as ‘good’.

However, in terms of water pollution, officials said there will only be a minimal impact even if there is no pilgrimage activity on the river banks.

“Usually there is a minimal impact on water quality of river Krishna by the pilgrim activity and the impact is localised. It is the domestic sewage generated by Vijayawada that is adversely affecting the quality of water. There is no letup in that. Hence, there won’t be any lockdown effect on water quality of river Krishna,” Prasad added.


