Ludhiana: Lockdown forces many to sell vegetables to earn a living
2020-04-28
LUDHIANA: Left with no savings to feed his family, Vijay Pal, 42, who had been selling Bhelpuri for the last 22 years, has now taken to vegetable vending. Following the slapping of lockdown, neither he could go out to sell Bhelpuri, nor were there any takers for the stuff. His son also goes with him for selling vegetables.

A resident of New Sant Nagar here, Vijay said, “What will I do if I will not sell vegetables? I have wife and four children, and if I will not work then who will give them food? I tried the helpline numbers issued by the government, but nothing worked for me.” 

He said five days back, he started selling vegetables, as he was left with only Rs 1,000 which he invested to buy vegetables from a supplier. “I am earning Rs 100-150 daily now…at least we will not sleep hungry.”

The story of 45-year-old Mohd Ehjaz is no different. He used to do embroidery work on clothes at a shop in Model Town and earned Rs 12,000 a month. But, now that the shop is closed, he does not have many options. Narrating his problem, he said, “We are a family of four and reside in Dhakka Colony. Since April 24, I am selling fruits. Even to buy fruits from supplier, I had to borrow Rs 3,000 from somebody, and till today (Sunday), I haven’t been able to save anything. I am hoping against hope that perhaps in the coming days, I will have some money to buy necessary items for my family members.”

Ravi Kumar and Sunny used to deliver vegetables to vendors in an auto until the lockdown, but now they can’t do that. So, they managed a rehri from somebody and started selling onions and potato. Ravi Kumar, a resident of Haibowal, said for the past one month, he has been selling only onions and potatoes because other vegetables are perishable but these two sustain for couple of days. 

His friend Sunny said, “We are daily wagers and we have to work daily to feed out families. We don’t know when the situation will become normal, so we have switched to rehri and selling in streets.”

Similar is the tale of a mobile shop owner-turned-vegetables vendor. A resident of Ashok Nagar, Prince Narang is delivering vegetables in his locality after receiving orders over phone. “There was already a slump in mobile industry and this coronavirus sent it the nosiness in ICU. After 10 days of lockdown, I had started home delivery of vegetables, because one needs money.” He said he is not making much profit, as he is selling at genuine market rates to retain the customers. After all, I need to bring food for his parents, wife, two kids and a brother.”


