Lockdown must not continue, but be relaxed in phases: MKU ex-prof
2020-04-11
Madurai: Continuing the present lockdown is unwarranted and it should be relaxed in a phased manner as soon as possible, though the unseen virus has brought the world to a standstill, former professor of Immunology at the Madurai Kamaraj University (MKU), Dr R M Pitchappan has said.

Speaking to TOI, he said that viral infections have been playing havoc on mankind since time immemorial. At the end of the day, it was the sub-clinical infection and herd immunity that prevailed and protected the population.

It is usually stated that in immunogenetic parlance that “not all the infected develop the disease”. Thus, even if a virus entered a host, it need not essentially manifest into a disease, which is sometimes called ‘virulence’. The virulence dies out with time. “This is what we aim to achieve through the lockdowns,” he said.

The virus that is wreaking havoc in other countries is slow in its spread in India. The three weeks’ lockdown in India has given a breather to organize ourselves, medical aid and enable tracking and isolating the cases and contacts. Essentially, this has cut the chain transmission into community, which is the first step in tackling any new pandemic/epidemic. 

Pitchappan said that it is now time to consider the cost benefit ratio. The economy of the country and livelihood of individuals should be considered. He said the extension of the full lockdown was not needed. “This suggestion was based on the history of infectious diseases – their pandemic/epidemic in the past and their elimination/ disappearance from the world,” he said..

What could be done is a partial lockdown for another month, public services like bus, train and air services should be resumed in a phased manner. This is the first time that public transport vehicles have been completely sanitized in India in recent times and this should become a daily activity.

Case finding, contact tracing and quarantine shall be continued for another two months. Government offices can start functioning with social distancing at regular hours. Industries should be made responsible for the health of their employees.

Scientists in central laboratories and universities with facilities to study various aspects of Covid-19 outbreak, treatment and immunity shall be identified and entrusted to carry out the work. In India, the field of epidemiology needs to be strengthened further. “If it is done in another two months, we would know the status of herd immunity developed, which is the only solution to the current virus crisis, in the absence of a vaccine,” Pitchappan said.


