Lockdown halts transport business
2020-05-06
Indore: Lockdown has halted the transport sector with just about 20 per cent rolling in transportation of essential goods. While for the rest, lack of drivers and subordinate staff as many have left for native villages are seen as major challenge in resuming work with easing lockdown guidelines. 

Rakesh Tiwari, state president, All India Motor Transport Congress, Madhya Pradesh chapter said, “Survival is the biggest challenge in such a scenario. Drivers and workers are reluctant to come back fearing corona infection. Government should announce insurance cover for drivers also so that they get a sense of security.” 

To survive slump in lockdown period, transporters have sought suspension of state and municipal tolls and reduction in VAT on diesel.

Tiwari said, “Many transport firms especially smaller ones will shut down. State, municipal tolls and diesel together constitute about 80 per cent of the operating cost, if these are suspended, the sector will be immensely benefitted.” 

Many transporters said though many industries are gradually resuming operations with ease in lockdown guidelines and may require transportation, lack of drivers will play a spoil sports for them. 

Transporters of the state held a meeting to discuss issues related to compliance and resuming operations. They demanded that all statutory compliances should be deferred by six months, and interest on EMIs should be waived for the deferred period. 

Transporters said to aid the industry survive this slump, all taxes including road tax, goods tax and passenger tax should be deferred till October 31, 2020 and thereafter it should be taken at 50 per cent for the rest of the period in the current financial year. 

Vijay Kalra, vice president, All India Motor Transport Congress, west zone said, “On duty drivers are getting infected with Covid-19. The government should make arrangements utilizing infrastructure at petrol pumps and toll plazas for sanitization of vehicles, screening of drivers, helpers and creating adequate awareness on the highways and roads.” 


