Lockdown 3.0: Offices in U’khand to open from 10 am to 4 pm, shops from 7 am to 4 pm
2020-05-03
Dehradun: With the Centre extending the lockdown for another two weeks, the Uttarakhand government has decided to allow government offices to remain open May 4 onwards with limited staff from 10 am to 4 pm. Besides, shops and other commercial establishments would be permitted to operate from 7 am to 4 pm. Meanwhile, the state government on Saturday started the process of bringing back state residents stranded in other states. Also, facility for inter-district movement will be arranged for people stuck in different regions of the state. 

In a media briefing on Saturday, chief secretary Utpal Kumar Singh said, “In green zone areas, it is compulsory for Grade I and II officers to attend office and 50% of the office staff of Grade III and IV would be called for work each day. Pregnant women, those with children below 10 years of age, and employees above 55 years of age would be called only for important and urgent works.” 

For the orange and red zone areas, the office timings would remain the same. However, the percentage of Grade III and IV employees to be called for duty would be 33%. The head of departments would prepare the roster for the employees. “The situation will be reviewed on a weekly basis and if the condition improves, we can call 50% staff for work in these two zones as well,” added the chief secretary. The official further said that the secretariat office in Dehradun would open at 9:30 am. 

The chief secretary said that over 1.25 lakh people of Uttarakhand, who are stranded in other states, have applied on the official website for their return. “Over 20,000 people have registered from Uttar Pradesh, 15,000 from Maharashtra, over 7,000 from Punjab, and 3,600 from Chhattisgarh. We expect the number to go up further,” he said. 

He pointed out that it was an extensive exercise and a high number of people wanted to return to hill districts of Almora, Pauri, and Tehri. 

Meanwhile, on Saturday, around 1,500 people from Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Haryana were brought back to Uttarakhand till the afternoon hours. Likewise, over 3,000 people, who were stuck at different locations within the state, were moved to their respective native districts. 

On the issue of maintaining state revenue, the chief secretary said that a committee headed by Indu Kumar Pandey, former chief secretary, is expected to handover its report by the next week. “The committee has interacted with several stakeholders, experts and authorities and on the basis of the report, we will take further action.”

He pointed out that more than 1.45 lakh quintal wheat has been procured and the payment to farmers is being ensured within 48 hours. A fund of Rs 24 crore has also been released for the purpose. 


