Lockdown violations rampant in slums, cops to counsel people
2020-03-27
Nagpur: The movement of citizens on the roads, with or without vehicles, has left many disappointed in the backdrop of the national lockdown over coronavirus, even as the city witnessed its fifth positive case getting registered on Thursday.

District guardian minister Nitin Raut, who inspected Mayo Hospital and Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), said preparations are being expedited to put in place special facilities. “We are soon going to have a special 250-bed special ward for Covid-19, and another 1,200-1,300-bedded facility at GMCH, which will have 50% reserved for intensive care units,” he said.

Raut, who expressed dismay at the fifth positive patient in the city, said the health team had done well to send one earlier patient home fit and fine. “I have already sanctioned Rs25 crore to set up infrastructure to fight Covid-19 in the district, in addition to Rs7 crore for the rural areas,” said the guardian minister.

Raut expressed satisfaction with the existing facilities of treating Covid-19 patients and suspects at government hospitals but said there is scope for improvement, which too would be a reality soon.

Raut also said people had started queuing up at grocery shops and such other outlets of essential commodities after the announcement by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, but their fears have been allayed now. “We are stressing on social distancing now, especially at shops and other places,” he said.

With slums left grossly unattended by authorities, including police, the fear of community infection spreading there seems to be high among the more aware citizens, since the unaware lot are venturing out and mingling, violating all orders. 

At slums like Naik Talao, Pandhrabodi, Futala Nayi Vasti and such places, people were spotted socializing and gathering. There are also reports of liquor being available at such places at higher rates.

Mamta Sharma, a teacher from Hiwre Layout, said the streets are occupied by loitering people, cyclists and bikers despite prohibitory orders, which is causing distress to people like her who are aware about the dangerous situation. “Twice I had to call police and again NMC control room. They just come for temporary rounds,” she said, demanding permanent deployment at Wathoda Road and Quetta Colony.

Sandesh Singalkar, Congress spokesperson, too said the lack of awareness is causing problems in East Nagpur, where public seems to be taking the Covid-19 threat casually. “Public is coming out, gathering at different places, socializing and remaining out of their homes causing much fear of infection spread,” he said. Singalkar wanted the government to pronounce it’s policies in more clear terms to remove all confusion.

East Nagpur MLA Krishna Khopde said daily wagers are coming onto the streets and can be found more in slums and areas where the economically weaker community reside. “With the Central government under PM Modi having detailed sops for daily wagers, they are likely to remain inside homes now. I am constantly communicating with my supporters and party office-bearers, and accordingly sharing feedback and alerting authorities regarding issues cropping up,” said Khopde.

“People need to understand and cooperate as a pandemic like Covid-19 will not go away unless they join us in our fight,” said Khopde.

City police, on Thursday, detained 76 persons, registered three offences against violators, and slapped penalties at nakabandis against 171 persons. Around 4,732 passes were also distributed to citizens at different police stations for emergency movement.

City police chief BK Upadhyay said the police would now try to create awareness among citizens in slums. “We will make announcements through our public address systems in the slums and interior lanes,” he said.


