Lockdown plugs flow of effluents to Cauvery; river flows pure again
2020-04-18
Madikeri: In cities across India, many have observed a marked difference in the quality of air since the lockdown came into force, coupled with an equally sharp decline in noise pollution . However, it is not just the city-dwellers who have tasted the sweeter fruits of the lockdown; the closure of industries has resulted in many rivers across India getting a fresh lease of life, as the flow of contaminating effluents has stopped almost entirely. One of the rivers where this difference is particularly visible is the Cauvery, which, in some places, is flowing in all its pure glory. 

Data with the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) indicates that the quality of water of River Cauvery in some places is at A – a healthy indicator – and at B in many more spots. This is in sharp contrast to the level of purity recorded prior to the lockdown, wherein the pollution level was much worse, at C. 

The quality of water of the River Cauvery is tested once every month, and samples are collected at Bhagamandala, Napoklu, Dubare and Kushalnagar. The latest report, compiled with figures collected after the enforcement of the lockdown, shows that the quality of water is at A in most places in Kodagu, where the Cauvery originates. KSPCB’s regional officer for Kodagu GR Ganeshan attributed the improvement in the quality of the Cauvery’s waters to the decline in commercial activities in all villages and towns in Kodagu. “Consequently, no pollutants are flowing into the river, and the water is very clear in some places,” he said. 

Convener of the Cleanup Cauvery Movement for Karnataka MR Chandramohan said that unchecked growth of the tourism industry in the hilly district, illegal mining operations and thoughtless development projects had resulted in the Cauvery getting overly polluted. Chinnappa, a retired additional conservator of forests, said that it would not be a bad idea to enforce a lockdown for a week once every six months, during which the river could be cleaned thoroughly. 

Crack down on home stays

Member of Mysore Nature Group and environmentalist S Shylajesh lamented how tourism had itself been responsible for the sector’s death in the hilly district. “Earlier, we took a vacation to places like Kodagu or to pilgrimage centres once a year, but times have changed. Now, people, particularly youngsters are going on tours every weekend. This has resulted in an increase in the number of resorts, hotels and homestays in ecologically sensitive areas. One hopes that people realise, after the lockdown, how nature has a way of cleaning itself. The government must adopt stringent policies, and close down homestays and resorts that have come at the cost of forest land,” Shylajesh told TOI. 

Manu K, founder of Mysore Amateur Naturalists said that this could serve as a wake-up call to governments across the world. “They should get together and chalk out a plan to restore the ecological balance. The Covid-19 pandemic is a lesson to all of us, and a blessing in disguise. There should be a region-wise lockdown once every month,” said Manu. 


