Lockdown hits Akola onion growers hard
2020-04-17
Nagpur: The nationwide lockdown has hit the farming community hard. Already battered by unseasonal rains and pests attacks, several onion farmers from the Akola district have rushed a letter to chief minister Uddhav Thackeray urging him to buy their produce as they are decaying either on fields or godowns due to lockdown.

According to them, they are forced to sell their produce in local markets for one fourth price less than the original cost. That is the reason, the farmers demanded purchase of their produce by the state government so that they could get something out of it, else they will be in deep financial trouble.

“We usually get Rs1,000 per quintal price as the retailers purchased from us. But after lockdown, they aren’t getting any means of transportation and even drivers are not ready to accompany them. Now, we’re forced to sell it at a pittance in local markets, but even that is in very limited quantity,” aggrieved farmer Vilas Tathod told TOI.

The onion growers from villages of Talegaon Wadner, Babulgaon, Wangargaon, Daula and Nimbhora, coming under Telhara town of Akola, have also written to state agriculture minister Dadadji Bhuse for helping them out in this unprecedented crisis.

Bhuse told TOI that the government had talked to the Centre to help cotton farmers from across the state. “We demanded the union government to allow us to distribute onions across the country through railway. We’ve also planned to directly sell the onion in small bags of 2.5 kgs or less to customers so that they could fetch decent price for it,” he said.

“Though he had assured us of help, no response came from him for the last many days. Since the daily consumption rate has come down, the demand for onions has also dropped significantly. Even hotels, eateries and restaurants are closed, thus adding to our woes. We will again be forced to take new loans either from banks or moneylenders,” another farmer said.

The onion is grown in 10-15 villages in Akola and the area is known as onion belt spread over 1,500 acres. At start of March, the farmers had kept the stock of onion ready, but suddenly after lockdown, there were no takers for their produce. “If you visit our village, you will see heaps of onions lying on fields. Some of the produce is also decaying at godowns,” the farmers rued.


