#LockdownGoals: Tips and tricks to jazz up your Insta shoots
2020-04-20
Mobile phone cameras have turned most of us into photography enthusiasts. There’s a constant urge to beat each other with regular posts on social media. After all, how can you disappoint your followers? Ever since this lockdown clipped our wings, people have either been posting throwback photos or showing off their culinary skills with food pictures. But why join the crowd? Say goodbye to boredom, as this is the time when you can actually boost your photography skills. Challenge yourself to click a few stylised photos right inside your house and surprise everyone. So, what are you waiting for? Lights, camera, post!


Prep clicks, not the final product
An interesting idea would be to click the preparation stage and not the final product. Before storing your grocery, just take a shot of the messy kitchen counter. Colourful grains look beautiful, don’t they? But while shooting indoors, make sure the lighting is good and there’s no shadow. “I enjoy food photography with my phone camera. I did an entire series on whatever I cooked during lockdown. I got several likes. But now, not just my friends, even I am getting bored of sharing similar posts. This time, I am thinking of clicking food grains and spices for a change,” says Shuchika Agarwal Goyal, an image consultant from Delhi.”


Hunt for fun ideas
Look for beautiful objects in your kitchen or drawing room. Ask your family members to select objects that they want you to shoot. If you live alone, you can ask your friends choose stuff for you through video calls. Be it your phone or sofa set, use your creativity in capturing them. “Go around the house, find any object and try to photograph them in different ways. It can be pieces from your cutlery set or a set of wine glasses. Unleash your creativity and raise it to the next level. With a little self-motivation, you can actually end up learning more,” says Swaarup S Chatterjjee, a professional photographer from Mumbai.



Change your view
Beauty lies in simple things, especially when you are shooting indoors. “We normally tend to look at eye level. But you can amp up your photography skills by changing the angles of your camera. Take a bird’s eye view of your dinner table, shoot your balcony plants from a low angle or zoom in on a bud or leaf. This will help you understand how to balance light and shade in different scenarios,” says Cinderella Dsilva, an amateur photographer and communications personnel from Mumbai. The outcome will inspire your friends as well.


Be minimalistic
Opportunities are endless, especially with today’s smartphones. “In our daily lives, we might be constantly looking for inspiration while on the move. But when you are trying photography at home, focus on one single point and cut out the clutter around it. Remember, the subject you choose has to be strong enough. You can light up an incense stick and place it behind any prop, such as a toy or a bottle. Switch off all the lights in the room. Place a torch or table lamp behind the stick and start clicking photos using your smartphone. You can also use a glass bowl filled with water. Pour a teaspoon of oil and stir well. Take out a colourful image saved on your phone. Place the phone under the bowl to create a beautiful reflection. Shoot it with another phone,” shares Kunal Malhotra, a professional photographer from Delhi.


Go monochrome
A splash of colours has its own attraction, but making something look equally eye-catching in black and white is quite a challenge. You need to look for the right texture, line, pattern, shape, as well as light and shade. “Though mobile cameras have certain limitations in quality and format, you can still give it a shot. No one is judging you. If you don’t want to take a selfie, just capture your own silhouette,” suggests Swaarup.

