Lockdown hits publishers and booksellers hard
2020-05-11
PATNA: Even as the reading habit of people has improved a lot, the booksellers are facing the worst financial crisis due to the lockdown.

Though the government allowed the sale of several items, including electronics and electrical goods in the third phase of the lockdown, books remained excluded from the Centre’s list of essential items. On pressing demand of school management and the guardians of schoolchildren, the district administration allowed some bookstores in the city to reopen, but this order remained in operation only from April 15 to 30. Other bookshops dealing with general books meant for college and university students or the people in general did not reopen.

All bookstores are hit very hard. The shops are closed and not a single book has been sold since March 25, but the shopowners have to pay monthly salaries to their staff and meet other essential expenses from their own pocket. “We are paying monthly salaries to staff, electricity bill, rent and all sorts of taxes even though we are not earning even a paisa these days,” said Nand Kishore Singh, a bookstore owner.

Singh further said he used to earn Rs2.5 to 3 lakh every month before the lockdown. “I do not know as to how long this lockdown would continue and the market conditions become normal,” he added.

Bimal Rastogi, whose bookshop is located on Ashok Rajpath, echoed similar views. Besides selling books to college and university students through the counters, he used to supply all sorts of textbooks and reference books to the libraries of different colleges and postgraduate departments of Patna University. But all such activities are completely closed these days and the same are not likely to be revived soon. “The entire book industry is likely to collapse if such situation is allowed to continue for a longer period,” he quipped.

The business of publishing and not just book selling has also been severely affected by the lockdown. “For publishers like us who struggle to get our books on the stacks of libraries of educational institutions, serious returns on a book only appear six to eight months after it is published. Most of our revenue comes from selling books to stores, libraries and institutions. We are supposed to make payments to printers, binders, paper merchants, etc in time. All these activities are likely to pose greater constraints to the publishers once the lockdown is revoked,” said Narendra Jha.

However, worst is the condition of those who used to sell competitive books and other help books on the footpath opposite Patna University. Most of them are facing starvation as they have not been able to earn anything since the lockdown. While some of them have taken to selling vegetables or fruits, others are anxiously awaiting the situation to normalize.


