Lockdown 2.0: Security beefed up in city, more policemen on roads
2020-04-16
Prayagraj: The second leg of the lockdown commenced with tighter security arrangements in the city on Wednesday. Twelve persons were booked and fined in the city in the past 24 hours — between Tuesday and Wednesday — for allegedly violating guidelines during the lockdown, enforced amid the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. 

SSP Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj said, “Additional police forces have been roped in to ensure that residents follow the lockdown norms strictly. Eleven persons were arrested and 10 FIRs were registered against them in different parts of the city like Mutthiganj, Sarayinayat, Daraganj, Phulpur, Mauaima and Jhunsi in the past 24 hours against those found violating the lockdown rules.” The 11 were booked under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, which covers violation of section 144 of CrPc.

Over 6,124 vehicles were checked and 967 vehicles were challaned on Wednesday. Of these, 10 vehicles were seized, the SSP added.

Police intensified patrolling in Old City localities like Lukerganj, Mutthiganj, Attarsuiya, Kareli, Atala, Karelabagh, Bahadurganj, Chowk, Shahganj, Dhoomanganj and adjoining area on Wednesday. 

A group of 17 migrant labourers were intercepted as they were heading to Bihar from Banda district. The daily wagers were stopped near Parade Ground and were riding 11 bicycles. 

The labourers were quarantined at Haiza Hospital.

The labourers told the police that they used to work in Banda and were stranded in the UP district during the lockdown. However, they decided to head back to their home town on Wednesday as they had run out of money and eatables.

Meanwhile, additional chief medical officer Dr Rishi Sahai said that of the 280 samples sent for testing from Prayagraj between March 24 and Apil 15, 255 had tested negative for novel coronavirus.

Till now, an Indonesian national who came to Prayagraj after attending the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi on March 12-13 is the only Covid-19 case to be reported from the district. The foreigner had come to Prayagraj on March 22.

Health department officials said they were waiting for the results of the remaining 24 samples.

Additional CMO Dr Rishi Sahai said, “We had sent 280 samples to Lucknow’s King George’s Medical University, MLN Medical College and other labs for testing. Of these, 255 tested negative for Covid-19.” 

Nine Covid-19 cases have been reported from Pratapgarh, Kaushambi and Prayagraj till now. “The nine novel coronavirus patients are undergoing treatment at Covid-19 Level One Hospital in Kotwa and their condition is improving,” the additional CMO said.


