Lockdown pushes many down the economic ladder
2020-04-24
VISAKHAPATNAM: Eighteen-year-old Bittu from Bihar works at a recovery store in Visakhapatnam. He made about Rs 500 per day by stitching car seats. Life was not easy but he managed to get food on his plate and save money to send back home. But having lost his livelihood since the lockdown, Bittu’s savings are dwindling and the prospect of begging for food is looming large. 


He dropped out twice from a queue at a food distribution centre at the Gnanapuram side of the railway station. “Every time I go there, I see people who are more desperate than I am. I can manage with the rations we have left, or even go hungry. But slum dwellers have nothing left. So, I leave the queue. Sooner or later I will have to stand with the others for four hours a day waiting for food,” said Bittu. The eighteen-year-old lives with 10 workers in a small rented house in Akkayapalem and they cook their own meals.

Bittu is one among a large group of migrant labourers who work in Visakhapatnam and belong to the low income group. The protracted lockdown has cast uncertainty on their lives and future and is pushing them lower down the economic ladder. It is hence of little surprise that the number of people thronging food distribution centre is swelling with each passing day.

Vanaprastha Old Age home began distributing food on March 23, a day after the Janata Curfew that preceded the lockdown. The demand for food has been increasing with each passing day. The numbers have now swelled to more than 25,000 a day.Over 20 hunger relief centres, police, NGOs and individuals have also joined hands to feed the poor. 

Bittu has already spent Rs 7,000 of his savings since the lockdown began. “Our contractor paid us only for the work done till the beginning of the lockdown. I feel bad as I have never stood in a queue for food.” 

Another urban poor, who was not a destitute before the lockdown, and is now a common face in food queues is Pothu Raju, a contractor who hires daily wage workers for construction activities. 

Speaking to TOI, he said “Several people like us have used up savings and rations. But money and food both are running low,” Raju said. “I lost my livelihood since construction activities have come to a standstill. And now I have joined the food queues.”

“ I used to help carry brick and mortar at a construction site. But since I have been out of work I borrowed from my neighbours to feed my two infants,” said Anusuya, who has a family of four. “Yesterday, I set aside all shame and stood in the queue. But a fight broke out and I returned home humiliated and helpless, but I have to do something for food,” she added.

