Lockdown rule violation still keeping cops on toes in Kanpur
2020-03-31
PRAYAGRAJ: Police on Monday enforced a complete lockdown and did not allow even a single roadways bus to enter the city. Around 22 roadways buses were engaged on Sunday to send migrant workers to their destinations. On Monday the police ensured that nobody was seen loitering in the Civil Lines area as well as the Civil Lines bus station.


SSP, Prayagraj, Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj said that adequate police forces were deployed at inter-district borders and not a single bus was allowed to enter the city. He added that policemen deployed on the district borders have been asked not to allow anyone to enter the city and lockdown norms were followed strictly.

On Monday, streets of the city were wearing a deserted look. Additional mobile police pickets were deployed in Khuldabad, Mutthiganj, Ram Bagh, Kareli, Sulemsarai and adjoining areas to enforce the lockdown strictly.

The police allowed movement of vegetable and milk vendors only between 7am and 10am. Police teams were spotted marching in narrow streets directing people to keep themselves indoors. Massive security arrangement was seen at Phaphamau, Jhunsi, Dhoomanganj, Shankargarh, Handia, Saraymamrez and other areas. 

Though the movement of migrant workers in small groups was spotted on state and national highways, the police did not allow anybody to enter the city.

Meanwhile, over 130 locals were booked for flouting rules on the sixth day of lockdown on Monday. They were charged under Section 188 (violation of norms) of the Indian Penal Code.

A team of senior police and district officials on Monday inspected temporary shelter homes set for migrants and asked them to stay there till April 14. District magistrate Bhanu Chandra Goswami asked his subordinates to sort out problems of the commonman. 

District authorities also visited KP Community Hall where around 100 residents of Prayagraj district are kept in quarantine. 

In the past 24 hours, the police claimed to have arrested 48 persons on the charges of violating lockdown norms in the city and trans Ganga and Yamuna areas. A man was also arrested on the charges of blackmarketing of essential commodities. The police also claimed to have checked 5,517 vehicles in 24 hours and seized 13 of them. Besides, 513 vehicles were challaned.


