Cash flows for companies dry up due to lockdown
2020-05-04
MUMBAI: Cash flows, the lifeline of businesses, are drying up fast. An extended lockdown has left companies — micro, small & medium enterprises (MSMEs) in particular — staring at a bleak future. Some companies are struggling to pay salaries to employees, while some are looking at winding up operations rather than continue with an unprofitable enterprise.


Companies use working capital for their day-to-day expenses. When finished products are sold, they get income. While the fixed expenses — such as salaries to employees — have remained constant even during the lockdown, there’s been no income or cash that has come for a non-essential manufacturer or service provider.

DPK Engineers CMD S Sampathraman said, “Cash flow is to a business what blood is to the human body. When there’s no blood circulation for a few minutes, we would die. My cash flows will run dry in a week.” DPK Engineers, which posted a turnover of around Rs 170 crore in 2018-19, is into diesel generators.

 


Several MSMEs are facing a tough time in drawing working capital from banks. “My banker said 10-12 days ago that he would lend 20% extra over and above the existing lending limit to alleviate the Covid-19 lockdown problems. A couple of days ago, he said the extra limit has been slashed to 10%. Eligibility criteria continue to be surplus of assets over liabilities, sufficient stocks and debtors (with margins of 25% and 30%, respectively) to avail the 10% extra credit. These criteria are impractical when there has been zero business in the 40 days of lockdown,” said Sampathraman.

In large companies, there’s greater debt, but they also have more assets to pledge/sell and seek extra funds. Those with stronger balance sheets have sufficient cash to sustain their operations for a longer period. Reliance Industries, the country’s most valued company, had a debt of Rs 3.36 lakh crore as of March 2020, while its cash and cash equivalents stood at Rs 1.61 lakh crore.

Companies like TCS, which has zero debt and strong cash flows, are better placed to tide over the challenging business environment. TCS’s cash flow from operations stood at Rs 32,303 crore in fiscal 2020. Employee costs, the highest expense of the company, comprised 42% (Rs 65,642 crore) of its revenue. TCS is the largest employer of coders in the country with 4.5 lakh people. On the other hand, Hindustan Unilever’s cash position as on March 31, 2020, is Rs 9,770 crore.

Kotak Securities EVP Rusmik Oza said, “The lockdown and uncertainty of when things will get back to normalcy have brought cash flows back into focus. Companies having higher ebitda (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation) margins, less/no debt and decent cash in their balance sheets will be able to weather this phase in a better manner. From an operations perspective, companies generating healthy operating cash flows are better placed in these times when revenue is impacted but certain fixed costs still need to be incurred.”

Unlike large enterprises, several MSMEs are in dire straits. “It’s practically a winding-up situation for 60% of them,” said Sampathraman. Solkar Solar Industry CMD K E Raghunathan is considering shutting operations altogether. “We do not have any cash. Period. I am planning to wind up my operations because I am pushed to the wall. At one point the pilot has to eject. I will no longer be able to run the company profitably,” said Raghunathan. “But I will ensure all my dependents are taken care of,” said Raghunathan, who has been an entrepreneur for over three decades and started Solkar Solar Industries in 1984.

“One major commitment I have is salary, which I do not know how to pay. There’s a lot of pressure on MSMEs to reduce their drawing power (cash from banks). According to my understanding, 70% of MSMEs will not be able to pay salaries this month,” said Raghunathan.

Companies which have better working capital cycles are less strained in such times. Traditionally, sectors like FMCG, IT, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, two-wheelers and gas, which have better cash flows and lesser Capex requirements, will be less impacted in the near term. On the other hand, sectors that are highly capital-intensive and have high fixed costs will find it difficult to manage this difficult phase of Covid-19.

“Sectors that could face cash flow problems in the very near term are aviation, smaller NBFCs, capital goods, construction, hotels, infrastructure, metals, real estate and textiles,” said Oza of Kotak Securities. Sampathraman said the government should spend $500 billion on doles to poor, protection of livelihood of employee and short-maturity infrastructure projects with enormous rural employment opportunities, like registering and promoting ‘Geographical Indications’ for free.


