Lockdown trauma: 67-yr-old drives thrice in nine days to Bypass hospital for dialysis
2020-04-03
Kolkata: Ever since the lockdown started, life has turned particularly difficult and even risky for 67-year-old Tapan Mukherjee, who suffers from a renal ailment. Mukherjee, who lives with his wife off Hazra Road, has been forced to drive to and from a hospital off EM Bypass for dialysis, thrice since March 25. On one occasion, he almost blacked out as he drove back home after the procedure.

Mukherjee has been suffering from renal failure since 2016 and undergoing dialysis – a treatment that filters and purifies the blood with the help of a machine. Though he sometimes drove his car, he hired cabs on the days of his dialysis. 

His friends, all senior citizens, would often accompany him to the hospital for the dialysis that would usually go on for four hours. Since the lockdown he has not been able to get a ride. His son Indranil, a senior executive at infrastructure major L&T, is extremely anxious but he cannot help him for being stranded in Mumbai, where he works. 

“I tried to call a few taxi drivers I knew, but none of them agreed to go, fearing harassment by the police for flouting the lockdown. I had no other option than driving down for the dialysis,” said Mukherjee, who needs to undergo the treatment twice a week. 

While he doesn't mind the 10-km drive to the hospital via Southern Avenue, Gariahat Road South, Prince Anwar Shah Connector and EM Bypass to reach the hospital, he is very worried about driving back home. On at least one occasion, he has felt dizzy and stopped to recover before commencing the journey again. 

Nephrologist Dilip Kumar Pahari, who treats him, has advised him to take at least an hour's rest at the hospital after his dialysis. Though he does accordingly, driving feels taxing. After the journey, he has to struggle to climb up to the second floor apartment, stopping for several minutes on the first floor to regain his breath. 

Mukherjee wished that one of his friends could accompany him but they could not do so, lest they became vulnerable to the Coronavirus attack. Though his wife Bulbul wants to accompany him, she is ailing as well and can’t climb the stairs at home. 

“My father’s creatinine level has been stable for the last few years but skipping a dialysis or not maintaining proper diet can worsen his condition. I am really worried about his driving back homer after the dialysis. He shouldn't be doing it, but we are not getting any help from anyone,” Indranil rued. 

Mukherjee had applied for registration in Pronam, the Kolkata Police initiative to help senior citizens. But the lockdown happened before his application could be processed. 


