Lockdown anxiety eating away at to-be-parents
2020-04-12
The coronavirus pandemic and the subsequent lockdown couldn’t have come at a worse time for 33-year-old Divya G, who is full-term pregnant and due any day now. "Of course, I am worried about my baby catching the virus. I am being extra cautious and not only following advice from my obstetrician to the T, but also ensuring social distancing in my house as well. Despite all that, I have to admit, the anxiety does get to me," she says. TV actor Skanda Ashok understands Divya’s worries, given that his wife is six-months pregnant and currently managing without routine check-ups, while staying indoors to be safe. “The uncertainty of the situation is stressful for both of us. There’s the fear of the pandemic and the fact that none of u know how long it will last and the magnitude of its effect on us,” he says. Skanda and Divya are only a few among a large number of to-be-parents who are struggling with the limitations of the lockdown and fear for the safety of their unborn children. 


There’s an increased demand for caesarian section birthsAmid all the pandemonium surrounding the pandemic, medical experts say that there has been an increased demand for elective caesarian sections. "A lot of pregnant women have been requesting early C-sections, because they are scared of inadvertently contracting the coronavirus and passing it on to their unborn kids. For some reason, they think they can protect their children better once born. My advice has been to wait till they are full term, 39-40 weeks, as a baby is any day safer in the womb than outside," says gynaecologist Dr Swarnalatha S.


No nanny’s available

It’s standard practice in most households to hire external help for post-natal care, including herbal oil baths for mom and child. "We had found a nanny to help me after the delivery, including the oil massages for both mom and baby and other needs of the child, but with the lockdown, I am not sure if she will be able to come anytime soon,” says Divya.

 


Limited post-delivery care

Adding to Divya’s woes is the fact that new mothers are being sent home as soon as possible after delivery. Dr Swarnalatha explains, "Yes, new mothers being sent home within 24 hours of delivery to avoid infections. Many are still processing these sudden changes. Normally, we would have kept them for a few days, depending on the type of delivery, which also allowed us enough time to help them understand the needs of the newborn. But these are extraordinary times, and we cannot afford those luxuries. Even routine scans and consultations have been halted for women in earlier stages of pregnancy.”



Home remedies to boost a pregnant mother's immunity


Spice drink

Take 3-4 cups of water in a saucepan and add a teaspoon each of cumin seeds, coriander seeds and crushed pepper. To this, add some turmeric and three cubes of ginger chunks. Bring the mixture to a boil. Let cool. Strain and drink. 



Neem flower drink Boil neem flowers in a pan with three cups of water. Turn off the flame and let it cool. Add lemon juice and a teaspoon of honey and drink.



