Lockdown visitor: Leopard comes to Hyderabad, thrills locals and vanishes
2020-05-15
HYDERABAD: It is not unusual to see rare birds in the city during lockdown, but spotting a leopard resting against a road median on the outskirts of Hyderabad on Thursday morning came as a huge surprise to motorists and locals alike. Despite cars whizzing past on either side of the road, the unperturbed big cat barely moving, when local residents sent an SOS to the forest department. 

In came the police with a large team of forest officials in tow, even as the animal seemed to enjoy the early morning sun, while turning its head occasionally to check the swelling crowd. “It is quite unusual for a leopard to sit in the middle of a road where there are so much vehicular movement and chaos. We initially suspected that it could be injured in a road accident,” a senior forest department official told TOI. “But we soon found out that it wasn’t the case at all,” he added.

As word spread and people from nearby villages trooped to the area, with some even making noises to scare the leopard away, the animal suddenly made its move. “It crossed the road and dashed for some vegetation. The animal may have reached the road before dawn when there were fewer cars. But now it was on the run and we knew it was going to be tough from here,” the official said.

As it tried to escape from the crowd, the big cat accidentally injured a man who was standing on the roadside. But luckily, the man escaped with a few scratches. About an hour later, news of a leopard getting into a nearby private farm after scaling a compound wall, reached the forest department and they knew the big cat had headed for the farm spread over 80 acres.

Forest officials have secured the area from the outside and began efforts to safely capture the animal. Till last reports came in, authorities had set up two trap cages, loads of nets, 25 CCTV cameras, and deployed three special teams, apart from police and zoo authorities to catch the big cat on the loose.

