Lockdown 5.0 opens up Tamil Nadu: Buses can ply, firms to work with 100% strength
2020-06-01
CHENNAI: The state government has announced extension of the lockdown in containment zones across Tamil Nadu till June 30, with partial opening of public transport and nod for more employees at workplaces in tandem with the Centre’s lockdown 5.0 guidelines issued on Saturday.


In a statement on Sunday, chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami sought to drive home the need to continue restrictions while taking steps to facilitate revival of economic activities. “Our fatality rate is low, while the number of people being cured of Covid-19 and getting discharged from hospitals is the highest in the country, ” he said.

 

As per the new norms, all industries and private enterprises outside Greater Chennai police limits can function with 100% employees and workers.

Public transport will become operational in the state with 50% fleet strength and 60% occupancy. The 37 districts in the state have been divided into eight zones for the purpose. Ban on public transport, however, will continue in Greater Chennai police limits (Zone VIII) and Chengalpet, Kanchipuram and Thiruvallur districts (Zone VII). Movement of people and transport can resume within the zones without e-pass. Interstate and interzone movement of buses remains banned; people can avail e-passes for such travel.

 

While restaurants can open across TN from June 8 with 50% occupancy, religious places will remain closed and congregations will be banned till June 30. Cabs, taxis, autos and cycle rickshaws can operate across the state, including Chennai, subject to restrictions on number of passengers. 

Buses to run within zones, but only 60% seats available

Bus services of state-run transport corporations and private operators will on Monday resume across the state barring Chennai and its neighbouring districts. There will be no change in fare charts and passengers need not apply for e-passes to travel in these buses.

Around 50% of buses will be operated in the state that has been divided into eight zones, said an official release. To maintain social distancing norms, only 60% of seats will be used – 30-35 passengers in a mofussil bus and 20 passengers in a town bus.


Given that more private firms are set to reopen on Monday, some conductors and drivers said the demand might be high. “Passengers waiting for a long time at bus stops will not listen to us and will push to get inside. This will lead to chaos,” said A Arunagirinathan, a conductor from Coimbatore.

A TNSTC (Coimbatore) official said they would operate 1,019 buses including town buses – 375 from Coimbatore city, 148 from Nilgiris, 299 from Erode and 197 from Tirupur.

Passengers will be allowed to pay for tickets in cash and no additional charges will be levied. Everyone will have to wear a facemask and fleets will be disinfected on reaching the destinations. Passengers will have to board through the rear entrance and disembark from the front, said an official of TNSTC Trichy which will run 330 buse.

In Madurai, after an inspection on Sunday, stickers were pasted on seats that can be use.

Private operators, however, are in no hurry to resume operations as their buses are not ready. “We may resume city and mofussil operations in a week,”

said D R Dharmarajan, secretary, Federation of bus operators association of Tamil Nadu . Hundreds of TNSTC workers protested at several depots, demanding full salary for May.

