Lockdown helps forest dept curb man-animal conflicts
2020-04-19
Visakhapatnam: Man-animal conflicts have always been a concern for the forest department, but the lockdown imposed to prevent spread of coronavirus (Covid-19) has helped them avert such situations.

A heard of six wild elephants that were spotted in Srikakulam near the Odisha border a few months ago have moved back to the Kurupam range in Vizianagaram district. Forest officials say that the reason for the pachyderms to return is the availability of sufficient food and water. 

The officials further said people have also stopped venturing out of their homes and farmers are also keeping away from their fields and orchards.

“One of the main reasons for the elephants returning to the Kurupam range so early is easy access to food and water, which are in abundance now. Moreover, there is little room for conflict as farmers have almost abandoned their banana orchards due to the Covid-19 threat,” said Kurupam range officer M Murali Krishna.

Sources said that the incident at Basangi last year where a woman was trampled to death by elephants made forest officials introduce extra measures such as creation of WhatsApp groups to alert people wherever and whenever animals move.

The elephant monitoring cell headed by ranger Annuru Prema has also increased its staff strength from 15 to 20 after the lockdown was announced. “This was done to strengthen our team at a time when police services are not available to help us monitor these animals,” Prema said, adding that now there are three full-time field officers on the job.

The staff, assisted by revenue department officials, are monitoring elephant movement 24x7, but there are times when curious locals get too close to the animals. “With people being restricted to their homes, some locals get adventurous and tru to get a closer look at the elephants just for fun. We are having a tough time holding these youngsters back,” Murali Krishna said.

However, all measure are being taken while ensuring that lockdown protocols are followed, including social distancing among officials. 


