Lockdown effect: Panchaganga river flows clean, air quality improves
2020-04-08
Kolhapur: The ongoing nationwide shutdown, by reducing human interference and industrial effluent release, had benefited the rivers and water bodies. The water in the Panchaganga river is much cleaner now than it was a few weeks ago and even the air quality in the city has improved.

People residing in towns and villages are getting cleaner water as the amount of sewage entering the river, most of which is usually untreated, has significantly reduced.

According to the Kolhapur Municipal Corporation's (KMC) environment department, there has been a drop of around 30 million litre in total sewage generated in the city. The sewage that is generated is being treated fully at two sewage treatment plants.

According to officials, the Panchaganga river witnesses hyacinth growth due to the increase in sewage flowing into it. Now, the river is hyacinth-free.

A senior KMC official said, “We are studying the effect of lockdown on the environment in the city. This is for record purpose and may be used in future. Currently, we have the capacity to treat 93 million litre sewage every day at two treatment plants. The total generation is around 120 million litre, when all hotels, commercial establishments, offices, tourist places are open. Currently, around 60 million litre of sewage is being treated.”

The district authorities claim the purification expenditure by the villages and towns have reduced significantly mainly due to improvement in the quality of river water. Also, the small industrial units and mills contributing to the river pollution are shut due to lockdown.

The KMC official said the data they are collecting will help in starting the initiatives to reduce the pollution of the city and the river. “Since the past one year, we have focused on cleaning of Jayanthi nullah which was once a source of fresh water. With the data we are collecting, we have to convince people to use less water or shut down the hotels for some time to rejuvenate the streams,” said the official.

Since vehicles are not allowed on the roads and the companies and industries are shut, the air quality has also improved considerably. The data accessed from local pollution measuring units shows that the content of pollutants have come down to nil. This is mainly due to the reduction of carbon and sulphur in the air.

At all three measuring centres — Dabholkar Corner, Mahadwar Road and Shivaji University — the air quality index is reported to be less than 100 units meaning the level of pollutants and solid particulate matter has come down below 10%.


