#LockdownEffect: Mumbai circus troupe calls out for help
2020-04-19
While life in the city has come to a standstill with the coronavirus outbreak, there’s one fallout that has gone fairly unnoticed — the state of the city circus. The troupe of the city-based Rambo Circus is grappling with no daily income and is reaching out to people for help.


'We have nowhere to go. The tents on the ground are where we live’ 
 The circus, currently stationed in Airoli, is wearing a deserted look with performers sitting around or using the time to practise their skills. Talking to BT, Sujit Dilip, the owner of the circus, says, “The lockdown is necessary, but with no income, it is difficult to manage the daily expenses for food, medicines, electricity, water supply, etc. Besides, we have nowhere to go. The tents on the ground are where we live. This is our home.” The circus has been facing a tough time since the unprecedented rains in 2019. “Most of our equipment got destroyed in it. I sold my home to put up a show in Mumbai and barely managed to cover the losses in the few shows that we did in Malad last year,” adds Sujit.


Clowns began the coronavirus awareness drive in February 
 The circus troupe kicked off the coronavirus awareness drive a couple of months ago. Informs Sujit, “When we were in Sanpada in February, our clown had a special task, which was to announce and ensure that everyone maintained hygiene and used a sanitiser. We also sanitised the patrons’ chairs with a disinfectant and reduced the seating capacity from 1,000 to only 400 to ensure that there was distance between the chairs.” The troupe has been continuing the practice since. “We are strict about hygiene on the campus ground. Our artistes use masks and maintain social distance even while rehearsing their acts,” adds the circus owner.


‘Kunal Kapoor, Renuka Shahane tried to help’ 
 The circus owner took to Facebook to write about his plight. A friend connected them to actor Kunal Kapoor, whose crowdfunding platform is helping raise funds for the troupe. “Mumbaikars like Renuka Shahane also helped us. The city is all heart, most of their childhood memories are associated with the circus, which came to light through their chats on social media,” reveals Sujit. 


Mumbai's special connect 
Did you know, the Indian circus began in Mumbai (Churchgate) in 1880? "It was started by Vishnupant Chatre, a riding master in 1880. It went from Maharashtra to Kerala and then spread to India. Our circus is like a travelling vagabond village. Earlier, there were 300 circuses in India, now there are only 16 circuses left," he adds.


