Lockdown shuts industries, lifts storage in dams
2020-04-08
Aurangabad: The cumulative storage in different dams in Marathwada stands at over 46% which is more than twice the average stock in the past five years. 

The sufficient stock is considered as the bright spot for the region ahead of summer amid the Covid-19 crisis, which has lowered the industrial and commercial demand of water to a certain extent.

Jaisingh Hire, the assistant superintendent engineer with Command Area Development Authority (CADA), Aurangabad, on Tuesday said that the industrial demand has reduced by around 55 MLD presently amid the outbreak of pandemic.

“The daily requirement of industries housed in Aurangabad and neighbouring Jalna district has come to almost 20 MLD currently from 75 MLD earlier. The drop is attributed to the current lockdown which is applicable to industries too, barring those into essential services and continuous supply,” he said.

Hire said that the demand for irrigation sector as well as domestic needs was almost unchanged. “Both right and left bank canal systems of Jayakwadi major irrigation projects are discharging water currently for irrigation needs towards current hot weather season of crops, which is scheduled to have four rotations of water till arrival of the next rainy season. On the other hand, the demand for domestic sector is also unchanged. While hotels and other such establishments are closed resulting into saving of water, people constrained to remain at homes during the current lockdown have been utilising more water,” he said. 

As reported earlier, only around 108 industrial units were operating in Aurangabad during the current lockdown. As per official data available with the Godavari Marathwada Irrigation Development Corporation, a total of 11 major irrigation projects from the region was holding 57% stock while 75 medium projects have 30% live storage. The region has 749 small irrigation projects which are holding 22% live storage whereas barrages on key rivers are left with 8% stock.

Meanwhile, many districts, especially Beed and Latur which are infamous for supply of tap-water after longer time intervals, have not effected any change in the water supply schedule during the current summer season so far.


