Varanasi: Lockdown develops special shopkeeper-customer bond
2020-04-02
VARANASI: In a matter of weeks, the global pandemic — the coronavirus — has transformed relationships especially during the lockdown. At a time when internet has emerged as the lifeline for many, in the bylanes of Varanasi, a unique and a pleasing bond is developing between local shopkeepers/medical stores and customers.


In view of the inconvenience caused during lockdown particularly to elderly, the local administration came up with a service ‘Dawa Aapke Dwar’ (Medicine at your doorstep) for those elderly, who are unable to go to the medicine shops. The service has been started in collaboration with the Chemist and Druggist Welfare Association and Indian Red Cross Society. 

Several medical stores came forward to join the service to serve the needy persons. About 16 medical stores have been identified in different parts of the district for the home delivery of medicines on demand. The names and phone numbers of these stores have been made public. One needs to send the prescription of doctor to the nearest medical store through whatsapp, and the delivery boy would bring the medicines to home. 

District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said that the service would be extended further as per the requirement. The service is available from 10 am to 5 pm. So far 500 people have been benefited with this service till Tuesday evening. 

It was a new experience for Ravindra Gupta, a medicine seller in Raja Bazar area, to supply medicines at the doorstep of the needy. “Never before, such arrangements were made for medicine supply to customers. But it is the need of the hour to serve people particularly the elderly,” he said. Like Ravindra, there are many others who are engaged in home delivery of essentials in different parts of the city.

Not only medicines but the supply of other essential goods is also being maintained through delivery vans in different localities. According to the DM, 325 four-wheelers and 412 persons have been engaged in this work. These delivery vans move in their respective areas to supply goods. Besides, for the convenience of people control rooms have been created to address their problems.


