Lockdown woes for ‘nautch girls’ of Bihar
2020-04-10
PATNA: Lockdown has come as a double blow for thousands of “nautch girls” of Bihar — first, since people are not allowed to go out their daily earnings have dried up and, second, the lockdown has forced cancellation of a large number of weddings where they earn by performing during the ‘baraat’.


The en mass cancellation of ‘Satta’, the agreement marriage parties have with nautch girls for their dance performance, has put a question mark on this wedding season income and has brought them on the verge of starvation.

“Most nautch girls, who are not engaged in flesh trade, have only two types of income -- daily income through performance at mujra, and seasonal income through performance either in weddings or other auspicious occasions,” Julie Khatoon, a community leader of nautch girls at Shravan Bazaar in Munger, told TOI over phone.

She added, “The income from wedding parties are used to meet major expenses in the family while mujra income meets minor household expenses. This lockdown has not only destroyed our daily income but also blocked all prospect of seasonal income as people are cancelling the ‘Satta’ (agreements).”

Around 50 families of nautch girls reside in Sharavan Bazaar, located in the heart of historic Munger town. With no customers since the lockdown began and no other source of income, most of these families are on the verge of starvation.

“One family in Shravan Bazaar has 12-members—six older girls, five minor girls and only one physically challenged male member. In usual days, the six nautch girls earn enough to survive. But after lockdown, this family has no income. Situation is more or less similar for all families that do not have any earning male member,” Julie said.

A large number of these performers also live in towns such as Gaya, Sasaram, Natwar (Rohtas), Purnia, Ara, Arwal, Behea (Bhojpur), Aurangabad and Nawada. However, Chaturbhuj Sthan in Muzaffarpur is their biggest hub in Bihar. Around 450 families of nautch girls live here.

“Of the total 450 families, nearly 250 are solely dependent on the nautch girls. As no customers are coming at the ‘kotha’ due to lockdown, they have no money even for grocery items. They are somehow surviving as neighbourhood grocery shops have agreed to give items on credit. We are virtually living on the mercy of grocery shop owners,” Rani Begam, a community leader and former ward councillor of Muzaffarpur Nagar Nigam, told TOI.

The nautch girls, Rani said, are facing the worst-ever financial crisis of their life. “Very old ladies say they had not seen such a crisis even the wars. Despite total blackout during the days of war, some customers used to visit them. In those days, some zamindars used to help them financially,” Rani added.

She rued that neither any government agency nor any social organisation has so far come to the aid of the starving families at Muzaffarpur or any other town. “As most of these families do not have ration card, they are not going to benefit from the state government’s recent announcement to provide one month’s free ration and Rs 1,000 per family to ration card holders,” Rani said.

“Majority of such families living at Muzaffarpur, Purnia, Munger or Gaya do not have ration card, so they can’t get any government assistance,” said Md Mahfooz Alam, a social activist who has been working for their uplift. He added, “I hope the respective district administrations will ensure the issuance of ration cards to all such families.” 

