Coronavirus scare in Gujarat: Lockdown necessary till March 31, says ACS home
2020-03-24
AHMEDABAD: Keeping in mind the seriousness of the situation arising out of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Gujarat government has decided to enforce a lockdown across the entire state, additional chief secretary Sangeeta Singh said on Monday night. The entire state will be under lockdown – only essential services will function and essential commodities will be available – from midnight on Monday to March 31.


“In view of the seriousness of the situation, the government has decided to lock down the entire state beginning March 23 midnight till March 31, 2020. We will ensure that essential services like medicines, groceries, milk supply, fruits and vegetables, hospitals, laboratories, internet, petrol stations, etc remain open, said Sangeeta Singh.
 
 

DGP Shivanand Jha said the decision is being taken in the interests of people and appealed to people to cooperate with the police enforcing the lockdown. “Stringent action will be taken against those who are found to be flouting provisions of the lockdown. Police will also carry out intensive checking of personal vehicles going out or coming into Gujarat,” he said.

Municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra said that because people did not observe a proper lockdown on Monday, many vital disease control activities were put on hold. “A major one was disinfection drive of all spaces of public congregation like bus stands, roads, community spaces.” He further added that a proper lockdown was important to slow the spread of the virus by performing proper contact tracing and ensuring that each individual observes 14-day home quarantine.

 In the absence of a good quality lockdown disinfection, contact tracing and home quarantine was observed properly.” City police commissioner Ashish Bhatia said that additional forces have been roped in to enforce home quarantines on 900-odd persons in the city. Three cases have already been filed against home-quarantined people for flouting norms. “In the last two days, police have filed three FIRs in Ghatlodia, Odhav and Maninagar, respectively for flouting of home quarantine rules,” Bhatia added.

