Lockdown contained, Gujarat set to unlock
2020-05-31
GANDHINAGAR: After more than two months of lockdown, where commercial activity and movement were highly restricted, Gujarat will get into unlock mode from Monday. CM Vijay Rupani announced on Saturday night that barring containment zones – where no relaxations have been granted – all other areas in the state will be opened up for commercial activity from Monday.




Gujarat on Saturday recorded 27 more deaths taking the total number of lives lost to 1,007. It is the second sate after Maharashtra to cross the 1,000 death-mark. The unlocking plan was declared by CM hours after Union ministry of home affairs allowed prohibited activities outside containment zones after Lockdown 4.0 ends on Sunday. The state government is expected to announce the revised list of containment zones on Sunday.

Signalling the government’s clear intent to open up commercial establishments and the service sector to full steam, the government announced on Saturday evening that hotels, malls, shops in malls, restaurants and religious places will open in Gujarat from June 8. Odd-even system has also been removed. However, they will have to strictly follow a standard operating procedure (SOP) that will be announced later.

The government also announced further relaxation in timings for keeping shops and establishments open as well as night curfew. From Monday, economic activity outside containment areas can continue until 7 pm instead of 4 pm allowed in Lockdown 4.0. Also, the night curfew timings have been truncated which will be in force only from 9 pm to 5 am from Monday instead of 7 am to 7 pm in Lockdown 4.0.

GSRTC buses will now operate across the state, including in Ahmedabad city and city bus services will commence with 50 per cent capacity in the city.


Most restrictions to be eased

GSRTC buses will now operate across the state, including in Ahmedabad city and city bus services will commence with 50 per cent capacity in the city. Meanwhile, people will now be able to ride pillion on twowheelers and three persons will be allowed in small cars, while four will be allowed in bigger cars.

Rupani said, “A majority of the restrictions during four phases of the lockdown will be eased from Monday. But we must remember that we are passing through the Covid-19 pandemic stage. We cannot afford to let our guard down.” Like in the four phases of lockdown, swimming pools, public gardens, zoos, water parks, beaches and places of tourist interest will remained closed until further directions.

