Lockdown in Mulavukadu, corp even after April 24
2020-04-21
Kochi: Lockdown restrictions will continue in Kochi corporation and Mulavukadu panchayat limits, identified as hotspots in Ernakulam, even after April 24 said agriculture minister V S Sunil Kumar.

Two entry and exit points to hotspots will be fixed. Travelling to hotspots will be allowed only in essential cases.

District health officials had earlier identified Chullikkal in Mattancherry as a hotspot since a resident in the area died of Covid-19. But the state government included the whole local body limit in the hotspot category.

Mulavukadu panchayat president Viji Shajan said they were yet to receive instructions from the district authorities regarding the implementation of restrictions related to hotspot. The minister said restrictions as part of lockdown will continue till April 24 in the district. Only family members will be allowed to travel on two-wheelers even after April 24. Everybody should wear mask while stepping out of their houses or face legal action.

Sanitation should be conducted as per lockdown norms in houses and its premises before Friday. No actions, which will jeopardize the achievements made by the state in fight against Covid-19, will be allowed in Ernakulam, he said. Minister asked health officials to formulate guidelines to be followed at hotspot areas even after the lockdown ends. Strict vigil in Chullikkal will continue.

Meanwhile, transportation of plastic waste from houses resumed in the district. The waste is being transported by Clean Kerala company. So far, four loads of plastic waste, kept at the collection facility, were transported from Chottanikkara panchayat. Forty tonnes of plastic waste are still remaining.

As per Suchitwa Mission report, collection points at 25 local bodies are filled with plastic waste. The collector has provided passes to 10 vehicles for transporting them. 

Though no decision has been taken to open airports, discussions are under way on preparedness. A mock drill will be conducted on Tuesday, the minister said.


