Madurai: Lockdown a double challenge for disabled
2020-04-01
MADURAI: Many among those with disabilities in Madurai, especially from the financial backgrounds, have been struggling for survival since the beginning of the lockdown. Despite being a vulnerable group, the community has little help from the government during the difficult times, said people with disabilities in the city.


“It is very difficult for us. Both my husband and I are disabled and we have a school-going daughter. My aged mother who stays with us is only getting us groceries. Financially, we don’t know how long we can continue and manage our food,” said Mangayarthilagam M, who resides with her family at Kamarajarpuram. Her husband Muthukumar does repair work for electronic gadgets and earns a salary of Rs 6,000 a month. But, now there is no other means for them to eke out a living.

For Jeyaraman M from Nagamalai-Pudukottai area, his physical disability is hurting him and his family far more than ever during the lockdown period. Unable to procure essentials, he is forced to seek the mercy of others to help him and his wife, who is also a disabled person. “We have to beg to our neighbours for getting groceries and are unable to go to the town. I eke out a living by writing petitions for Rs 10-20 in front of the district collectorate. Now, even that is not possible. How can I support my wife and two children?” asked Jeyaraman.

For female with disabilities, it is doubly difficult to stay safe during lockdown, said Mariammal R, a disabled woman who is part of a welfare association. “Many of the disabled people, especially women, are staying in rented houses. They are unable to pay rent. They are unable to even get loans and cannot afford to pay them later too with interest. Their future has become uncertain as most of them don’t have regular income and survive on government allowances or pensions,” she said. Though the most recommended preventive measure for Covid-19 is washing hands, people with disabilities ask how they can protect themselves when they use their hands to move around on roads.

Meanwhile, an official at the District Differently Abled Welfare Office, Madurai said that a state-wide toll free helpline for people with disabilities (18004250111) is currently functional. “We have two teams of volunteers working with our office. We follow up on the calls we get and provide assistance. As of now, people with disabilities are mainly requesting help for buying essentials,” he added.


