Lucknow: Lockdown leads to lowest pollution level in 4 years
2020-05-16
LUCKNOW: If you want to see the perfect amalgamation of Nawabi, colonial and modern era architecture of the city in one frame, literally, your time is now. 

Go to the rooftop of a tall building in the city and you can easily catch a glimpse of the city’s diverse grandeur, thanks to the clean air and visibility of up to 8 km because of low pollution.




TOI lensman, who set up a drone camera above Rumi Darwaza, captured colonial ‘Council House’, which is now Vidhan Bhawan, which is 5km away from the spot and on the other side, the modern architecture of Jai Prakash Narayan International Centre in Gomtinagar, at a distance of 8km from Rumi Darwaza. 

The splendid view has been possible because the city has recorded low pollution levels for the past 50 days since the lockdown began. 

For 31 of these days, the city’s Air Quality Index (AQI) was ‘satisfactory’.

According to an analysis of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) air pollution data available since 2016, pollution level from March 25 till May 14 (50 days) was lowest in four years.

Reduction in vehicular load and halting of commercial and industrial activities during the lockdown period have led to this. 

Satisfactory air means means exposure to air which leads to only minor breathing discomfort to sensitive people only. On 19 days, AQI was ‘moderate’, which means breathing discomfort to people with respiratory issues.

From 2016 till 2019, during the same period, more than 50% of days recorded poor or ‘very poor’ air quality, while remaining days saw a moderate air quality. There was not a single day of ‘satisfactory’ air quality in the last four days during this period.

According to environmentalist Venkatesh Dutta, “The fall in pollution level is due to the closure of construction activities, suspension of all modes of transportation and no emission of air pollutants from industries and dust suspension from broken roads.” He said the city wakes up to clear blue sky and sleeps under glittering stars visible through naked eyes due to low pollution levels.


