Lockdown: A ‘boon’ in disguise for academicians of Patna
2020-03-26
PATNA: The 21-day nationwide lockdown to contain the spread of Covid-19 may have led to unwarranted tension among a large number of people, but many academics consider it a blessing in disguise. Teachers, whether working or retired, are utilizing this period to complete pending academic assignments and read books or journals of their choice.


Patna University (PU) Hindi department head Tarun Kumar has taken up the “unfinished job” of revising the curriculum of the postgraduate course as per the requirements of the National Eligibility Test (NET) conducted by the University Grants Commission. “The performance of PU scholars in NET during the last few years has been far from satisfactory mainly due to the outdated syllabus,” he claims. 

The lockdown has also provided Kumar with ample time to finish some of his pending domestic works. An avid reader, he plans to read his favourite novels and story books, which he had purchased in the recent past.

PU social science faculty’s ex-dean and economics department former head Nawal Kishore Chaudhary, who likes travelling, might have been subjected to untold frustration during the lockdown, had he not discovered his newfound love for mathematics and philosophy.

“I have started reading mathematics and philosophy books, which I am enjoying. I also watch television and analyse the economic impact of coronavirus at the global and national levels. Besides, I have sufficient time to reconnect with my old friends,” he says.

Making the most of the 21-day lockdown, PU English department former head Shaileshwar Sati Prasad is writing his autobiography, which will throw light on the state of higher education in Bihar and the cultural growth of Patna. 

He says, “I am reading books and interacting with my friends and students on social media.”

Patna Science College geology department head Atul Aditya Pandey has started cleaning his book shelves and found several important documents he had been looking for. During the lockdown, he will rearrange all his study materials and finish his pending departmental works.

National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) teacher Vinayak Yashraj has decided to spend “quality time” with his children and is narrating stories to them. “This lockdown has taught me to live happily even in adverse circumstances and remain satisfied with the basic minimum amenities,” he says.


