Lockdown proves a boon for water bodies in Bihar
2020-06-15
PATNA: The nationwide lockdown to prevent spread of Covid-19 might have caused untold sufferings to millions of people within and outside the state, yet it did cast a magical impact on the state’s water bodies. There have been remarkable qualitative and quantitative changes in both surface water bodies and groundwater reservoirs during 68 days of the lockdown, claim experts.


The water quality in rivers passing through the state, such as the Ganga, the Gandak, the Sone and the Kosi improved considerably during the period. Besides, the quality of water in various lakes and ponds of the state, especially in north Bihar region, also improved considerably.

Though routine groundwater level measurements of different observatory wells for the pre-monsoon period have not yet been completed by the state’s minor irrigation department or the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) owing to restrictions in the movement of field staff during the lockdown, the water level must have gone high this summer as compared to last year, assert CGWB scientists.

Bihar State Pollution Control Board (BSPCB) has already studied the impact of lockdown on the quality of Ganga river water near Patna and found that almost all the parameters indicating high level of pollution of the river have subsided during the lockdown period. After making a comparative analysis of the data collected before and during the lockdown period, it has been found that the amount of dissolved oxygen has increased considerably, while those of COD, BOD, total suspended solid (TSS), total dissolved solid (TDS), total coliform (TC) and faecal coliform (FC) have reduced drastically during the lockdown, said BSPCB chairman Ashok Kumar Ghosh. 

“Since all major polluting industries situated in cities located on the banks of the Ganga were closed, the toxic load remained off the river. Besides, the amount of municipal and domestic wastes was also checked during the lockdown,” Ghosh added.

With the improvement in quality of water, the aquatic life also heaved a sigh of relief. Dolphins, which are good indicators of water quality, have started resurfacing in the river as visible from different ghats of Patna, said Zoological Survey of India joint director Gopal Sharma.

Environmentalist and Ganga Prahari Deepak Kumar said more and more dolphins are now visible at the Vikramshila Dolphin Sanctuary near Bhagalpur these days as the water has become cleaner and the flow of the river also remains undisturbed owing to the reduction of anthropogenic activities during the lockdown. The number of smaller fish, frogs and turtles has also increased considerably during the period, he said.

Central University of South Bihar’s environmental science faculty Pradhan Parth Sarthi said during the lockdown period, there was drastic reduction in PM10 and PM2.5 pollutants in the lower atmosphere at various places, including Patna. Such reduction (50-60%) has improved the quality of surface water resources. With the reduction in emission of greenhouse gases, there will be a change in the pattern of rainfall, enhancing our surface and groundwater resources, he said. 

Moreover, behavioural changes in human beings during the lockdown also led to enrichment of water resources. “Less pumping of hand pumps and tube wells for domestic, irrigational and industrial purposes exerted less pressure on the aquifers and hence the groundwater level remained almost static even during the summer. Requirements of bathing and washing clothes were also reduced during the lockdown, saving our precious groundwater resource,” said CGWB regional director A K Agrawal.

Satellite data indicate that there are nearly 28,000 water bodies having an area above 0.5 hectare in the state. But, only 14% of them are perennial and the remaining smaller water bodies are seasonal. The lockdown has had a positive impact on all these water bodies and they are likely to contribute to the sustainable water resource development in near future, said Geological Survey of India retired director N Dayal.


