Rajasthan: Lockdown no bed of roses for florists, farmers
2020-04-02
JAIPUR: Heaps of roses, marigolds and jasmines are being destroyed by farmers and florists across the state. The lockdown implies that there are no takers for these flowers which are used in weddings, functions and at temples. 


Though the climatic conditions of the state are not conducive for production of flowers, yet they are cultivated on around 3,600 hectares of land. There are specific mandis dedicated to flowers in the state, with Jaipur being the business hub. During the peak season, 50,000kg of flowers is sold at the market in the city’s Chandi ki Taksal. 

Due to the lockdown, all weddings, events and festivals have either been cancelled or postponed. Since vegetables and foodgrains come in essential services, their demand is unabated, but flowers have no buyers in these trying times. 

Ashutosh Pareek, a farmer from Bhilwara, said his sales will be pushed back by a year due to the pandemic. “I am currently farming rose and marigold. I am harvesting 8,000 roses per day and this season, we were expecting to get Rs 6 per stem. Due to the lockdown and cancellation of events, I am facing a loss of Rs 50,000 every day. I have no option but to destroy them as there is no additional value of them. If this situation extends till September, then I will be pushed back by at least a year,” said Pareek. 

The situation of flower farmers and florists calls for urgent need for some form of financial support. Due to the lockdown, all the flower markets are closed and florists with stocks are forced to destroy the produce. 

Rahul Saini, a florist from Jaipur, said that he is facing immense financial problems due to the lockdown. “The situation is worrisome for the florists or farmers at present. However, we want some kind of assistance from the government. This lockdown has completely destroyed our business and the labourers attached to it,” said Saini. 

There are however some suggestions being given to at least minimize the losses. Sharad Godha, director, State Institute of Agriculture Management (SIAM) said that farmers can still utilize roses for making products like gulkand (a sweet made out of roses). “Most of the flowers are imported in the state except marigold and roses. Apart from gulkand, roses can be utilized for other industries as well, but utilizing marigold which is cultivated in large proportions of Rajasthan is a problem. Farmers can still make compost from it. They should try doing it to lower the losses,” said Godha.

Farmers however said that investing in some other activity, whether for making gulkand or for compost, is a gamble at present, when all the transport services and industries are shut. They are not sure if a new investment can yield them profits. 


