Lockdown extension: Form teams of experts to provide essential things
2020-04-14
As decided and announced by Punjab government to extend the lockdown and curfew till May1, challenges like demand of grocery, routine and health check-ups, are likely to be faced by the administration. Council of Engineers is regularly suggesting solutions to administration to fight against Covid-19 and to minimise the chances of community spread of Covid-19. Listed here are a few...

20 teams of experts 

Ward-wise distribution of grocery/vegetables as well as other essential commodities has been started in Ludhiana, which is appreciable effort of administration. It is further suggested that parallel to ward-wise distribution, Ludhiana may be divided into 20 parts (with 5 wards each) and for each part, teams comprising officials from DC Office, some police personnel, PWD, PSPCL, private practitioner doctors, paramedical staff as well as some members of active NGOs may be formulated.

The team should move in well equipped vehicles (with necessary precautions, kits and speakers) and visit their respective wards every three to five days to find out if any one is facing any health problem or showing symptoms of the deadly virus. Random samples taken by the administration will help in preventing Covid-19 from spreading further.

Taking advantage of the present situation, many residents are making fake calls for grocery items. The teams formed should also verify the genuinity of such calls. Contact numbers of the teams should be made public or shared with some active NGOs so that people can approach or provide information. 

There are large number of areas in Ludhiana which are congested, making it impossible for people to observe social distancing. These people, mostly migrant labourers, can be shifted to government schools in villages and tubewell rooms. They could also be employed in fields to harvest crops as well as in grain markets. The teams identify daily wagers who are interested to work in fields. This will lighten the burden of the administration who otherwise have to provide them with rations and food.

NGOs must not be allowed to distribute food or grocery to the needy families directly. They must supply the food packets/grocery kits to the teams, who will appoint some local representatives for proper distribution. Any demand must be met through local representative and these local representative must be made responsible for identifying genuine cases.

Free movement of residents 

After inspection by the teams, residents of localities that are found free of coronavirus may be allowed to move within the locality and shopkeepers may also be allowed to open their shops. Initially, it can be allowed for a few hours in a day, say 10am to 3pm) with proper precautions of social distancing and sanitisation. The administration can also think about pedestrian movement only i.e. no vehicle to be allowed to be used within the permitted areas too. This option will automatically restrict them to move longer distances. By this, only entry and exit points will be required to be sealed and only few traffic marshals/ police personnel will be required. The area of movement of residents can be increased accordingly with time. This will also ensure that the local shopkeepers can earn their livelihoods. No person from locality should be allowed to go beyond the locality and supply of goods to shopkeepers must be done in similar manner as it is being done these days. Similarly, some confined areas of planned and developed industrial areas, like Focal Point, Industrial Area A & B, can be made operational with sealing of certain roads to restrict free movement of workers. Different working hours to run industries in localities can be fixed to avoid unnecessary traffic/accumulation of labours.

Use smart city/cow cess funds

There are crores of rupees available in smart city account with the department. As already suggested earlier too, these funds can be used to arrange 50,000 grocery kits, PPE kits for saviours as well as other essential arrangements in hospitals. In our opinion, for next 15 days, only around 10 crores in each major district like Ludhiana, Jalandhar, Amritsar, Patiala and Mohali will be required to fulfill aforementioned basic necessities. Similarly, there must be crores of rupees available in cow cess account with the municipal corporation, which can also be used now.

Raise funds at local level

Every citizen has responsibility to stand by the nation. Though large number of citizens are contributing at national as well as state level, similar arrangements must be introduced to collect funds at district level. Corporate sector must be asked to deposit certain amount out of their Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) at the earliest possible. This practice may be continued every year by forming a trust with members from administration, leading industrial associations and NGOs to upgrade medical/defence infrastructure in civil hospitals from time to time.

(Writer is president, 

Council of Engineers)


