Lockdown-hit elderly struggle for groceries, medicines
2020-03-25
BENGALURU: Rumi Basu, 63, visited a bank on Tuesday morning only to be turned back. The staff advised her to use online banking as they have been instructed to minimise face-to-face interaction. “But I don’t know how to go about it. People of my generation are not tech-savvy,” said a clueless Rumi.

In the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, senior citizens like Rumi are facing several concerns. Many who live alone are unable to keep up with the mad rush for groceries that the city witnessed on Tuesday and Wednesday. 

“Several shops were closed. Those that were open were too crowded. Some of them like Hopcoms functioned during irregular hours depending on the arrival of fruits and vegetables. It became extremely difficult for senior citizens to get even basic necessities. Many pharmacies ran out of medicines. Many elderly persons can’t make rounds of shops, shoving crowds or walking long distances,” said Santhosh Abraham, who runs a social enterprise called ElderAid Wellness. Santosh said there’s a spike in calls seeking help from his organisation.

Senior citizens are among the worst affected, said Mahita Nagaraj, a digital marketing professional who is a caremonger now. “We have received calls from elderly patients who need to undergo dialysis saying they have been unable to arrange transport to hospital. There are others whose home nurses did not turn up,” said Mahiya.

“My domestic help has not been coming for two days now. It’s not easy for a healthy adult to run a home without the maid. So you can imagine my situation,” said 66-year-old Nalini V, who stays with her 70-year-old husband in Nandini Layout.

Susheela Venkat, who lives in an apartment complex on Cambridge Road, said the children of several senior citizens stay in different parts of the country and the world. “They are concerned not just about themselves but about their children as well. We are keeping a regular check on them. We have a group of youngsters running errands for them,” she said. 

“Many senior citizens, including several of my friends, are worried about contracting the disease. We fear if there is acute shortage of medical facilities, we may not be top priority for doctors and will be left to our destiny,” added Rumi. 

Even their routines have taken a hit. “It’s difficult to pass time now. We used to go for a morning walk every day, sit on the benches in the neighbourhood park, have coffee with friends at the local darshini and again get together for a chat in the evening. Now, parks are closed and so are darshinis,” said Siddappa Shankar, a retired medical officer. 


