Lockdown has turned life miserable for this speech and hearing-impaired couple from Thiruvananthapuram
2020-05-15
Anil John Itty and his wife Lin Anil are speech and hearing impaired by birth. All these years, the disabilities hadn’t bothered them. But things changed once the lockdown was announced.

The simplest things of everyday life have now become a challenge for them. Be it to purchase anything from shops, communicate with officials or even contact the coronavirus helpdesk, the duo who work in Technopark, Thiruvananthapuram, have to struggle. Lin, a senior finance executive, says over a text message, “Lockdown has made us feel a lot more secluded from the society than before. So far, we have been relying on lip-reading and facial expressions for communication. Now, with everyone wearing a mask, it is difficult. The need to stay six feet away to ensure social distancing makes communication even more tough.” She quotes an example of trying to make a purchase from shops. “When we give a written list of items to buy to shopkeepers from small provision stores - which are the only shops open - they refuse to read it and get us the items. Either because they can't read well, have too many customers to attend to or are just arrogant. Also, as they wear masks, we can’t read their lips either. Some of the shop keepers have even cheated us with goods of compromised quality and by charging extra.”

Anil says that earlier, in his office, he used to have face-to-face meetings with his stakeholders and team members, relying on body language interpretation and lip reading. “Now, it is a challenge through video calls, as at times, internet crashes and disrupts communication. And as there are no disabled-friendly helpdesks or internet services either, it is very tiresome for us,” he says. Anil quotes another instance. “A while ago, I was walking once to a shop near our place to buy some essentials. Suddenly, I was grabbed by a policeman, who was all set to swing his lathi at me. I stopped him, but couldn’t understand what he was trying to say, as he was wearing a mask. When I gestured that I am deaf, and tried to convey to him where I was going, he gestured to just go back home. As I feared that he would hit me, I walked back home. We feel its better not to step out, as the situation outside is not disabled-friendly at all.”
Now, Anil and wife are trying to escape the isolation through organic farming, cooking experiments and texting their friends and family. The couple says, “Our eight-year-old son isn’t deaf or mute and he stays with our parents now in Kottayam, as his school is closed. We miss him a lot now, as he is our voice. We are looking forward to the day on which we can get back with him, and escape this lonely environment around us.”

Photo Courtesy: Satheeshan Karicheri





