Lockdown ‘Lakshman rekha’ curbs hit Rabi farmers’ fortunes in Uttar Pradesh
2020-03-26
LUCKNOW: The nine-day-long Chaitra Navaratra dedicated to the nine incarnations of Goddess Shakti also heralds the new year of Hindu calendar celebrated all over the country with varying names in different states — Gudi Padwa in Maharashtra and Goa, and Ugadi in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.


The Navaratra also mark the beginning of harvesting of wheat and other crops of Rabi season. Farmers prepare to reap their crops and take it to their homes.

 
 
However, this year, the nationwide lockdown has dampened the new year festivities while the famers scared by coronavirus threat are staying inside their homes after having already suffered substantial losses due to hailstorm and heavy rains lashing the state in February and early March.

The strict lockdown for next three weeks has further deepened the worry lines on the foreheads of farmers as their ripe crops continue to stand in the fields due to lack of reaping hands. The situation is no less worrisome in west UP, where lakhs of farmers had prepared soil beds for sowing, but plantation of sugar cane nurseries has come to a halt since the exercise is labour intensive.

The Yogi Adityanath government has announced a slew of relief measures for people living in cities like providing grocery and other essentials at their doorsteps, but farmers have not got any attention of the government.

As the rural population is also not to cross “Laxman rekha” of their homes for the next three weeks, the farming activities have failed to take off during the strict implementation of lockdown. Officially, in UP, Rabi crops are sown in 136 lakh hectares of agriculture land, including wheat in 100 lakh hectares, 20 lakh hectares of pulses, 10 lakh hectares oilseeds and remaining miscellaneous.

Last year, the state had produced 381 lakh metric tonnes of wheat and the target for 2020 was 391 lakh metric tonnes, but the untimely hailstorm and heavy rains harmed the crop severely and now the threat of delayed harvesting may further affect foodgrain production.

Speaking to TOI, agriculture minister Surya Pratap Shahi said he had asked his principal secretary to speak to officials in Union government to seek guidelines on how to harvest crop in midst of lock down.

“Though the farmers can wait for a week or so as their wheat crop is yet to ripen. I would speak to chief minister Yogi Adityanath to get permission for farmers and labourers for harvesting,” he added.

