Lockdown is for your own safety: DIG Wali
2020-03-25
Bhopal: Just after hectic duty due to the high-voltage political crisis in Bhopal, which lingered on for around three weeks, city cops were pressed into relentless service to enforce restrictions amid the Covid-19 outbreak that led to the ‘janata curfew’, followed by a total lockdown and curfew.

TOI talked to DIG Irshad Wali over the extraordinary situation. Excerpts from the interview

Q: Although you are known to be a workaholic, what are your present working hours?

DIG Wali: My working hours are not fixed. I start working since 6am and am engaged till 2.30am at night. I monitor the situation across the city and give necessary instructions. People do not understand that the lockdown is for their own safety. Despite the lockdown, many Bhopalis are hell-bent on coming out and also seek every facility.

Q: You meet a lot of people during the day and are exposed to health risks. How do you manage yourself?

DIG Wali: One has to deal with it. I change my clothes and take a thorough bath as soon as I reach home.

Q: There are reports that you stayed at the police control room the whole night. Is it true?

DIG Wali: Yes. On Sunday night Bhopal district collector Tarun Pithode and I decided to stay at the police control room. If police and administration get information of a single coronavirus positive case entering the city by flight or any other route, they need to plan accordingly.

Q: What measures have been taken to avoid infection of the deadly coronavirus among the police force?

DIG Wali: We planned it around 7-8 days back, even before the advisories were issued before the lockdown and placed sanitizers at police stations. Masks have been provided to the police staff. Efforts are on to provide them sanitizers and masks individually once again. I myself briefed the force on precautions to be taken to avoid the deadly infection.

Q: Cops were already stressed due to the rigorous law and order duty during the recent political crisis in the state and are now enforcing a curfew. How do you plan to rotate the staff?

DIG Wali: Definitely, the staff is stressed, and we have asked for additional force from the police headquarters. Police is one department which only gets criticism. We try to motivate our staff. People try to find fault in us. If policemen enforce lockdown, ask for papers, they are severely criticised. People should take this unprecedented situation positively. It is a matter of life and death. People move out of their homes for silly reasons — just to take a glance at the empty roads during curfew. People should understand that the energy of police staff is also limited, and they get frustrated after a certain point of time.


