Lockdown draws wild animals out of forests in Rohilkhand
2020-05-01
BAREILLY: Lack of movement and noise due to the lockdown has drawn wild animals out of the forests to human habitation even to areas, never seen before in memory of locals. 

This was so when a farmer working in his field spotted a leopard in Bareilly's Karimganj village earller this week. As he stared at the animal in disbelief, it slipped away.

Later, forest department staff confirmed the presence of the leopard on the basis of its pugmarks. 

This is not an isolated case in the Rohilkhand forest zone following the lockdown.

Chief conservator of forests, Rohilkhand zone, Lalit Verma told TOI, “Apart from leopards and tigers, there have been numerous sightings of hyenas, jackals, deer, jungle cats and crocodiles in human settlements in the last one month. We have rescued many wild animals since the lockdown.” 

He added, “Following the lockdown, there is hardly any movement on roads. Due to minimum disturbance, wild animals are freely moving about." 

Divisional forest officer, Bareilly, Bharat Lal, said, “With minimum noise pollution and least interference of humans, wild animals are feeling a change in the environment and venturing out. It is a phenomenon occurring across the country.”

According to forest department here, villagers living near the Uttarakhand border under Baheri sub-division of Bareilly district sighted a leopard whose pugmarks were found by foresters. Forest officials suspect that the leopard has now returned to the forest. 

Similarly, pugmarks of a leopard were found at two different areas in Budaun.

Besides, a leopard which strayed from Bareilly to Rampur was rescued by the forest department and shifted to Kanpur zoo, where it succumbed to injuries.

Officials said tigers have also been spotted in agriculture fields in Pilibhit. 

Verma said forest department staff was on the alert and on getting information, immediately goes to the spot to give safe passage to animals so that they return to the forest.


