Lockdown stalls Smart City works in Madurai
2020-04-07
Madurai: Works on Smart City projects have come to a grinding halt ever since the introduction of the lockdown. Officials said that only curating works are being carried out with minimum employees for the time being. However, they are confident of finishing the projects without much delay, if the curfew restrictions were lifted soon.

The officials from Madurai Corporation said that the Smart City projects may delay by a month or so. Works will be expedited once the curfew restrictions are lifted and they will try to finish it in time, they say.

“We do not think there will be any major implication in completing the projects other than a few days’ delay. It will take a few days for the work to attain pace even after the curfew is lifted, since materials have to be transported from places such as Krishnagiri,” a higher official from Madurai Corporation said.

Meanwhile, guest workers from various states, who are staying at the project sites, are being well taken care of. Another official said that there are 203 such workers staying at Periyar Junction and Meenakshi Amman Temple. The corporation and contractors are taking care of them.

He said, “We often supply them food prepared at Amma canteens and community kitchens. Medical screening and assistance is also being provided to them. We also make sure that they maintain social distance with others. They did not take up long distance travel recently. Measures are in place to prevent them from contracting Covid-19 from others.”

Madurai Corporation is carrying out Smart City works at an estimated cost of Rs 970 crore. It includes construction of Underground Drainage System in 15 wards in North Madurai at a cost of Rs 291 crore, Reconstruction of Periyar bus terminal at a cost of Rs 160 crore, Vaigai Riverfront development at Rs 81.41 crore, heritage structure development at Rs 40.68 and multi-level car parking and convention centre at Tamukkam ground at Rs 45.55 crore.

The water distribution project after drawing water from Mullaperiyar dam carried out a cost of more than Rs 1,500 crore is also stalled due to the curfew.


