Lockdown heroes wipe tears of migrants on highways
2020-05-13
Bhopal: Moved by their plight and wanting to offer some solace to thousands of migrant workers - community kitchens, volunteers and NGOs are helping them with food, water and transport at the Vidisha Highway to help them reach home. These labourers were stuck in the city for over 45 days, without any source of income - surviving on the food donated by the social welfare organizations. Now that some means of public transport have been reopened, they are now taking the first ride home in buses, tractors, trucks, bicycles and on foot. According to the volunteers, around 10,000 labourers passed via Vidisha Highway on May 11 and around 5000 on May 12.

Seema Kurup, coordinator of Jansampark samooh, a voluntary organization, has started a 'Majdoor Sahiyog Kendra' that is not only providing them with food and water, but much more. "Around 10000 migrant labourers crossed the Vidisha highway to reach other districts of MP on Monday and by Tuesday afternoon around 5000 had already crossed the highway. These are only the few who hitch-hiked on trucks, we do not have the exact number as several of them are also riding on bikes, bicycles or walking. We are trying to coordinate with district administrations to send buses or other means of transport and give them the permission to cross district borders. We are also providing them with slippers and shoes as they will have a long walk ahead. Some of them also need first aid as they have blisters on their feet from walking such long distances and others suffer from dehydration because of the heat. Food and water is also being provided to them for their journey," said Kurup. 

Sachin Jain, a noted right to food activist at Vikas Samvad, told TOI, "Most of the labourers are going towards Chattarpur, Damoh, Satna, Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh and there is another large group that is going to Banda in Uttar Pradesh. We are trying to coordinate with the district administration of the UP districts to arrange for inter-state transport facilities and permission for them to cross state borders.”

A few organizations are supplying ready-to-eat kits to the labourers going back home so that they have enough supplies to last a few days, along with packets of cooked food from Saket Nagar Gurudwara. Roli Shivhare, of Aawaj foundation said, "We collected around 500 packets of khichdi form the Gurudwara and prepared 300 ready-to-eat food kits with things like sattu, bread, pickles, sachets of jams and ketchup, along with small packets of sugar and salt. We are supplying these kits to the labourers and the families with small children who will be walking for next few days. The kits also contain packets of oral rehydration solution and over the counter medicines for pain and fever."

A few individuals in several localities also prepared food and distributed pouches of water to the labourers. Members of Katara Hills Corona Relief Group are volunteering at the Ayodhaya Bypass road to ensure that migrant workers leaving form the area to go to Vidisha highway have food and water while leaving. 

"We reached the spot around 9 am and came to know that some of the labourers had left the city at the break of dawn. We provided water pouches, packets of biscuits and a home-cooked food with pickles to them so that they could at least eat once and then have biscuits later," Prashant Parashar, a volunteer of the group said. 


