Lockdown leaves truckers stranded on highways
2020-03-27
Nagpur: The ongoing lockdown has also left many truckers stranded at the highways. On the roads leading to the city, truckers who came with loaded vehicles are not able to take them further to their destinations. Those who have unloaded their cargohere, are also stuck.

For nearly a week, the trucks have become home to their drivers and helpers who are managing with the rations they carried. As cash is running out, even ATMSsin the outer areas are dry, said the drivers along the Nagpur Amravati highway. The dhabas have also closed. 

“One of our vehicles was supposed to reach a consignment of medicines to Lupin’s warehouse at Kalmeshwar but now the truck cannot move further. There are some empty trucks of our company too which cannot return,” said Balkrishna Pandey, who was resting with other drivers in one of the vehicles.

“Food has not been a problem so far as we carry rations along. To start fires, we use diesel from vehicles. We are buying supplies from shops in nearby areas but are running short of cash. We hope to get some help from the company’s office soon,” said Pandey who hopes the lockdown would not go beyond 21 days. “Even the police are offering help, but we have been able to manage so far,” he said.

Pandey and other drivers had come from Mumbai and are working for a Gujarat based transport company. 

Manikchand Tiwari, a native of Allahabad, said he could not find cash in ATMs close by and has run out of money. “There is no money left and I cannot find cash in ATMs too. The wait seems endless,” he said.

Nanhe Soni, a worker who applies grease in the trucks, is jobless these days but says he can manage. “I am on fast due to Navratri,” he says. A little ahead Afsar and Salman said they were helped by locals yesterday.

Kukku Marwah, president of Nagpur Truckers Unity, said, “there is a longer queue at the Pardi Naka. Members of our association had gone there to distribute food but the police stopped us a kilometre away and allowed only one driver at a time driver to pick up the meals from a distance. We have not reached out to them again.”

Meanwhile, Pandey and others are happy they can recharge their mobile phones at nearby shops and talk to their family members. “We have charging equipment with us too,” he said. 


