Lockdown due to Covid-19 has changed life at individual level: Survey
2020-06-03
Ludhiana: While the world is trying to cope up with the rising infections and death toll due to Covid-19, lockdowns announced in different phases has affected all sections of society at various levels.

In a survey conducted recently by PAU, nearly three-fourth of the respondents, 73%, were of the belief that the lockdown due to Covid-19 had changed their way of living and they had learnt to live with this virus, while 90% added that the lockdown had made them more aware about water, sanitation, hygiene, waste management and cleanliness. 80% respondents were concerned about the hindrance in education of students studying in schools, colleges and universities due to lockdown.

Social scientists define three different levels of society— macro, meso and micro levels. At the micro level, the focus is on individuals and the relationships between different individuals. The individual level is the strongest one to shape up one’s personality and develop the traits that shape positive or negative outlook. 

A survey of 750 respondents by Surabhi Mahajan of the department of apparel and textile science, Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) made an attempt to investigate the impact of the lockdown in India at the individual level. As far as the background information of respondents is concerned, 56% of them were males; majority i.e. 64% of them were less than 35 years of age, followed by 31% between 35 to 58 years (middle aged working population) and remaining over 58 years. 46% of them were students, while rest were government or private employees, businessmen, doctors, police personnel and housewives. 59% respondents belonged to nuclear families and majority (30%) had monthly family income of less than Rs 50,000, followed by 29% who had family income between Rs 50,000 and Rs 1 lakh. 

Though all types of educational and coaching institutions took many steps to conduct online classes for the students during the lockdown period, but 77% respondents opined that online classes were not as effective as traditional classrooms for the students because of technical issues in networking and also lack of congenial environment in homes of many students. They are not good substitute but may play supplementary role to strengthen classroom teaching. 

According to 75% of the respondents, their routine has become monotonous and boring due to no movement outside the homes and absence of any physical work for most of the individuals during lockdown,. The regular, repeated pattern of daily routine is being followed without any change. This has made individuals restless and agitated leading to mental trauma as stated by 61% respondents. The situation has aggravated due to closure of schools/colleges/universities, workplaces and business establishments. 60% of the respondents felt that social isolation was very difficult to experience and they felt tense about it. 74% respondents stated that lockdown and uncertainty about future due to Covid-19 had increased social insecurity among individuals. 

Pointing at the other side of the coin, 90% respondents revealed that social media had become immensely popular during lockdown for idling away time and the most joyous activity during the lockdown period has been connecting to their friends and relatives virtually through internet and other social media platforms. 86% of the respondents opined that availability of ample time during the lockdown had given them an opportunity to introspect themselves and to become more responsible citizens of the country. 75% respondents also added that the extra time had been utilised by them in a productive manner and lockdown had proved a blessing for them as they were able to pursue their hobbies and relax for future busy schedules. 

Only 40% of the respondents utilised this time for yoga/exercise/meditation for keeping fit and feeling energetic. Rest of the respondents disagreed to utilisation of time by indulging in such activities. 89% respondents felt that individuals have become more aware about advanced technology, which enabled them to work from home. They added that this was going to surely benefit them in future to fit in the MNC culture or to operate for their own businesses from home.

It may be concluded that our life at individual level is not going to be the same as that before the global spread of Covid-19. Social distancing, use of masks, sanitisation and washing hands repeatedly are going to be part of our life in school/colleges/universities, during journey by bus or train, morning and evening walk, shopping in market places and malls and going out for dinning in hotels and restaurants, joining marriage or birthday parties and so on. How we shall be able to learn the new way of life and customise ourselves, only time to come will validate.

This survey was guided by Sandeep Bains, dean of College of Community Science, PAU, Ludhiana. 


