Lockdown taking toll on mental health of Rajasthan residents
2020-04-01
JAIPUR: Real estate broker Saurabh Choudhary spends hours every day on his mobile phone checking the latest updates on coronavirus. An avid traveller and a social person, Choudhary keeps waking up at night since the lockdown was announced by the state. 


“He constantly thinks about the impact of the epidemic in his business and personal life. Remaining glued to his cellphone throughout the day and losing sleep at night is a simple case of high levels of anxiety,” said neuro-physician Dr Bhawna Sharma, while sharing the case of one of his patients who consulted her on Tuesday.


 
Choudhary is not alone whose life has turned upside down after the government forced people to go into self quarantine to combat the spread of the virus. 

Manjari Shah (name changed), a mother of two children aged 3 and 6 years, is a relationship manager at a private bank. “Living in a house 24/7 with a family is a luxury, but it becomes a nightmare with intense work pressure, discharging household work added with fear of the epidemic. It is completely disorienting my focus. Not only am I making mistakes in my office work, but while I cook, I miss some ingredients,” said Shah. 

Sleep disorders, cognitive imbalance and anxiety are the most common symptoms many people are complaining to neuro-physicists, clinical psychiatrists and psychologists in Jaipur. The lockdown, which has forced people to stay indoors, has started taking a toll on the mental health of people. Most complainants are highly educated or businessmen.

Students are at the receiving end of the lockdown due to the indefinite postponement of their exams and uncertainty of the future. “I have noticed changes in the behaviour of most of them. They over react to every situation, display their anger too often and remained isolated,” said Sarvesh Kumar, a hostel warden in Kota. He has 16 students in his hostel stuck up due to lockdown.

S S Nathawat, the former head of department psychology, Rajasthan University, termed it a situation akin to national emergencies. “The mental health problem is spreading like an epidemic especially among the young brigade. The uncertainty about future is a single most reason slipping them into depression. The government has to work towards spreading positivity by diverting their attention towards self-belief,” said Nathawat, who has authored 11 books on behavioural science.

