#LockdownEffect: Now, farmers too rely on technology to reach out to customers directly
2020-04-16
The nation-wide lockdown surely has been a major inconvenience, especially for those working in the areas dictated by demand and supply, like farming, for instance. But quite like every other sector seems to have figured out how to handle their work online, a lot of the farmers dealing seasonal and perishable items seem to have followed suit. And if you have already received the odd message or a notification on your social media feed about a fresh batch of mangoes or grapes available for sale, you will know exactly what this is all about.


Gated communities, apartment complexes are a farmer’s hotspots
Rashmi Suresh, who grows muskmelons as a family business, says that the lockdown hit them hard at first. "We grow close to 120 tonnes of muskmelon at this time of the year. When the lockdown was announced, we wondered what to do, but realised that we could reach out to apartment complexes in the city. The message we sent to a few friends was shared widely and we soon began getting orders from many societies. The only condition we laid down was that each individual order had to be for five kgs. We catered to an 800 kg order at an apartment complex recently, but have a long way to go. We are hoping to sell as much as we can before the fruits start going bad," she says.
In the past few weeks, residents at gated communities, apartments and societies, have become part of dime-a-dozen instant messaging groups, designed solely for the purpose of collating bulk orders for famers to deliver.
Pratap GM, who grows grapes near Devanahalli, has been following a similar modus operandi now. “I sent messages to all my contacts, who, in turn, forwarded it to their apartment groups. While it is true that I have been getting bulk orders, but it is nothing compared to how it would have been if not for the lockdown,” he says.
Arjun and his brother Madhu grow a wide variety of mangoes at their farm in Kolar. “A few of our regular customers knew we were ready to harvest, but that getting the produce to the market was an issue. They spread word about the varieties we have, we started getting orders from individuals and housing societies. We pack each variety by the box, of approximately 3.5 kgs each and ensure contactless delivery. At individual houses we leave the boxes at the door, while in gated communities we insist on customers bringing their own bags, into which we empty the boxes. We recently followed the same method in Whitefield. Right from the harvesting to packing, we have been sanitising at every step," he says and adds, “Getting orders has been, surprisingly, easy, what isn’t is the part where we have to live up to that, given that we have to do everything ourselves, from harvesting to packing and delivering across the city, as our labourers have all gone home.”


Citizens too pitch in with reposts of available produce on their social media pages
Anamika Bist, who promotes community farming through her enterprise, says that since the lockdown, farmers have been reaching out to her to help them sell their harvest. “Since we work closely with farmers, they have been seeking our help. We reach out to our customer/clients and contacts via messages, emails, social media and such and tell them what a particular farmer is selling and for how much. Since people too are not able to get their hands on fresh fruits and vegetables, this benefits both the farmer and the consumers,” says Anamika.
Ruth James, who used to procure fresh fruits and vegetables from farmers in Ooty for her small-scale jam and pickle operation, had just began expanding orders to include requests from friends when the lockdown happened. “Since I already know a few farmers, I have been trying to help them sell their produce by spreading the word among friends and clients. Given the current situation, farmers only agree to ship if there is a specific volume and I try my best to meet that,” she says.
 



