Lockdown 4.0 in Bihar: Some welcome relaxations, others seek curbs
2020-05-19
PATNA: The fourth phase of the Covid-19 lockdown has begun with certain relaxations in terms of economic activities in the state. 


Utensil shops, sports complexes and educational institutes will be allowed to open with social distancing norms and other restrictions in place. While no spectator will be allowed in sports complexes, coaching centres and schools will only be opened for the faculty members. Majority of the restrictions, including night curfew, curb on movement of public transport and opening of shopping complexes and cinema halls, will, however, continue to remain in force.



Patna district magistrate (DM) Kumar Ravi told this newspaper on Monday afternoon that fresh Covid-19 cases were restricted to certain areas of the city. “A number of economic activities, which were not permitted during the first two phases of the lockdown, will start again,” he said.

Asked about the relaxations in use of public transport, the DM replied that Patna was in the ‘red zone’ with around 19 containment areas. “Allowing movement of public transport can worsen the situation. Therefore, we cannot allow autos or buses to ply on roads for the time being. Only those with private vehicles can move across the city,” Ravi said.

Meanwhile, several sectors hailed the decision of restarting economic activities. Bihar Players’ Association president Mrityunjay Tiwari said, “Many sportsmen have not been able to practise on ground and train themselves for the last two months. Now that sports complexes have been allowed to open, we will ensure that everyone maintains distance and follows all the guidelines.”

Manish Kumar Singh, who reopened his utensil shop at Bandar Bagicha after a long time, asked only four of his employees to rejoin on Monday and took “all precautionary measures”.

Since the hospitality sector continues to remain non-functional during lockdown 4.0, many hotels have planned to start home delivery services. Brajesh Kumar, an executive at a city hotel, said, “Keeping the current situation in mind, we have decided to begin doorstep delivery of food soon.”

Other sectors, which have still not been allowed to function in the fourth phase of the lockdown, are disappointed with the government’s decision. “If the government is allowing certain economic activities despite the Covid-19 crisis, they should restart public transport too. We are ready to follow the necessary guidelines,” claimed Bihar State Autorickshaw Drivers’ Association general secretary Rajkumar Jha.

Residents, on the other hand, are scared that the relaxations might lead to an increase in Covid-19 cases. Kadamkuan resident Sanjay Kumar pointed out that lifting certain restrictions was fine, but “the condition may deteriorate in the coming days”.

Similar was the reaction of Tanushree, a resident of Nala Road, who urged the government to impose complete lockdown again.

