Lockdown forces online delivery firms to suspend operation, cancel orders
2020-03-25
GURUGRAM: Online grocery stores such as Milkbasket and Bigbasket have partially suspended their operations in the national capital region amidst the lockdown, leaving many residents stuck as their orders scheduled for Monday and Tuesday stood cancelled. The Chemists and Drug Association in the city also spoke about the problems faced in the transportation of medicines and that could impact supply in the coming days.


Big Basket completely stopped operations from Tuesday in Gurugram. The website stated, “We are not operational due to the restrictions imposed by the local authorities on the movement of goods in spite of clear guidelines provided by the central authorities to enable essential services.” It further stated that they are working with the authorities to resolve the issue.

Online grocer Milkbasket which also failed to deliver to several locations across NCR on Monday and Tuesday. According to sources, due to the restrictions imposed by the local police, they could only operate at 40% of their capacity in Gurugram on Monday and the figure was even lower in Noida. "We will not be able to deliver any fresh milk in Gurugram, Noida and Hyderabad on Wednesday as well. However, we shall be able to deliver most orders for groceries," said the company in a statement issued for the customers.

Grofers also faced similar hurdles while delivering essential items.

This left many residents, who were expecting their orders to be delivered, in despair. “We are following the orders and staying home. But essential items are not being delivered which is likely to aggravate our problems in the coming days, if not resolved. As of now, I wear a mask and go out to buy stuff and even then, I do not get many essential items. Milk has been in shortage for the past couple of days as well,” said Rohit Motwani, a resident from Orchid Island, Sector 51.

Meanwhile, local chemists also accused the police of restricting their movement. "We are already running low on medicine stocks, and now, if the medicines cannot be transported, we might as well have to shut shop," read the statement issued by the Chemist and Drug Association, Gurugram. 

Many others had similar apprehensions and said that if the situation persists, it will be very difficult to stay indoors. Responding to several complaints, the district administration has decided to resolve the issue. “We have decided to issue passes to all those involved in the delivery of essential services to ensure their smooth operations,” said a district official.

However, that is only one aspect of the problem as many offline retailers are also facing issues in sourcing staples because the supply chain is interrupted at many points. “While the supplies were coming in smoothly till yesterday, we faced some issues in procurement today as the supply has been hit. We are making whatever arrangements we could to meet the demand,” said Rajesh, a store owner in Sector 55.

