Bhopal: Lockdown flattens crime graph, but house break-ins & vehicle thefts rise
2020-05-26
BHOPAL: The city’s crime rate has fallen to a large extent during the lockdown period, but since lockdown 4.0 has started, the crime graph — especially for theft and vehicle theft cases — has shot up. Although the number of cases of crime against women has fallen, molestation and rape cases are still being reported.




In May, two murders, including the recovery of an unidentified man’s decomposed body stuffed in a sack with hands and legs tied was found from a well in Nazirabad and the killing of a 65-year-old railway employee by unidentified thief in Chhola, shocked the city. In both the cases, police have been clueless till date. The cases have also raised questions over the police monitoring during the lockdown.

Burglary from locked shops at Gurukripa Tower at Sarvdharm on the main road in Kolar also raised questions on police vigil as the accused barged thrice into the same shops and were caught on CCTV cameras, but are still on the run.

Now with relaxations given in lockdown, criminal elements have also started coming out and police are facing problems in identifying them as they come out wearing masks. Cops, however, claimed that the situation is under control. An 85% decline has been recorded in crime against women, including rape, abduction and molestation cases reported during the lockdown period. The number of other serious offences, including attempt to murder, loot, theft and vehicle theft also declined sharply by more than 50% in all the categories.

More than two dozen house break-in cases and around a dozen theft cases were reported in the month of May till now. Around two dozen vehicle theft cases have been reported in the city in May till date. Despite the lockdown and strict police enforcement, a rise in cases of illegal liquor supply was seen in the city. 

DIG Irshad Wali said that strict enforcement of lockdown by police and constant monitoring has resulted in a decline in the crime rate. He said that the police were monitoring history-sheeters and habitual offenders using criminal tracking techniques. Their record will be made and man-to-man monitoring will be increased.


