Visakhapatnam: Lockdown witnesses surge in data usage
2020-05-07
VISAKHAPATNAM: Data from the telecom operators show that in the last one and half month internet usage in the state has increased by at least 50%. And homemakers and senior citizens account largely to the surge.


“While about 40% of this surge is owing to work-from-home, the rest 60% is owing to non-work related activities. Besides social networking sites, most user, especially women and senior citizens, are using apps such as Netflix, Zee 5 and Aha. Going by the data log of our customers, several of these users are first-time users of such streaming apps. The lockdown has witnessed a shift of preference from televisions to online entertainment apps,” M Satya Prasad, assistant general manager of BSNL, told TOI.

Meanwhile, with most corporate employees switching to work-from-home, the traffic on shared network has reduced to a large extent. On the contrary there has been a demand for high speed net connectivity at individual homes. 

“An employee needs high-speed connectivity at home to get connect with the company’s server. During the lockdown we saw a rise in demand for high speed fiber optic connections,” said Satya Prasad. 

Use of mobile internet has also witnessed an upward trend. Data usage of the postpaid users has increased considerably. Even prepaid users have been noticed opting for ‘add-on’ data packs. Telecom operators said, such figures clearly indicate that since the lockdown was imposed, people in large numbers have turned to the internet for their work and entertainment need. 

“The pandemic has made people more dependent on the internet. They have been using it to make payment, access information and entertainment. We have more prepaid customers and they are either buying more add-on data packs or upgrading directly to a pack that gives more data services,” said Patta Sreedhar from Reliance Jio.

Speaking to people about how many hours a day they are spending online, the answers were varied. R Neelam, a homemaker from MVP Colony, said, “Someone in the family is always online. For me, I watch a lot of Netflix, but when I am in the kitchen or doing household chores I usually have a music app on.”

