Lockdown stalls stem cell transplants of 15 patients
2020-05-02
SURAT: The family of 12-year-old Harsh Bhanushali (name changed) living in Gir-Somnath was elated after being informed that a life-saving match donor for blood stem cell transplant was found in March. Harsh, a thalassaemia major, needs to be taken to Rajkot twice a month for blood transfusion.

However, their joy was short-lived after DATRI, India's largest unrelated blood stem cell donors’ registry, told them on March 24 that the donor won’t be able to travel due to the nationwide lockdown. Ultimately, his life-saving operation planned at Ahmedabad was postponed.

Harsh is not the only case. About 15 patients suffering from various blood ailments including cancer will have to wait for transplant despite the fact that their stem cells have matched with as many donors. Stem cell donors need to reach to the hospital two days before the transplant.

"Our only hope was the blood stem cell transplantation. I don’t know when it will happen now,” Harsh’s mother, a widow, told TOI. 

Jalpa Sukhanandi, region head, Gujarat, DATRI, told TOI: “The lockdown has affected the process of facilitating blood stem cell transplants and transporting blood stem cells across state borders to the patients in various hospitals. Travel restrictions, coronavirus risk at hospitals, both to recipients as well as donors, have forced hospitals to postpone blood stem cell and bone marrow transplantations.” 

Sukhanandi cited another case of a 21-year-old man from the state diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), a type of cancer, who scheduled for transplant, but is now being compelled to take extra dose of chemotherapy as he cannot fly down to Tamil Nadu for the transplant. “In this Covid situation, blood cancer patients are the most vulnerable. Time is running out fast for critical patients” she added. 

Stem cell transplant is the last hope of patients suffering from fatal blood diseases like leukaemia and thalassaemia. 

The transplant when a matched donor gives his/her stem cells and these are transplanted to the patient.


