Lockdown violation: Clip of b’day party inside Lodhi Club goes viral
2020-05-27
Ludhiana: Reports of celebration of birthday of an office-bearer of Lodhi Club on the premises have emerged on social media. The reports say for lunch, food items were brought from outside as all of club’s restaurants were closed. An audio clip too has gone viral in which a club member is questioning another executive committee member as the latter admitted that gathering of about seven persons took place and a birthday cake was cut followed by lunch. The security guard who had tried to capture the incident in his mobile is now missing and not reporting on duty. Due to lockdown, clubs have been ordered to remain close till further notice.According to Nitin Mahajan, club’s general secretary, “I was out of town on Sunday and came to know of the incident from the WhatsApp group. According to the social media reports, six to seven members of the executive committee took part in the birthday celebrations of an office-bearer and the on-duty security guard filmed it. The security guard is not reporting for duty for the past two days and we are trying to contact him. Moreover, till now no one has lodged an official complaint and in case someone does, I will take action in consultation with the deputy commissioner, who is the president of the club.” The office-bearer at the centre of the controversy refuted all claims. He said, “This is a conspiracy by some persons to malign my image. No celebration took place on the club premises. It was just a meeting of executive committee to discuss the upcoming projects. These are routine meetings, which are not banned. Moreover, I have enough evidence to prove that no celebrations of this sort happened. And what is wrong in bringing home-cooked food and water inside the club in the time of pandemic. This is a story cooked up by my detractors and I am considering legal action against them. Besides, my birthday was not on Sunday. It falls on May 21.”The TOI tried to contact club’s president DC Pardeep Agrawal, but he did not respond to calls and messages.