Patna: Lockdown relaxation a boon for technicians, daily wagers
2020-04-22
PATNA: The partial lockdown relaxation has provided a sigh of relief to workers in unorganised sector, technicians, daily wagers, dhaba wallahs and farmers, who have resumed work after nearly four weeks.


Ravindra Kumar, a technician from Mithapur locality in the city, said he received several calls from people regarding problems they have been facing in their devices. “I attended only one customer on Monday as he was in urgent need. Keeping the current situation in mind, I wear mask and gloves while leaving home. Besides, I maintain distance from customers and suggest them to stay at least three feet away from me,” he said.

A tea seller at Zero Mile, Shanti Devi, was quite elated to resume her business. “I was running short of money following the lockdown. The partial relaxation has come as a boon for me and other tea sellers and daily wagers, who work day and night to meet their basic necessities. Even though the number of customers is much less than what it used to be earlier, I am still happy as something is better than nothing,” she said. 

Some others, however, said they are facing hassles in resuming work. Fateh Alam, an electrician from Exhibition Road said he was stopped by cops at several places on Monday.

“Despite showing all the documents of the vehicle and even my tools, I was not allowed to move on the roads. I had been at home for 28 days with no income. Last week, when it was announced that electricians will be allowed to go to houses for repairing electronics and other devices, I thought my problems would end from Monday. However, the kind of treatment I received from police personnel was disappointing,” Alam said.

Banti Kumar, owner of a dhaba on Bailey Road, he has applied for vehicle pass.

The animal and fisheries resources department has also issued passes to poultry owners and non-vegetarian shops. District animal husbandry officer Anuranjan Kumar Gautam said at least 40 poultry shop owners have got vehicle passes. “The shopkeepers have been asked to follow safety measures,” he said.

Road construction department engineer Sumit Kumar Rai said he follows all the guidelines issued by the government. “We are taking all precautionary measures like maintaining social distancing, calling the staff on alternate days, wearing face masks and using sanitizers, while at work. As several infrastructure projects have resumed, we are trying our best to complete work by following all safety measures and maintaining hygiene,” he said.


