Lockdown no excuse, fitness lovers enjoying home workouts
2020-04-29
NAGPUR: Lock down and self isolation is not stopping fitness enthusiasts from following their regimen regularly in the comfort of their homes. Some are practicing body strengthening yoga postures in the cool morning breeze on the terrace, while some have set up a gym-like work out station. Keeping up with the online trend, they are also following and uploading online tutorials, which ensures they do not become couch potatoes.


Trupti Bansod, mother of star badminton player Malvika, shared a glimpses into her little champ’s fitness and training regimen in their house. They have made space in her room, so she can practice yoga. “Malvika is very particular about her fitness and training. After her exams, she was looking forward to aggressive training sessions, but now she practices everything at home,” said Trupti.

Right from warm-ups, yoga and stretching exercises to playing badminton, she manages it all.

Gaurav Chouksey, director of a resort, has set up his own workout station at home like a gym, and works out there every single day. “I anticipated that because of lockdown situation, we will be grounded at our homes soon. Hence, I planned everything and set up a small workout station, which has all the required equipment. I workout from 6-8 in the evening,” he said.

Keeping up the online training and classes, Gyani Kaushik, an ardent gym lover and owner, follows his fitness regimen at home regularly. He also shoots exercise videos and uploads them to his social media, so others can follow the routines. “I start my day with morning yoga, and do cross-fit trainings, body weight training etc. Everyone must do a light workout daily, it helps to boost mindfulness and immunity,” he said.

For Sachin Deshmukh, a physical education teacher, lockdown is not an excuse to skip exercising. He has taken to shooting basic fitness routines and uploading them to his WhatsApp group, where children and adults follow his techniques. “To reduce the risk of getting injured at home, I am making simple videos of suryanamaskar and stretching exercises, which children can follow easily. I get a good response and people follow those videos religiously.”

Sambhaji Bhonsale, a swimming coach and teacher, dedicates his morning and evening time with his son, who is a national level swimmer, in fitness activities on their terrace, with bricks and props replacing dumbbells. “We don’t miss out on our workout any day. It helps to improve immunity to keep the virus away, results in good blood circulation, and improves the strength of the body,” said Bhonsale.

Harsha Kanojiya, a student and passionate yoga lover, follows advanced yoga postures. “I perform yoga in the morning from 8-10 on the terrace or in my well ventilated room there. I practice advanced yoga to improve my immunity,” she said.

Shreya Dandekar is regular at practicing her regular work out at home and is making sure never to skip it. “It’s the best time for everyone to make the most of the time, and work towards their fitness. I do weight loss exercises and also make sure to inculcate upper and lower body exercises daily on my terrace,” she said.

