Lockdown rejuvenates lakes, avian life in Udaipur district
2020-05-07
UDAIPUR: As the world continues to grapple with coronavirus, the pandemic is having some unexpected side effects, few good ones for the ecology.

Udaipur, one of the biggest tourist attractions of the state, which is usually teeming with visitors throughout the year, wears a deserted and forlorn look. Right now, when the whole country is under lockdown as coronavirus continues to spread, locals in Udaipur have noticed that the water in the city's lakes has become much clearer, with small fishes visible swimming around and many varieties of chirping birds.

“The water now looks clearer because there is less traffic around the lake side, boating activities are completely stopped allowing the sediment to stay at the bottom,” Tej Shankar Paliwal, an activist who lives near the shores of Lake Pichhola says.

“It’s because there is less boat traffic that usually brings sediment to the top of the water's surface. I can see small fishes in the water and some water birds playing merrily on the water surface, which were not seen for the past few years,” Paliwal said.

Though water pollution may not have much decreased drastically, the amount of dissolved oxygen (DO) has increased considerably in a month, says data accumulated by the pollution control board office.

In Pichhola, the DO amount which was 6.8 in March has increased to 8.2 mg per litre, while in Fatehsagar, the amount has improved by 1.8 mg per litre in a month. Similarly, the acidic property has also reduced as the potential of hydrogen (PH), indicator has gone up. Before lockdown, the PH level of lake Pichhola and Fatehsagar was 7.9 and 8.3 mg/litre which has now improved to 8.16 and 8.7, respectively. The TDS (total dissolved solids) has come down in the lake water which is an indicator of the improving health of the lakes.

“The air, water quality has considerably improved in Udaipur during the lockdown since all the industrial units are shut down and there is almost zero public movement around the lakes. Water is less polluted without boat traffic and cause of the restricted movement of residents,” B R Panwar, the regional officer of the pollution control board said.

Besides, air and water quality, avian life is also buzzing with activities these days as humans are under lockdown, birds are not. House sparrows, crows are visible in good numbers these days which had almost got invisible in the recent past.

“House sparrows have lived around humans for centuries. During the lockdown, their movement, reproduction and feeding habits have witnessed interesting changes,” Vinay Dave, an ornithologist says.

The expert, who has put up artificial nests for these small birds, has found that a male bird of the specie has two female partners living in two separate nests.

“It was interesting to watch that initially the two female birds fought and bullied each other but, now after some days, they are at rest and happy in their respective nests with the male looking after the young chicks in both.”

The expert also noticed that due to fogging and sanitisation activities, small insects which were preferred by the sparrows, have gone scarce and hence the little ones are being fed with chapati particles fetched by the winged parents.


