Coronavirus outbreak: Lockdown in Wuhan University worries parents in Chennai
2020-01-26
CHENNAI: It’s been a week since S Palayam’s son had a full meal. P Vishal is one of the medical students from Chennai at Wuhan University, China, stuck in their hostel rooms and dormitories following the government-ordered lockdown of the city since the outbreak of coronavirus.


Many Indian students had come home for the month-long Chinese New Year holidays, but the few who stayed back – especially at Wuhan, which is the centre of the outbreak – are living in fear. The whole city has been quarantined; flights and trains remain cancelled.

Parents in India are desperate to have their wards back home, while they are still healthy. “If there’s a right time to send them back, it is now,” says Palayam, who works as an auto plant serviceman in Chennai. “We speak with our son twice a day, and as a medical student he probably knows the precautions better than we do, but we’ve still asked him to drink turmeric mixed with warm milk every day to keep infections at bay. There’s nothing more we can do now,” he says.

Back in Wuhan, one of the 13 cities in China shut down following the outbreak, Vishal and his friends have been calling the Indian embassy at Beijing at least four times a day, appealing to them to be transported to India. “As it is, we have no access to facilities here. We’re only asked to stay in our rooms, wear masks and not step out. The university has also only given us basic surgical masks. They say if any of us exhibits symptoms, they’ll look into it. But we’re trying to find a way to not fall ill in the first place,” says a student. “One of our friends had a cough a few days back, and it made us all anxious,” he adds.

Following their constant appeal, the canteen at the university has been opened once a day in the evenings, but all restaurants, shops and transport has been shut down.

An intern from Chennai (who asked not to be named) at the Jiangxi medical hospital in Nanchang, says students have been advised not to travel via Wuhan. “The challenge is that a lay person cannot differentiate between influenza, pneumonia and coronavirus, until they collapse,” he says. He, however, says that Nanchang, which has close to 100 students from Tamil Nadu, is safer. “The government has released emergency numbers that are accessible, and the hospital has provided us with masks,” he says.

P Palanivelu, vice-president of China Tamil Community in Guangzhou province that is home to about 1,000 Tamils including 400 medical students, says people are meticulously following precautions. “They wear masks when they head out and don’t consume game meat,” he said.

Coronavirus has spread to Hong Kong, as well, where most Tamil natives are employed in the IT sector. Mohamed Ismail S M K, Tamil cultural association-Hong Kong president, however, said things were normal in Hong Kong. 

“People are taking all safety measures and we do not see much panic,” he said.

