#LockdownEffect: No Jashn-e-Eid this year
2020-05-22
Every year, there are celebrations galore in Delhi with power-packed 
iftar evenings and Eid lunches. However, celebrations this year are low-key, owing to the pandemic. Delhiites, who either organise these parties or attend them, tell us what are they missing the most about those gatherings.


Virtual Eid celebrations this year 
 


Renu Hussain and 
Shahnawaz Hussain host an Eid lunch every year at their home. Renu tells us, “This year, we’re celebrating Eid at home with only family members. We’ve been hosting Eid parties for the last 20 years, and there have seldom been times when we couldn’t host one. I’m really touched to hear how much my friends are missing celebrating Eid with me. This year I’ll organise a Zoom party with my friends, so we can have a virtual celebration.” 
 


Neelam Pratap Rudy says, “Eid means celebrations with Renu and Shahnawaz Hussain. They are like family to me, and my younger daughter ties a 
rakhi to Renu’s two sons. So for me, it’s like a family event. This will be the first time I won’t be at their place on Eid, but I’ll pray we meet soon and celebrate together.”


'Will miss meeting friends at Eid parties'

 


Leena Singh says, “For me, Eid has always been an occasion to celebrate with my staff, spend time with them and celebrate the rest of the day with my friends at an Eid 
ki dawat. This year, I will greet everyone on phone. What I am already missing is hugs from my friends. Eid 
gale milne ka tyohaar hai and it is sad that we won’t be able to do that this year. I never miss Eid parties because I get to meet all my friends, and we all sit for hours and chat. Also, the food at their Eid parties is the best – I always eat 
jalebi, 
rabri and 
kulfi.” 

 

Though 
Vani Tripathi Tikoo will miss going to Eid and 
iftar parties, she reminds us that the need of the hour is social 
distancing. She says, "It’s important to understand that social distancing is necessary. We haven’t celebrated any festival in the last two months, and we’ll all celebrate Eid at home. However, I’m definitely missing going to 
iftar and Eid parties, the warmth of hosts and meeting my friends."


'I'll miss friends coming over on Eid'

Amaan Ali Bangash says that while he isn’t a regular to Eid parties, he’ll miss the gathering at home. "Eid at home has always been with some close friends, who come home to greet our family, and we have a great time talking and eating good food. This year I’ll miss that human presence. Abhi toh achcha khaana khaane ka bhi mann nahi hai, since there are so many people who aren’t even getting two meals a day. When I was a kid, I remember my father would go to some iftar and Eid parties, but I’ve always loved spending time with family on Eid. This time also, I’ll be with my family and we’ll pray, but will miss the celebrations," he says.


