Madurai: Lockdown impacts summer sales of consumer durables
2020-05-14
MADURAI: Lockdown for more than six weeks during the peak annual summer business season, followed by the economic crisis as a result of job loss and pay cut stares at the consumer electronic goods business. Sale of air conditioners and air coolers that account for a major share of the business has been badly affected and they are unsure of what portion of it could be sold before the end of this month.

“The business is 20 to 30% less compared to the same time last year. But we are not sure whether these customers are only those who wanted to purchase when shutters were down,” says J Johnson managing director of Sathya Agency Private Limited that has a chain of 117 consumer goods stores in the state and Pondicherry. He said that 32 of his outlets are closed due to restrictions due to Covid-19 pandemic.

From observations in the business, which he has been doing for 34 years, he told TOI that air conditioners and air coolers used to account for 30% of the business for nine months a year. “It increases to 45% between March and May along with the soaring temperature. Usually we stock 40,000 AC units for the summer sale from March end, when the companies give us offers,” he said.

Thankfully, for him, the lockdown was announced a week ahead. “So we have only around 20,000 ACs that will be sold in three months as it is sold throughout the year,” he said and added that problem is clearing the stock of air coolers as it is sold only during summer. “We have nearly 6,000 air coolers. If we are unable to sell them by May 31, we have to wait till March 2021,” Johnson added.

C N Saravanan, managing director of Meenakshi Fan House that has a chain of outlets in Southern Tamil Nadu, said that ACs, air coolers and fans account for 70% of their summer business. “We stocked them in March and are paying interest for the loans we have obtained from banks despite inability to sell the products. We cannot blame the government because the whole world is affected,” he said.

Consumer goods outlets have also seen a change in those buying LED televisions. “Usually 32 inch panel televisions account for 50% of the business. Many used to exchange the free televisions given by the government and upgrade. This has dropped heavily. Meanwhile, the share of higher end smart TVs in the range of Rs 50,000 to Rs 2 lakh has increased by 10% to 35%,” owner of a chain said.


