Lockdown adds to cancer patient’s woes
2020-04-17
Ahmedabad: Kaushik Yadav (27) is in a quandary due to the lockdown and coronavirus pandemic. He cannot ensure treatment for his father Ram Prakash Yadav, who is suffering from cancer. He is also unable to take him back to his native place Shikohabad town in western Uttar Pradesh.

Yadav had once tried to take his father to UP, but his vehicle was stopped at Ratanpur, and the Rajasthan police sent them back. The police insisted on Ahmedabad district collector’s consent letter for travel. They refused to accept the medical papers as a valid reason to allow the vehicle to pass through.

Yadav, who works in a garment factory, had called his father from UP after he was detected with cancer. After he was taken to the Gujarat Cancer Research Institute at the Civil Hospital on March 18, the scenario changed due to the nationwide lockdown. GCRI, which treated Ram Prakash, as an outside patient later refused to admit him. “My father’s suffering increased, but because of coronavirus outbreak, the hospital refused to admit any patient. They refused to conduct surgery also. He was given medicine only, whereas he requires chemotherapy and surgery. I got this opinion from a private doctor, but I cannot afford treatment in any private hospital. It is unbearable for me to see him sitting with blood oozing from his mouth, and I cannot do anything,” Yadav said.

He further said that he and his two brothers in Shikohabad decided that their father should be shifted to UP because treatment was not possible in Ahmedabad. 

“I hired a vehicle and left for Shikohabad, but Rajasthan police did not allow us to enter the state. I did not have discharge card because my father was not admitted in the Civil Hospital at all. I have to arrange for the district collector’s permission letter,” Yadav said and added that he visited the collector office ten days ago, but he did not get any response. 

“They told me to apply online, but I need assistance in this process. I have not been able to do it yet,” he said further.


