Lockdown: Mysuru could remain closed beyond April 14
2020-04-06
MYSURU: B Harshavardhan, BJP legislator from Nanjangud, indicated operations at Jubilant Life Sciences plant in the town, the epicentre of a cluster outbreak, will remain closed even if the lockdown is lifted – which is becoming more unlikely with each passing day – on April 14.


An employee of Jubilant – patient 52 – tested positive on March 26 and since then 21 others in the town have tested positive. Senior officials from the health and family welfare department had visited the plant and collected details, but the cause of the outbreak still remains a mystery.


Nanjangud, about 20km from Mysuru, has resembled a ghost town in the past week. Harshavardhan said the pharmaceutical unit will remain shut until a probe to detect how employees were infected concludes. He too suggested P52 could have been infected by a consignment from China, although there is no evidence to prove that theory as yet.

Mysuru deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar last week said the plant was ordered closed, but it had sought time to gradually shutdown operations since stopping them in one go could trigger a chemical accident. The plant employs 1,400 people.

Mysuru district now has a total 28 positive cases, 75% of them from the Nanjangud plant. This could put Mysuru under an extended lockdown to contain the spread of the virus. Authorities tightened restrictions on movement of people over the past few days with all shops, including those that sell groceries, ordered to close by 6 pm.

More than 100 samples – mainly from primary contacts from the Nanjangud firm and delegates of the Tablighi Jamaat meet in New Delhi – are being tested at a Mysuru lab.

More than 750 people are in quarantine in their homes in Nanjangud, while another 100 are housed at a facility in rural Nanjangud. Authorities are distributing food grains, mainly rice, to the doorsteps of people in the town to ensure people do not venture out and to maintain social distancing. Using services of Hopcoms and their personnel, authorities are also delivering vegetables to their doorsteps.

