Lockdown air as clean as it was in 2006
2020-05-21
Nagpur: You are breathing air as clean as it was 14 years back, reveals the first peer-reviewed analysis of the drop in carbon emissions during the Covid-19 lockdown.

Published recently in the UK-headquartered scientific journal Nature Climate Change, the research shows that daily emissions decreased by 17%, or 17 million tonnes of carbon dioxide globally, during the peak of the confinement on April 7, dropping to levels last observed in 2006. 

In India, the maximum emissions drop was 26%. “Government policies during the Covid-19 pandemic have drastically altered patterns of energy demand around the world. Many international borders were closed and populations were confined to their homes, which reduced transport and changed consumption patterns,” the research states.

The decrease in activities led to a significant drop in daily CO2 emissions from different sectors. While emissions from surface transport accounted for almost half (43%) of the decrease in global emissions, those from industry and power together accounted for a further 43% of the decrease in daily global emissions.

Aviation sector is the most impacted by the confinement, but its emissions account for only 3% of global emissions, or 10% of the decrease in global emissions during the pandemic.

According to the analysis, the impact of confinement on annual emissions in 2020 is likely to lead to the largest single annual decrease in absolute emissions since the end of World War II.

However as per the authors, the decrease in emissions this year will not do much to impact climate change as the reduction is “extremely small compared to the emissions accumulated so far and compared to the emissions cuts needed to tackle climate change.” 

The authors warn that the rush for economic stimulus packages must not make future emissions higher by delaying new green deals or weakening emissions standards.

Lead author Prof Corinne Le Quéré, of the University of East Anglia (Norfolk, UK)), says, “Population confinement has led to drastic changes in energy use and CO2 emissions. These extreme decreases are likely to be temporary though as they do not reflect structural changes in the economic, transport, or energy systems. The extent to which world leaders consider climate change when planning their economic responses post Covid-19 will influence the global CO2 emissions paths for decades to come.” 

IN A NUTSHELL

* Daily emissions of CO2 decreased by 17%

* Maximum emissions drop in India | 26%

* Emissions from surface transport accounted for 43% decrease in global emissions

* Industry and power together accounted for 43% decrease

* Aviation sector saw 10% decrease


