Lockdown hits transgenders hard in Bihar
2020-03-31
PATNA: Members of transgender community are facing one of the worst crises in their lives due to nationwide lockdown.

The community members depend on daily earnings through ‘badhai’ visits to families on auspicious occasions like child birth, marriage and a few other holy occasions. Nowadays, their source of income has dried up as they can’t move out.

“Our community members have reached on the verge of starvation as they have been earning nothing since ‘janata curfew’ on March 22,” transgender activist Reshma Prasad told TOI on Monday.

According to Reshma, there are around 40,000 transgenders in Bihar. Of them, around 2,500 live in Patna district alone and only 60 to 70 live with their biological families. 

“Most of the transgenders reside in groups with their ‘guru’ in different localities of the state capital. Most of them live in rented accommodations. Some of them live in slum areas as they have low income. Their main source of income is through ‘Badhai’ visits or dance performance. Around 800 to 900 members residing in the state capital are solely dependent on the Badhai earnings,” Reshma, who is also the secretary of Dostana Safar, a community based social organization, told TOI.

“As they are following the government’s guidelines during the lockdown, their only source of income has dried up,” said another transgender activist Anupriya Singh. “Those living with ‘gharana’ of their gurus are worst sufferers, as they cannot move out due to the lockdown,” Singh said.

Santosh Guru, who heads a family of around 20 transgender people in Mithapur area, said, “When people are not coming out of their homes, to whom we will seek financial assistance. In the last seven days, we spent whatever little savings we had. With no concrete help coming from the government side, we are now on the verge of starvation,” she said over the phone.

“We live in a rented house at Mithapur and pay Rs5,000 per month. In general days, we cook meals ourselves. Sometimes we take meals at roadside eateries. Due to lockdown, all eateries are now closed. We are running our kitchens by taking grocery items on credit from nearby shops. If the grocery shopowner stops giving us credit, we will die of starvation,” Santosh said. 

“With the assistance of Dostana safar, the Bihar Electric Traders’ Association on last Friday distributed packets of grocery items among the community members. But such assistance is not enough. More social organizations should come forward to help out the community members,” said Dimple Jasmine, another transgender activist. 


