Lockdown ‘unclogs’ sewer lines in Thiruvananthapuram
2020-04-23
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The sewerage division of Kerala water authority (KWA) is having a trouble-free time during the lockdown. Just like KWA, which is getting fewer complaints over non-availability of water due to closure of commercial institutions, sewerage department is recording fewer cases of blocks in sewer lines.

Senior officials of sewerage division of KWA said that though they are attending complaints on time even during lockdown, cases of overflowing of sewer line or blockades are few. 

“Due to the lockdown, majority of restaurants are not functioning in the city. Despite several attempts to prevent it, restaurants used to dump their waste into sewer lines, thereby causing blockades and overflowing of manholes. There is drastic reduction in number of such cases,” said an official.

Regarding reports that irresponsible dumping of waste is causing blockades in sewers, officials said that the number of cases of waste dumping too have reduced due to lockdown.

 “No cases of dumping of masks or other waste into sewer lines came to our notice,” said officials.

Though there is relief regarding regular maintenance works, the department is not able to start pre-monsoon maintenance works due to the lockdown. 

“The cleaning of sewers, including work to remove all accumulated waste, was completed in several wards around Attukal temple prior to the pongala festival. Now, works are pending in areas in and around Sastamangalam. We are planning to take up the works when government announces relaxation in lockdown norms. The contractors assigned for each area will be responsible for works,” officials said.

Meanwhile, the sewage treatment plant (STP) which began its operations in June 2013 continues to work during lockdown without any break. Officials of STP said that staff were provided pass for essential services and are working in various shifts to ensure continuous functioning of the plant, which has a capacity to treat 107 million litres of sewage per day. Due to poor sewerage connectivity, only around 75MLD is reaching the plant for treatment. 

“The amount of sewage reaching the plant is almost the same even after lockdown. Earlier, there was a peak hour when sewage flow will be maximum during the morning when people get ready for school or office. Now the flow is almost consistent throughout the day,” officials said.

