Lockdown effect: Parks in city suffer due to lack of upkeep
2020-04-18
Ludhiana: Despite imposition of curfew, the park management committees (PMC) are trying to manage the greenery in the parks around their localities, but they have to deal with horticulture waste that is being collected in large quantities both inside and outside the parks. Some have made pits inside parks to collect dry leaves and fallen branches. And some PMCs complained that they did not get payment from the civic body for maintaining parks so they are managing from their own resources. 

Baljeet Singh, a resident of BRS Nagar H block, who is general secretary of park management committee, said, “We are able to manage one park only while park under our management is getting buried under heaps of dry leaves and other horticulture waste.” He said after December 2019 they did not get any payment from the civic body to maintain two parks in the locality. He said since gardeners are not allowed to work during curfew in his area, even cutting grass has become a huge task. He claimed that at least gardeners should be allowed to come. 

Meanwhile, Dr D B Pandhi from Lajpat Nagar, said, “We dug two pits to collect dry leaves and other horticulture waste. Initially, there was problem of gardeners. I sorted it out after contacting the civic body officials.” 

According to him, they get Rs 3,000 the from civic body sporadically but this amount goes to gardener and other tasks like plantation they are collect money among themselves. Dr Pandhi said earlier the gates of park were locked, but now they have opened one gate and people are being allowed inside on condition of social distancing. 

A member of Kitchlu Nagar welfare association, Varinder Bhakoo said, “Our park is being managed by gardener appointed by the civic body because one park is under MC maintenance and he comes on alternate days so we are managing things.” He said these days people avoid coming to parks in large number, as only a few could be seen coming for the morning or evening walks. 

When contacted, supervisor of horticulture branch, Kripal Singh, said, “From almost over a month, we are stuck in curfew so may be some payments of PMCs can be pending. Regarding horticulture waste too, trolleys are being sent to lift waste in the last few days.”


