Lockdown blues: Stray dogs attack people after food scarcity
2020-05-11
Ranchi: Recently, two people suffered dog bites in Doranda and Hawai Nagar areas of the capital city. There have been reports of stray dog menace from other parts of Ranchi as well. Veterinarians and members of NGOs working for stray animals here attribute the apparent rise in dog bite cases to the ongoing lockdown. They said the closure of road-side eateries and restaurants has cut off a major source of food for the strays, which has, in turn, heightened the “attacking instinct” among the dogs. 

Talking to TOI, veterinary officer of a Ranchi-based pet clinic, Dr Sameer Sahay, said: “There are two major reasons for the increase in dog bite incidents. “Stray dogs always fight among themselves for food, but they do not attack humans if food is available in sufficient quantity. But when food is scarce, they become agitated and attack people. The second reason could be the soaring temperature, which has made them more anxious.”

A person who was recently bitten by a stray said the dogs chased him because he did not have enough food to feed all of them. “I was feeding chapatis to two dogs near my house and all of a sudden, other strays in the area crowded us. I tried to shoo them away as I did not have any food left, but they chased me and one of them bit me,” said Anil Kumar, a resident of Shivpurio colony in Hinoo.

Notably, many NGOs and dog lover groups were feeding the stray dogs during the initial phase of the nationwide lockdown. But with their resources drying up and no support from the government forthcoming, many have been forced to stop their activities.

Somen Majumdar, who has been running a dog shelter in Angara for more than six years, said, “I rescued more than two dozen stray dogs and also fed hundreds across the city for more than a fortnight. But with our coffers running dry, I had to suspend the operation. I hope that the administration will take some measures to protect stray animals in the city.”


