Lockdown effect: Nomadic tribes in Rajasthan struggle for survival
2020-06-05
JAIPUR: Pandemic has hit nomadic tribes in Rajasthan hard. The two-month lockdown has forced them to live in temporary sheds and trek long distances to reach home. 


Nayak Bhopa, a semi-nomadic community, is mostly staying in tents on the outskirts of the city or villages. They are surviving on donations received from the government and generous people. Travelling to different places, Bhopas sing in front of phad (a scroll) depicting story of a deity, are now barely making their ends meet.

Plight of migrant workers has been on news as they are travelling on foot long distance to reach home. Not many are aware that migrant workers include nomadic tribe as well. Many of these workers are under huge debt taken during the lockdown.

Dhanraj Kalbeliya, from Bundi explains that hundreds of Kalbeliya community workers are travelling from all over the country on foot to reach Rajasthan. “I believe 70% of our people do not have permanent house. Most of us have no documents and survive on daily wages we receive performing dance in front of tourists. We expect tourism will not revive in future. People in our community who have permanent houses are travelling back on foot sometimes for 20 days to get back home. We need some support from the government as lockdown has completely destroyed our livelihood,” said Kalbeliya.

Cultural activist and anthropologist Madan Meena, who have been working with nomadic communities, explains, “There is an urgent need to give special attention towards these tribes as lockdown has hit them hard. Rajasthan has maximum number of nomadic tribes in the country. Without any source of income from tourism and cultural events, state government need to provide some assistance immediately.”

There is a De-notified Nomadic Tribe (DNT) Board in Rajasthan which is not functioning for many years.

Gopal Kesawat, former chairman of this board says, “Without any chairman or budget allocation the DNT board is not functioning. Most of the nomadic tribes perform in cultural events and are daily wagers. Nat community people used to perform on street and in circuses are all out of work. I believe that if period of pandemic increases, nomadic tribes will be infected in maximum numbers. Government needs to allocate special budget for these tribes or they will die of starvation.”

Other nomadic tribes are Kanjar, Nat, Banjara, Jogis, Garasia, Gadiya Lohar and others.

