Lockdown hits production of Buransh squash, livelihood of many affected
2020-04-29
ALMORA: The ongoing Covid-19 lockdown is severely affecting earnings of people who are involved in either the production or sale of Buransh (Rhododendron) squash in hills.


Despite Buransh blooming in forests, they are not being collected due to the Covid-19 lockdown. This has caused supply disruptions for factories where Buransh squash is processed. 

Sanjeev Bhagat, the owner of Fruitage Nainital Food Products, a renowned brand of local fruit products, told TOI, “As a precautionary measure, we had stopped operations in our factory before the lockdown was imposed by the government. Since then, our factory has remained shut.” He added that without getting supply of Buransh, which blooms in this season, squash can’t be made. “We are not even getting the supply of flowers and preservative chemicals that are used in the processing of squash,” said Bhagat.

Besides more than two dozen employees who work at different units of Fruitage, the income of rural women who collect Buransh from jungle has also been impacted due to the lockdown. 

Bhagat told TOI that the coronavirus outbreak started hitting his business since February as supplies from China had got disrupted. “I placed order for some preservative chemicals in January and they were to be supplied here by the first week of February. However, the Delhi-based supplier cancelled my order saying that he hasn’t got any supply from China due to the outbreak of coronavirus,” Bhagat informed.

“This time of the year, I used to buy Buransh flowers from the people of my village and from surrounding villages. One kilogram of this flower usually costs Rs 20. We used to collect 30–40 quintal of this flower. Subsequently, we used to sell them to local processing units. However, the lockdown has hindered our work this year,” said Dhan Singh, a resident of the Sundarkhal Village of Mukteshwar. Notably, Singh is also a resource person for Fruitage and other such factories in the area. 

“We used to earn some money by collecting flowers but this year, we have not been able to make anything,” said Lalita Devi, a local of Sundarkhal village.


