Lockdown won’t be extended, says Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain
2020-06-13
NEW DELHI: Amid widespread speculation that the city may undergo another phase of economic lockdown, health minister Satyendar Jain made it clear on Friday that “the lockdown in Delhi will no longer be extended”.


Following central guidelines to ease the anti-corona lockdown, Delhi government started opening up economic activities on a large scale from May 18, followed by more relaxations from June 1. Finally, all malls, restaurants and religious places were allowed to operate while adhering to strict safety norms from this Monday. 

In the meantime, the number of Covid-19 cases in Delhi are also increasing rapidly. While till June 1, the capital had 20,834 positive cases and 523 deaths, the counts stood at 34,687 and 1,085, respectively, on June 11, prompting the speculation. At 1,877 new cases, Thursday also recorded the highest number of positive cases in a single day.

However, Jain said, “We have to see the context of the situation. The corona pandemic has been the worst disease to have hit the humankind in the past 100 years. Around 100 years ago, a virus known as Spanish Flu of the same intensity spread across the world.” 

“To say that the case count is more in Delhi and less everywhere else is not correct,” the health minister said. “The case count across different nations can be different, which is also true for various cities... The cities that have been hit by the pandemic much later are witnessing a stark rise in the case count, but the intensity of the spread of the disease is the same,” he claimed. 

The government is making preparations to deal with the increasing numbers, Jain said. “Beds and ventilators will be increased. The Centre has also told us that they will ensure full cooperation, so we will seek their help. Its hospitals have a lot of ICU beds. There are around 13,000 beds in the central government hospitals, we would like to request the Centre to use those beds for Covid-19 treatment,” he said.

The government has also identified places such as banquet and community halls and stadiums to create additional beds and run temporary hospitals, said Jain. An official said the identified facilities can accommodate 27,000 beds — 12,000 in banquets halls, 10,000 in religious institutes like dharamshala and 2,500 in Pragati Maidan and Talkatora Stadium each. Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal is likely to go out to identify more such facilities .

“A total of 80% beds in the Covid-19 dedicated Delhi government hospitals are oxygen beds, and we are also preparing oxygen beds in non-dedicated hospitals,” said Jain.

