Lockdown 4.0: Entire Agra city to remain under containment zone
2020-05-20
AGRA: Agra city, Covid-19 epicentre in Uttar Pradesh, has now been marked as a containment zone under lockdown 4.0. Apart from this, 13 other rural areas in the district have also been marked as containment zones. According to the district administration, no relaxation will be allowed in these areas.


Besides all the 100 municipal wards of the city, areas of the district which were marked containment zones include Nagla Kali on Deori road; Rajrai village in Barauli Ahir block, Fatehpur Sikri; village Jarua Katra in Akola block; Jharpura village and Bamrauli Katara under Sadar sub-division; Tapra village in Bichpuri block, Arsena village in Achnera block; Dhaurra village in Khandauli block; Shyamo village and Nadhot in Baroli block; Gadi Khandera village under Shamshabad block; Shashtri Nagar in Baroli Aheer block and Pathauli in Bichpuri village.

According to the directives issued by the district administration, people above 65 years of age, those having multiple health issues, pregnant women and children below 10 years of age (exception for health-related requirements) are prohibited to step out of their homes.

No one will be allowed to use a vehicle between 7pm to 7am, except in case of emergency. Restaurants and sweet shops outside the containment zones will be operating, but customers’ entry is not allowed. These setups will provide home delivery services. Marriage venues outside the containment zones will be operational, but maximum 20 people will be allowed to attend an event after the district magistrate grants permission.

The 14-point directive also mentions that only one person will be allowed on a two-wheeler. Besides driver, only two people will be allowed to travel in a car or auto. All social, religious and political gatherings will remain prohibited across the district.

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “The entire city and small parts of rural areas of the district are in the containment zone. In areas outside the containment zones, majority of the businesses will be allowed to operate with some restrictions. We will also organise meetings with the business and market organization leaders.”

