Lockdown: Chandigarh Congress president Pardeep Chhabra sends memorandum to UT administrator VP Singh Badnore
2020-05-20
CHANDIGARH: Chandigarh Congress President Pardeep Chhabra on Tuesday sent a Memorandum to UT administrator, VP Singh Badnore with suggestions for combating the hardships faced by residents due to prolonged lockdown and to boost the local economy after the lockdown.

Chhabra said that everyone is aware that in the wake of COVID-19 pandemic, India is facing massive economic burden and the citizens of India are also under immense financial strain because of the prolonged lockdown.

As a solution to this issue, Chandigarh Territorial Congress Committee presented its recommendations to the Chandigarh Administration to combat the hardships being faced by the residents of Chandigarh and to boost the local economy along with different viable solutions to the issues raised.

The suggestion is that no school fees should be charged upon the students for the Lockdown Period of 2 months, April and May. Chhabra pointed that the State Governments of Punjab and Rajasthan have already ordered the complete fee waiver during the lockdown period, and so we demand that similar directives should be adopted in Chandigarh too, in order to relieve a considerable proportion of economic burden on parents in this phase of hardship. But, at the same time, the administration must also ensure that the schools duly pay the salaries to the staff. “besides the schools, it must also be ensured that in order to mitigate the loss suffered by both the employer and employees during the lockdown, the financial burden should be shared equally amongst the employer, the employee and the government. The government should waive off the electricity charges, water bills of the business enterprises for this time period of the lockdown”, Chhabra said.

Another suggestion Congress gave that Congress is for the Tenants (Residential or Commercial), who have to pay monthly rent for their shops or business premises or residential accommodation and are also facing excessive losses because of the lockdown. In this case, Congress recommended that the burden of loss must not be borne by any one individual and on humanitarian grounds, the burden should be shared equally by the tenant and the owner of that particular property.

Chhabra said that they have requested the Chandigarh administrator to ponder upon these recommendations thoroughly and deliberate on them, because, if implemented properly, these recommendations will not just ease the burden on various segments of residents in Chandigarh, but, they shall also prove highly effective in combating the economic slowdown by boosting the local economy of Chandigarh.

