Lockdown separates mothers and daughters across the border
2020-04-17
Nagpur: “There is no problem as such, my daughter is safe with my husband in Aurangabad, but then I am longing to be with her,” says Amarta Haswani before breaking down. The lockdown has left Amarta stranded at Jarwar town in Sindh province of Pakistan while her four-year-old daughter remains in India. Amarta reached Pakistan on March 10 and planned to return to India in 10 days after attending her brother’s marriage. The borders were sealed during this period. Her daughter needs medical attention, which includes administering injections. “ I am managing but after all there can be no alternative to mother’s care,” her husband Sunil tells TOI from Aurangabad.The international borders too have been sealed after the lockdown to contain spread of Covid-19. This has left a number of Indians, especially Hindus from Sindh living in India on long term visas (LTV), held up in Pakistan. While on LTV, they can make brief visits to Pakistan on No Objection Return to India (NORI) visas which are valid for three months. TOI had on April 4 reported about their condition after being stranded in Pakistan. At that time, like in India it was also expected in Pakistan that the lockdown may be lifted after April 14, and borders may open too. Their hopes have dashed due to extension of lockdown.As many as 36 of the Sindhi Hindus in India are from Nagpur. The biggest worry for most of them is that they may lose the chance to get citizenship under CAA if their stay exceeds three months under NORI visa. The earlier period which qualified them for CAA will not be counted then.Meanwhile, Pakistan has facilitated the return of its 180 citizens who were stranded in India.“I made several calls to the Indian embassy at Islamabad but none picked up,” says Amarta. Her husband was already staying on LTV in India as she joined him after marriage eight years ago.TOI came across one more case of a mother being separated from her daughter across the border due to the lockdown. Chanda Mandar and her husband are in Shikarpur city of Sindh, where they had gone to attend a marriage leaving their two-year-old daughter behind because she did not have a passport. The toddler is now in the care of Chanda’s in-laws in Jalgaon.“She is comfortable because my relatives are there but we are missing her. I am feeling bad about having left her in India. wish she was with us,” says Chanda. An official at the Indian embassy’s helpline said there was no travel advisory received yet. “If their NORI visas were ending they can apply for a fresh one,” he said.