Lockdown brings city to standstill, but migrants’ march to safety continues
2020-03-30
Prayagraj: Adequate police force was deployed at Civil Lines bus station and adjoining areas on Sunday to regulate flow of migrant labourers who are reaching the city from different parts of the state. Two medical teams have also been deployed at the bus station to examine their health condition.

As the nationwide lockdown enforced in view of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic entered the fifth day on Sunday, over 70 city residents were booked for flouting rules. The accused were charged under Section 188 (violation of norms) of the Indian Penal Code.

SSP, Prayagraj, Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj told TOI that around 20 buses have brought scores of migrant labourers at Civil Lines bus station. “A large posse of policemen, including an additional SP, two deputy SPs, five inspector and 200 constables, were deployed there to regulate migrant workers,” he added.

Besides, two medical teams were engaged to check migrant labouers who were later shifted to temporary shelter camps in different parts of the city. The local thana police with the help of NGOs are taking care of migrant labourers and offering them eatables and other necessary items. Netram, a migrant labourer, said “I arrived Prayagraj from Lucknow on a government bus and wants to go to my native town in Satna. However, I and my family members have been asked to stay at a shelter home. We are offered meal by some people.”

Balak ram, another migrant labouer, said “ I reached lucknow from Barielly on foot and wanted to go Rewa”. He added, “A roadways bus brought us to Prayagraj. We requested police authorities to arrange another bus so that we would reach Rewa. However, the cops brought us to a temporary shelter point.”

More migrant labourers were spotted moving on Varanasi-Kanpur highway as they wanted to walk down to Jalaun. Mukesh , a migrant worker, said“ We started our journey from Varanasi on Saturday morning and reached Prayagraj on Sunday and would be travelling on foot to Jalaun”. He also said that he had no money. “Some people gave us food at Handia when we were on way to Prayagraj.”

Migrant labourers, however, demanded local authorities to make arrangement to send them to their native towns in Rewa, Satna, Meja, Manda and adjoining areas.

Meanwhile, eight police teams were deployed at wholesale vegetable markets, including Mundera Mandi, Daraganj and Hashimpur crossing, on Sunday for better crowd management. Vendors were also asked to maintain proper distance from one another.

SSP, meanwhile, said mobile police teams have stepped up checking in areas like Shivkuti, Muttiganj Nawabganj, Khuldabad, Shahganj, Khiri, Mauaima and Manda. He added that over 5400 vehicles were checked in different parts of the city. “While 635 of them were challaned for flouting rules, 25 vehicles were seized,” he added.

Like the past four days, city streets wore a deserted look on Sunday as local residents stayed indoors. Shops selling medicines and groceries were open from 7am to 10pm.

Meanwhile, the district administration on Sunday issued corona medical control helpline numbers 0532-2266098 and 0532-2266099, corona administrative control room numbers 0532-2641577 and 0532-2641578 and in-charge of control room 9544178813.


