Lockdown hit Telangana economy hard, but will bounce back: FM Harish Rao
2020-05-07
The state’s revenues hit a new low during the lockdown with just 17% of monthly average collections in April, says finance minister T Harish Rao. 



Claiming that the government will work out a bailout package by discussing it with industry experts on revival of economy, the minister tells Koride Mahesh that Telangana will bounce back soon. His hope stems from the fact that during natural calamities, the loss is enormous and in this case, it can be bridged. Excerpts from the interview.


What is the overall impact of Covid-19 and lockdown on state’s economy? 

The state’s revenues were badly impacted since March 15 after the lockdown was imposed in the state. The government gets Rs 10,800 crore a month on account of GST, excise, stamps and registration, mining and other heads. In April, Telangana earned only Rs 1,700 crore. But, the government’s monthly commitments are intact such as Aasara pension (Rs 875 crore), salaries and pensions (Rs 1,800 crore), power subsidies (Rs 850 crore), rice subsidy (Rs 600 crore), etc. Apart from this, Rs 2,300 crore interest goes towards loan payment. An amount of Rs 1,200 crore was released for Rs 1,500 financial assistance to 80 lakh ration card holders for two months. Apart from this, Rs 1,200 crore was released for loan waiver scheme. 


Does the state have plans to impose special coronavirus fee or tax on the lines of Delhi government?

The state government hiked 16% on liquor prices on popular brands and 11% on cheap liquor. It is like coronavirus fee only. As of now, the government has no such plans on collecting special fee from other sectors.


A couple of months ago, CM announced that there would be a hike in property tax, land market value for property registrations and power tariff. Will government go ahead with its plan?

If one sector is affected, the government can recover it by enhancing charges or taxes. Every sector has suffered due to Covid-19 pandemic. The CM will take a call on this. Before taking any decision, the government will elicit views from industry and several experts. For instance, on increasing the market value prices, the government will take the opinion of TREDA and other real estate bodies. 


KCR has made suggestions for revival of economy in the country and also called for handholding of states. Has the state got any assurance on this?

The CM suggested four to five measures such as increasing FRBM limit from current 3% to 3.5% of GSDP, deferment of loan instalments to be paid by the state government, helicopter money to rescue state governments and clearing of Rs 1,500 crore GST and IGST arrears. The Centre released only Rs 269 crore in the first week of April. It is unfortunate that Centre has not responded to our requests. Even for transporting migrant workers, we paid Rs 5 crore advance to SCR.

Is there any proposal on increased focus on health and medical department in the wake of Covid-19? 

Health has been a priority sector for the Telangana government. KCR Kits, Basti Dawakhanas and equipment and infrastructure development in hospitals have all been part of this endeavour. The government has spent over Rs 1,000 crore to procure PPEs, N95 masks, ventilators and for developing a Covid-19 hospital at Gachibowli and augmenting facilities in existing hospitals.

