Lockdown effect? Big cats move out of buffer zones
2020-06-08
Bareilly: The prolonged lockdown on human activity since March has given wildlife, including big cats, a chance to roam about freely away from the buffer forest areas and venture near human settlements in Uttar Pradesh. This has increased the risk of man-animal conflict. On Sunday, a tiger prowling about in a social forestry area attacked a farmer in Lakhimpur Kheri district while a five-year-old girl, who was playing outside her house, was injured by a leopard in Bareilly's Bahedi area on Saturday night.

The incident in Kheri district was reported from Sundarpur village, near Maheshpur range. Susheel Kumar, a farmer, was working on his farmland when a tiger attacked him. Kumar managed to flee but was injured. He is admitted at the district hospital. 

Earlier, a tiger had killed a labourer and injured a man besides attacking the cattle at another village. Both villages are within 5-km radius of Maheshpur range.

Forest department has installed camera traps in the area and are using drone cameras to track the tiger. A cage has been placed to trap it. 

Ravi Shukla, sub-divisional officer, South Kheri forest division, told TOI, “The farmer was attached nearly a kilometre outside the forest. We are monitoring the movement of the tiger to minimize man-animal conflict.” 

In Bareilly, a leopard attacked a five-year-old girl at Jawaharpur village of Bahedi tehsil on Saturday night. Bahedi shares its border with Uttarakhand and has a rich social forestry range.

The girl's father, Hariram, said the big cat was lurking amid the bushes of a nearby field and suddenly charged at his daughter. It tried to drag her away, "but we managed to rescue her", he said. The girl has sustained multiple injuries. Now, the entire village is terrified of a similar attack.

Bharat Lal, DFO, Bareilly, said, “Our team has found the pugmarks of a leopard and efforts are on to track it. We may initiate a rescue operation if needed after seeking approval from the PCCF.”

Earlier on June 4, a two-year-old leopard attacked and injured six people, including a forest guard and a policeman, at Durgagaudi village, situated on the fringes of Katarniaghat forest range in Kheri district. 

On June 3, a six-year-old boy was killed by a big cat at Dalapurva village, situated on Kheri-Bahraich border and adjacent to Dhaurahra range of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve.


