Lockdown effect: Retailers eye renegotiating contracts at malls
2020-05-10
Ahmedabad: With malls remaining shut since the lockdown and both organized and unorganized retail getting adversely affected, retailers at malls are considering renegotiating their renewal contracts. Mall owners indicate that several retailers are proposing to go by the revenue sharing model instead of paying fixed rent because revenue projections for retailers appear weak in the coming months. In fact, malls are also anticipating a huge drop in footfall at the malls owing to social distancing norms made more stringent.Retailers are reeling from severe revenue crunch with many of them failing to pay the rent for April. “We have received requests from several retailers to renegotiate the rental contracts and shift to a revenue-sharing model. We understand it is a tough time for retailers with zero revenue and we have assured to support them in whatever way possible. Summer months also coincide with school and college vacations and therefore the footfall is usually higher. However, with the lockdown, we have completely lost out on this business,” said Aditya Shah, CFO, Gulmohar Park Mall in Ahmedabad.Mall owners estimate that revenues will be dented by at least 40% for the year 2020 not only due to the impact of closure but also due to a likely decline in footfall even after the malls open.“Footfall will remain low-key even when the malls open as consumer behaviour may change and people may be wary. These are very uncertain times and we cannot really predict how the situation will unfold,” said Jayen Naik, senior vice president, Ahmedabad One Mall.Industry players say sales will remain lukewarm because people will prioritize essential requirements over binge shopping. Mall owners also said that a number of small retailers and local brands are mulling over shutting down as they are unable to sustain operating costs in absence of revenue.“Retailers are facing major revenue problems. Some 30% of small retailers and stores are considering shutting down. While prominent brands have not decided to shut down as yet, smaller ones are considering that option,” said Jayesh Kotak, managing director, Iscon Group, which manages Iscon Mega Mall.