Lockdown violators will not be spared, warns district collector
2020-03-30
Kolhapur: District collector Daulat Desai has warned of stern action against those who violate the current lockdown situation across the district and the state. 

In view of the rising number of returning citizens from Mumbai and Pune, he said, “Many public representatives, institutions, and elite citizens have been found to be giving out letters for the returning citizens to enter the district amid curfew, thus violating it. Such individuals, public representatives and institutes will face consequences, including criminal action.”

He has given the instructions to superintendent of police Abhinav Deshmukh stating that those returning from Mumbai and Pune with any letter will face action. “Any citizens returning from Mumbai and Pune and showing any such letter will face action, including the ones who have recommended them the letter, and their vehicle will also be impounded,” he said.

He added that curfew has been imposed to contain the spread of coronavirus infection. However, people returning to the city and district may create law and order situation which will not be tolerated. It could result in an increase in the spread of the infection which can destabilize the current health situation in the region.

He has appealed to the individuals, public representatives, and institutions not to issue any such letters and to take back those that have already been issued.

Desai, on Sunday, said that the work related to the national and state highway, electricity, telecommunication, water supply and cleanliness should be completed at the earliest to provide essential services. 

Meanwhile, Minakshi Gajbhiye, dean of Rajarshi Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj Government Medical College and Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya (CPR) spoke about the current situation of the swab samples. She said that they have sent around 63 swab samples to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune and are awaiting results.

According to Gajbhiye, there is shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE), however, the Kolhapur zilla parishad has agreed to provide them with the kits at the earliest.


