Lockdown & corona fear stopping them from bidding last goodbye to loved ones
2020-05-12
Nagpur: The fear of the coronavirus, the lockdown and the limit of 20 are stopping people from saying their final goodbyes to their loved ones. It’s emotionally more painful for those who could not make it for the funeral or the last rites of their parents or family members as travelling from one city to another was impossible despite a pass as public transport — road, rail and air — had come to a standstill.

Sangeeta Mangalkar, who lost her father, will carry the bitterness for life as she could not see him for one last time. “We couldn’t even travel by car. Getting emergency passes was not easy. The body couldn’t be kept for many days. I wish it was easy to travel by car. I was having cough and cold and hence, doctors advised me against travelling,” she said.

City businessman Inderjeet Singh Baweja lost his elder brother on April 26. The deceased’s sisters couldn’t say their final goodbyes. The Bawejas were, however, firm on following the norms issued by the government and made sure that not more than 20 were present for the last rites. “Our other relatives joined us for the last rites, but sadly, my sisters could not come from Delhi. We also requested many of our well-wishers not to come over to our residence due to the norms. It’s heartbreaking because all the family members could not be present,” said Baweja.

Mangal Raut has been working at a crematorium for over 20 years. He said that the number of visitors has reduced drastically, from an average 135-140 to 40-50. “Every month, 100-odd deceased are brought for cremation, but now, the numbers have gone down. Not more than 20 people come for the last rites of a deceased. It’s good that people are following the rules, but it’s also sad at the same time,” said Raut.

Not a single patient, who has died of a heart problem, sugar or any other health issue, has been cremated at the ghat since the lockdown. “As people are at home, life expectancy has increased. They are happy and have all the facilities,” feels Raut. 

Dr Harshwardhan Barihat lost his father on May 5. Many of his relatives could not make it to the city to pay their last respects. “Getting emergency passes and travelling overnight was not feasible for them. Many of our family members live in the city, but still could not attended the last rites as only 20 are allowed,” he said.

Cop Shashikant Awasthi lost his mother, but made sure that rules weren’t broken. His mother’s sisters and close friends could not bid her adieu. “Travelling across the state is very risky. It was a painful situation. We haven’t immersed the ashes yet. We need family support.” he said and made sure that the 10th and 13th day custom of feeding family members was performed with covid distancing.

Rajesh Paunikar’s close friend passed away a few days back. Despite being in town, he chose not to attend the last rites as his friend’s 15-20 relatives were already present. “The fear of the pandemic has become so rigid in our brains that we ourselves avoid going to public places. I couldn’t attend the last rites of my dear friend as the lockdown was enforced and cops were patrolling all the streets,” he said.


