Lockdown halts routine immunization programmes for kids
2020-04-08
Ranchi: The routine immunization programme for children, carried out in Jharkhand by the state health, medical education and family welfare department, has come to a halt amid the nationwide lockdown imposed to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus. The programmes, which involves vaccinating newborns, infants and children up to five years of age, have been shelved since March 26 after the Union ministry of health and family welfare issued a directive in this regard to all the states. 

The World Health Organisation has made it very clear that no essential health services, particularly immunisation and childbirth care, should be affected during lockdown. Its director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, even issued a statement to that effect on March 30.

The year-round immunization drive, which played a critical role in lowering Jharkhand's infant mortality and under-five mortality rates in the last decade, include administering vaccines for measles, influenza, polio, Japanese encephalitis, diphtheria, tuberculosis, hepatitis and rotavirus among others.

In the hinterland of Jharkhand, the auxiliary nurse midwives (ANM) are in charge of administering the vaccines to children at panchayat and block levels through the 38,000-odd Anganwadi centres being run by the department of women and child development. Since March 22, these centres are temporarily shut to comply with the lockdown. 

"The routine immunization drive, carried out by anganwadi centres through village health and nutrition day (VHND) camps, has been halted till further orders. We were told carrying on with the programme would be a violation of the lockdown," Dr Amar Kumar Mishra, the state immunization officer, told TOI. The camps could also cause community transmission of Covid-19 if any undetected person attended any such programme, he said. Villages also boycotted the health workers in early days of lockdown. "In various pockets of the district, locals boycotted VHND in apprehensions of Covid-19 spread," Ranchi civil surgeon Dr V B Prasad said.

While VHNDs have been suspended indefinitely, community health centres and district hospitals have been asked to carry on with the immunization. “But there has hardly been any footfall in these facilities since lockdown,” another official said. 

As per estimates, 8.5 lakh children are born in Jharkhand every year through institutional deliveries. The Rotavirus vaccine, launched in 2018 to fight diarrhoea among infants, is administered to children within 1.5 months of their birth. Diarrhoea kills 30,000 children below five annually in state, as per Unicef data. 

As per NHFS data, 30 out of every 1,000 infants die in Jharkhand's rural areas each year. Around 165 mothers die in every one lakh deliveries in the state each year.

Besides critical vaccines for children, the tetanus diphtheria vaccine, which is administered to pregnant women in their first two trimesters, has also been put on hold. 

Conceding that the break in the immunization programme could become a big issue, Mishra said: "Hospitals have been directed to administer zero dosage to newborns. As soon as the lockdown ends, we will begin the programme from where we left."


