Lockdown Day 1: Apprehension, caution and questions
2020-03-17
AHMEDABAD: Aniket Rawal, 38, a resident of New Ranip, was surprised on being greeted with a thermal scanner at a supermarket near his home on Monday. “I was also told to sanitize my hands and the guard at the gate asked about my travel history. I thought that such questions were reserved for hospitals, but this was happening right near my home, COVID-19 awareness has hit home,” he said.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Rawal was not alone. Several Amdavadis on Monday, Day 1 of the ‘COVID-19 lockdown,’ saw precautions at every step. With schools and colleges closed, campuses were deserted. While malls have not been put under lockdown, the majority of them saw a steep fall in visitor numbers. A few visitors were also seen with masks. 


 
All public swimming pools were closed since Monday morning. Several gym chains followed suit and closed operations till March 31.

 At Income Tax Crossroads, the joint enforcement team (JET) of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) and Ahmedabad city police caught multiple offenders for spitting in public. “The majority of them claimed that ignorance about the proscription and promised not to repeat the act. We caught five persons in the matter of an hour,” said a JET member.

“We know there is not a single confirmed positive case so far, but the preparations and the lockdown are worrisome. From the media in the morning to senior citizen meetings in the evenings, I can’t get away from it. Hopefully, the stringent actions initiated by the state government will yield the desired results,” said Sunanda Singh, a resident of South Bopal.

Several city-based NGOs started distributing protective masks and sanitizers besides spreading awareness. At the Lal Darwaja AMTS bus depot, a water jug was repurposed to serve as a hand sanitizer dispenser for the masses.

Visits curtailed

SAL Hospital on Monday informed relatives of patients that meetings during visiting hours had been suspended as a precaution. Chirag Rajput, vice president, SAL Hospital, told TOI that the step aimed to ensure minimal contact with patients in need of critical care. “We have also asked the existing patients to avoid OPD visits if there is no major change in their health condition,” he said. 


