Lockdown within lockdown: The day Madurai stood still
2020-04-27
Madurai: State government’s blanket lockdown received good cooperation as people obeyed the rules staying home for the day. A few vehicles seen on the road were used by those involved in essential works, who have been exempted by the government.

Except for the police enforcing the lockdown and sanitary workers, major junctions sported a deserted look. Only medical stores remained open but hardly a few people turned up to buy medicine. Police officials said the empty roads had a feel of the Janata curfew observed on March 22.

Traffic deputy police commissioner K Sugumaran said, “There was a complete cooperation from the public on the day one of the complete lockdown. Only a few people like corporation employees, tele communication, internet and government officials were on the roads. We made usual police deployment throughout the city to ensure lockdown,” he said.

Madurai corporation quietly delivered vegetables at doorsteps in both containment areas and all parts of the city through vehicles. Those, who were assigned the job of delivering essentials at containment areas, have been provided with personnel protection equipment. Volunteers involved in helping poor and providing food for stray dogs carried out work as usual. P R Vishwanath of Thirunagar Pakkam, an NGO, said police allowed them to carry out their regular work of feeding the poor. “We did not find any difficulty in moving around as we are familiar with the police in our area,” he said.

A meeting convened by zonal task force formed to prevent covid-19 spread held at Madurai district collector office on Sunday. In the meeting, it was decided to ensure that each containment zone has only one entry and exit points. Each street in containment zone will be blocked to prevent people from moving from street to street.

Action will be taken against those going out of their houses. A list will be prepared containing details of elderly people, and those having diabetes, high blood pressure, and have kidney transplanted and pregnant women to check their health status on regular basis.

Zonal task force chief C Kamaraj, Madurai district collector T G Vinay, inspector general of police S Murugan and south zone inspector general of police K P Shanmuga Rajeswaran took part. 


