Lockdown deals to bloody blow to salons, barber shops
2020-04-26
BHUBANESWAR: Closure of salons, beauty parlours and barber shops during the lockdown have left both the owners and employees in the lurch. 

Barbers, who have small kiosks in Bhubaneswar and other parts of the state, are eagerly waiting to re-open their kiosks as they do not have any alternative source of income. Their major concern is to pay shop rent, salaries to their employees and EMIs on loan. 

“I have to pay Rs 2,000 as monthly rent for my small shop at Kanan Vihar-II and Rs 7,000 for my rented accommodation. Besides, I have to pay the installments of MUDRA loan. This shop was my only source of income,” said Narayan Barik, a barber shop owner. 

He said he also has to look after his family in the village. “I fear that my business will take time to gather momentum even after the lockdown is lifted. Due to social distancing rules, people may avoid to come to our shops for a few more days,” he added.

Anita Nayak, owner of a beauty parlour at Nandankanan Road, Patia, said she has to pay Rs 1 lakh monthly rent for her salon space and salary to12 employees. “My parlour is shut since March 22 and I do not have other income. I have to bear the losses. Besides, I have to repay the EMI of MUDRA loan. I fail to comprehend how to manage my finances,” she added.

Nayak said she procures beauty products in bulk. Date of some of these products will expire soon. “I do not think that people will visit parlours like before. Most people are facing financial crisis due to the pandemic situation and will not be ready to spend much,” she added. 

They had expected to open their shops and salons from Sunday like other standalone shops but the notification from Union ministry of home affairs on Saturday stated that barber shops and salons will remain closed during the lockdown period. 

After closure of these shops, people have started learning different ways to cut their beard or hair at home. Sometimes family members help them in it. 

Santosh Nayak from Saheed Nagar here said he shaved his own beard by purchasing a razor from a grocery shop. “My friend trimmed the hair of his school-going son with scissors. This has become a learning situation for us. We have to manage without any luxury,” he added. 


