Lockdown choking MSMEs, industry body to approach Tamil Nadu CM Edappadi K Palaniswami for rescue
2020-04-21
The MSME sector does not require just a relief package or reprieves, but a holistic compassionate approach for revival to transition them back to a state of movement all over again. This is the bottom line of the ‘Corona Lockdown Impact Analysis Report for Tamil Nadu-based MSMEs’. The report will be submitted to the chief minister and the industries department on Tuesday.


The study conducted by 15 people comprising economists and educationists was prepared by the Consortium for Technology Research Entrepreneurship an Employment (ConsoTree) State Tamilnadu Advisory Group for Empowerment (STAGE) among members of the Madurai District Tiny and Small Scale Industries Association (MADITSSIA) – in coordination with Tamil Nadu Small and Tiny Industries Association.

The overall revenue in the nearly 15 industries they studied had fallen by 47.7% in March as the revenues started dropping from March 10, two weeks before the lockdown. In April it further dropped to 61.3%. The study estimates the average loss in revenue for the two months at 54.5%.

Among the worst hit are the building and construction, chemical, furniture, textile garments and services that suffered 100% revenue loss this month with the revenue dropping to zero. The food sector recorded 90% revenue loss in April and 61% in March. The study shows uniform pattern in the impact of the lockdown across sectors.

"MSMEs in Madurai were chosen for the sample survey as the clusters in Chennai and Coimbatore are dense. Madurai is between the large and small clusters and has a variety of industries that are present across the state," says R K Jeyabalan the executive director of ConsoTree and convenor of STAGE.

More than half the MSMEs lost more than 25% revenues as overhead during the lockdown, which is significant and should not to be overlooked. Overall, 40% of the average revenue was lost on overheads that have no levers to decelerate, making the lives of these business firms miserable.

MSMEs especially producing goods using machinery and turnkey projects don’t have the work from home option. It makes the entire labour force unproductive. About 15% revenue is lost in this overhead.

"Only 25% labourers are guest workers. The majority are skilled, semiskilled and unskilled workers from villages around Madurai," MADITSSIA president B Muruganantham said. "We are worried about retaining them once the industries reopen as they could migrate in search of jobs to run their families," he said adding that this is an issue of concern.

Impact on the MSME sector that accounts for more than 50% of the GDP will affect the entire system as the micro, small and medium enterprises form the bottom of the pyramid. "It will affect production, supply chain and employability across sectors. So the government should look into the issue seriously," Muruganantham said.


