Lockdown not a reason to deny bail, says Kerala HC
2020-05-22
KOCHI: Bail cannot be denied to an accused citing the reason that police could not file a final report in the case due to the lockdown imposed in view of Covid-19, the Kerala high court has held. Justice Raja Vijayaraghavan V issued the ruling after considering a bail application (BA No. 2856/2020) filed by Mohammed Ali of Kannur through advocate Mansoor B H.

Police had contended in court that even though investigation in the case is complete, a final report could not be filed as the magistrate court was not functioning due to the ongoing lockdown. 

Prosecution relied on a directive of the Supreme Court on March 23 that period of limitation prescribed under the general law of limitation or under special laws will stand extended from March 15 until further orders. 

As per section 167 of Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC), investigation in cases involving offences punishable with death, life imprisonment, or imprisonment for not less than 10 years should be completed within 90 days. For other offences, the probe must be concluded and final report filed within 60 days.

Opposing prosecution’s argument, advocate Mansoor argued that CrPC does not contemplate any extension of the statutory period within which final report is to be filed on any grounds whatsoever.

The court pointed out that the Supreme Court’s directive is applicable to petitions or applications or suits or appeals and other proceedings where the period of limitation is prescribed under the general law or special laws. Where any special or local law prescribes a different period of limitation, such limitation would apply, the court held. Section 167 of CrPC does not prevent the police from conducting the investigation but only bars detention of the accused, the court noted.

“If the submission of the learned public prosecutor is accepted, the very same contention can be taken by the investigating agency and they can very well contend that they can detain the accused in custody for more than 24 hours which would clearly be violative of Article 22(2) of the Constitution and Section 57 of the CrPC. They can also demand that they are entitled to get police custody even beyond the period of 15 days from the first remand. This will result in serious deprivation of the rights of the accused and most certainly will be misused in certain cases,” the judgment said. Rejecting prosecution’s argument, the court granted conditional bail to the petitioner.


