Lockdown intensified in Krishna Lanka
2020-04-27
VIJAYAWADA: With some areas in Vijayawada city now becoming the hotspots of Covid-19 spread, the district administration intensified surveillance and enforcement operations in the areas identified as red zones. Krishna district collector A Mohammed Imtiaz and city police commissioner Ch Dwaraka Tirumala Rao conducted a vehicle march on Sunday at Krishna Lanka area one of the worst affected areas in the city.


The police, revenue and State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) officials have marched through the area cautioning people to remain in their homes to stop further spread of the virus. The collector and the police commissioner explained the consequences of being negligent as all the newly emerged cases have been identified to have originated from two persons.

Speaking to reporters, Imtiaz said that despite the government taking several measures to contain the spread of virus, positive cases have been reported from Krishna Lanka, Khuddus Nagar and Karmika Nagar areas. This is because the people in these areas did not observed the lockdown, he said. He observed that one infected person from these areas spread the virus at least to 20 others. “We appeal that even now people should take the virus seriously and remain in their homes. If people do not observe the lockdown properly all the measures taken by the government would go in vain,” he said.

Thirumala Rao said one negligent lorry driver and another foreign returnee who hid his travel details are responsible for the new wave of cases that have been reported in the last couple of days. Their irresponsible behaviour has put the lives of many others at risk. Cases have been booked against those persons for violating lockdown norms and for not revealing their travel details. 

Pointing out to the criticism on police for being tough, the city police commissioner said people’s lives are paramount to the police and they will continue to be tough in enforcing the law. 

“There will be increased surveillance through drone cameras and CCTV cameras across the city and stringent action will be taken against lockdown violators,” he added.


