Lockdown 3.0 was not that effective: Punjab Agricultural University survey
2020-05-29
LUDHIANA: A survey of 750 respondents from over 22 states and union territories by Dr Surabhi Mahajan of department of apparel and textile science, Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) stated that the first and second phases of the lockdown — from March 25 to April 14 and April 14 to May 3 — have proved to be a right decision taken by the government to contain the spread of pandemic, supported by 96 and 98% respondents, respectively. However, the third phase of the lockdown, from May 4 to May 17, is considered right decision only by 76% respondents. The rest felt that prolonging the lockdown has resulted in economic instability in the country, increasing poverty and hunger among many people, including migrant labourers.

A little less than half (46%) of the respondents of the survey also feel that the lockdown was a hasty decision taken by the government without any prior warning to people resulting in panic and problems for daily wage workers, students and industries. 

Mahajan said, “Though, the government made many policies and took stringent actions so that people follow the lockdown rigorously, but only 57% respondents felt lockdown was strictly followed by the masses. The remaining respondents were of the belief that a large section of the society violated the norms of lockdown because of their callous attitude and being ignorant about the severity of the spread of infection. Nearly 63% respondents stated that strict curfew could have been a better option than lockdown, as people in India do not cooperate voluntarily and can be controlled only through imposing fine and giving punishment. This is also reflected in response of only 60% respondents who felt that people affected with Covid-19 or doubtful for being affected with the virus restricted themselves to self-quarantine. The rest of the respondents stated that many people, including celebrities whom we see as our role models, did not follow the government advisory of quarantining themselves if they were suspected for being infected.”

She further added, “The health workers, police and para-military personnel and other Covid-19 warriors have done remarkable job to fight against the pandemic during the lockdown according to 95% respondents and all of them showed anguish against the incidents of violence that happened with the corona warriors in different parts of the country.”

There was a mixed response among people on whether the administration was able to keep adequate supply of essential communities during lockdown in India, as it was supported by only 41.1% respondents while 39.3% showed their disagreement to it and remaining 19.6 % respondents were not sure and were of the opinion that the supply of essential commodities to people varied from place to place and cannot be generalised. 

The survey concluded that the lockdown has been a tough period but overall, majority of the respondents were appreciative of the government’s decision taken for the welfare of the country men.


