Uttarakhand: Lockdown hurting small, medium business owners most
2020-04-13
DEHRADUN: With high speculations over the extension of the lock down, the small and medium scale business owners in the state claimed that the pressure of clearing dues related to salaries of employees, payment of taxes and fees have turned into long-term losses.


Talking to TOI, Pawan Sharma, president of the collective body of ready-made garments shop owners of Ghat Road said, “Every shopkeeper here has at least 6 to 8 workers and paying their salaries has become a liability. We have not earned a single penny since the lockdown was announced and now how are we supposed to pay them? In addition to this we all have loans to pay back with GST deadlines and audit fees to be cleared. In case the lockdown gets extended, we will not be able to sustain, unless the government exempts us from paying our EMI and interest along with some relaxation from taxes for a while. The lockdown will also hamper the cash flow in the market that will make the daily transaction difficult”.

According to the state government records, over 1.25 lakh industry owners are registered and over 40,000 firms come under the small and medium sized category in state.

Explaining how high rents and other expenditure are making it difficult to work, Jaideep Aggarwal, a mobile application developer, said, “I have to pay Rs 35,000 rent, plus salary of 10 people and repayment of Rs 15 lakh loan.” He added that it would be impossible to get business in next three months. “If I default in paying EMI, the bank will make a negative and my financial rating would devastate the business profile of my firm,” he said. The central government must, ensure that any payment default during the lockdown must not be made on the basis of negative financial rating of firm.

Sanjay Chamoli, a transport firm owner, said, “After three months of relaxation time, I will be paying EMI and the additional interest on the principal amount so in a nutshell will end up paying more.” The lockdown has also affected the bookings made for Char Dham Yatra which have been cancelled. Abhishek Sharma, president of Ashram Dharamshala Prabandhan Samiti said “Our economy is based mainly on the income we generate during the Yatra. Since maximum bookings have been cancelled, there is no way out for revival of business unless the government makes substantial relaxation from taxes and other bills for a period of one year.” Pankaj Mason, president of Doon Valley Mahanagar Vyapar Mandal, said, “There are clear signs of the lockdown being extended. The business has been affected badly, and we expect worse if the government doesn’t come up with plans to ease the business class. In the times when we have been forced to stop all business operations paying the bills, taxes, salaries will become a challenge”.

Meanwhile, industry insiders feel that it would take at least three more months to get back to normal. “But how a mid- sized firm owner is going to pay workforce, rents and other operational cost is a bigger question. The NPA due to medium and small sized factories will go up in next six months,” said Arun Saraswat, a manufacture unit owner in Haridwar.

However, there are others like BPO owner Ritesh Arora, who said that everyone has to evolve to remain in business during such tough times. “I have offered work from home to all my staff, similarly others too will have to think out-of-the-box to remain in business.”


