Lockdown extension or unlock 1.0? J’khand-specific guidelines today
2020-06-01
Ranchi: The Jharkhand government will come up with detailed state-specific guidelines on Monday on the fate of the lockdown in the state after an advisory was issued by the Union ministry of home affairs on Saturday.

The latest MHA guidelines, which will come in force from June 1, is primarily aimed at relaxing the lockdown in three phases, starting with the reopening of religious places, restaurants and others from June 8.

Sources in the state government on Sunday hinted that while the state machinery isn’t inclined on immediately opening all sectors, it may provide more relaxations in comparison to lockdown 4.0. The state information and public relations department said the detailed guidelines will be announced by chief minister Hemant Soren.

State finance minister Rameshwar Oraon said, “The state government will take a judicious call on time considering the on ground situation. The Union government, which has announced lockdown 1.0 in March in just four hours’ notice without even consulting the state governments, has now passed the ball to respective state governments. We are keeping an eye on the situation and the government will take an appropriate decision in public interest.”

Meanwhile, Hemant or his office is yet to react on the situation, but in a conversation with the media two days back, he had said, “If cases continue to rise, we may go for an extension of the lockdown. Safety of our people is more important than everything else at this stage.”

Meanwhile, the state rural development department on Sunday announced an extension of the CM Didi Kitchens till June 30. A communiqué from the department said so far they have fed 2.25 crore plates of healthy meals to the poor and needy in the state.

The state education department in an order to all the district education officers have asked to defer reopening of government schools, earlier slated to begin from June 1, till further orders. However, the department has asked officials to continue with the mandatory non-teaching works at the schools.

Meanwhile, Jharkhand Pradesh Diesel Auto Chalak Sangh appealed to the state government to permit plying of autos and e-rickshaws in view of the central government advisories. President of the outfit, Ram Kumar Singh, said, “Auto and e-rickshaw drivers are in abject poverty due no income for the last two months. We want to hit the streets to sustain our families. On Monday, a delegation will meet Hemant to press for our demands if the state government doesn’t allow public transport.”

Sources in the state transport department, however, said the government is considering resuming public transport in limited areas to assist mobility. A source unwilling to be named said, “Since offices have already resumed and some are in the process, the state government is considering resuming transport in public interest in non-risky areas, but talks on the way to go about it is on.”


