Tamil Nadu: Lockdown passes misused for smuggling narcotics
2020-05-22
CHENNAI: The Ramanathapuram police have unearthed rampant misuse of lockdown relaxation passes issued by the government for trafficking a range of narcotic and psychotropic drugs and have arrested nine people from Ramanathapuram and Sivaganga districts. Drugs like methamphetamine, amphetamine, methaqualone, opium, heroin and ecstasy worth more than Rs 5 crore were seized from them on Wednesday evening.


The seizure has blown the lid off a major racket involved in trafficking drugs from India and Afghanistan to Australia via Sri Lanka. The drugs were sourced from Afghanistan, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal through dozens of intermediaries in Goa, Bangalore, Coimbatore and Pollachi, police said. The drugs were to be transported to Sri Lanka via Thondi, a coastal village in Ramanathapuram district. Police intercepted the gang in Thiruvadanai sub-division when they were going to Thondi.

Those arrested include the kingpin, G Arul Das of Ilayangudi in Sivagangai district. The contraband was to be ferried across Palk Straits in a country boat owned by A Ajmeer Khan of Thondi. Seven others – A Ajmal Khan, J Abdul Kalam Azad, D Abdul Wahab, M Abdul Rahim, R Muthuraja, S Suresh Kumar and A Kesavan, all from Sivaganga district – were involved in transporting the drugs from various places to Thondi. Cases have been booked under Sections 34 and 120 B of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 25, 17 (c) and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act, 1985. Investigation has revealed that they were involved in smuggling several drugs in the past. One auto-rickshaw, two two-wheelers and a car used for smuggling the contraband have been seized.

Police had started working on the case almost two months ago. When a consignment of red sanders was seized from a gang based on a tip-off received by Ramanathapuram superintendent of police Varun Kumar, police stumbled upon the information that drugs were also being smuggled through Ramanathapuram district to Sri Lanka. “I got some calls from a few informers sometime in May about the people involved in the racket. The district special branch and serious crime squad were roped in to pursue the case and eight special teams were formed to nab the gang. The ongoing lockdown delayed our investigation a bit,” Kumar told TOI. 

As transfer of Thiruvadanai DSP Pugazhenthi Ganesh, who led the investigation, gave some hiccups, DGP J K Tripathy stepped in to put Ganesh’s transfer on hold till the case was cracked, sources said. “We were working under severe constraints as 33% of the force was under quarantine. But the quality of information was good and that made our job easy,” said a sub-inspector involved in the investigation.

Of late, informers are calling senior police officials directly with specific information. Kumar, whose personal mobile number is widely publicised in Ramanathapuram district, said, “We have cracked many sensitive cases based on tip-offs received on my mobile phone. We ensure that our informers are never exposed.”


