#LockdownCreativity: Needlework is helping people in quarantine relieve anxiety
2020-05-13
‘A stitch in time saves nine’, goes the proverb. But the current slowdown has given that little extra time on our hands to revisit some of the long-forgotten hobbies, stitching being one of them. Photographer Manvi Gandotra loves being creative with the camera, but it’s needle and thread that are keeping her spirits high during the lockdown. “Considering the situation around, I was slightly demotivated to do photography at this time. And I realised sewing is something that could keep me creatively engaged at home,” say Manvi, who has already churned out more than 40 embroidered pieces of cloth in the past few weeks. She admits being quite addicted to her lockdown hobby and, in fact, finds it therapeutic during these stressful times. Although the calming effect of art therapy is known to all, embroidery hoops are beating the confinement blues like how! 


Sewing can be both creative and therapeutic
Similarly, Maya Kilpadi, who works with a city start-up, finds needlework to be a creatively satisfying pastime that has helped her de-stress while in quarantine. However, instead of picking up something new, Maya resumed an incomplete project, which she had begun 10 years ago. “I had this kit with a half-done piece of embroidery lying at home for a decade. So, I started working on it again,” she explains. 
Manvi, on the other hand, likes to do a little something every day. “I take up a small stitching pattern daily, and I try to finish it by the end of the day. This gives me a sense of accomplishment. I also try to learn a new stitching technique every day.”


It’s like walking down memory laneAnisha Yadav, who is studying medicine in the US, found her inspiration for stitching on social media. “My friend had posted a picture on Instagram some time ago, and it brought back so many memories of my grandmother and mother stitching when I was a kid, and then me trying to follow the tradition when I was in school,” she says, adding, “Of late, sewing has also helped me cope with my anxiety issues.”


A perfect gift for your loved onesThe calming effects aside, a piece of neat needlework can also be the perfect gift for a dear friend or a family member. “I recently presented an embroidered frame to my friend’s little daughter, something that can be added to her nursery. To be able to gift someone a personalised, handmade item makes you feel happy and satisfied. Who knew a simple activity could lead to such a strong sense of connection,” says Anisha.


Tips for first-timers…


 Start with a small project – an easy pattern or design
 Try simple stitching techniques, such as filling stitch or running stitch
 Don’t look at stitching as a task. Instead, try and enjoy the process


