Lockdown effect: Bihar’s revenue falls 82% in April
2020-05-22
PATNA: The near-cessation of economic and trade activities in Bihar since the beginning of lockdown on March 24 to prevent spread of coronavirus caused a massive revenue loss of 82.29% to the state government in April this year when compared to the same month during 2019-20 financial year.


If the revenue earnings of the state government from all its sources was Rs 2,542.23 crore in April last year, it plummeted to Rs 450.21 crore in April this year.

The lockdown destabilised all the economic and revenue calculations of the state government pertaining to the current fiscal, as the expenditures on salary, pension, disaster management, social security, public debt repayment and grants to the panchayats remained unchanged. 

While the state’s total income was Rs 9,861 crore in April this year by way of revenue earnings from its own tax resources and share in the central pool of taxes and grants received from the Centre, the total expenditure was to the tune of Rs 12,202 crore. The expenditure, thus, was in excess of the income by Rs 2,341 crore. 

All these aspects came to light on May 18 when deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi, who also holds the finance portfolio, reviewed the revenue earnings made by the departments concerned in April.

Following high expenditure and less income witnessed in April this year, the state government resorted to additional resource mobilization (ARM) measure and increased the value added tax (VAT) on petrol and diesel on May 18 itself.

However, the overall position of the government’s revenue earnings in May might not be as bleak as it was in April as the fourth version of the lockdown has seen some relaxations and comparatively increased economic and trade activities, including movement of vehicles.

Industry minister Shyam Rajak said 4,252 industrial units have reopened in the state. Similarly, the revenue returns from the mines department is expected to increase following increase in number of vehicles engaged in mining and lifting of sand. Only around 10,000 big and small vehicles were pressed into service to lift sand in mid-April, mines department director Arun Prakash said.

The earnings of transport and commercial taxes departments would also increase due the hike in VAT on petrol and diesel and opening of standalone shops and establishments as well as shops selling agriculture-related items.

State transport department has incurred around 85% revenue loss due to disruption in the services during the lockdown. In last 50 days, the department has collected Rs 35 crore through fines and penalties under the Motor Vehicles Act and road tax of commercial vehicles, while the total revenue collection in April was only Rs 2-3 crore, according to the officials of the transport department.

State transport department secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said the estimated revenue collection of the department was Rs 200 crore per month. “However, the department has managed only Rs 35 crore in last 40 days. The main source of revenue collection for transport department is registration of vehicles, driving licence, road tax and penalties for violating traffic norms,” he said.

