Lockdown affects cattle feed production
2020-03-30
Kolhapur: The problems of dairy farmers in the sugar bowl of Maharashtra is likely to increase in next few days as the raw material for producing cattle feed is getting exhausted and the industries producing the feed would have to discontinue production. The farmers have enough fodder for their cattle, but need cattle feed to increase the nutritional content.

Gokul, one of the major milk procurers and cattle feed producers in the district, is facing an inter-state supply problem to source raw material.

Cattle feed is used to increase the quality and nutrition of the milk. Most farmers get the cattle feed through the dairies that are attached to Gokul through its cattle feed-producing plant.

Gokul’s cattle feed plant sources raw materials like deoiled cakes of rice bran, corn, millet — which has high protein content — and molasses from other states like Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka.

Ravindra Apate, the chairman of Gokul Dairy, said: “Since the lockdown, we have been unable to get the supply of these raw materials. Without the raw materials, we cannot continue production. Usually, we produce 600 tonne of cattle feed every day. But now we have reduced the production to half. With the available raw material, we can sustain for the next few days. If the situation continues, we will have to discontinue production from April 15.”

Rahul Khade, a dairy farmer from Kolhapur city, said, “We have enough fodder. The government has allowed the supply of fodder in the market and there is no scarcity. The fields along the banks of the Panchaganga river also have sufficient fodder that can be cut and supplied to the major markets for livestock. What we are fearing is the shortage of cattle feed. We are not getting enough supply of the cattle feed for our buffaloes and cows.”

Ramesh Malgonda Patil, the chairman Laxmi Vikas Seva Society and a dairy farmer from Gadhinglaj, said, “Usually we need one 50kg bag per cattle per month. The price is around Rs 1,150 per bag. We usually procure cattle feed from the dairy we supply milk to. Though we asked for two bags of cattle feed, we got only one. The dairy officials have asked us to use the feed judiciously.”


