Lockdown woes hit mental health patients
2020-04-16
PATNA: With the extension of lockdown, psychiatrists are flagging a rise in mental health issues among people in the city, especially those living alone or temporarily separated from their loved ones.

Psychiatrists say while patients with existing conditions such as depression are relapsing, others are having a tough time coping with being confined at home and no social interaction. The lockdown has also heightened concerns about career and job security leading to a lot of people turning to psychiatrists for counselling, who are coming across cases of unusual behaviour, including self-harming.

Boring Road resident Priya Singh, mother of a 24-year-old, is worried about her son who has started freaking out even over smallest of things. “My son was offered a job in one of the top multi-national companies in the country. However, his offer letter was cancelled due to the impact of lockdown. Now, he hardly talks to anyone and stays in his room all the time. He starts screaming out of fear every time he sees me or his father leaving the house to buy vegetables or milk,” she said.

Dr Saurabh Kumar, assistant professor of psychiatry at PMCH in Patna, pointed out that mental health issues, including anxiety and depression, are spiking among patients as well as those who never faced any such issue. “There has been an increase in obsessive fear which has led to acute stress reactions. These reactions usually occur during unexpected crisis in life. People who have anxiety or any other mental illness are the worst sufferers. Besides, the lockdown extension has killed hopes of many patients who thought they could go back to their normal life,” Kumar said.

He added, “During this time of crisis it is very important to reach out for help to cope up the current situation and maintain mental health with a healthy lifestyle.”

There are examples of individuals who are facing a relapse of their existing mental health problems. “The symptoms of my bipolar disorder have worsened due to the covid-19 scare. In addition, I have started getting panic attacks. I feel like going out and seeking medical help but I don’t have the courage to step outside,” said Muskan Thakur, a resident of Saguna More.

City-based psychiatrist Dr Binda Singh said she has been receiving unusual cases. “The separation from a loved one and the fear of never being able to meet them can result in panic attacks even among people who never faced any mental health issues,” she said.

Citing the example of a patient, Singh said: “The patient’s mother contacted me saying her son is afraid and saying things like ‘I don’t want to get infected’. After talking to him, I got to know that he was hardly taking any rest and was constantly reading about covid-19 cases.”

She added: “The situation we are in right now is difficult for everyone, be it rich or poor, healthy or weak, police or health worker, everybody is fighting their own battles. However, the impact of the lockdown is not the same for everyone, especially for people who are fragile and mentally weak. Hence, it’s the responsibility of every citizen to keep a check on their family members and seek medical help.”

Dr Binda Singh said it is important for parents to keep an eye on their kids. "I have been counselling a graduation student whose end semester exams were postponed due to the lockdown. His father noticed the sudden behavioural change in him and informed me," she added. 

Kankarbagh resident Shreya Sinha said she has started experiencing hallucinations again. “A year ago, I underwent treatment for hearing voices that appeared to be real but were the creation of my mind. Everything was fine until the lockdown started. I had to consult my psychiatrist again, who has started conducting happiness sessions for me. I hope everything goes back to normal,” she added.


