Lockdown heroes: Within touching distance of virus, but duty calls
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: The story of Safdarjung Hospital nursing officer Amit Kansal deployed in the coronavirus ward is one of spirit and dedication. Across India, more than 50 healthcare workers have tested positive for Covid-19 and the fear of infection looms over the hospitals. Yet an undaunted Kansal spends over eight hours every day in the risky ward attending to the virus-positive patients and motivating them to fight it out.

The 37-year-old has been working in the corona ward for two months. “The virus-positive patients have all the facilities inside the room and we monitor them digitally,” he explains when TOI met him during his night shift on Friday. “We talk to them over phone and visit them from time to time.” It has been a trying time for the Kansal couple, the wife too a nursing officer at Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences in Dilshad Garden.


At home, he and his wife eat in separate utensils and use separate washrooms. His heart is torn when he cannot play with his two kids after returning from work. “I leave my shoes in the car, phone my mother to keep the doors of the house open so I don’t touch any object while entering,” he relates. “Regardless of whether I am tired or sleepy, I go straight for a hot-water bath and wash my clothes in hot water too.”

Kansal, whose widowed mother is constantly fretting about his safety, hasn’t for tunately faced any discrimination in his housing society due to his daily nearness to the dangerous virus. But for the healthcare workers, it is an unnerving experience to be so close to Covid-19 patients and to think they could be risking the safety of their family. Kansal was terrified a few days ago when his 10-year-old daughter had cold and mild fever. It turned out it was only an ailment brought on by the change in season. “I will make all the sacrifices I have to while continuing to serve the country which needs all healthcare workers at this hour of crisis,”

avers Kansal.

At the newly constructed block at Safdarjung Hospital, which has been turned into the corona ward, over 30 patients are currently admitted. Treatment protocols are strictly followed by the healthcare workers, but there is a sense of foreboding in the corridors. Kansal’s determination overpowers his fears. “When we are required to go into the isolation rooms to give medicines, we wear personal protective equipment and the moment we come out, we discard the PPE kit to avoid infection,” says Kansal.

While meeting the isolated patients, Kansal has encouraging words for them. “I tell them that confidence is the key,” he says. The nursing official has seen patients recover and go home. They are given a phone contact that they can dial in case they need help. Kansal’s advice to health workers is to follow the government guidelines strictly at work and to maintain social distancing at home, no matter how frustrating that can be. This is the only way to emerge victorious in the war against the novel coronavirus.

