Lockdown effect: Eid celebrations to be different this time in Bihar
2020-05-19
PATNA: As Covid-19 has changed lifestyle, even Eid celebrations will be different this time. There will neither be namaz in congregation nor embracing one another to wish ‘Eid Mubarak’.


People, especially youngsters, have been asking others to donate money to poor instead of spending on clothes and other valuables this Eid, which will be either on Sunday or Monday, depending on the sighting of moon. The youngsters are sharing this message on social media to reach larger audience. For instance, a group of IITians came up with Twitter thread “Eid at home” recently.

IIT Kharagpur alumnus Imbesat Ahmed, who is from Patna native and a part of this group, said, “Social distancing is very important and what we have achieved so far is because of this. So, we requested people to continue with social distancing even on Eid. We are coming up with another thread, Eidi for migrants. Basically, Eidi is given by elderly to youngsters and children on Eid as a token of gift. But today, our migrants need money and we are asking people to give Eidi to those in distress.”

Kankarbagh resident Bashshar Habibullah said they have come up with different posters with messages on social media, like “This Eid be different, pay rent for one family for a month or provide food to one family for a month.”

Bashshar said though religious bodies have also urged people to donate to poor and help migrants this Eid and maintain social distancing, “our idea is to reach young generation active on social media”.

Dr Mahjabeen Naaz, who is Muslim Personal Law Bard state coordinator, said she has been holding live sessions with different groups and making them take pledge not to go out shopping and stay at home this Eid. All India Tahreeh-e-Insaaf council secretary Maulana Shakeel Ahmad Hashmi said Covid-19 has troubled the entire world and people should help needy ones now. “There is no need for extravagant shopping or new clothes. It is better to spend money on the poor and migrants who are suffering at the moment. In fact, zakat distributed among poor during Ramzan, should also be given to the poor migrants,” he said. 


