Lockdown benefit: Country breathing cleaner air
2020-04-15
Nagpur: While various states have announced extending the lockdown till April 30, the bright side of it is that citizens will be breathing much cleaner air. Latest analysis done by environment organization Climate Trends reveals that many cities in the country saw an improvement in air quality during the lockdown.

The analysis of air pollution levels shows that out of 101 cities, 35 recorded ‘good’ air quality on the fourth day of nationwide curfew. The analysis claimed these levels were unprecedented and have not been since the Air Quality Index (AQI) was launched in 2014.

Moreover, New Delhi recorded its best ever AQI of 45 on March 26 which was the first ‘good’ air quality day in the capital since August 18 last year and only the third in more than three years.

Analysis of System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research (SAFAR) data brought to the fore that the near-complete stoppage of daily traffic has led to drastic fall in the levels of particulate matter (PM) 2.5. The pollutant’s levels dropped by 62% in Delhi, 45% in Mumbai, 31% in Pune and 57% in Ahmedabad post April 6.

However, the biggest impact has been on the levels nitrogen dioxide which is formed from the burning of coal and vehicular emissions. The high presence of pollutant can increase the risk of respiratory ailments. “In Pune, NOx pollution has reduced by 62% in the week starting April 6, in Mumbai by 60%, in Delhi by 50% and in Ahmedabad by 32%,” the analysis stated.

It further highlighted that in 38 monitoring stations in Delhi, NOx levels dropped drastically, except in Jehangirpuri which recorded highest NOx levels in the capital at an avg of 77.63 on the third day of the lockdown, indicating the pollutant’s other sources apart from vehicles.

It’s not just the cities that are breathing easy but also industrial clusters in Gujarat like Vapi, Ankaleshwar and Vatva have also reported cleaner air during the lockdown. Vapi, ranked as the most polluted industrial cluster on the Central Pollution Control Board’s (CPCB) Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI), recorded a 79.7% drop in sulphur dioxide (SO2) levels, one of the key emissions from coal-fired thermal power plants. “The air quality index in Vapi dropped to 100 from 313 on March 19,” the analysis added.

Stating that a nationwide lockdown should not be needed to achieve improved air quality, the analysis suggested some mitigation measures for policy-makers. “Monitoring data proves that shut down of local sources from activities like transport, construction and industries have reduced PM2.5, PM10 and NOx levels, but background pollution levels remain even amidst the complete halt to the economy. The existing way of producing energy and economic activity have to transform towards sustainable and clean energy systems if India is to experience clean air in future,” it stated.

Further adding that Indian power grid system has been grossly underestimated, the analysis stated, “With the nine minutes of solidarity event of April 9, it is clear the grid system is flexible enough to handle a greater percentage of variable solar and wind energy. Efforts need to be made to implement learnings from this event.”

It added that vehicles on the road need to be zero emission vehicles for them to “stop being a health hazard”.


