Lockdown heat for poultry biz, incurs Rs 100 crore loss every day
2020-04-12
BHOPAL: Recording a loss of around Rs 100 crore daily, the poultry buisness (eggs and broiler) in the state capital has been severely hit due to the ongoing lockdown over coronavirus. Poultry owners said if the lockdown goes beyond April 14, it will become tough to recover the losses. They felt that whenever lockdown ends, it will take another two months to go back to the normal situation. Around 90 per cent business in Bhopal is severely hit. 

Ever since the lockdown, both eggs and broilers have witnessed a decline in consumption largely due to supply and demand issues. Initially, many people didn’t buy chicken because of rumours that Covid-19 might spread through poultry. However, the state government has been regularly clarifying that there is no harm in having chicken. Post imposition of the lockdown, poultry shops have remained closed.

Poultry owners said that there is a consumption of around 10-12 lakh eggs per day only in Bhopal. Consumption of broiler stood at around 40 tonnes per day. “Poultry is a huge buisness in every state across the country. This could be gauged from the fact that only in Bhopal, there is a consumption of around 25 tonnes to 40 tonnes of broiler. Imagine the situation when the entire business closes down, which is happening at the moment,” said poultry owners and consultant, Dr Mahendra Singh. 

He claimed that the poultry industry started witnessing the slump two months ago after rampant rumours that coronavirus spreads through poultry. “The situation worsened when lockdown was declared. Retailers were ready to sell each broiler for as low as Rs 15, but that also could not be sold,” said Dr Singh.

Due to lockdown, poultry owners were not able to feed the birds due to which they had to kill them. “Around 60% farmers have done this in the past two weeks. It was done as the chicks started hurting each other as we could not feed them. In such a situation, poultry owners found it better to kill them,” said Pradeep Chakradhar, a poultry owner. 

“It takes 5-6 months to prepare a bird to start laying eggs. It takes 35-40 days for becoming a complete broiler to be sent to the shop. Now, that a majority of the business is hit, one can understand the situation,” said Chakradhar. 


