Lockdown halts survey to record bat species in K’taka
2020-05-26
Belagavi: In a first, conservationists are carrying out a diversity survey of bats across Karnataka. 

A team of Bat Conservation India Trust (BCIT) will create a database on the various species of bats for the state forest department. The team started the survey in January at Bhimgad National Park which is home to the rare Wroughton’s free-tailed bats. 

According to Belagavi deputy conservator of forests (DCF) Amarnath MV, a three-member team surveyed bats in January and February, but the study was halted due to the lockdown. 

Earlier surveys of bats have been conducted by photographing the animals in some habitats. However, the new three-year project panning across the state will be done more scientifically by laying mist nets, measuring skull sizes and taking tissue samples from wings to record the DNA of the species, said Amarnath. 

The team has so far conducted the survey at Bhimgad and Chorla. As the monsoon is approaching, the team will conduct the survey in plains. Once the rainy season ends, they will continue their activities in the Western Ghats. 

Rajesh Puttaswamaiah, a citizen scientist and trustee of BCIT, said as per the preliminary studies there are around 42 species in the state. But they have been recorded only through pictures. “In Belagavi, the recorded species are 11, but there are around 20 species in Bhimgad,” he pointed out. 

During its survey, the team used mist nets to capture two species of bats - Hipposideros speoris and Rhinolophoidea - and took measurements. In the coming days, skull measurement and tissue samples collection will be done, said Rajesh. 

“Five-six members are currently involved in the project and if needed, more students studying in the streams of wildlife biology will be roped in. The team will revisit Bhimgad and Choral, probably after the monsoon,” he added. 

Rajesh said recording species will help in their conservation. “There are some endangered bat species, and when the survey finds the habitats of such species, those places can be conserved. For example, Barapede Caves which house Wroughton’ free-tailed bats is now being protect carefully,” he said. 


