Lockdown relaxation likely in 15 containment areas in Bhopal: Collector
2020-04-29
BHOPAL: Ten new localities were declared containment areas on Monday after 13 more tested positive in Bhopal. 

Though Jehangirabad is considered to be the coronavirus hotspot of Bhopal, the localities under Koh-e-Fiza police station have more containment areas than those under Jehangirabad police station. 

Areas under the jurisdiction of Koh-e-Fiza police have 75 containment areas while those under Jehangirabad police station’s jurisdiction had 72 on Monday, before 10 more areas were added among them on Monday evening. On the other hand, Bhopal collector said, administration would look to ease restrictions in 15 containment areas soon if people of the area cooperate and no new cases are found there. 

The 10 new containment areas declared on Monday are in areas under Talaiya police station, Chhola police station, Koh-e-Fiza police station, two under Jehangirabad police station, Bajariya police station, Kamla Nagar police station, Govindpura police station and Aishbagh police station. 

Under the containment plan, Bhopal has been divided in eight zones and containment areas have been designated according to the police station the area falls under. Demographic distribution of coronavirus patients in the city as suggested through containment areas make it clear that spread of deadly infection is throughout the length and breadth of the city and "containment plan " has failed to deliver. 

Amid allegations of leniency in enforcing restrictions in the containment areas, district collector, Tarun Pithode, said, "CCTV surveillance vehicles and live videography is also being done for monitoring of containment areas. Three CCTV surveillance vehicles are moving in north and south Bhopal round-the-clock to ensure enforcement of "containment norms" and people are being persuaded to stay inside their houses", he said. 

Pithode however, insisted that without cooperation of the people, effective "containment" of virus was not possible and if people stick to containment norms, they would themselves, be free of the restrictions early. 


