Lockdown games lead to cluster in Ashok Ngr street
2020-05-04
Chennai: In yet another case of an emerging cluster in the city, more than 24 people have tested positive in Ashok Nagar Pudur 11th Street on Sunday. Corporation officials said a majority of the cases are contacts who played carrom, ludo with the primary sources. 

The primary sources were two people aged 40 and 25 years, who took to selling vegetables during the lockdown. Both had visited the Koyambedu market, from where they are suspected to have contracted the virus. 

Corporation officials said one of them is a construction worker who took to selling vegetables as there was no construction activity in the city for the past 45 days. 

After showing symptoms, the two tested positive on May 1 (Friday), after which the street was brought under containment and their immediate family and other contacts were traced. 

It was then that the officials realised that apart from selling vegetables, the two had also played carrom, ludo with friends in their street to kill time. Samples were taken from as many as 50 of them, of whom 22 have tested positive, said an official. 

Ashok Nagar falls under Kodambakkam zone (Zone 10), which has recorded 199 positive cases till date — the third highest in the city behind, Thiru Vi Ka Nagar (Zone 6- 322 cases), Royapuram (Zone 5- 275 cases). Koyambedu wholesale market falls under this zone. 

From just 60 cases on April 27 to 199 cases on May 3, the number of cases has trebled in the zone in a week. Vadapalani market is already under containment since April 24 after a vendor there was tested positive. 

The increase in the number of cases has made residents pensive. “Most of the vendors buy vegetables, fruits and flowers from the Koyambedu market. Health officials should test all vendors as they will not come forward to get themselves tested. The recent rise in cases is due to Koyambedu only,” said Vasanthi Kannan, a resident of Kodambakkam. 

In V R Pillai street in Triplicane, in which 42 people had tested positive until Saturday, the number has increased to 52, special nodal officer for Chennai J Radhakrishnan said. Two residents of the street — relatives, who were volunteering and distributing food and refreshments in and around the neighbourhood — were the primary sources.


