‘Lockdown sex therapy is good for well-being’
2020-05-24
Lockdown is in place for more than two months now and several physical, mental, emotional and psychological health aspects have been thoroughly discussed on various platforms. But, when it comes to sexual wellness, social media is brimming with only jokes.

Dr Sanjay Deshpande, well-known consultant in sexual medicine, is practising in Nagpur since last 25 years. In a ‘lockdown’ interview with TOI, he shared tips for those single, married, in a relationship, living away from partners and those who don’t have partners. 

Excerpts..

Q. Are people having more sex during lockdown?

A. Yes, and I believe its great. Everybody is stressed in lockdown and there is uncertainty. We don’t know when it will end or if it will be extended again. Many of us are working from home and it has its own stress. Many are stuck away from families. Some have kids to look after, others have ailing elderly people at home. There is physical, mental and social stress. Moreover, there are clouds of financial uncertainty hovering over us. Sex can be a remedy to all such stressful situations. It could be the distraction that you need amid this unpredictable crisis. It’s communication, relaxation and exercise. Sex reduces pain, its anti-hypertensive and stress-buster. Sex is must-have thing in lockdown. However, I have observed that the excitement about sex in lockdown-1 has gone down gradually until lockdown-4. 

Q. What new problems are your patients sharing with you especially after Covid-19 crisis?

A. To my surprise, I am attending 10-12 patients in one session, which is almost like normal times. Many couples are using this period to fix sexual problems. Some are using this period to re-explore the lost pleasure in their relationship, which is a positive thing. Certainly, sex life has seen many changes during the Covid-19 crisis. Cohabiting with a family, managing day-to-day chores in travel ban and commuting limitations and, most importantly, added stress from following coronavirus news are affecting one’s sex life. Some are getting too much privacy and getting bored, while others have lost their private moments as all family members are at home all the time. 

Q. What do you suggest to those who are living away from partners?

A. There are many couples who had to stay away from each other due to travel restrictions. Many in secret relationships who used to meet regularly are not getting opportunities. Singles also get sexual desire during extended free time offered by lockdown. I tell them you are the best partner for yourself and masturbation is the safest and best way to get sexual pleasure during Covid crisis. It’s not possible to maintain Covid distancing during sexual activity and having sex with an unknown partner is full of infection risk. Even while having sex with an known partner, both should take special care of sexual hygiene. Sexual minorities like LGBT should also take care of hygiene. Covid-19 does not spread through sexual intercourse, but it’s important to stay safe. 

Q. What do you suggest to those who go out for work? 

A. Take special care about hygiene so that they should not carry infection with them. If your partner is having cough, cold, fever or other symptoms, you should avoid having sex. Ultimately, sex is for pleasure and not to be done under pressure. 

Q. Several incidents of child abuse have been noticed during lockdown. 

A. It's a harsh reality. Parent have an additional responsibility to look after their kids. If your child is willing to share something, you should listen with patience. Awareness is the key in such matters. 

Q. Lot of buzz about the probable baby boom due to lockdown. Your take? 

A. Many couples are indeed experiencing a better sexual life, especially those who had busy schedules and little time for each other in the pre-Covid era. Many of them may plan pregnancy during this period. If you and your partner want it, its perfectly all right. But, I suggest people to use contraceptives and avoid unplanned pregnancy during this period. Even married or newly married couples should delay the pregnancy in current situation. Because pregnancy means you have to visit hospitals regularly and coronavirus threat is here to stay for a long time.

Q. What can be the post-Covid situation?

A. I would say post lockdown. People may be anxious after lockdown relaxation. Many will meet up after long gap and chances of unprotected sex are more. People must avoid sex with unknown partners. Those who are into hookups and night stands should be more careful. Sex life is not going to be as easy as it used to be before lockdown. Golden advice from me would be stay indoors and have it only with your most trustworthy partner. 


