Lucknow: Lockdown setback for professional swimmers
2020-05-03
LUCKNOW: Depicting their pathetic tales amid the lockdown, deserted swimming pools in major cities are not only facing financial losses, but are also posing a setback to young swimmers trying to carve a niche for themselves as well as their state in national and international tournaments. The city’s army and civilian pools are also facing the same situation.

Unlike the western region of country, swimming in UP is a season specific sport limited only to four-five months of summers. The prolonged lockdown has dashed the swimmers' hopes of taking to the pool this season as even after restrictions are withdrawn there is a remote possibility that the sport would attract people.

All-weather pools are common in Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and other big cities, offering an opportunity to swimmers to practice throughout the year. Successive governments in UP have promised to convert the KD Singh Babu stadium's swimming pool into an all-weather pool, but till date no such facility is available.

During the Samajwadi Party government, two international swimming pools with all-weather facilities had been developed at Saifai and the JPNIC in Lucknow. “However, both the pools have been lying defunct for three years,” lamented Ravi Kapoor, state secretary, UP Swimming Association.

Expressing similar views, state president of the association Ranjit Singh Judev, a former Congress minister, said, “Such facility could have proved a boon for swimming enthusiasts. After Lokpati Tripathi if anyone had seriously contributed to the sports promotion in the state, it was former UP chief minister Akhilesh Yadav who had even engaged a Croation coach to promote football in the state.”

The association regretted that at a time when other states are offering quality swimming pools to their players, the two swimming pools in UP which also meet international standards have been closed. The swimming pool at KD Singh Babu stadium in Lucknow does not have all-weather facility and the association has also raised objections over its poor water quality.


