Lockdown hits immunization campaign as AES threat looms
2020-04-04
PATNA: With immunization drive coming to a halt owing to the health department’s focus on fighting coronavirus, the threat of acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) and Japanese Encephalitis (JE) is looming large over the state. 

A health official associated with immunization drive said the exercise would be expedited after the end of lockdown. “Vaccination was in full swing in the state before the outbreak of coronavirus. We postponed our outreach immunization programme to deal with the present situation. However, children are still vaccinated at our health centres,” the official said.

The Union ministry of health and family welfare had asked all the states last week to stop outreach immunization programme. Hence, the campaign for JE vaccination in state was also stopped.

Even ‘Global Polio Eradication Initiative’ has stopped door-to-door polio vaccination campaign in the present scenario. However, institutional deliveries, especially for high-risk pregnant women and immunization at health centres are still on.

According to a state health department official, the outreach immunization for JE was carried out in 26 districts before the lockdown. “The remaining 12 districts will be covered after the end of lockdown,” the official added.

State Health Society (SHS) executive director Manoj Kumar said, “It is not possible for us to carry out immunization campaign under the present circumstances. These vaccines are administered at anganwadi cnetres and schools which are closed.”

Another SHS official said JE vaccines were administered to 7.89 lakh children in three vulnerable districts – Muzaffarpur, Vaishali and East Champaran – before the announcement of lockdown. “Over 10.14 lakh children were administered JE vaccine in Sitamarhi and 1.79 lakh in Sheohar,” he added.

UNICEF health specialist Dr Syed Hubbe Ali said planning for the left out 12 districts was ready and the vaccination process would start after the situation normalises.

Over 150 children had died due to acute encephalitis syndrome in Bihar last year. “AES is a syndrome and JE is part of it. All kids being given JE vaccine may not be protected for AES, but it works in around 35 to 40% cases,” Dr Ali said, adding since door-to-door polio eradication campaign is carried out thrice a year in January, July and December, it will not be affected by the lockdown.


