Coronavirus lockdown to delay Chennai metro project
2020-03-24
CHENNAI: The state lockdown set to begin from Tuesday evening is likely to hit construction of Chennai Metro Rail’s 9km phase-1 extension from Washermenpet to Wimco Nagar. Operations on the line were expected to begin by mid-2020. CMRL officials said more than 80% of the workers will not be turning up for work during the lockdown from Tuesday till March 31, which is likely to delay the project.


A metro rail official said except for some critical work in the underground section and in the cut and cover that links the underground tunnels with the elevated corridor, work may come to a halt in the rest of the stretch. More than 1,000 workers are engaged to work on the line.

“We have instructed workers to stay home. So, workers will be present only to remove water from the tunnels and finish the civil work in the cut and cover section. The safety of our workers is more important to us now than the project,” a metro rail official said. “There will be another round of discussions on Tuesday. We are monitoring the health of our workers.” The stretch from Washermenpet to Wimco Nagar has eight stations, including two under ground.

On Monday, the chief minister announced that the state will be under lockdown from 6pm on Tuesday till March 31, following the Centre recommending it to prevent spread of Covid-19. Section 144 of the CrPc will be in force to prevent people from gathering in any place. 

The outbreak of Covid-19 in China and many European countries had already delayed the project by two months as electrical equipment, elevators and other parts required for installation of systems like platform screendoors are imported. 

The line, which was planned to be opened in June 2020, faced the first hurdle when CMRL had to terminate contract with IL&FS Transportation Networks Limited over delay in completion of underground stations at Sir Theagaraya College and Korukkupet. 

Earlier this month, officials operated a motorised trolley along the 9km stretch to check the track alignment. They had planned to conduct trial runs by operating a diesel locomotive in April followed by metro trains late next month or in May. 

