Lockdown disrupts plans of non-custodial parents
2020-05-09
Thiruvananthapuram: Kiran (named changed) was longing to meet his five-year-old son during his summer holidays. At the time of divorce, Kiran’s estranged wife got the custody of the child, a toddler then. Kiran, usually uses the period - around 12 days each during April and May - as the best time to develop a bonding with his only son. His parents too long for the arrival of their only grandson. However, lockdown has disrupted all their plans.

Kiran is not alone. Several persons, who have only visitation rights over their kids, said that they were losing their only opportunity to spend quality time with their kids. 

Apart from weekends, Onam and Christmas holidays, summer vacation is often the only time when non-custodial parents get more time to spend with their kids. Parents get 12-45 days depending upon court order during the vacation. The parents were waiting for the lockdown to end. Now, family court in Thrissur has ordered that such cases will be taken up after May 18. 

Advocate J Sandhya said that cases of custodial rights of kids of estranged parents are pending as the courts are hearing only emergency bail pleas. “It is a sensitive issue. The court will start hearing such cases after lockdown,” she said.

Another parent, who does not wish to be named, said that he wishes that courts would extend time period of custody after lockdown as a compensation for their loss of time. “In my case, my child is staying only 3km away from my house. I as well as my parents were waiting to see him. I had taught him cycling and swimming during the previous vacations. I use the vacation time to spend some productive time with my child. I am filing an RTI with court to know whether I could get more time to compensate for the time I lost,” he said.

Another parent opined that from his experiences, majority parents with permanent custody of their children have not handed over children for interim custody during vacation citing spread of Covid and lockdown. “In majority of cases, whether it is mother or father who has permanent custody often tend to discourage any option of the children to meet the other parent,” he said.

“Following closure of their schools, I had approached court on March 16 seeking interim custody of my children. The order directed to hand over children on April 6. Now, I am not getting custody even though there is relaxation in lockdown in Thrissur,” he said, adding that he could not approach court as it is not hearing such cases now.

“Kids are often an option to negotiate between estranged couples. We don’t get them over phone or video call,” said a parent over phone from Palakkad.


