Lockdown Day 2: Delhi falls in line
2020-03-25
NEW DELHI: On the second day of the lockdown in Delhi on Tuesday, just essential services were operational and only people with curfew passes were allowed to move around. There was, therefore, a drastic change from Monday in the number of people on the streets. Unlike the thousands who were out of their houses a day earlier, those who stepped out on Tuesday were mostly on foot going to the nearest grocery store.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

While police stepped up efforts to keep people off the streets, even placing barricades on the colony lanes to prevent cars driving to the main roads, rainfall around 4pm helped keep citizens indoors. However, some hours later, after the Prime Minister announced a 21-day national lockdown from midnight, there was a flurry on the roads with people scurrying to the shops for essentials.

Arpit Bhatia of Jangpura Extension stayed inside through the day but had to step out at night for food. “There was no clarity on grocery shops remaining open in the PM’s speech so I had to arrange stocks in case there are restrictions in the coming days. There were long queues everywhere,” said Bhatia.

Unlike Bhatia, Parvinder Singh Nanda was out most of the day. Nanda, who is part of the NGO United Sikhs which provides welfare and assistance to the needy, said his group has been delivering food and essentials to those who require them. “There was strict checking on the roads, but we had made curfew passes,” said Nanda.

Jahangirpuri resident Akhil Khanna reported seeing people on the streets throughout the day. After the PM’s announcement of a national lockdown, Khanna went with his father to purchase some groceries in the fear that shops would be told to close down. “The shops were packed with people. They were all in a panic and I had to wait in the queue for around 45 minutes despite being there for only a few basic things. Mad time, indeed,” Khanna exclaimed, before thoughtfully adding, “However, the lockdown is the need of the hour.”

In order to stop people coming to and gathering at markets, the cops had deployed mobile patrol teams. They monitored the crowds around the markets and used public address systems to warn people against massing there. Drones were also used in some places to keep an eye on the throngs.

In some parts of the city, the cops roped in the residents’ welfare associations to deter people from heading to the markets in groups or lingering around after buying whatever they needed for their daily needs.

The cops also prevented daily-wage workers from walking into the city in groups and from gathering at spots from which they then went their ways. Section 144 of CrPC, which bans assembly of more than five persons, is in operation across the city. A police officer said, “We also sensitised our men to request people to disperse in an orderly fashion from market places or from near government offices.”

Police teams, equipped with public address systems, also made the rounds of residential colonies informing people about the curfew rules and instructing them to stay indoors. Beat constables have been asked to patrol their respective wards and enquire from people outside the reason for their leaving their homes. “We expect people to be less curious about the situation in the coming days. We will then enforce the curfew more strictly,” said a senior cop.

