Lockdown inspires artists to get creative
2020-04-02
Panaji: Middle-aged Sada-resident Poonam Naik feels the added responsibility these days of keeping the elderly members of her family safe from the outside world, where the Covid-19 infection lurks.

She is one of the Goans whose lockdown experience has taken the visual form in Mandrem-based artist Kedar D K’s recent series ‘Lonely Residents’.

 Kedar is only one of the artists, who has sought to express the unexpected feelings citizens are experiencing in these unusual circumstances.

“Being an artist, I found the situation tense as most of people face great difficulty in being indoors only. On the social media, I asked friends and acquaintances to share with me a picture of themselves in their house and a brief text about how they are using this quarantine time and how they feel being locked at home. I feel these drawings of ‘Lonely Residents’ will give them a realisation that the house is a great sea to explore,” Kedar said.

He hopes that these portraits, which he draws and shares online, “will make these people feel good and make them forget the tense situation”.

 Artist and print-maker Vijay Bhandare, based in Thana, Cortalim, is similarly expressing the angst of the lockdown using different mediums.

 “The typical Goan living the village life is a curious being. He likes to wander in the fish market every morning and chat up on street corners. Even when if he does not want to buy an expensive kingfish, he will still stand there checking out the day’s catch and watch the reactions of the other buyers. I completely support the lockdown, but such village folks are unaware of the seriousness of the disease and suddenly find themselves caught up in an unfamiliar situation,” Bhandare said.

Another pen and ink work shows the coronavirus crawling on the skin of two individuals as they lock their hands.

The lockdown has inspired Chaitali Morajkar to revisit one of her recent artworks which shows a woman gazing outside the window, in a seemingly endless wait, as her face is a slow ticking clock.

In the coming days of the lockdown, the artist plans to give it the shape of a new painting.

“At times, it feels like time haunts us, the way we keeping running around as per the time. Now that we are in a lockdown, time doesn’t seem to pass as quickly. So insecurity, lack of freedom, unexpected danger, all emotions have come flooding to us,” said Morajkar.


