#LOCKDOWNEFFECT: Weddings in Lucknow get postponed indefinitely
2020-04-24
The lockdown due to Coronavirus has brought the business of shaadi to a grinding halt. More than 1600 weddings functions in the city have been cancelled or postponed due to lockdown in just April. These cancellations and postponements have incurred a loss of crores for all the associated parties like the caterers, decorators, hotels and wedding venues, band wallahs, etc. Industry wallahs fear the worst is yet to come, not counting the people whose weddings and engagements have been postponed.

LOSS IN IN CRORES 
"Just in the month of April, we have seen cancellation and postponement of over 1600 wedding and related functions in only Lucknow district. And this estimate is of the bigger venues, not including the smaller ones. With the way things are going, we don’t see people having bigger gatherings for at least a year to come. Even if the administration gives permission for a wedding, do you think people will risk attending huge wedding functions? Also, at an average, a caterer charges Rs 700 per head per wedding, so if you include the next three months at least, no big weddings will take place before that and that’s why our losses are running in crores," says," Tarun Sawhney, President, Oudh Caterers Association. 



YEH SHAADI ABHI NAHI HO SAKTI
Alka Srivastava, a housewife, whose son’s wedding was supposed to take place on May 2 has postponed it to later this year whenever a suitable date will be found next. “I had made the bookings in a hotel but now with the lockdown, having a normal shaadi seems impossible. My money that I had deposited for the wedding is also either gone or stuck,” says Alka, who is now contemplating having a small gathering of just family members after the lockdown is lifted to hold the wedding in her house.

NO VENUE FOR LATER IN THE YEAR
The weddings or engagements that have been postponed have little chance of being held or accommodated at the same venue later in the year because the bookings for that period have already been made. As Alka tells us,”Even if we postpone the wedding, most of the venues are already booked on the auspicious dates.” A fact that Arjun Singh, director of a prominent resort on Faizabad road agrees with. “We had approximately 46 bookings during this time, which have been cancelled for now. Now the catch is that while most people want the booking to be postponed for the later part of the year, we do not have availability of the venue as it is already booked for those dates,” says Arjun.
Jatin Ahuja, owner of wedding banquet halls and hotels in the city says that he too had more than two dozen bookings for weddings and engagements in April but most have been postponed now. “All the people who had a booking with us have postponed the weddings as of now. They informed us that they will discuss the next available dates but it will be hard to accommodate them as we already have the bookings for the next sahalak,” he says. 



WHAT HAPPENS TO THE REFUND?
The manager of a prominent hotel in Gomti Nagar, on the basis of anonymity, shares that as of now making refunds for bookings already made is not possible. “Though the weddings have been postponed at our hotel too, we are not sure regarding the policy of the refund as of now.” But for smaller venues, the problem of giving back the booking amount is a big problem. Ashok Singh, (name changed on requests) manager of a wedding venue, says that since the booking amount is shared with third parties like decorators, caterers etc, it is very difficult to give it back. “We share the booking amount with the decorators, light wallahas, phool wallahs, etc. These are small vendors and asking them to give us back the money at this time is not possible, so for us to return the booking amount is impossible at this momentin time. At the most, we can ask the people to postpone the date to a later available vacant slot at our venue.” 

