Lockdown: More than half of Gujarat’s shops remain closed
2020-04-29
GANDHINAGAR: Although the state government is yet to carry out an in-depth survey on the adverse impact that the coronavirus pandemic and subsequent lockdown has had on employment, figures from the state labour and employment department suggest that a large majority of the 9.8 lakh shops and establishments which employ 12.70 lakh people, have remained shut during the lockdown.





More than a month into the lockdown, the state government, on April 26, granted permission to shops and establishments to function albeit under stringent precautions.

However, shops and establishments have not been allowed to open in the four major cities of Ahmedabad, Surat, Vadodara and Rajkot as they have registered high number of Covid-19 cases. The majority of shops and establishments in the state are in these four cities.

Despite the relaxation, around 5.60 lakh shops in Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Rajkot and Surat are still waiting to open. Labour department figures say that there are 6.59 lakh shops and establishments in these four districts, employing between 8.50 lakh and 9 lakh people.

Key sources said that these figures are of registered shops and establishments, and and do not include the very large number of small roadside shops. “Temporary and long-term unemployment figures for this section, which is not registered with the government, must also be documented and they must be given some relief,” a source said.

Jayendra Tanna, president, Traders’ Federation, said that Gujarat is a state of traders and only about 10% of shops are registered under the Shops and Establishments Act. “About ten lakh shopkeepers are registered under the Act, and all of them have suffered huge losses. Although the government has permitted opening of shops in places other than four big cities, the trader community is still facing huge losses,” he said. 

He added that if restrictions continue after May 3, shopkeepers will face serious problems and there is a need to announce an economic support package for them.


