Lockdown halts Sada-Varunapuri work, expected deadline now Jan 2021
2020-04-22
PANAJI: Just as construction of the four-lane road from Varunapuri junction to Sada junction, including a flyover, was restarting, the lockdown imposed in view of the coronavirus threat has stalled work all over again. Officials said that work is now expected to begin only after the lockdown is lifted, and once the PWD supervisory committee approves the cost-sharing formula for the additional works that are being taken up.

Chief minister Pramod Sawant reviewed the status of the long-delayed project over a month ago and asked Gammon India Engineers & Contractors Limited to expedite the project.

The Rs 397 crore-undertaking had come to a standstill due to four changes in the project sought by PWD. Gammon India has asked the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and PWD to clear the payment for the additional works.

“The supervisory committee meeting to approve the cost sharing formula for the additional works has to be held. Once that issue is resolved, the work will pick up pace,” said a PWD official.

Gammon India bagged the contract to build the 5.2km long Sada to Varunapuri road in September 2015, with PWD executing the project and Mormugao Port Trust and NHAI sharing the cost. The construction cost of the elevated portion of the four-lane road near Baina beach is being borne by the Goa government.

Though the work order was issued in October 2015, work has progressed at a slow pace due to land acquisition hurdles, political interference, delayed payments and revision of the project plans.

“We expect the project to be completed by January 31, 2021,” said an MPT official.

A PWD official said that they had planned to complete as much work as possible before the monsoon began as the rains will once again slow down the pace of the work. However, due to the lockdown and uncertainty on its extension, a fresh timeline will have to be drawn up.

As per the present funding formula, NHAI will bear 28.5% of the project cost, the Goa government 37.18%, and MPT, 34.25%, with grants of Rs 187 crore from the Union ministry of shipping.

In January and February, Sawant held a meeting with the officials of the ministry of road transport and highways and the Union ministry of shipping, as well as PWD and Gammon India, regarding the projects.


