Lockdown hits projects in Bihar
2020-03-27
PATNA: The lockdown to prevent spread of coronavirus might lead to delay in completion of several infrastructure projects, such as roads, flyovers, foot overbridges and underpasses. Many real estate projects may also bear the brunt of the lockdown.

State road construction minister Nand Kishor Yadav said the projects were stalled keeping in mind health of workers. “Thousands of workers and engineers work day and night together to construct a road or a bridge. It is obvious that we will face loses. However, our only concern under the present circumstances is the safety of our workers,” he added.

Bihar State Road Development Corporation Limited (BSRDCL) managing director Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said the construction work would remain suspended till the lockdown continues. Some of the key projects which have been put on hold are listed below.

Road projects: Work on several roads in Patna, including Digha-Danapur elevated road, R-Block Digha road and Lohia Path Chakra, was in full swing before coronavirus reared its ugly head in the city. The much-awaited Lohia Path Chakra project, under which short elevated roads and multiple underpasses are proposed to be made at prominent traffic points between Lalit Bhavan and Vidyut Bhavan on Bailey Road, was expected to be completed by the end of this year.

AIIMS-Digha elevated road and R-Block Digha road were targeted to be completed by May or June. A BSRDCL official said more than 98% of construction work had already been completed on AIIMS-Digha elevated road.

The Saguna Mor-Danapur road was to be converted into an eight-lane road by August this year. Other stalled road projects are Ganga Path or Ganga expressway and Bihta- Sarmera road.

Bridges and flyovers: The rehabilitation of Mahatma Gandhi Setu and construction of a six-lane Kachchi Dargah-Bidupur bridge have also been halted. Work on construction of R-Block flyover connecting Mithapur ROB to Bhikhari Thakur ROB has also been suspended.

Patna Metro project: Chief minister Nitish Kumar had on March 17 approved the alignments of Patna Metro Rail project. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), which is executing the project in a joint venture with the state government, had started conducting soil test. However, the lockdown has hit this project too.

Smart City projects: A slew of Patna Smart City projects were to be inaugurated in March and April this year. However, these projects will now be delayed for at least a couple of months due to the lockdown. Earlier this year, Rahul Kapoor, director, Smart Cities Mission, Union ministry of housing and urban affairs, had suggested grand launch of a 72-foot-high mega screen at Gandhi Maidan. He had also asked PSCL officials to complete work on Adalatganj pond redevelopment before the upcoming Assembly elections in October-November this year.

Underpasses and foot overbridges: Pedestrians in the state capital will have to wait for another few months to see foot overbridges and underpasses at different places in the city. Bidding process for foot overbridges at Rupaspur, Rajendra Nagar and two underpass escalators near Samrat Ashoka Convention Centre was initiated by Bihar Rajya Pul Nirman Nigam Limited and Bihar State Road Development Corporation Limited this year. However, the projects aimed at easing traffic and pedestrian movement on busy roads, are now likely to be delayed.

Ropeway at Rohtasgarh hill: Work on installation of ropeway at Rohtasgarh hill in Rohtas district and Mundeshwari hill in Kaimur district, which was likely to commence in March this year, would be delayed again following the countrywide lockdown. Similarly, Science City at Rajendra Nagar in Patna, interstate bus terminus near Zero Mile and Bapu Tower projects may also get delayed. 

Real estate projects: Several real estate projects are also bearing the brunt of lockdown. Sachin Chandra, president of Bihar chapter of Builders’ Association of India, said construction activity has almost come to a standstill and homebuyers will have to deal with delayed project deliveries. 


