Gujarat: Lockdowns, rising heat correlate to Covid-19 case growth dip
2020-05-25
AHMEDABAD: A correlation study of the lockdowns and rising temperatures with average of daily growth rate of Covid-19 cases in the state has revealed that the daily growth rate dipped significantly as temperatures rose. The study was carried out by an Ahmedabad liver transplant surgeon.


The study involving 6,625 Covid-19 cases and 479 deaths found that the average daily growth rate of Covid-19 cases dipped from as high as 78% in the initial period of the lockdown, beginning March 25, to 8.32% by May 6. The average temperature during this period rose from 34°C to 44°C. When correlated with corresponding four lockdowns, the average dip in Covid-19 cases’ growth rate was from 15.30% to 3.46%. In fact, a similar trend was observed by Dr Bhavin Vasavada, the liver surgeon at a city-based hospital, when it came to the growth rate of positive cases being reported each day. Towards the beginning of the lockdown, the growth rate of patients turning Covid-19 positive was 16%. By the fourth phase of the lockdown, the figure hovered between 6.5% and 6.8%.



“Let me be clear, it’s a correlation study of lockdown days and temperature rise that saw a dipping daily growth rate of Covid-19 cases,” said Vasavada. “I have not attributed these factors as reasons for the dipping Covid-19 growth rate. That’s a matter of scientific investigation.” He added, “Since it’s a new virus and many of us have no immunity against it, it must be one of the many reasons why there is rapid spread. But heat and dry conditions do play a role in curtailing respiratory droplets and fomites, which are essential for viral transmission.” Vasada had taken Ahmedabad’s temperature as reference, “as maximum cases, almost 80%, were being reported from the city.”

A senior health expert told TOI that an epidemiologist should evaluate this correlation study. “It is worth noting that when any epidemic spreads, the day-on-day growth rate may decrease,” the expert said. “It is also to be seen how the Covid-19 spread would have turned out had it happened during winter months. Similar correlation studies should be analyzed in Europe, China, or the Americas.”


