Bihar: Lockdown shadow on a young woman’s last journey
2020-03-28
PATNA: The Covid-19 lockdown, essential as it is to check the spread of the virus, is having unintended consequences for people, even those who are dead.


The dead tell no tales, but if they could, the woman— whose dead body was seen being carried at the Ganga Pathway by two of her family members for cremation on Saturday afternoon— would have rued that even in her last journey she had to face hurdles.

The dead body of 25-year-old Sanju Devi had to be carried by two of her family members from PMCH, where she passed away on Saturday morning, to Gulabi Ghat for cremation as they were denied the facility of an ambulance.

Sanju’s uncle Hridey told this newspaper that the PMCH administration denied them ambulance to take the body to their village for her last rites. “We were forced to carry the dead body to the ghat as no public vehicle was available. We don’t know anyone in the city and have no money and food. We did not get any help from the administration,” he said.

“When we pleaded for the vehicle, they asked us to pay Rs 6,000 for the ambulance service. It is not possible for us to pay that much money. We had got the ambulance at Biharsharif Sadar Hospital without any charge from where we brought her here yesterday,” he added.

Sanju, wife of Feku Paswan, was admitted at PMCH on Friday at 1pm and she died after a few hours. The woman was taken to PMCH from Biharsharif Sadar Hospital at 8am when Sanju complained of stomach- ache and breathlessness.

Her father Suninder Paswan, mother Usha Devi and uncle (chacha) Hridey Paswan accompanied her to PMCH from Nalanda in an ambulance provided by Sadar Hospital. She was from Bakkhar block under Nursaray police station in Nalanda.

The deceased’s paternal aunt, Chandani Devi said Sanju was suffering from stomach ache for last 15 days and she was also a diabetic. “She was on medication prescribed by Vardhaman Institute of Medical Sciences (VIMS), Pawapuri. After the lockdown, we were unable to get the required medicine,” she added.

“Since last night, the pain was unbearable for her. In the morning, we admitted her to VIMS from where she was referred to Sadar Hospital and then to PMCH, where she passed away. We could not even perform her last rites properly,” Chandani said over phone from Nalanda.

PMCH superintendent Dr Bimal Karak did not respond to the messages sent for his reaction.

Authorities on the other hand, advised people to follow social distancing guidelines in cremation and burial as well.

Sanjay Kumar Agarwal, Patna divisional commissioner told this newspaper that for the final funeral procession to crematorium and burial ground, the residents have to coordinate with the local police station with their respective areas.

“For burial at graveyard, local committees help the people for all arrangements whereas for cremation at ghats, the PMC provides assistance. People should also ensure that there are not more than 20 people at the funeral procession during lockdown. There are also mortuary vans available at PMCH and some other private bodies, which is free of cost,” Agarwal said.

“The charges are very nominal and free for those who can’t afford. It is managed by a private company, which has been roped in on contract basis. There is no restriction for people to perform last rites at cremation sites,” Harshita, the PRO of PMC said.

