Kolkata: Lockdown violators find novel ways to flout rules
2020-04-18
KOLKATA: People are coming up with various ways to flout the lockdown rules. From using police stickers, medical staff passes to travelling in ambulances, they have tried every trick in the book. 


On Thursday and Friday, some of these tricks came under the scanner of police who slapped the accused with stringent cases of cheating and impersonation.

At Howrah, cops traced the lockdown violators using CCTV and drones. They sent notices to the houses of those whom they could not catch on the spot. 

Cops said that the biggest incident in the past 48 hours had been reported from Kasba. Basudeb Pramanik, a resident of Swinhoe Street, was arrested for using a fake police board to travel around the city. He was stopped at a naka check near Kasba police station and arrested. 

In another incident, four men were arrested from the south suburban border for travelling in an ambulance to reach Canning from Garden Reach. They claimed that one of them had been suffering from stomach infection. 

But a medical test revealed that they were faking the illness. They have been sent to a quarantine centre, after which they would be put under arrest. Earlier, six men had been caught at Patuli on their way to Bongaon.

Lalbazar said they have introduced special night checking and asked every OC or additional OC to stay at police stations at night. 

“We have asked the police to use our app and find out whether the QR code on the e-pass is genuine. We have taken action against 370-odd people so far for not wearing masks. On an average, around 450 to 600 people are being arrested and 100-120 cars are being seized daily,” said an IPS officer.

Chief minister Mamata Banerjee, on Friday, asked the police to engage club members and Durga Puja organizers in developing community reach. “They can report any issue in their areas to the police,” said Banerjee. 

Cops will seek their help to know how many people are conforming to the lockdown and wearing masks.


