Lockdown Heroes: Zeal to help the destitute drives him
2020-04-09
NEW DELHI: On March 23, news TV networks showed thousands of daily-wage earners in dire straits due to the nationwide lockdown, some in a locality not too far from where 35-year-old Ambrish lives. For the driver, this was the trigger to put to use whatever little resources he had in helping such people. Roping in other family members, Ambrish began preparing food and distributing it to the poor by noon. 

Ambrish, father of a six-year-old boy and four-year-old girl, lives in Faridabad and works as a driver for a senior advocate in Delhi. Ambrish has refused help offered by his employer for the food project. "He said he would let me know when he needed assistance, but hasn’t asked for anything," the lawyer says.

Ambrish is not a wealthy man, but his heart is rich. The humble driver himself says, "Ye koi badi cheez nahi hai. Agar koi soche ki bahut kharcha hoga, aisa nahi hai. Saada bhojan bhi bana ke de sakte hain. Khud banane se kharcha nahi hota aur gareebon ko khila sakte hain (It’s not a difficult to prepare simple meals and cook ourselves to save on the expenses. It’s not true that one will end up spending a lot)."

His wife, brother and brother-in-law step in to prepare 150 packets of food he takes help of his wife, brother and brother-in-law. The day starts at around 6.30am, when he wakes up. An hour later, he is in the kitchen, assisted by his wife, to begin the cooking. The meals mostly comprise vegetable pulao or biryani. They pack the food in aluminium foil containers and take them to the jhuggis.

"We leave home in a car around noon to reach the shanties near the MCD toll booth where around 50 people live. We distribute some packets there. We then drive to a place called Naya Pul to help 30-35 persons, following which we go to Labour Chowk in Sector 37, where there are 15-20 needy people," says Ambrish.

He recounts the first day of the food distribution on March 25, when he met someone who hadn’t eaten for three days. "Luckily, many others now provide meals to the people affected by the lockdown. When I go out to distribute food packets, I see others doing the same," says Ambrish.

The driver plans to carry on till April 14, when the lockdown is scheduled to be called off. He derives inspiration from his 70-year-old mother, who lives in their native village. It is his mother who always advised him to share whatever he had with others. "I initially distributed groceries to some hungry people, but decided I should do more and started cooking meals myself," he smiles.

While distributing food, Ambrish takes all precautions — wearing a mask and frequently using hand sanitiser, and those awaiting food are told to maintain a distance between themselves. "It’s not necessary to feed 500 people at once. Start with what you are capable of," Ambrish suggests. "If people contribute even a little, it adds up to a lot."


