#LockdownEffect: How will the cherished Easter traditions change this year?
2020-04-09
The midnight masses, long confession lines, crossbuns-making, palm-leaf processions, egg hunts… all those familiar sights and traditions of the Easter week would be different this year, all thanks to the Covid-19 induced lockdowns. But, churches, devotees and youngsters in Kerala are all set to make it special in ways they can, thanks to technology.



Virtual is the way

The Way of the Cross prayer, the Easter night vigil, Passover day and Good Friday prayers, all of them would reach the devotees across factions through live streaming. Fr Milton Kalapurakkal from Kochi says, “All major churches will stream their services live. The Palm Sunday prayers were already conducted online and instead of the leaves from church, some people used their own from homes, and got them symbolically blessed.” 

Kochi-based entrepreneur Ann Maria George says, “My family members dial in from various locations to recite Way of The Cross via video conferencing. We are planning the same for the family Easter breakfast, this year.”


A family affair

A handful of church traditions will be confined within four walls, this year. Tourism professional Teena Tony says, “Earlier, my extended family used to join us for Maundy Thursday’s breaking of the bread, but this time it’s just my husband, son and me.” 

Meanwhile, Fr Noble Parakkan from Mananthavady says, “We asked families to preside over prayers of Palm Sunday and Good Friday, themselves. As for the serving of choruka (the bitter concoction served on Good Friday), families would be making it with bitter gourd and its leaves at home and serve it post prayers.”


What’s missing?

However, many says that they will miss a lot of the trademark festive traditions such as the Palm Sunday and Good Friday processions, the washing of the feet and even the confession - considered the most important one in the year. Fr Noble says, “Following the canon law, Pope has asked people to express contrition, and resolve to return to sacrament the earliest they can. It is a provision that is used by church in such extraordinary circumstances.”


A scaled down Vishu

Amid the lockdown, Vishu too will be celebrated minus the usual family get-togethers, temple visits or the hansel (kaineettam) from the elders to children. “My two kids, who are aged 11 and 10, are already asking if they won’t be able to get a kaineettam from all the elders and not meet cousins,” says Kochi-based entrepreneur Lakshmi Raju. She says that usually the uncles, aunts and cousins on her husband’s side, from Kochi and even those settled in other states, will get together at his family home in Vytilla. “We go to the temple, have a pot luck lunch and all of us play games or catch up. There will definitely be something lacking this Vishu, but we are preparing to put together a kanni with whatever is available and have started preparing the things for a small-scale sadhya in our apartment this time around,” she says.

- With Inputs from Anna.Mathews@timesgroup.com

