‘Lockdown must for India, it will delay Covid-19 community spread’
2020-04-12
Veteran pulmonologist Dr Ashok Arbat is a pioneer of multi-speciality hospitals in Nagpur. He has seen, studied and treated SARS, swine flu, Zika, and other epidemics. His publication ‘Analysing the clinical profile of swine flu/ Influenza — A H1N1 infection in Central India’ was appreciated worldwide through international journal of viral diseases. His experience makes him an authority to speak on Covid-19. In an interview with TOI, he spoke at length on lockdown extension, post-lockdown situation, heard immunity and post-Covid situation in terms of health care scenario. Q. Do you think extending the lockdown will help? A. I am sure it will. Because in our country, we don’t have any better option than lockdown to restrict spread of Covid-19. Presently, we are working on the formula of test the suspects and isolate the patients. This aims to stop community spread of Covid-19. Use of masks and social distancing aim at the same. All this will delay the community spread. Q. You mean lockdown and social distancing will only delay and not stop Covid-19 community spread? A. Yes. And this delay is the only option available to us. Data says that transmission rate of Covid-19 from primary patient to others is between 1.5 and 3. This means, one patient can infect about 3 patients even during isolation. If not isolated, one patient can infect 406 others. These figures are from China. Population density of India is 440.29 person per square km compared to 148.81 of China. So, India is 2.96 times denser than China. This means, one patient can infect not less than 1,000 patients in India. Imagine the situation if we lift the lockdown and let everyone roam around freely. Q. But, can’t we isolate all positive patients in hospitals and lift the lockdown?A. This won’t be a good idea. Because, thousands of asymptomatic positive patients are there around us. In fact, of all the Covid-19 patients, 18% show no symptoms even during 14 days of incubation period. They get cured by their own antibodies. But these healthy patients can always spread the infection to those who are not so healthy or vulnerable — like aged people. So, exposing everyone to the virus will be dangerous. Q. How to identify an asymptomatic carrier? A. There is only one way to identify this — conducting tests. Many countries are conducting mass tests and isolating infected people. In India, we have limitations on tests. So, we have decided to follow total lockdown and avoid social contacts. During this lockdown, it becomes easy for us to locate positive patients, trace their contacts, high risk individuals and conduct their tests subsequently. Q. But, don’t you think exposing more people to the virus will develop heard immunity?A. Heard immunity is the final remedy for viral disease. First solution is vaccination, which currently is not available. Second is isolation, which we are doing. Third is heard immunity. This develops when more than 60% of the total population gets infected. This means more than 85 crore Indians. Now, more than 80% of these might be in mild category of infection, and they will recover by taking rest at home. About 10% will be in moderate category of infection and they will need medical treatment. About 5-7% are vulnerable and they will need ICU care, ventilators and hospitalization. Looking at the population, four crore people in India will need these services. But we don’t have enough hospital beds, ICUs and ventilators even if we count all private and government establishments in country. Q. So, heard immunity is not for us? A. At least not at this point of time. We need to work a lot on our health infrastructure. We need to increase our health budget. More than 80% of India’s health burden is on private sector. We need to provide some relief to this sector. Not more than 5% of Indians have health insurance. We need to work on it too. This virus is not the last one to infect us. We must get ready for many such viruses in future. Q. What is the way to safeguard most people and withdraw lockdown, at least partially? A. Lockdown or no lockdown, we must follow social distancing. We must keep aged people away from young members. Even if lockdown opens, people having diabetes and hypertension should not go out and mix with others. Work from home should become new normal. We have started following it in hospitals. Young doctors are the front line warriors. Seniors above 60 years of age are only guiding them. All departments will have to follow this until we discover vaccine for Covid-19, which is at least a year away from now. Grandparents need to stay away from children who could be asymptomatic carriers. Israel has done this and successfully restricted cases. Q. Do you agree when people say Indians have better immunity and we can get away with this infection?A. I agree that Indians have better immunity, but this won’t end Covid-19. It’s due to our immunity we have less number of cases and less number of deaths as compared to international data. But this immunity cannot stop spread of virus. Our population is our weakness here. We have many patients of diabetes, hypertension and obesity. They are our weakness. Post Covid-19, at least 40 crore Indians will fall below poverty line, crores of us may lose our jobs and economy will be in doom. Collectively, this will affect our immunity. To avoid this, we must go ahead with present situation and lock ourselves down in homes.