Lockdown? Not in Pernem, where foreigners arrange rave parties
2020-04-26
MAPUSA: While the world is fighting the coronavirus pandemic by staying at home and maintaining social distance, foreigners in Pernem are busy arranging and hosting rave parties. One such attempt was foiled by locals of Paliem and Arambol late on Friday.

Sources said a cashew farmer at his distillery on the Arambol plateau saw about 30 motorcycles travelling in the jungle through narrow lanes near the famous banyan tree.


We checked, but didn’t find any foreigner: Police

On his way home, he informed locals that foreigners have moved inside the jungle. Already upset with music parties held earlier, locals dialled the Arambol police outpost.

Two Robert police vehicles arrived at the site and, along with locals, marched towards the banyan tree. Seeing them, the foreigners fled inside the jungle.

Furious locals then deflated tyres of the motorcycles.

“After locals informed us that foreigners are arranging the party, police immediately rushed to the site. We checked, but didn’t find any foreigner,” said Pernem PI Sandesh Chodankar.

But when TOI visited the site on Saturday morning, foreigners were trooping out of the forest towards the two-wheelers.

“How much can police monitor and make everyone follow lockdown guidelines? I appeal to everyone not to provide their bike (on rent) to foreigners who indulge in such activities,” said Santosh Korkankar, who volunteered and joined police in its search.

A few days ago, sources said, another party was organised by foreigners at Arambol which went on till 4am and was stopped only after intervention of the locals.

Morjim, too, saw another party by the foreigners.

“After the lockdown was announced, guests left hotels and moved into houses (on rent). At Nasnoskarwada in Arambol, there are plenty of foreigners who stay in houses and roam freely, violating lockdown norms,” said one local.

At Bhomwada in Paliem, foreigners have captured a huge banyan tree and have now started living there.

“We fear to enter cashew plantations as about 25-30 foreigners are seen there, smoking and doing other activities. They even cook food there. We fear an outbreak of coronavirus here,” said another villager.


