Lockdown woes: Stranded in Nepal, 25 labourers from UP appeal for help
2020-05-04
Bareilly: At least 25 labourers of UP's Moradabad are currently stuck in Butwal, Nepal - around 700 km away from home. All packed in one small room inside a factory, they not only face shortage of food or money but are extremely worried of getting infected by Covid-19. With the ongoing lockdown in both the countries, these distressed labourers have now made an urgent appeal to the Central government in Delhi to bring them home.

In a video clip widely circulated on social networking sites, the labourers could be seen pleading for immediate assistance after being left stranded for over two months. “We are running out of food, money and have no sufficient space to sleep since we are forced to use a common room," they could be heard saying. With families also struggling back home to feed themselves, and left with very little hope, these 25 men have now requested PM Narendra Modi and CM Yogi Adityanath to take note of their plight.

On Sunday, one of the stranded labourers, Waseem Khan told TOI, "We had requested our factory authorities to provide us with transport facility, but they declined. We have been told that we can’t move from here until the lockdown is lifted."

The resident of Katghar in Moradabad said that the stranded group is facing tremendous hardships. "We are living in one room inside the factory where we work with very limited ration."

Worryingly, the possibility of getting infected by corona is real, he said, as they cannot follow social distancing, they don't have any face masks or sanitisers.

Another member of Khan's stranded group, Mohammed Shareef said, “Ever since lockdown came into force, work has been shut. And so, we cannot earn any money to survive. So far, we were using the ration in limited quantities, but it is also running out."

Shareef claimed that they had requested for ration from the factory authorities in Nepal but they asked us to "make our own arrangements".

"We, therefore, request our country's authorities to help us out,” the labourer pleaded after going through a harrowing two-month experience.

The 25 workers which includes one from Nagina, Bijnor, had travelled to Butwal, near Sonauli, close to the Indo-Nepal border, to do metal works such as peeling and polishing in the neighbouring country's industrial area in February. Most of them are residents of Barbalan, Jama Masjid, Karula localities under Mughalpura and Katghar police stations of Moradabad.

“My family [wife and two children] live in a rented place and we are very poor. There is no one to look after my family or to help my wife in getting food. She struggles daily to get household items due to lockdown. Also, we are left with very limited resources now,” another labourer Saabir Ali, a resident of Barbalan, said, summing up the dire situation of the 25 stranded labourers from India. 


