Lockdown to be eased as per govt directives: Mundhe
2020-05-31
Nagpur: The Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) will abide by the guidelines issued by both central and state governments on easing the lockdown. The lockdown 4, which will end on May 31, will not be withdrawn completely at one go but rather in a staggered manner, according to municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe.

In a near hourlong live social media interaction session on Saturday, the civic body chief said all establishments, including parlours, gyms and public transport system, will be given permission to start their functioning. “These establishments were shut to contain spread of the disease. In due course of time, all will be given permission to start their business activity but of course with some guidelines to follow,” he said.

The state government acceded to Mundhe’s request to extend the city’s lockdown which was to end on May 22.

Mundhe said the virus is to stay even if the lockdown is not extended further but Nagpurians can help it to contain from spreading. “If people make certain preventive measures a habit while venturing out like using mask, maintaining Covid distancing and regular washing of hands etc, the virus can be contained,” he said.

He explained what all precautions did the NMC take and make Nagpur an ideal city in containing spread of the virus. 

According to him, the new containment areas were the result of people returning from other severely coronavirus-affected cities like Mumbai, Pune etc

Mundhe also answered questions posed by citizens on the occasion. One Jyoti Kamble raised the issues of controversy in declaring containment zones, problems like lack of sanitation, poor quality food being served to people in quarantine centres, among others. 

Mundhe refuted all the allegations and said that the NMC always ensured good facilities at both containment zones and quarantine centres, respectively.

He explained the importance of quarantining people from containment zones and clarified that rooms in MLA hostel has attached toilets, while other quarantine centres have facilities on every floor and the NMC ensured disinfection of all the centres every day.

Shashank Wandile, another resident of the city, raised a widely perceived belief that most patients in the city got infected due to mass quarantine, to which, Mundhe claimed that none of 474 patients in Nagpur who had been tested positive contracted the infection either in quarantine centres or at isolation centres and hospitals. He also justified his statement and cited examples of Ravi Nagar where one of the persons tested negative on first day of quarantine and tested positive on 14th day. This is neither the first case nor the last one when a person can come positive on 14th day or even on 28th day too, Mundhe said. 

He also rubbished questions on terming him as arrogant, dictator and media savvy, saying that he had never worked to gain publicity and always worked for society and people at large. 

The civic body chief further informed that it almost readied five of its hospitals to fight coronavirus cases. All these five NMC-run hospitals will have 450 beds, he said. 


