Lockdown blues at veg markets, haats in Bihar
2020-04-30
PATNA: The number of customers visiting the traditional ‘haats’ in rural areas and vegetable markets in towns and cities in the state has fallen sharply as a result of the coronavirus outbreak and the consequent lockdown as well as enforcement of social-distancing guidelines.


The famous tribal ‘haat’ at Mirganj, 22 km west of Purnia in Dhamdaha block, is a case in point. “Before the coronavirus outbreak, traders and customers used to come here with their merchandise, including vegetables, spices, cloths and sundry other items, like vermilion and ‘bindi’ dots, from places in a 10 km radius, but now their number has fallen by around 60%,” said Kumod Kumar, a local resident.

Purnia, Katihar, Araria and Kishanganj districts have together have the largest concentration of tribal population in Bihar after the creation of Jharkhand in 2000. Even the tribals living in half a dozen villages near Mirganj have not been coming to the haat. “They used to come here with a visible amusement as if going to a fair,” said a regular customer at the haat.

Incidentally, ‘haats,’ which open twice a week, are considered primary markets, where traders sell their merchandise directly to farmers and others of different economic and social standing without the involvement of middlemen.

Before 2000, Bihar used to have 2,894 traditional haats in the state. After the separation of Jharkhand, it is now left with around 2,000 of them. However, small new haats have also come up, one in each in 8,300 panchayats.

In contrast, the state has 199 towns and cities with more than 1 lakh population, which have been provided with the institutional mechanism of municipal corporation, Nagar Parishad and Nagar Panchayats. They get vegetables from the areas in their periphery.

In towns like Purnia -- even before it reported a corona positive case on Tuesday -- vegetable markets were shifted to the outskirts of the town, or to the Zila School ground, to prevent crowding, Anshuman Kumar, a local resident, said on phone.

Foreign veggie varieties promoted: Patna: Agriculture minister Prem Kumar said that the horticulture department would provide 90% subsidy on purchase of saplings of vegetables of foreign variety by farmers, as also on the saplings of hybrid variety of vegetables, like seedless cucumber, brinjal and beats, to promote their cultivation.

“While the twin variety of vegetable cultivation is being promoted in the districts of Magadh division to cater to the culinary demand of foreign tourists, a sapling selling at Rs 10 per plant would be provided to farmers at Re 1, and the hybrid variety selling at Re 3 per plant for 30 paise per plant,” Kumar said. Overall, 24,000 saplings of foreign variety of vegetables would be sold in the five districts of Magadh division, and 4.80 lakh saplings of the hybrid variety of vegetables.

