Lockdown hits admissions in vernacular schools
2020-06-01
NAGPUR: Private-aided vernacular schools in Nagpur say the lockdown has hit their admission drive, something which is vital for their institution’s survival. 

In aided schools, salaries of teachers are paid from state coffers and the validity of their post is directly connected with the number of students enrolled.

Principal of Methodist High School (Marathi medium), Sundeep Gaikwad, said they travel to far off places to get students. “Last year I went to small villages near Pench to find students. Our school has a hostel too so we can accommodate them here, all without any charge,” said Gaikwad. 

He added that ultimately it has become a matter of survival for all. “The number of students determine the number of teachers in a school. If the numbers drop then teachers will be categorized as ‘excess’ and taken off duty. If no other position is found for them then it could mean no-work, no-pay and possibly losing retirement benefits like pension,” said Gaikwad. 

At least two staff members must be allowed in the school to start basic paperwork, feels Madhusudan Mude, principal of Major Hemant Jakate High School (Marathi medium). “Our condition is not like the big brand private schools where people themselves line up to take admissions. Here we have to go out and scout for admissions in slums and far flung areas. So schools must be allowed to open up even for non-board exam-related work so that we can try to get new admissions,” said Mude. 

Teachers of Anjuman School (Mahal), an Urdu medium institution, started survey for prospective students from March itself. “Teachers visited the outskirts of the city to find students. We pay for their transportation to school. Obviously books and uniforms are also given free of cost,” said principal Nazra Patel. 

The admission rate will take a hit this year, feels Premlata Tiwari, principal of Bhola High School. “I think admissions will be down by 50% this year as students from the outskirts won’t come due to the Covid-19 fear. I think parents will prefer to enrol them in neighbourhood schools,” said Tiwari. 


