Lockdown drives many to learn new skills in Patna
2020-04-20
PATNA: With nowhere to go for studies, work or casual hangouts, people in city are beating lockdown blues by learning new skills at home.


While some are using the opportunity to learn new languages, others are learning new skills like playing musical instruments, sketching and writing.

Bailey Road resident Rishi Shrivastava believes there’s nothing wrong in starting late when it comes to learning something new. Shrivastava, who has enrolled in a 15-day online flute course, said virtual learning methods are equally beneficial as any other method.

“Earlier I used to spend time by using my cellphone and watching TV series and movies, but the lockdown taught me to learn new skills. It has been 10 days since I started playing flute and I can already see myself playing it at a beginner’s level,” Shrivastava said, adding he is also helping his mother in household chores.

Akshat Raj, a resident of Lohanipur, is learning Spanish through online workshops and webinar. “I always wanted to learn Spanish but never got the time to pursue a course in the language. Now that I have got a lot of free time, I have enrolled myself in a Spanish course. I think it is a great way to pass the monotonous lockdown days,” Raj said.

With the world going through a crisis, Patnaites also think that learning new skills is the best way to keep negative thoughts at bay.

“Having sound mental health at this point of time is very important for every individual. Hence, I have indulged myself in new activities like dancing by following one of the country’s prominent dancers, who recently started giving online dance lessons,” said Shristy Singh, a resident of Buddha Colony.

Some people are also using the time in bettering and nurturing their growth and development. Aryan Raj of Digha-Danapur Canal Road has started doing internship in digital marketing. “Not only it is helping me reduce boredom, but also preparing me for the future,” he said.

Aryan, a second-year student, said he finds himself lucky to get a paid internship during lockdown. “Surfing the internet can sometimes help us in finding good things. I am trying my best to take advantage of the lockdown by doing something productive which will also improve my resume,” he said.

Gola Road resident Baljeet Singh, a collegian, said various apps and portals help him enhance his football skills. “I have got myself enrolled in an online football training class. It was a little expensive, but totally worth it. Two days back, my theoretical classes got over and I started practising football in my garden,” he said.

Even parents are teaching new skills to their children. “Being a working woman, it was tough for me to spend with my child. However, I am now spending a lot of time with my five-year-old son and teaching him rhymes and words,” said Maya Sinha, a resident of Boring Road. 

