Lockdown in MP to continue till May 3: CM
2020-04-15
BHOPAL: Following Prime Minister’s announcement to extend the lockdown in the country till May 3, chief minister, Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that the lockdown in MP would also continue till May 3. He said that the Prime Minister was a far-sighted man with strong willpower and under his guidance; India would win over the Coronavirus pandemic. 


He further said that Madhya Pradesh would follow what the Prime Minister has said in letter and spirit because it was the best method to control and ultimately end the Coronavirus threat in the country.

Chief minister said that detailed guidelines on the lockdown, which shall continue till May 3, would be declared on April 15 and different activities in Madhya Pradesh would be accordingly carried out.

Meanwhile, Chouhan has informed that procurement of wheat on support price from farmers will start from Wednesday, under Rabi marketing year 2020-21. He said that the date of procurement in Indore, Bhopal and Ujjain districts will be announced later.

The Chief Minister informed that this time the support price of wheat has been fixed at Rs 1925 per quintal by the government.

Chief minister Chouhan has urged the farmers to come to the procurement centre on the date and time mentioned in the SMS sent to them. He assured that the produce of all farmers will be procured at support price. He said farmers are expected to keep complete social distance at the procurement centres to prevent the spread of Corona infection.

The chief minister has told the farmers that in case of any complaint or problem related to procurement, they can contact the CM helpline number 181. He said that this time the number of procurement centres has been increased for the convenience of farmers. He advised the old and sick people not to come to the procurement centre and instead send any other representative they wish to nominate if necessary.

BOXES....INSET 

Liquor shops to remain closed till April 20

TNN

Bhopal: The state government has ordered the extension of closure of all liquor shops including country liquor shops in the state till April 20. The decision has been taken to prevent spread of Covid-19 in the state.

Cinema halls closed till May 3

TNN

Bhopal: In view of the Covid-19 infection, the state government directed all cinema halls and multiplexes in the state to remain shut till May 3. Earlier, the cinema halls were closd thill April 14.


