Hyderabad: Lockdown slams brakes on lorries, fruits of labour rot
2020-04-15
HYDERABAD: A farmer from Maharashtra got 100 lorry loads of oranges to Hyderabad in mid-March to preserve them in cold storage so that he could transport them to various parts of the country. The farmer, Anil Malpani, has now ended up with heavy losses soon after the lockdown was announced. Like Malpani’s, at least another 1,000 lorry loads of different types of fruits have also been brought to Hyderabad by traders and farmers to sell them. 

However, due to the lockdown the stock is lying in various cold storages on the outskirts of Hyderabad. “During the lockdown, vehicles should be allowed to transport fruits to different parts of the country,” said Malpani.

 

Nearly nine crore farmers are engaged in horticulture crops. Owing to the lockdown and without the facility to transport their produce, including fruits and vegetables, this farm sector is in doldrums. 

Expressing his concern, farmers’ activist and chief advisor of Consortium of Indian Farmers Associations, P Chengal Reddy said fruits and vegetables should be transported to mandis, superbazars and to consumers directly. 

“The kisan (farmer) is as important as a jawan (soldier) in protecting the country,” Chengal Reddy said and added health of people takes precedence because of coronavirus and people should have access to different types of fruits.

Reddy urged the government to allow transportation in a systematic manner as fruits are also essential commodities. “We have 310 million tonnes of horticulture crops cultivated across the country and 96 million tonnes of it are fruits,” he explained. 

A grape farmer from Nashik in Maharashtra said grapes were grown in 30,000 acres and four lakh tonnes of grapes were harvested. “With no exports, the entire stock is being sold at Rs 5 per kg as we have no means to transport,” Sandeep Dagusandhan, the grape farmer, said. Otherwise, he said, a good quality grapes would sell at Rs 200 per kg. 

Delhi is deprived of papaya which is sold throughout the year and a considerable quantity is sent from Andhra Pradesh. Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and AP produce 16.38 million coconuts and export them to Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad. With lockdown in place, the farmers are not even harvesting the coconuts. 

Similar is the plight of nearly 200 polyhouses around Hyderabad where flowers are produced for export. The growers too are staring at huge losses. 


