Lockdown effect? More children are exploring porn nowadays
2020-05-02
Indore: City based psychiatrists have noticed an increase in number of children exploring porn on the internet while being stationed in front of screens for hours. Since school work and classes have also shifted online, parents now cannot force children to stay away from laptops. 

Working parents are facing a lot of problems as despite being at home, they are not able to monitor what their child is doing on laptop. According to psychologist and cybercrime expert Nirali Bhatia, increased and unstructured time online may expose children to potentially harmful and violent content as well as greater risk of falling prey to various types of cybercrimes (such as cyberbullying, trolling, grooming) and addiction. “A lack of face-to-face contact with friends, peers may lead to heightened risk-taking such as sending, sharing sexual images or indulging in sexting,” she told TOI. 

Bhatia added that during this lockdown, parents can take an initiative to be proactive and talk to the children about the dangers online, about sexual or violent content and its effects on young minds. Many parents are also approaching cyber experts asking them to install hidden software to track what their children are doing. They should ensure that the devices their children use are all secured by an antivirus which is regularly updated plus the software of those devices is also updated in order to avoid any kind of malware hacks. 

Psychiatrist Dr Hiral Kotadiya said that access to computers and internet has become easier and voluntary exposure can happen because more time is spent on screen. “The possibility of accidental exposure is also there as something inappropriate can pop up based on adult history,” he said. There is curiosity and inquisitiveness because children are partially informed but have pressure from peer group and so they may explore it. 

Cyber bullying can also happen in such a scenario. “If they watch porn accidentally, kids below the age of six years might not understand but may repeat the things that they watch on the internet. The younger children between 6-12 years get very disturbed or angry as they don’t know how to react and so violence may increase,” he said adding that adolescents get distressed and repeated exposure might lead to addiction for them which may in turn lead to academic downfall. 


