Lockdown exacerbates pregnancy worries
2020-05-13
Visakhapatnam: When 31-year-old L Madhu learnt that she was pregnant last December, she was ecstatic at the prospect of becoming a mother. She had already suffered a miscarriage once and had then undergone three years of in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatments. 

But four months into her pregnancy, Madhu is now ridden with anxiety. She has found it difficult to buy necessary medicines, particularly a hormone-based medication that she was supposed to take until the fifth month. The medicine isn’t available with local chemists, hasn’t been available since March.

Like Madhu, many expectant mothers are now ridden with anxiety brought on by the Covid-19. The lockdown has augmented troubles as visiting doctors has become a problem. Stepping out of the home to go to a hospital increases the risk of infection manifold. Further, expectant mothers are very worried about the impact the infection can have on their unborn children.

According to Dr Bindu, consultant obstetrician and gynaecologist, the transmission of the novel coronavirus from mother to child before and during delivery is possible. Although, the proportion of affected pregnancies and its significance to the neonate remains to be determined, Dr Bindu said.

Another doctor said that she had to keep her nursing home open during the lockdown as pregnant women were missing their antenatal visits and scans which was making them nervous. Now, hospitals and private nursing homes are giving appointments to only those who are in their 35-37th week of pregnancy or are due for delivery, the doctor said.

Stakeholders of the pharmaceutical market say that logistics and the affected supply chain are causing problems. Nirmal Kumar, who works at a pharmacy opposite NRI Hospital said, “It’s not that medicines aren’t available, but many trucks are unable to reach pharmacies. Drivers are scared to move about or aren’t being allowed to.”

Dr Vidulatha, a gynaecologist said that it is important that pregnant women do breathing exercises, yoga and have a nutritious diet. 


