Lockdown extension appreciable, relaxation can be risky, say citizens
2020-04-15
Nagpur: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has extended the national lockdown until May 3 but what caught the attention of many is him saying some areas could be opened up in a limited way from April 20.

To allow this relaxation, the government will keep a keen eye on Covid-19 hotspots and take decisions so as to prevent creation of new hotspots. For the next one week, India will enforce stricter measures to contain the virus. Many citizens see this move as a major threat.

The guidelines for relaxation will be known on April 15. Areas with little corona footprint and good containment can restart some activity. Chartered accountant Sandeep Agrawal, calls this a risky step. “The common man has understood very clearly whatever is being said is for the larger good of all citizens, irrespective of all other identities that mankind has created for itself. Relaxation is not advisable, especially in red zones, unless we see a considerable and sustainable downtrend in positive cases,” he said.

Mandar Pandhare, an IT professional, said, “Considering what happened during Janata Curfew or during exodus in Delhi, a little relaxation can backfire massively and can result into community transmission.”

People are indulging in panic buying and also holding gatherings, defeating the whole idea of lockdown. Relaxation will only increase the casual attitude of the people. Jayakrishnan P, another chartered accountant, said, “Extension of lockdown is appreciable, but relaxation is not something that would be beneficial to the people. A sudden relief to people will give them a chance to gather more,” he said.

Mrunal Naik, project head at SGR Foundation, said, "If we don't want to go the Italy way, then we have to follow the lockdown. Even if there is relaxation, we should think whether it is really more necessary than life of self and others. People must cooperate, which is not seen in the city. Mass gatherings and crowd at markets are a common sight.” 

Prameela Unnikrishnan, director of dance academy Shreekrishna Nrithalayam, said, “The government has said it will look at the less-spread areas. Still taking such a huge step at this peak hour is not needed.”


