Lockdown imposed in Kangra, in rest of HP ‘janta’ curfewed themselves
2020-03-23
SHIMLA/MANALI: Roads and streets were deserted across Himachal Pradesh, as people heeded enthusiastically Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ‘janata curfew’ call on Sunday. Meanwhile, considering the detection of two positive cases of Covid-19 from Kangra district, state government on Sunday ordered complete lockdown in Kangra district.


People who returned from foreign countries on or after March 9 are asked to observe strict quarantine at home.

In an order issued by the health and family welfare department, it has been stated that complete lockdown has been ordered keeping in view the influx of large number of persons from other countries and other states and the confirmation of Covid-19 in residents of Kangra district. “It is imperative that strict measures should be undertaken with immediate effect,” it added.

During the lockdown, all interstate and intrastate movement of public and private stage and contract carriages, including taxis and auto rickshaws are prohibited. Trains and commercial aircraft are also prohibited from operating. Only vehicles for emergency services would be allowed to ply during the lockdown. All shops, commercial establishments, factories, workshops and godowns will close down their operations except shops selling groceries, food items, medicines, petrol pumps and LPG.

Order said people will stay in their homes and will come out only for basic purpose like a visit to grocery shops, vegetable shops and chemists, while no mass gathering would be allowed for social, religious or political purpose.

In the state, 31 suspected samples were tested for Covid-19 on Sunday of which 24 samples were found to be negative while result of seven samples are still awaited. Totally, 1,237 people who have been to Covid-19 affected countries are under surveillance. Of the 1,237, Bilaspur district has 39, Chamba 31, Hamirpur 114, Kangra 545, Kullu 10, Kinnaur 3, Mandi 122, Shimla 126, Sirmaur 58, Solan 113, Una 75 and Lahaul-Spiti 1.

Meanwhile in Manali, even as people stayed the whole day at home for ‘janata curfew’, a large number of migrant workers, who do not have the social security to distance themselves, moved about, causing headache to law enforcers. Also, despite ban, police detained two tourists at Kullu on Sunday and they were taken for medical examination.

At 5pm, the residents clapped their hands and banged utensils to express gratitude to all those participating in the war against coronavirus. Even at many temples, drums and trumpets could be heard at the appointed hour.

The residents here want the government to impose similar curfews for few more days to fight the virus. 

“The shops, hotels and private offices are already shut. Government offices too have limited functioning. This is the right time that government should announce curfew like situations till March 31 or at least for a week. This will prove a boon in containing the spread of the Covid-19,” Mukesh Thakur, a resident, said.


