Lockdown cuts city waste by half
2020-04-02
PATNA: Amid the lockdown, Patna is not only witnessing an improvement in air quality but also cleaner roads free from litters. Even the waste generation here has decreased by around 53%.

Patna Municipal Corporation (PMC) officials said that garbage generation in the city has dropped by 700 metric tonnes per day. The plunge in trash generation has been attributed to the closure of food joints (restaurants, hotels and roadside eateries) and commercial establishments like shopping malls, supermarkets, industries and factories, educational institutes etc.

Patna Mayor Sita Sahu said on Wednesday, “On an average, the city generates around 1,300 metric tonnes of garbage. However it has now come down to 600 tonnes following the lockdown. The shutdown of food joints has reduced wet garbage, while dry garbage generation has also gone down as offices, factories and industries among other commercial establishments are closed.”

She also added that due to the outbreak of Covid-19, the number of sanitation workers has educed by 20% as some used to travel miles to come for the work.

Empowered standing committee member and ward councillor of ward number 48, Indradeep Chandravanshi, said, “At present, there are 3,800 daily wagers, 2,000 outsourced workers and 1,300 permanent group D employees of the municipal body. They are engaged in door-to-door garbage collection, manual and machinery road sweeping, sanitisation drive and cleaning of drains.”

“The garbage collected from Patna City, Kankerbagh and Azimabad circles are directly disposed of at a landfill site at Ramchak Bariya, whereas waste collected from other three circles— Bankipore, New Capital and Patliputra —are first dumped at Bakri Bazaar near Patna Junction. On alternate days, it is disposed of at landfill site,” said Patna Nagar Nigam Staff Union president Chandra Prakash.

Kankerbagh circle executive officer SK Mishra also said that since all commercial set ups and other establishments are closed, garbage generation has sharply reduced. “Even if sanitation workers do not sweep the road for two consecutive days, the city still remains clean. There is no litter and bins placed on roadside are not full. In fact, many of the bins remain empty in residential areas as people prefer to stay indoors and come out only to purchase essential commodities.”


