Lockdown cuts waste generation
2020-04-03
Madurai: The garbage generation in the city has dropped by at least 200 tonnes a day on an average as commercial establishments including hotels and marriage halls are shut because of the lockdown. 

Madurai corporation officials said waste generation has come down from 630 to 650 tonnes a day to 425 to 430 tonnes, a 33% fall. Most of the waste collected at present is from households. The quantity of waste collected in dumper bins kept in various parts of the city has also decreased. Only those which have been kept in markets are getting filled up. Other dumper bins are not emptied as frequently as they used to be. 

A Madurai corporation official said most of the waste obtained at present is collected directly from houses through sanitary workers. Bio-decomposable waste is being processed at micro composting centres, wherever available. They are operated with full capacity as usual. Only non-decomposable waste and waste collected from areas where micro composting centres are not available are being carried to Vellaikkal solid waste management centre.

A sanitary officer said that the roads and streets in the city look much cleaner now compared earlier days. At present, the only waste accumulated on the streets is leaves and twigs. Especially not much plastic waste on streets, he said.

Stormwater drains also look better now as people are not allowed to loiter unnecessarily on roads. “Earlier people used to carry waste and dump it in stormwater drains. It will clog at various points. Since there is a restriction, people are promptly handing over waste to sanitary workers during door-to- door collection,” he said.

At least 100 light commercial vehicles, which were used for garbage collection, have been deployed to sell vegetables at various points of the city. A larger share of the workforce involved in garbage collection has now been redeployed for disinfection of public places to prevent the spread of Covid-19, officials said.


