Lockdown in Punjab: Ludhiana’s air turns cleanest among 108 cities in India
2020-03-24
LUDHIANA: With the state government announcing lockdown and curfew in view of rising coronavirus cases, Ludhiana at least got some clean air to breathe on Monday.


According to the bulletin released by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), city’s air quality index (AQI) level stood at 36 which comes under ‘Good Category’ with minimal health impact.

Importantly, Ludhiana pollution level was the lowest among cities, whose data was released by CPCB. 

The AQI is measure of air quality in an area and it includes the values for combination of many air pollutants --- respirable suspended particulate matter (RSPM), oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and sulphur, carbon monoxide, benzene, xylene etc.

Thane in Maharashtra was number two (with AQI value of 39) among 108 Indian cities for which the AQI data was released. Rupnagar in Punjab and Chandigarh were at number three spot with AQI value of 41, whereas Udaipur in Rajasthan stood fourth in the list with AQI of 42.

The data of the last few days revealed that AQI for Ludhiana had started to fall since last Saturday (105). On Sunday, AQI was 70. 

Last year on the same date, the AQI value for the city was 58 which comes under ‘satisfactory category’ with possible health impacts as ‘minor breathing discomfort to sensitive people’.

With the pollution level going down, the green activists are happy with the change. “Normally, we have heard about the city for all wrong reasons on the pollution front, but this is a pleasant change. We are happy that residents had got almost pure air to breathe which will improve their respiratory health, especially during this crucial time. Hope the authorities will study such huge fall in pollution and the reasons which can be used to minimize pollution levels in the city in the future,” said Ravi Kumar, a green activist. 

Local PPCB officials said it is good news but they will be happier if it was under normal circumstances and not under lockdown and curfew.

“It is perhaps because of industrial shutdown, no vehicular traffic etc. However, PPCB will be happy if this kind of AQI stays round the year. If people from various walks of life including industry and civil society fulfill their responsibility, the goal can be achieved too,” said Sandeep Behl, senior officer of PPCB at Ludhiana.


