Lockdown brake on pujas, devotees go tech-savvy
2020-04-01
Kolkata: The nationwide lockdown imposed to minimise the spread of novel coronavirus has put the brakes on the celebration of the last puja on the Hindu calendar: Navratri for Gujaratis and Punjabis and Basanti Puja for Bengalis. While all community celebrations have been called off, families traditionally holding Annapurna puja on Ashtami have done away with all the elaborate arrangements, carrying out the rituals with bare minimum flowers and prasad. It goes without saying that no invitation has gone out.

Pricey fruits and scarce sweets are another reason for people to cut down on prasad. In spite of supply improving, fruits are being sold for a premium and most sweet shops remained shut. People also complained about not getting enough milk to prepare kheer.

Those who took the trouble to visit flower wholesale market at Jagannath Ghat on Tuesday were shocked to see the rush for the limited fares. With local train services being suspended, flowers from Sheoraphuli, Uluberia and Kolaghat have not been arriving; even retail shops across the city have been closed. In spite of the scarcity, some sellers brought flowers to Jagannath Ghat, hitching a hike on the small trucks and battery-operated rickshaws being used by vegetable sellers. But all that they could offer were hibiscus, rajanigandha, bel, dopati and marigold. 

 Prabir Lahiri from Ballygunge Place will go ahead with his family’s Annapurna puja. But he has cancelled the order for an idol and that of a caterer. “It will be just the four of us in the family this time. I will perform the puja in the absence of a purohit,” Lahiri said.

Some Gujarati families in Bhowanipore used technology to celebrate Navratri. They read out “kathas”, connecting friends and relatives over videoconferencing. “We usually get together to chant the prayers and sing garbas, but these are extraordinary times,” said Amit Popat. His wife, Bhavika, has decorated the picture of the Goddess and kept a smartphone in front of it, through which extended families joined in the puja.

A large number of people will also celebrate Ram Navami on Thursday online. Among them is 76-year-old Bharat Kumar Raja, a resident of Elgin Road, who heads one such group that will chant the ‘Ram Raksha mantra’ over a videoconferencing app.


