Lockdown sees surge in calls to women’s helpline in Patna
2020-04-10
PATNA: Since the 21-day nationwide lockdown began on March 24, the women’s helpline number in Patna has been ringing off the hook with a large number of calls reporting domestic abuse, harassment over phone and couples seeking virtual counselling for marital discords.


According to protection officer Pramila Kumari, there has been a 75% surge in virtual counselling appointments due to the Covid-19 pandemic. “We have started counselling people via calls to follow social distancing norms. Even though, we only look after issues related to Patna, these days we are getting calls from other districts too,” Pramila said.

As a positive fallout of the lockdown, married couples, have become more understanding of each other now regarding resolving their disputes, she added.

“Counselling plays a very important role when it comes to cases related to marital problems. We counsel the victims, along with their husbands, which has somehow become more effective these days. Now, be it the fear of us taking strict action or the positive aspects of counselling, couples have become more understanding about resolving their personal issues,” she said.

According to psychologists in the city, the lockdown is having a negative impact on couples with existing problems as their frustration levels are going up due to being cooped up at home without the scope of going out and meeting people.

“Even though I have stopped face-to-face counselling at my clinic, several married couples are seeking help via calls. The lockdown has added fuel to their existing problems as not going out or meeting people is quite stressful for a lot of people,” said Dr Binda Singh, a clinical psychologist.

The women’s helpline, helmed by Pramila, is helping women deal with another issue — verbal abuse and harassment over phone by unknown callers, much like what they face in public places.

“The number of complaints regarding verbal abuse and eve teasing via phone calls and messages has surpassed domestic violence cases in the past two weeks. While victims of domestic abuse are not more than 24, the other cases, which typically include calls and messages from unknown numbers, are at least 45-50,” Pramila said.

She added: “For instance, Nidhi (name changed) sent us a message saying she was being harassed by an unknown caller few days back. She said she was being harassed by someone over phone, who called her from three different numbers. He even sent a voice note saying bad things in foul language.”

Pramila said within two hours the miscreant was nabbed.

