Lockdown impacts South Western Railway’s double-tracking work schedule
2020-03-29
MARGAO: The current lockdown in the state is likely to the see the timelines of South Western Railway’s (SWR) double-tracking project pushed back. The work of the entire Hospet-Hubballi-Tinaigat-Vasco doubling work has come to a standstill. 


SWR had set March 2021 as the tentative target to make the Margao-Sanvordem double-tracked route operational with the trial run planned for this March end.

 
 
“We had aimed to operationalise the Margao-Sanvordem route by March 2021. We had also planned to have a trial run by running an engine on the track before the end of this month. The work was underway as scheduled before the shutdown was announced, and everything had to be stalled,” Sashibhushan Sahoo, general manager, Rail Vikas Nikas Ltd (RVNL), the executing agency of SWR’s double-tracking project told TOI on Thursday.

RVNL had also planned to complete the Sanvordem-Kalay stretch of the project by June-December 2021.

“All the deadlines will now have to be rescheduled. Currently, all the offices of RVNL are closed. Operations will resume only after the lockdown is lifted,” Sahoo said, suggesting that the 21-day lockdown across the country could lead to considerable delay of the entire project. Earlier this year, the ministry of railways had notified the Hospet-Hubballi-Tinaigat-Vasco doubling project in Goa as the “special railway project” with a view to fasttrack the project. The move has been aimed to facilitate the Indian Railways to acquire land under the Railways Act, 1989, in areas where the state government has failed to do so as required for the project. The ministry of railways has also notified road over bridge (ROB) projects at Xelvon, Nessai and Cansaulim as “special railway projects”.

Meanwhile, RVNL has made arrangements to provide meals to its large number of migrant laborers, largely from Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh, working on the project, who have now been left jobless and can’t go back to their native states. 

