Lockdown impact: Panic buying hits pharma industry, stores run out of drugs
2020-04-02
MANGALURU: Only a week into the lockdown and Mangaluru is already facing a shortage of several drugs. Retailers across the district have run out of essential medicines for diabetes and blood pressure, apart from regular antiseptic liquids, cleaners, masks and sanitisers.


Despite medical stores being open as promised by the Prime Minister, queues outside the stores clearly indicate the panic and people’s state of mind. “Do we see people standing in serpentine queues in front of medical stores on a normal day?,” wondered Harish, a medical store employee.

Retailers say instead of buying drugs for 10 or 20 days in one go, driven by panic, consumers are buying them in larger quantities to last for at least three months. Lockdown has also hit the supply chain and production of pharamaceuticals. 

“At least 30% of the customers are buying in large quantities. Wholesalers and distributors are finding it difficult to supply due to transportation and staff shortage issues,” said Praveen Vijayashankar, proprietor, Janata Pharma, Marnamikatta. 

“Earlier, people used to be very particular about the brand as mentioned in the prescription. Now, on finding that a particular brand of medicine is not available, without thinking twice they settle for an alternate brand,” he added.

Speaking to TOI, Sai Radha Group managing director Manohar Shetty said: “Only 10% of the stocks are reaching the wholesalers from the super stockists also known as carry & forward agents. The supply chain has been disrupted.”

Shetty said the transportation crisis clubbed with staff shortage is a major issue faced by drug manufacturers after the announcement of lockdown. 

“We have been instructed by the government to pay employees their full salaries, but several cases of employees unwilling to step out and work despite residing close to units go unreported,” he said.

“There could be certain problems due to transportation issue, especially since most district borders are sealed, but these issues are being taken care of and streamlined by the district administration,” said a senior official from the drug control department. 

Ruling out shortage of medicines in Dakshina Kannada district, the official said, “Certain brands may not be available, but generic medicines are available. We have reached out to manufacturing units and they have already increased production. We are trying our best to ensure there is sufficient supply of all medicines even in the taluks.” 

