Meet the lockdown warriors who are aiding Chennai and its police in this #coronacrisis
2020-05-28
While health professionals, corporation workers and the police are leading the fight against the coronavirus pandemic, countless communities and volunteers have also stepped in to ease their burden. Friends of Police (FOP) is one such entity that has been on its feet ever since the lockdown was announced.

While their normal operations would include helping the police with bandobast duties, vehicle checks and crime prevention, post lockdown, the organisation’s focus has steered to COVID-19 relief work. Feeding and tending to strays, distributing hot meals and grocery packets to migrant labourers and the city’s poor are a few initiatives on their plate.

 


“Since March 26, we have been issuing 1,000 food packets daily in all zones for police officials,” says Raghunaathen, a civil service-aspirant who has been associated with FOP for the past 11 years. “We also distribute grocery bags containing around 10 essentials for the poor and needy. We have distributed over 5,000 such packets to slum areas and containment zones like Koyambedu and North Chennai.”

 


The organisation is the brain child of Prateep Philip, the DGP of CBCID in Tamil Nadu. The intent is to not just help the police, but to also help the people of the city, the DGP says, adding that volunteer applications have been quite a handful in the past few months. “The police can get overburdened and exhausted. The FOP helps the police in ensuring things like social distancing, especially during lockdown,” he says.

As for their future plans, the goal is to keep their relief work going until things become better. “We are going to reach out and help to the extent we can. When people call us and ask for help, we have not said no to anybody,” the DGP adds.

 



Origin story of FOP In 1991, Prateep was a young ASP, just three feet ahead of Rajiv Gandhi, when the former Prime Minister was assassinated in Sriperumbudur. Prateep was badly injured and extremely thirsty as he had lost a lot of blood. “A poor boy with a torn shirt volunteered to get into the jeep and gave me drops of water,” he says, adding that the moment became a turning point in his life, prompting him to start FOP. “He was a citizen who showed concern for others in a time of need. I decided to start a model on that,” he adds.


Structured approachFOP’s COVID-19 relief work follows an all-inclusive and structured approach, explains Raghunaathen. For instance, shortly after the demise of Dr Simon Hercules, and the chaos that ensued, the organisation began an initiative to combat misinformation about burials. “Through our Friends of Perished initiative, we have been issuing informative pamphlets to residents staying around Chennai’s graveyards and make them aware about how the burial of infected people does not harm the locals,” he adds.

