Lockdown a bane for many, boon for bird lovers
2020-04-21
Nagpur: Even as the lockdown has put people to hardships, it has come as a treat for bird watchers.Results of the week-long lockdown birding competition by Central India Birders Network (CIBN), a group of city birders, reveal that many bird species, which are usually found near forests and water bodies or greener landscapes, have been quite frequently sighted in city areas.Fantail flycatcher, grey francolin, yellow-footed green pigeon, paradise dlycatcher, grey heron... the long list goes on.“In Sahakar Nagar near Sonegaon where I stay, never before such a huge bird activity was noticed. I recorded fantail flycatcher and grey francolin, which are usually not found in human-dominated landscape. In Sonegaon, a heronry of cattle egrets with over 100 birds has come up,” said bird expert Nitin Marathe.Marathe attributed the buzz in bird activity to reduced air and noise pollution in the city and construction works on various projects coming to a standstill due to the lockdown.Over 55 entries were received for the lockdown bird count. One of the participants and winners of the contest is Sachet Khandeshwar from Ahmedabad. Entries were also received from other cities of Vidarbha.“The basic idea was to survey birds while being indoors during lockdown. Participants were asked to post pictures on CIBN page on Facebook for a week. The best 4 images were declared winners,” said Mayuresh Joshi, one of the coordinators of the event.Apart from common bird species like doves, sparrows, maynas, bulbuls, barbets etc, some good and rare sightings in urban area included paradise flycather by senior birder Surendra Agnihotri in Laxmi Nagar.“Though some birds like oriental honey buzzard and shikra are common, I saw nesting of shikra in my area in Madhav Nagar for the first time. The prey bird feeds on small birds and rodents and never before nesting were seen in such human-dominated landscape,” Joshi said.Birders like Anshuman Sahasrabhojanee from Shankar Nagar was lucky to sight a yellow-footed green pigeon, which is the bird of Maharashtra, small minivet, and horn bills. “Though not rare, these birds were not common in urban areas and we used to visit water bodies near city to sight them,” said Sahasrabhojanee, the first runner-up of the contest.“May be presence of these birds was there but we could not sight them due to air and noise pollution and disturbance. Rather, we never focused to look after these species. I recorded painted stork and red-napped Ibis in Hudkeshwar where I stay,” said Abhinav Bapat, second runner-up of the contest along with Archu Waranashiwar.Winner Sachet Khandeshwar said in an industrial city like Ahmedabad, sighting of non-urban birds like blyth’s reed warbler from an apartment is something to study. His evening picture of a black kite in the shadow of full moon bagged the first prize.“We will award Khandeshwar with a copy of a pocket guide on ‘Birds in Central India’ published by CIBN after lockdown is over,” said Chinmay Joshi, another coordinator of the event.The best part of the competition was that Pushkar Kulkarni of CIBN took the event to webinar on World of Birds in association with Vidarbha Trekkers to enlighten the audience. “Due to encouraging response, we are planning to conduct similar webinars and competitions online to promote birding while staying home and boost hobby at the same time,” said Kulkarni.