Surat: Lockdown keeps three infant girls away from new parents’ love
2020-05-23
SURAT: If it would not have been for the global pandemic and its aftermath, three infant girls from Surat would by now have been with their adoptive parents, enjoying a new chapter in their lives. But the lockdown has kept that joy in abeyance not only for the trio, but also for the would-be parents, while the baby girls are being looked after in a children’s home at present.

Only a few months old, these baby girls at V R Popawala Children Home have already been cleared legally for adoption and would be united with their foster parents, moment the restrictions are lifted. 

The girls, brought to the centre in the past six months, were abandoned by their biological parents and rescued by the police. According to the norms, after the cops rescue an abandoned child and brings it to the safety of these homes, they start searching for the actual parents. But most of the time, their efforts to trace the parents meet a dead end.

“Not being able to locate these girls’ actual parents, the cops brought the case to the Child Welfare Committee (CWC) urging it to declare their status as ‘open for adoption’,” explained Jayendra Thakore, child welfare officer, Surat.

Once cleared, the child’s details are sent to the Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA), New Delhi, which publicizes the case. 

“Within a matter of few days, CARA ensures that the abandoned or orphaned child gets adopted. However, owing to the ongoing lockdown, no adoption has taken place from the city after January. The online portal is also closed due to the current situation,” said Hemant Gamit, manager of Specialised Adoption Agency, (SAA), that functions at city level for CARA.

On an average, 12 children from the diamond city get adopted in a year. The adoption process is likely to restart only after the coronavirus spread is contained. In a recently held meeting state officials of the adoption agency have expressed that the adoption should be put on hold as it involves people migrating from one place to another. An official informed that adoptions can start after June if situation improves across the country.


