Lockdown breach: Over 1L vehicles seized, 17k fined
2020-04-12
Prayagraj: Police issued 17,968 challans and seized 1,15,875 vehicles while penalising those found violating guidelines issued during the lockdown, which reached its 18th day on Friday, enforced to contain the spread of novel coronavirus. 

“Ever since the lockdown was announced, we are keeping a strict vigil on commuters violating rules and have put up 185 barricades across the district to restrict traffic movement. We seized 300 vehicles till Friday and realised Rs 1,62,600 in fine from violators,” said SSP (Prayagraj) Satyarth Aniruddha Pankaj. 

The SSP also said that since March 24 247 cases have been registered against 1,031 individuals, while 372 arrests were made under section 188 of the IPC during lockdown. “Another five cases were registered against five individuals and one person was arrested under Essential Commodities Act.” Apart from this, the traffic department too has been strict against the violators. Records show that between March 23 and April 9, the traffic police issued 7,738 e-challans to violators. This is besides hundreds let off with warnings.

Circle officer (traffic) Ratnesh Singh, “Our department acted only against people who were found roaming on the streets in vehicles with no valid reason. Vehicles which were part of essential traffic like ambulances were issued passes for free movement. We are also allowing patients and their attendants to commute to hospitals. However, there are still many residents who refuse to follow the lockdown rules and play with not only with their lives, but that of their fellow citizens as well.”

The CO also added that those found roaming without valid a valid reason or without wearing helmets on two-wheelers or parking vehicles and disappearing for hours were fined too.

These challans by traffic police are besides hundreds of challans, seizure of vehicles and dozens of arrests made by civil police for violations of the lockdown and Epidemic Act in the district. 


