Lockdown in state may continue till May 31
2020-05-16
Patna: The Bihar government seems set to extend the lockdown till May 31 with certain exemptions for economic activities. PM Narendra Modi in his May 12 address said lockdown 4.0 will have new set of rules to be announced by central government before May 18.

Chief secretary Deepak Kumar told TOI on Friday that though Bihar government is waiting for the Centre’s fresh guidelines, the state requires restrictions to be in place as it is faced with heavy inflow of migrant workers from across the country. 

The state government is not in favour of running interstate buses, regular passenger trains and commercial flights for the time being. Schools, colleges and malls among other public places will also continue to remain closed, he said.

Deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi told TOI that altogether 4.80 lakh migrants were estimated to return to Bihar by 389 Shramik special trains and 2.26 of them have already arrived by 224 trains. “Containment zones will continue to face strict restrictions, while relaxations will be given for economic activities in non- containment zones,” SuMo said on the possibility of lockdown 4.0.

Deepak said the state government wants to keep the restrictions in place till the returnee migrant workers get settled in the quarantine centres. “We are expecting the migrant workers’ return to the state till May 25. Lifting the lockdown before that will not be a prudent step with respect to containment of Covid-19 spread. Besides, we are expecting large number of returnee migrant workers to complete their institutional quarantine period of 14 days by May 31. Accordingly, Bihar government is in favour of keeping the restrictions in place till May 31,” he said.

Earlier, CM Nitish Kumar had also suggested in the meeting with PM and CMs of other states to extend the lockdown till May 31. “This will allow us to identify the infected persons coming from outside and safeguard others from the infection,” Nitish had said. 

Elaborating on the possible relaxations, Deepak said: “Some relaxations will be allowed in construction activities, agriculture, industries and shops, so as to open some opportunities for employment generation.” 


