Lockdown and low demand: Double whammy for lac cultivators in Jharkhand
2020-05-26
RANCHI: The lockdown, which is in force throughout the country since March 24, has hit lac cultivation and production in Jharkhand, the biggest producer of lac in the country.

A natural resin secreted by lac insects, lac is used in the manufacture of dyes, resins, wax, cosmetics, medicines and so on. 

“When the lockdown began in March, the lac harvesting season was mostly over in Jharkhand. Lac farmers sell their produce at the village haats (markets) to traders and agents of lac-processing industries. With strict lockdown measures in force and traders shying away from village haats, farmers have been left saddled with large quantities of sticklac and no takers,” Dr K K Sharma, the director of Indian Institute of Natural Resins and Gums (IINRG), Ranchi, told TOI.

The shutdown of lac-processing units, absence of labour, lack of transportation, closure of agriculture shops selling chemical pesticides in March and April, pose further challenges for the thousands of lac farmers, who are already battling low demand, he added.

For the second lac crop, whose harvesting time is scheduled during June and July, the first spraying of chemical insecticides to protect the lac crop could not commence. The only silver lining is that with restrictions now being eased and agri and horticulture activities allowed to resume, we have issued advisory to lac farmers that despite the delay, they need to undertake spraying of insecticides, the IINRG director added.

When asked about the steps that need to be undertaken to recover lost ground in the lac sector, the IINRG director said, “There is a need to set up a ‘Lac Board’ — both at the national and state levels — to promote lac cultivation.”

“The lac sector needs a fresh look. Lac is classified as a forest produce. Income from sale of forest produce is taxable under the Income Tax Act. To boost farm incomes and to ensure more purchasing power in rural areas, lac needs to be reclassified as agriculture produce, income from which is exempt from income tax,” he added.

The minimum support price (MSP) of rangeeni variety of lac varies between Rs 130 to Rs 200 per kg, whilst that of the kusumi variety ranges between Rs 203 and Rs 275 per kg. The state government needs to ensure that all lac purchases by traders and agents be made at the determined MSP, the IINRG director said.

More than 60% of all lac produced in Jharkhand are exported. However, exporters often experience wide fluctuations in ruling prices that vary between Rs 80 to Rs 800 a kg, depending on demand from foreign buyers. The state government needs to build a buffer stock of lac to offset fluctuations in overseas demand and prices, Sharma said.

It might be recalled that on May 5, chief minister Hemant Soren visited the IINRG at Namkum in Ranchi and discussed possibilities of enhancing employment opportunities in the lac sector with Sharma and other officials of the institute.


