Karnataka: Lockdown brings hooch into market
2020-04-09
BENGALURU: Cashing in on the huge demand for liquor — just about any kind — dozens of illegal home distilleries, located mostly in rural areas of the state, are producing country-made liquor which guarantees a bigger high than any other form of alcohol.

Aware of the racket, excise department officials have been conducting a series of raids and the results have been staggering. In 6,915 raids between March 27 and April 5, officials confiscated 5,021 litres of Indian made liquor (IML), 1,465 litres of beer and 632 litres of wine. Bengaluru division alone accounted for half the seizures – a dubious distinction. Officials recorded 292 cases and booked 123 people, besides seizing 3,687 litres of IML from 1,841 raids — the highest across any division.

“The only way to curb this illegal trade is to conduct widespread enforcement drives. We will conduct more raids over the next few days,” said additional excise commissioner SL Rajendra Prasad.

The bigger worry for the government and the liquor industry — from the point of view of loss of income — is the increasing supply of illicitly distilled (ID) liquor or hooch. Officials seized 1,062 litres of toddy and 797 litres of ID liquor, but say it’s only the tip of the proverbial iceberg. Most of the illicit version is being supplied from Telangana where toddy tapping and sale is legal.

Officials say another worry is the health issue. They say illegal distillers are using liberal quantities of methanol, a toxic ingredient, besides alprazolam tablets (used to treat anxiety), battery acid and intoxicating powders, to make the brew stronger.

And as if that isn’t enough, villagers in many parts of the state are concocting their own brand of intoxicating drinks. For example, districts in the Malnad region are known for its urea drink, which is prepared using urea, jaggery and special soil cakes called ‘nadu sarai’.

Karnataka is known for a variety of country-made liquors, which is prepared from rice, wheat, maize, jaggery and citrus fruits. These drinks are considered better than legal liquor, but manufacture and sale of these drinks completely ended after the government allowed IMFL liqour shops in every nook and corner of the state. Now, with the lockdown in place, they are back with a vengeance.


