Lockdown impact? Dogs in Nainital catching fish from Naini lake
2020-05-12
Nainital/Mussoorie: With the nationwide lockdown leading to closure of all the hotels and restaurants in Nainital, dogs in the lake town, who subsisted largely on leftovers from these establishments, have reportedly resorted to killing fishes from Naini lake for food.

A video shot by a local resident went viral on Sunday where a dog can be seen catching a live fish from the lake and eating it along with other dogs. Ashish Shah, the resident who shot the video, told TOI, “I was walking near the lake on Sunday morning when I saw three dogs near the lake. One of them jumped in and caught a big fish near the shore. It was later devoured by the pack.” He added that this isn’t the only incident when he saw a dog catching a fish from Naini lake. “A couple of weeks back, too, I had spotted a bunch of dogs catching fishes from the lake. Many others have also seen several dogs jumping into the lake and trying to catch fish.”

Naini lake is home to thousands of different fishes including Mahseer, Grass Carp and Silver Carp. Nainital-based environmentalist Ajay Singh Rawat told TOI that “this behaviour being displayed by dogs is very unusual.” “We have rarely seen such sights in Nainital. But then, recent changes in behaviour have been witnessed in many other animals as well. The instances of leopards, tigers and elephants roaming on streets in some places have also occured since the lockdown began." 

Government veterinary officials in Nainital acknowledged that instances of dogs trying to catch fish from the lake had not been reported earlier, adding that it may be possible that due to the closure of restaurants and hotels, dogs have resorted to feeding on fishes. Hema Rathore, senior veterinary officer, Nainital, told TOI, “I have not seen the video yet but we will make sure that if dogs are not getting food, they are provided for. We are feeding around 500 dogs each day and our aim is that no animal should remain hungry.”

According to estimates, there are around 1000 dogs in the hill station. Most of them survive on leftovers from eateries and hotels. Tourists also feed many dogs while taking strolls on the Mall Road or places like Bhutia Market and Pant Park. The state government had also released an amount of Rs 15 lakh for Nainital district to be used to feed stray animals.

Meanwhile, in Mussoorie, too, aggressive behaviour of strays has been reported. Even though citizen groups in the town are making efforts to feed the strays, there have been instances of stray dogs attacking a deer and a calf and killing a monkey and cat in the town.

About two week ago, an instance of dogs attacking and severely injuring a child has also been reported. In fact, the child received severe bites on his leg before locals managed to scare the dogs away. 

According to Dr Monika Tamta, a veterinarian, non-availability of leftovers due to closure of hotels, restaurants and schools in the town may be a major factor responsible for the aggressive behaviour being displayed by the canines.

(with inputs from Anmol Jain)


