Lockdown gets meat lovers’ goat as abattoir yet to open in Delhi
2020-05-08
NEW DELHI: Though the price of mutton is soaring and customers are being made to pay through the nose, the city’s only functional abattoir at Ghazipur remains closed for 45 days and counting.

The closure orders were issued by East Delhi Municipal Corporation on March 24 when the lockdown came into force to “restrict close proximity of human involvement to contain Covid-19”. However, EDMC argued that it later granted permission to a private operator on the condition that social distancing was enforced on the premises.

EDMC spokesperson Arun Kumar said that the operator, Frigorifico Allana, is not willing to run the facility in the current circumstances. “We had told them to ensure availability of livestock and practise social distancing while butchering. But the operator might be facing a reduction in demand for meat for export, affecting profits,” Kumar said.

As per the rules, butchers need to keep a distance of 2 metres, which can end in capacity reduction to half.

Several factors seem to be at play behind the closure of the slaughterhouse. Though the facility is located on the highway and the central government has granted permission for movement of goods, most of the animals brought to Ghazipur are transported from Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan, where multiple restrictions exist.

Moreover, the 10-year lease period of the firm running the plant has expired. A senior EDMC official said that extensions could be granted to the operator. “The plant runs in three shifts, of which two are for local consumption and one for export purposes. Since exports are currently hit, it will be less profitable for the company to run the plant,” the official added.

Sufian, the in-charge of operations for Allana, said the company has not accepted the extension. “We have replied to the corporation. We also didn’t insist on the abattoir being opened as it would have been very difficult to ensure social distancing. There are 2,000-2,500 people present at any given time and it’s not possible to manage such a huge number,” he added.

Meanwhile, the price of mutton on several online outlets has gone over Rs 1,500 per kg. Residents fear illegal slaughtering of animal may lead to issues of hygiene and public health.

Gulfam Qureshi, who heads the local livestock market at Ghazipur, said that the abattoir has been closed on the pretext of high footfall, but the same conditions exist in the chicken, vegetable and fish markets, all of which are running. “Excuses are being made to avoid opening the market,” he added.


