Nagpur: Lockdown may hit feeding of animals in zoo & Gorewada
2020-03-26
NAGPUR: The Central Zoo Authority (CZA), a statutory body under MoEFCC monitoring zoos in the country, has asked states to include upkeep and health care of captive animals housed in zoos under the essential services.

In a late evening development, the central government issued orders to include maintenance and upkeep of the animals in zoos, forest offices staff, field staff required to monitor nurseries, water plantations, wildlife areas, patrolling, firefighting and their necessary transport under essential services.


 
“The state government is yet to follow suit and there is confusion among the staff whether they should go ahead with their duties amid the lockdown for which they might face action. Now, state needs to issue similar notification to clear the confusion,” said senior forest officials.

Amid the 21-day lockdown, CZA has learnt that many zoos are facing tough time in getting supply of food owing to restrictions under Section 144 and the curfew imposed to contain coronavirus. As slaughter is also banned, getting meat for carnivores in zoos may be hampered.

CZA member-secretary SP Yadav said, “In the wake of the crisis, we have asked state governments to include upkeep of animals in zoos and rescue centres under ‘essential services’. We have also asked the chief wildlife wardens to ensure animal health care is not sidetracked.”

Even the latest Maharashtra government notification issued on March 25, though has included veterinary hospitals and animal care centres and pet shops under emergency services, it makes no mention of forest and wildlife and zoos.

Following the CZA advisory, TOI took stock of the situation at Gorewada Rescue Centre and Maharajbagh Zoo and found that both the captive animal centres are coping with the situation by stocking material.

Dr Sunil Bawaskar, Maharajbagh Zoo officer-in-charge, said, “Till March 31, we were prepared. With the extended lockdown till April 14, to fulfil the needs of animals, we are even contemplating to rear over 100 hens in a cage in case the situation worsens following transportation restrictions. Yesterday, one vehicle carrying fodder was detained for an hour. Now, we have issued an emergency certificate to the transporter, which he has pasted on the windscreen so the vehicle is not stopped by the cops.”

“We don’t know whether we will get buffalo meat or not. We need 35kg of it to feed tiger and leopards daily. Besides, 350kg green grass & vegetables and 30kg fruits to feed herbivores. The zoo houses over 150 animals. In worse scenario, we may have to cut tree branches and feed the herbivores,” said Dr Bawaskar.

The zoo in-charge said at present herbivore feed that will last for four days has been stocked and daily supply is also being receiving. Policemen are cooperating to allow food vehicles and staff too. Zookeepers have been asked to stay put and we have made arrangements so that they do not mix up with people outside,” said Bawaskar.

Similarly, Gorewada Rescue Centre, which houses eight tigers, 24 leopards, 10 sloth bears and 40 chitals and nilgais, has also geared up to handle the situation. FDCM divisional manager Nandkishore Kale said, “We have reduced the strength of labourers and those present have been accommodated in the quarters.”

“As we have not been included in the essential services, we are stocking non-perishable vegetables like cabbage, lauki (bottle gourd) and fruits like payaya and water melon in an air-conditioned room. We have stock for four days. The contractors, though, have assured supply of buffalo meat, we have flexibility to supply goat meat and chicken,” said Kale.

“Stocking of vegetables and fruits is being done as Kalamna Market, major supplier of fruits and vegetables, has also ordered closure for three days. We are also in touch with local farmers for supply of grass and oranges in case of emergency,” Kale said.


