Lockdown makes NK ministers more tech-savvy
2020-04-12
Hubballi: Several key ministers in the B S Yediyurappa government are turning tech-savvy, and are using best-in-class Apple and Android-based smartphones to remain active on various social media platforms.

Amid the lockdown, the ministers are using WhatsApp, Facebook and Twitter to keep track of the problems being faced by the people, and attending to their grievances.

Some ministers are interacting with officials and the public, through video conferencing. However, like in other sectors, ministers in North Karnataka are falling behind in using technology, compared to their South Karnataka counterparts.

Accounts of many ministers from North Karnataka, on Facebook and Twitter, are still limited to one-way communication to wish people or to share some information related to Covid-19.

Following chief minister Yediyurappa’s meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi through video conferencing on April 2, some North Karnataka ministers have decided to use video conferencing to hold meetings with officials. Mines and geology minister C C Patil, who is also in charge of Vijayapura and Gadag districts, convened a meeting through video conferencing on April 2 with Vijayapura deputy commissioner Y S Patil and other district officials.

His meeting through video conferencing was continued on April 3 with Gadag deputy commissioner M G Hiremath, superintendent of police Yatish N and ZP CEO Anand on April 3. 

Home minister Basavaraj Bommai, who represents Shiggaonv-Savanur assembly segment in Haveri district, but is given charge of Udupi, conducted a meeting with the Udupi DC, ZP CEO and SP on Tuesday.

Responding to the grievance of one Harish R Adavi on Twitter on April 2, forest minister Anand Singh postponed the last date for applying for the post of Karnataka forest guard.

Deputy chief minister Govind Karjol has showed his openness by sharing newspaper clippings in which he is criticised, on his Twitter handle.

Commenting on the trend, minister for large and medium scale industries Jagadish Shettar said that mobiles were just an instrument to make calls for politicians earlier. “Nowadays, mobile phones are turning into multipurpose instruments to direct officials and attend to the grievances of the public, particularly during the lockdown. Turning tech-savvy does not mean maintaining a distance from the public. Apart from instructing officials over WhatsApp, we are also attending to routine duties, while abiding by the lockdown,” he added.

He said that as the district in-charge minister for Dharwad and Belagavi, he is performing his duties both online and offline. “Earlier, we used to defer some issues, a decision for which could be taken at the next meeting, but the lockdown is forcing us to act instantly. In order to take immediate action, we are depending more on technology,” he said


