Lockdown blues: 55 wedding guests from Odisha stuck on rooftop in Jamshedpur
2020-04-25
JAMSHEDPUR: The lockdown has turned life upside down for around 55 guests from various parts of Odisha, who had come to the Steel City for a wedding reception on March 21.

The guests comprising women, about 10 children and even lactating kids, have been compelled to live on the rooftop pandal at Pardesi Para under the Sonari police station area in Jamshedpur. With no scope of any social distancing whatsoever, the guests mainly from Rourkela and Balangir in Odisha, are left at the mercy of nature. So from sweltering heat with temperature hovering over 40° Celsius during the daytime to nor’westers followed by heavy rain later in the evening, they have to face the nature’s fury. 

The family of the bridegroom, Sumit Kumar, talking to TOI on Friday lamented that after the Janata Curfew, the first phase of the lockdown started following which it was extended until May 3, leaving the guests with no option but to stay back. The wedding reception was on March 21 and the guests had stayed back to attend various family rituals.

Kumar said, “We are somehow arranging the food for all the guests. But as days are passing by, it is becoming increasingly difficult for us to bear the cost of feeding so many mouths four times a day.” He added that recently a local club had arranged a one-time meal for the guests, but the quantity was not enough.

Kumar said every alternate day they require an LPG cylinder to cook the food for so many people. “This was becoming difficult as new norms have come into force for booking a fresh cylinder amid the ongoing lockdown,” he groused. Arranging infant food has also become a challenge.

Ram Panda, who is farmer by profession, and was among the wedding guests said it was extremely difficult to maintain basic hygiene as so many people are living on the rooftop with two toilets.

When TOI visited the place, it was seen that more than 75% of the guests, including kids did not have masks and social distancing was simply out of the question in such a crammed space.

The guests wanted the district administration to issue them travel passes and arrange a vehicle such that they could go back to Odisha.

Kumar hoped that NGOs, political parties or the district administration would help them feed and give proper shelter to the guests in this lockdown.

In another house in Sonari west under the Sonari police station, more than 20 people from Varanasi, Bangalore and other parts of the country were stuck after they had come to attend the last rites of their kin in the city on March 24.

J Raju, the head of the family, said the guests now want to go back as it was extremely uncomfortable to live in a 3BHK flat for so many days. They had booked train and flight tickets, but they got automatically cancelled after the lockdown was extended.

The guests and hosts are keeping their fingers crossed for the end of lockdown 2.0 so that they can return to their homes safely.


