Bihar: Lockdown relief for prohibition cell
2020-04-12
PATNA: The 21-day nationwide lockdown to prevent the spread of Covid-19 has come as a big relief for the state prohibition cell in ‘dry’ Bihar. For, no any significant seizure of liquor has been reported from any part of the state since the lockdown was enforced on March 24 midnight.

“Since all the border checkposts in the 22 districts of the state have been sealed, there are little chances of illicit liquor smuggling into Bihar from outside,” a senior excise and prohibition department officer said. This is in contrast to the situation before the lockdown when quantum of alcohol seizure across the state was very high, he said.

The officer, however, admitted that at a few places, some people made attempts to smuggle the consignment from neighbouring Jharkhand, but “the alert cops foiled their bid”. The officer, who monitors the operation against liquor smugglers, attributed the reason for substantial decrease in the supply of India made foreign liquor (IMFL) from Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand and West Bengal besides Nepal to stepped up surveillance on the state’s borders due to the lockdown.

“Only those vehicles carrying essential commodities are being allowed to cross interstate or inter-district borders,” he said.

Highlighting the preventive measures to contain liquor smuggling, he said the prohibition cell at the headquarters has deployed three officers with adequate police force at each checkpost in the 22 districts.

When contacted, IG (prohibition) Amrit Raj said on Friday that the officers have been instructed to check all the vehicles engaged in transporting essential commodities before allowing them to enter the state limits.

“The instruction is being followed strictly. The results are obvious,” he said, adding that no major seizure of liquor consignment has been made from any part of the state ever since the lockdown came into force.

“The exercise to frisk the people and search the vehicles at the borders is aimed at preventing supply of liquor in the name of essential commodities in the state. This has been possible because the number of vehicles has decreased in the wake of lockdown,” the IG added.

According to the excise and prohibition department authorities, three officers with adequate police force were working at the checkposts round-the-clock. Each team works for eight hours. 

On the other hand, those engaged in the illegal trade said the stock of foreign liquor exhausted much before the Holi. “We were planning to book the consignment but the lockdown poured cold water on our plan. The flourishing trade has virtually come to a grinding halt,” one of the bootleggers said.

Sources said some liquor smugglers used to operate in Rohtas district, close to Jharkhand border, in the garb of police personnel. “Clad in police uniform, they escorted the trucks carrying liquor vehicles with police logo and carried licensed weapon to dodge the police and officials of the excise department,” a source in the prohibition cell said. 

Apart from the excise department, prohibition cell functioning under CID is the nodal agency to enforce prohibition in the state effectively.


