Lockdown & stock loss: Traders hit hard
2020-05-19
NAGPUR: “Humko bhi jaan pyaari hai … hum apna our humare customers ka khayal rakhenge lekin humein humari dukaan kholne do (We too care for our life. We will take all precautions for the safety of our customers but allow us to open our shops for livelihood),” was the appeal of small retailers such as cosmetics, footwear, sweet shop owners, as they urged the government to allow them to do business amid the extended lockdown. 

TOI spoke to many retailers of various trades in the city and almost all claimed that the over 50-day lockdown had made a deep hole in their already tattered business. With the lockdown forcing them to keep their shops closed right from March 25, many stocks with limited shelf life turned unfit for use, aggravating their financial loss, retailers said.

Pankaj Padiya, who owns a cosmetic shop on old Bhandara road, said the lockdown hit him very badly. “Apart from loss due to no business, I will suffer financial damage as many perishable cosmetic products like mehndi, nail paints etc will be of no use now.” Expecting a good business during marriage season, Padiya had big stock of cosmetics. “Now I am staring at a huge loss,” a dejected Padiya said. 

Ritesh Jain, who runs a ready-made garment shop at Shahid Chowk, Itwari, and does seasonal sale of raincoats and winter wear, said, “We have already approached municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe through our corporator Abha Pande and sought permission to run our business. Either allow us to open our shops on alternate days, or deliver garments through phone orders.”

Closed markets in Nagpur means “no business in Central India”, Jain said. According to him, entire Vidarbha region depends on shops in Nagpur. No business in Nagpur means starvation for shop owners of all non-essential shops, Jain added.

While big grocery shops selling essential commodities are allowed to operate during lockdown, why should our small shopkeepers — who sell similar daily-need goods — be deprived of their livelihood, asked the traders TOI spoke to.

Many traders feared damage of their stocked material, as they could not check the consignment that arrived just a day before lockdown was imposed. Many traders approached local corporators to allow them to check their stocks, to safeguard against possible NMC action if they opened their establishments. 

Ashwin Mehadia, president of Nag Vidarbha Chambers of Commerce (NVCC), said that the extended lockdown had hit almost all traders dealing in non-essential goods in the city very hard. The NVCC had submitted a memorandum to chief minister Uddhav Thackeray through district guardian minister Nitin Raut, he added.

The capital investment of these small retailers is locked in the stocks of non-essential products that remain unsold in their shops because of lockdown. They are now forced to dip into their minuscule savings, Mehadia added.

“Since Prime Minister Narendra Modi said we have to live with Covid-19, our association has urged the CM to give permission to all shops and establishments to start business,” said Mehadia. 


