Lockdown may leave car batteries dead in Visakhapatnam
2020-05-16
VISAKHAPATNAM: As parts of the city prepares to get back to work after nearly two months of lockdown, albeit in a graded manner, many of the parked vehicles in garages and underground parking spaces are likely to not spring back to life at the touch of ignition. The first casualty of such prolonged non-use is the battery. 


Most city dealerships are preparing to stock up on spare batteries as they feel there will be a deluge of calls complaining of dead batteries or partially discharged batteries.



“We will send a spare battery to our customers and bring the dead battery back for recharging. Or, we can also send jumper cables to start the car,” said Ravi Roy, proprietor of Sai Car Care near Venkojipalem. 

Explaining what causes the battery to die due to prolonged non-use, Roy said, “A fully-charged battery has lead plates suspended in a solution of water and sulphuric acid. As the battery discharges, sulphur is drawn out of the battery acid and the lead plates become coated in lead sulfate.”

“So you may find that a battery that has been jump-started or charged from dead more than a handful of times needs replacement,” he added.

For hybrid cars, which have two batteries — auxiliary and hybrid — it is the auxiliary one which starts the engine, and it can drain out if not in use for a long time, said V Janardhan Rao, service engineer at Sai Car Care. 

The other issue with cars that have not been in use will be the wheels. Jammed wheels are a common problem with stalled cars. However, jammed wheels can be fixed by sudden release of clutch and driving the car with force. “If that doesn’t help, the workshop needs to be alerted,” said S Sekhar, who works as senior service engineer at Skoda India at Marripalem. 

“We are keeping a team ready to attend to such service calls from customers. We are going to provide on-site service. Even if the lockdown is lifted, we may not be able to operate the workshop in full because of norms of social distancing,” said Roy.


