Lockdown helped identify Covid-19 sources: DGP
2020-04-15
Vijayawada: As the first phase of the lockdown comes to an end after 19 days, the state has witnessed a substantial decrease in the daily rate of Covid-19 cases this week compared to the previous week.

From a huge dip in crime rate to categorising the sources of infection, the government managed to witness a paradigm shift in dealing with the pandemic. Speaking to TOI, director general of police D Gautam Sawang said there are two main sources spreading the virus in the state--one coming from the foreign returnees and the other from the Tablighi Jamaat. “Crimes have come down since there is no instance for people to indulge in the activity. But we see some instances of domestic violence, harassment coming through the Disha helpline where counselling is being done through local NGOs,” Sawang said.

Until March 29, there were only 11 cases in the state, however, once the Tablighi Jamaat, the figure witnessed a huge jump. “We managed to contain the infection from foreign returnees in the initial stage. Both primary and secondary contacts were identified successfully,” Sawang added. 

Officials explained that 1,167 attended Tablighi Jamaat from the state out of which 1033 have come back to Andhra Pradesh. The primary contacts of Tablighi Jamaat attendees then stood at 4,767 contacts and the secondary contacts stood at 6,730. As of April 13, 2020, 439 cases were recorded out of which 356 belong to Tablighi Jamaat attendees.

Police attribute that there hasn’t been any major spread within the state due to the lockdown and social distancing. In terms of lockdown compliance, cops cite that the crowds have been controlled at the state borders during the initial days and there has been an increase in compliance rate. “This lockdown period helped us in identifying the high risk categories and vulnerable areas which gives us a clear idea as to where our focus should be. The CM has been conducting daily review meetings where strategic measures are taken to ensure the supply chain is secured,” Sawang said.


