Lockdown fails to play spoilsport for baby’s naming ceremony, thanks to the internet
2020-04-11
Aurangabad: Clad in a new dress and lying in a decorated cradle, a baby boy born in the Anwikar family on March 28 in the city was named ‘Swaransh’ by his aunt amid clapping and blessings from close relatives on Wednesday. 

The ceremony was similar to a traditional naming ceremony. The only difference was that relatives marked their virtual presence — thanks to the internet and modern technology. 

Swati Anwikar, the grandmother of the baby, said the virtual ceremony was the only option since the nationwide lockdown was in place to curb the spread of Covid-19. 

“It was my son’s first child. Hence,we had planned grand arrangements for the naming ceremony. The crisis that emerged from the pandemic unfolded in an unprecedented manner and we had almost shelved our plans. On a second thought, we discussed taking the help of technology and charted out plans for the virtual ceremony,” said Swati.

The family decided to make the best use of video-calling facilities involving multiple users to arrange the virtual naming ceremony. 

“All our closed relatives stay in and around Aurangabad. However, it was not possible for them to make it to the function due to the lockdown. We called upon families of seven close relatives for the virtual ceremony. We requested our relatives to download the necessary mobile applications and be ready on the pre-decided time,” said the boy’s father, Shree Anwikar. 

 As per Hindu tradition, the aunt of the new born has prominence in the naming ceremony as she formally reveals the name of the baby to others during function. The boy’s aunt Vidya Mahajan, who stays on Beed bypass area, said it was an unforgettable moment for her to attend the naming ceremony over phone. 

“I am not that tech-savvy. I took help of younger ones from the family to mark my presence in the virtual ceremony. Though the barrier of distance was there, we had great fun and it was a memorable function. The only thing missing was the customary patting on the back from relatives after revealing the baby’s name,” said Vidya.


