Lockdown Effect: Bangalore Times webinar on the challenges faced by the beauty industry and the way ahead
2020-06-20
Since the Coronavirus pandemic broke out and the subsequent nationwide lockdown, which threw life as we knew it out of gear, one of the services that both women and men regularly used and learnt to do without was that of the beauty industry. There were no trips to the salon to get perfectly-arched eyebrows, glowing skin or mani-pedis, etc., while the hygiene of the neighbourhood barber was a widely discussed topic for men, who then invested in personal grooming tools.


 With lockdown 4.0 here and salons and spas across the country poised to open in all-new avatars, we spoke to four experts from the industry, about the issues the pandemic threw up and how they are looking at overcoming them. On the panel were Dr Rekha Chaudhari, MD of Oneline Wellness Pvt. Ltd, which focuses on providing world-class quality products and support needed to set up salons or spas, Mukund Kulashekaran, SVP of Business at Urban Company, where he heads the beauty and wellness business, Sahil Gupta, the CEO and chief architect of Bodycraft salons and spas and Zorain Khaleeli, celebrity makeup artist and founder of Zorains Studio.


How bad has the lockdown been for the industry? 
 Dr Rekha: Although hygiene is paramount in the beauty industry, we are, for some reason, considered luxury and not essential service. Throughout the lockdown, every time relaxations were announced, we were pushed to the background, which is why I have been leading a delegation to take it up with the government and ensure that we can open businesses again soon. 
 So far, we have, no doubt, been affected badly. About 60% of the 80 lakh-odd professionals and entrepreneurs are women, most of whom are sole breadwinners for their families. Imagine the effect a complete stoppage of income has on a family like that? 
 Sahil: From an operational standpoint, the lockdown has been a pain, because to sustain the workforce with zero income is increasingly tough. What we also understand is that there has been reverse migration, possibly due to insecurity and lack of income, with many heading back home. So, even when we are to come back and mobilise operations, it might be difficult, because we may not have the same workforce with us. Also, the new norms that we have to establish, in terms of physical distancing, is going to cut down our capacities, 
 We might not anticipate the same client footfall because of fear psychosis. So, the business plan for the year and sustenance for a lot of companies is going to a be a concern area. We are reeling under this with lack of cognizance of how salons have been allowed to operate in other countries. Yes, we are a close contact service, but at the same time, our environments are probably the safest in comparison to everything else outside. Every industry has an organised and unorganised sector. In the organised sector, the customer is going to be relatively safer. The industry should also take the onus of educating the unorganised sector, roll out modules across languages, states and strata, to play safe in the time to come. 


How are you getting rid of the fear psychosis and getting your customers to come back? Sahil: I think the way ahead is for everyone to understand that a certain cost will have to be absorbed with regard to safety, health and hygiene. Everyone will have to factor it in their pricing and the customer will also have to be ready for it. 
 Customer awareness and industry learning will have to work side-by-side. At the end of the day, it is an essential service that you can't do away with it. A lot of people may have started grooming themselves at home, but I don't see that becoming the new normal. 
 Zorain: There are challenges for the segment dealing more with makeup and related services. Most of our employees come from below poverty line segments and their livelihoods have been affected, because it is difficult for us to pay salaries without a steady income. 
 Also, the big fat Indian wedding is no more. We are going to have a lot of new artists who have just learnt the craft or started a business, who will suffer a lot because they won't have enough work. Customers will be more careful and will opt for more known names, leaving newbies in the lurch. 


But how feasible is it going to be for most people in the industry to adapt to the new normal - wear masks, gloves, maybe even PPEs? Mukund: We have close to 10,000 professionals working closely with us, a majority of who are women. The last 2-3 months have been difficult and we have been trying to help with loans, etc., but they will only last so long. We have to now proactively work for safety. I don't think normalcy is anywhere around the corner. This virus is going to be around for a while. It is very important that we clarify to customers what safety protocols we adopt and that their safety is our top priority. As an industry we have always been responsive. I think we will get used to the new normal. It will mean fair bit of training, including getting used to PPEs, but I think that should be the focus. We have retrained all our professionals to change certain protocols. For instance, threading has always been done using your teeth. We have reimagined it and taught them to do it differently. We have been fixing all potential risk areas and ensuring people can wear masks, gloves and have temperature checks done frequently. If your standard operating procedure (SOP) does not involve bodily fluids, it can be done in an extremely safe environment. 
 Sahil: There is a large industry outside of India that is already working on international best practices, which is going to drill down through every service SOP. People are working with medical professionals to see how the services are going to be safe. Obviously, all SOPs are going to be modified accordingly.
 Dr Rekha: We have always been focusing on hygiene, but we are talking to experts in different areas, skin, hair, etc., to figure out precautions to be taken when handling a client. We have created protocols on SOPs and everyone will follow only that. Professionals who adopt these will be given special certification. 
 
 
One thing everyone mentioned is that most professionals are from poorer sections of society. Won't that be an issue for clients, because they do not know where the technician hails from, what kind of personal hygiene he/she maintains? Zorain: We understand that they come from crowded areas, but to prevent anything in our environments, we will, of course have temperature checks. We also have spray disinfectants and don't allow them to come in to the work space in their own clothes and get them to change into their uniforms, which we maintain. We make sure that they don't bring in anything. Besides, we will ensure sanitation and that they wear PPE kits.
 
 
Some of this might be a problem for Mukund, because his technicians go to homes... Mukund: Our strong belief is that home is much safer in the current environment and users are happy not stepping out. So, what we need to make sure is that the technician who is coming into your home is fully safe. For this, we have leveraged tech and government infrastructure. We are getting everyone to be on Aarogya Setu, which looks at the location of the person, etc. We have linked our activation to that. If a person is living in a containment zone, we automatically ensure they are in quarantine and don't service customers. After that, every day we do rigorous temperature checks. They have to do a live temperature check on a camera. Before every job start, we ensure they are wearing gloves and masks. We have seven steps to be followed before a job and make sure it is done by capturing it on camera. There is training over and above that to ensure safety measures are followed. 
 
 
Sahil, do you think home services will be a probability?
 Sahil: Mukund and I can agree to disagree on this one. My understanding is that the client who wants to come to the salon vs the one who wants services at home is very unique. If you stratify these segments, you will notice that the overlap is only up to 15%. There is clear demarcation of people who want to come to salon. Do we intend to start home services? I don't think that is going to happen, because as a business model, we have evaluated that in the past and that is not something we are looking at. 
 
 
What does the future of the industry look like? Will a trip to the salon look like a sci-fi movie? Sahil: I don't think so. I think we are exaggerating the extent of what needs to be done. My understanding is that a mask, face shield and sanitisation and sterilisation are basic principles we need to abide by.
 We are not an environment that is carrying this contagion all the time. Some of the stuff is a little over and beyond. Sure, there will be aesthetic changes in salons; a lot of the clutter will go away and you will see enhanced focus on hygiene aspects and PPEs, but in reasonable measure. What is happening right now seems exaggerated, but it will settle down once the industry resumes regular motions. 
 Zorain: We are going to have a transition into normalcy. 50% of clients are still going to be scared to come out. But there is a 50% that is waiting for salons to reopen. They are a little more sorted in their heads about the virus. Once this 50% triggers that they are going back to normalcy and we give them a great environment, there will be herd mentality and the rest will follow. 
 Dr Rekha: The focus will be on wellness. Everyone has understood that the body has to be strong to fight a virus as this. Wellness centres have alternative therapies that boost immunity and are not just about massages or aesthetic beauty.
 Mukund: I am the least optimistic. Next year, the overall economy is not going to do well and we are headed to a recession. Beauty is generally recession-proof, but I do think people will downgrade to some extent. Frequencies may come down and some discretionary services, like facials, may see more downgrades than necessary services like waxing or haircuts. I do think in the short run it is important for the industry to be ready to face the fact that we may be looking at a lower spend from our users. Long-term should, hopefully, bounce back. It is better for us to be aware and prepared. I do think our average billing prices will drop. 

 
 
Bangalore Times webinar on the challenges for the beauty industry in the post-Covid era43:54


