Lockdown eased but people still caged in gated societies?
2020-05-20
Ahmedabad: Foram Shah (name changed), a professional from Prahladnagar, was told to resume work on Tuesday, as the lockdown was eased in the city. More than looking forward to resuming work, she dreaded the household chores. “With the lockdown finally eased, I was hoping for some respite but the housing society I live in, has continued its ban the entry of visitors, handymen, domestic help and cooks. It is ridiculous how societies can impose their own rules on people. Work pressure will go up now and I wonder how I will manage on both fronts,” said Shah.Though the government has eased the lockdown rules, allowing movement of people from 7am to 7pm and allowing shops and offices to resume business with social distancing norms, a number of societies in various parts of Ahmedabad, have continued their restrictions on visitors.“At our society, the restrictions on not allowing outsiders have continued as some residents are apprehensive. However, we will take a decision to allow domestic help and other visitors over the next two to three days. The onus will now be on individuals to exercise cautions and maintain hygiene as they get on with normal life,” said Alpesh Shah, who represents a residential society in the Makarba area of the city.Some societies allowed the movements of visitors and domestic help, soon after the government decision was announced. “Imposing restrictions within societies will only invite a backlash from residents. The debate over safety in the time of Covid-19 will be never-ending. We immediately allowed movement of domestic workers, cleaners and other staff after the government decision. Besides, the government has allowed opening up so that daily wagers get work, so not allowing them is no option,” said Hemant Pandya, chairman of a residential societies association.Residents who have been cooped up at home for almost two months are now losing patience and believe that with due precautions, movement of persons must be allowed. “It will always be a double-edged sword. Measures such as maintaining registers, temperature checks and sanitizing hands may be put in place while moving towards normalcy,” said Arvind Paniker, a South Bopal resident.“If a society resident moves out, there’s no guarantee that one will not get infected. We’ll have to get on with normal life with precautions and thus restrictions by residential buildings and societies don’t make sense. With precautions, things must head towards normalcy.” Gauri Wagenaar, Bodakdev resident“During two months of lockdown, we have understood the meaning of social distancing. Why would we not follow it if it is in our own interest. If the government has allowed movement of people, decisions by societies to restrict movement of visitors and domestic help are illogical.” Rupal Shah, Vastrapur resident