Lockdown violation in Kerala: Jogging lands 41 in police station
2020-04-05
KOCHI: Police on Saturday morning arrested 41 walkers and joggers, including two women, who went out for their work out to Panampilly Nagar walkway, disobeying specific instructions not to venture out. 

Ernakulam South police said that warning them and sending them home had become a daily routine for the police every morning and evening, ever since the lockdown was declared. "We have been going to the walkway every morning to warn them not to go for jogging as it is not allowed. However, even if they go back when police approach them, they used to come back. So, we decided to register cases and take action," said a police officer. 

 

A police team led by assistant commissioner T R Rajesh and South SHO K G Aneesh were ready with enough force and vehicle to transport the offenders on Saturday morning as per the directive of deputy commissioner (law and order) G Poonguzhali. 

Senior officers said that the police had conducted a thorough checking of the area using drones before taking action. "In the footage, we could see many coming out for morning walk, violating social distancing. It is prohibited to go out before 7am even for purchasing goods. After 7am you can be out only if you have a sufficient reason, not for taking a morning walk. We have been spreading this message through the media, social media and even through public announcements. If the residents are not paying heed to these messages then we have no option but take penal action against them," said a senior officer. 

Police said that their operation was brief and was done with the intention of sending a message. "We only stayed there for less than half hour - from 6:30am to 7am. If we had continued the operation till 8, I am sure that many more would have been caught. We urge residents to consider this as a warning and to not violate lockdown in the coming days," said a senior officer. 

City police sources meanwhile said that similar surveillance is going on at other parts of the city, including West Kochi and central Ernakulam. "Strong surveillance is going on and if we find similar instances happening in other parts of the city, same action would be taken there as well," said an officer.

Local ward councillor K X Francis said that the local residents too welcomed the police action. "Most of the persons who go there for morning walk are well educated and they themselves have accepted the mistake. Police had even made announcement through megaphone the other day to not venture out for morning walk. Hopefully, the mistake won't be repeated," said Francis.


