Visakhapatnam: Lockdown Disrupts Supply Of Essentials
2020-03-27
VISAKHAPATNAM: Although the government has exempted essential goods and their delivery through e-commerce from the lockdown, shopkeepers are still finding it difficult to acquire stock. When TOI visited a few supermarkets and department stores, it was learnt that pulses, cereals and other essential commodities were out of stock.


“The scarcity is due to two reasons: shortage of staff and restrictions on traffic movement. Although we have enough stock at our warehouse, there are neither people at the backend nor there are staff to load the stock. Hence, most of the commodities like rava, oil, pulses, cereals, biscuits and dairy products were out of stock on Thursday,” a senior store manager of MORE supermarket said adding that it has become difficult to procure vegetables and fruits from other cities due to traffic restrictions.


 
The same is plight of e-commerce platforms. Since crowded areas are to be avoided, many opted to place orders online through various applications like Bigbasket, Amazon and Flipkart. But most of the e-commerce portals have stopped delivery.

P Asha, a homemaker, said, “I need wheat flour. Although I ordered online, my order was cancelled. Moreover, when I went to check at the supermarket, they said it is out of stock and could not say when stocks would arrive. My father’s medicines that I ordered online have also not arrived yet.” 

However, the picture is slightly different with local e-commerce portals like Do Ghante, Farm 19, etc. D Srinivas, director of Do Ghante, said, “We are getting many orders, but due to time contraints and travel restrictions, we are unable to reach out to the people. There are many people who are old and scared to visit markets. Hence, we approached the district administration to allow home delivery of essential commodities.”

Speaking to TOI, Ranga Reddy, DCP (law and order), said, “We have taken this matter to the district administration and discussed it with the police officials. People who wish to home deliver essential commodities need to make an ID card with their name, registered e-commerce portal and mention home delivery in the card. This card needs to be submitted to the police and a list will be prepared. Only then they will be allowed to home deliver. If the ID card is genuine, deliveries can be done from 6 am to 6 pm.”

