Lockdown spurs cops into action in virtual world
2020-04-28
PRAYAGRAJ: Cops are not only enforcing lockdown on the streets, but are also busy in the virtual world fighting against cyber fraudsters, who are taking this period as an opportunity to siphon off money from people’s bank accounts. A total of eight cases of cyber frauds were registered between the lockdown period from March 23 to April 23. 


The police have not only managed to redeposit the amount worth Rs 1.95 lakh into the accounts of victims (account holders) concerned, but also held Rs 56,000 after blocking the accounts of fraudsters. 

SP (Crime) Ashutosh Mishra said, “During the lockdown month (From March 23 to April 23) the sleuths of crime branch/cyber cell have managed to redeposit Rs 1.95 that had been debited from the account of victims.Majority of the victims had preferred online shopping and lodged complaints with cyber cell after getting duped.”

“As as soon we get information from victims about fraud, we sent email to e-commerce payment system, providing them ID and appealing to block or roll back the amount to the person (account holder) concerned in case of fraud,” said the SP adding, “some payment groups ask to lodge complaint on dispute form and this is taking time to return the money to victims.”

The sleuths of cyber cell after tracking the route of transaction approached financial institutions concerned and get the gateway — mode of the transaction of amount from one group/company to another — blocked. 

He added, “Cyber cell had also held the transactions amounting to Rs 56,000 and blocked at least 40 wallets. More than 40 cyber frauds were registered with the crime branch during the lockdown period from March 23 to April 23.”

The latest modus operandi is that scamsters call up and ensure that a specially designed app is downloaded on the victim’s smartphone, which then steals sensitive bank information. However, banks have already started issuing advisories to customers in this regard.


