Lockdown not applicable for farming activities: Minister
2020-04-12
Mysuru: The state government will issue ‘green pass’ for all farmers for their movement from one place to another to purchase seeds, chemicals and fertilizers during the lockdown period, agriculture minister B C Patil said on Saturday.

Speaking to reporters after a meeting with district-level officials and farmer leaders at zilla panchayat office here, he said passes would also be issued to tractor repair garage mechanics; salesmen of tractor companies, agriculture equipment, chemicals and fertilizers, personnel of enterprises & industries involved in promotion of agriculture, horticulture and all kinds of farming activities. They can collect the passes from their respective areas and taluk agriculture offices, he said.

The minister also said that lockdown is not applicable to agriculture activities. However, farmers should maintain social distancing and maintain personal hygiene like others for their own safety and health in the wake of Covid-19.

As monsoon has picked up and kharif season started in the district, farmers can take up their agriculture activities without any fear, he said.

The state government has taken all measures for supply of adequate seeds, chemicals, fertilizers and for procurement of crops and marketing of products. Instructions have been given to all Raitha Samparka Kendras, Krishi Kendras, farmer equipment rent kendras, all chemicals, seeds and fertilizer shops to open and supply their items to the farmers but after maintaining social distancing measures, he said.

Directions have also been issued to superintendents of police and officials of district administration to ensure security to farmers coming from border areas of the district and not to close their shops selling agriculture produce.

Borders open, except near Kerala

Except the check-posts on Kerala-Karnataka border, all other borders are open for facilitation of farming activities. A legal dispute over opening of Kerala-Karnataka border is still pending before the court, he said. 

On reports of some distressed farmers destroying their crops, vegetables and fruits in the fields itself due to lack of marketing, transportation and tight lockdown measures, the minister urged them not to indulge in such activities. 

The government will come to their help to ensure marketing facilities, he said. He also directed the officials to ensure adequate cold storages and use available containers to store perishable products.

Hinting that lockdown will continue for more days, the minister said that he had toured 19 districts and a detailed report will be submitted to the chief minister about the status of farmers and farming activities after the implementation of lockdown, he said.

Patil further said that the state government is planning to come out with a special package to bail farmers out of the farm crisis.

The state has already announced minimum support price for various crops. It will come out with MSP for some more crops, he said.

Farmer leader seeks package

Kurubur Shanthakumar, president of state Sugar Cane Growers Association, urged the government to come out with a special package for farmers in the wake of Covid-19. He demanded waiving of crop loan interest, inclusion of all crops under Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana and a direction to sugar mill owners to clear the dues of sugarcane growers.


