Lockdown halts migration of nomadic tribes, may affect intel gathering by security forces
2020-04-12
Nainital: The ongoing lockdown has affected the migration cycle of several nomadic hill tribes like Bhotiya, Shauka and Rung. These tribals come to lower reaches of the Himalayas at the onset of winter and return to valleys in the higher reaches (mostly near Sino-Indian border) as soon as the snow melts. Defence experts say that the movement of tribals to the border valleys like Johar, Darma, Mana and Niti is important for the country’s defence as well. “Nomads in Uttarakhand's high-altitude border region are invaluable assets for the security forces with respect to surveillance of unmanned areas and early warning,” said Lieutenant General Syed Ata Hasnain (retd).

Nainital-based historian and former professor of Kumaun University, Ajay Singh Rawat also pointed out that the tribals have for decades helped the defence forces in the tricky terrain of the Himalayas in terms of intelligence gathering and are also a source of daily essentials like milk and fresh vegetables for the Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) and Army personnel. “The tribals were instrumental in helping the defence forces during the Sino-Indian war. Though in the last few decades, defence forces have moved on to relying on more modern forms of surveillance, the tribals are still important as they populate these valleys and regularly keep informing the administration in case of suspicious movement,” Rawat said. 

Speaking to TOI, members of the tribes said that they start the journey to the high-altitude valleys in early to mid-April. “As soon as the snow melts, we start moving, because that is also the sowing season for major crops. But due to the lockdown, we have no choice but to wait,” said Manoj Pal who along with several others in Chhimka village in Chamoli — all belonging to the Bhotia tribe, was preparing to undertake the over 100-km-long journey to Bampa village in Niti valley when the lockdown was enforced.

ITBP officials also said that though their reliance on tribals for intelligence-gathering has decreased over the years, the shepherds who take their herds to the border areas are a valuable source of information for them. “We maintain routine contact with them for information-gathering purposes. It is good for us if these villagers get to migrate to their high-altitude villages near the borders and the villages remain populated,” said Aparna Kumar, DIG, ITBP (Sector headquarters), Dehradun.

Notably, there have been multiple instances of Chinese army incursions in the Barahoti area of Chamoli over the past few years with Chinese army personnel also threatening shepherds grazing their sheep in the area. The report of most of these incursions was given to Indian defence forces by the nomadic shepherds who belong to these tribes.

Meanwhile, the delay in migration, tribals say, is also disrupting their centuries-old ritualistic traditions, which they say is a bad omen. “When we come to lower Himalayas, we take our deities with us. However, we also make sure to re-establish them at their abode in the higher reaches as soon as the snow melts. Our village had held a meeting where it was decided that the deities will be reinstated at their abode in the higher Himalayas on April 14 but now, due to the lockdown, that is not possible. This delay is not a good omen,” said 70-year-old Puran Singh Pal.

The officials of the district administration also say that the migration of tribals is important for the area but it cannot be permitted till the time lockdown restrictions are in place. “We know that for the tribals, migration is very important and they are also a major help for the defence forces. We have been informed that the snow has just started to melt in many upper regions of Himalayas and therefore they still have time. The administration is also trying to make sure that they return to their villages as soon as the situation becomes normal,” said Vijay Kumar Jogdande, district magistrate, Pithoragarh.


