Lockdown affects app cab drivers’ livelihood
2020-04-07
Visakhapatnam: The 21-day nationwide lockdown to prevent the spread of coronavirus (Covid-19) has affected the livelihood of almost 3,500 app cab owners and drivers in the state.

With only little help from a few NGOs, the cab owners and drivers are having a tough time making ends meet.

“There has been no income since the lockdown was announced. My savings are almost exhausted and it is now becoming difficult to meet daily expenses,” said K Raju, a cab driver from Madhurawada.

There are around 2,000 app cab owners and drivers in the city and around 1,500 in Vijayawada. 

“Only a few NGOs have come forward to provide them with essential commodities. But their efforts are not enough considering the number of drivers in need of support. A huge number of drivers in Visakhapatnam and Vijayawada hail from adjacent districts. They got stuck in the lockdown and have to pay their monthly rents,” said B Jagan, president of Vizag Cab Workers’ Union.

The only solace for these owners and drivers are that most financial institutions have agreed to offer three-month moratorium on car loan EMIs. But the owners are worried that they have to foot a huge interest in the end of the third month.

“For now I am relaxed that i do not have to pay EMI on my car loan, but the financial institution which gave the loan has told me that they are going to charge accumulative interest from the fourth month itself,” said M Suresh, a cab owner.

Meanwhile, automobile engineers have laid down guidelines to ensure that car batteries do not lose charge and tyres do not get deflated.

“Ensure to start and drive your car for at least 50 metres once or twice a week during the lockdown period. Most owners are not driving their cars nowadays and this may affect the batteries and engine. The engine should remain switched on for 5 minutes as this will help your car battery from getting drained. Even your car tyres won’t go flat,” Surath Sarkar, an automobile engineer, told TOI.

After the nation announced a 21-day lockdown, several automobile majors began sending advisories to their clients to help them keep their cars in working condition. 

Maruti Suzuki, the country’s largest carmaker, has been sending maintenance tips to its customers. “Start your vehicle and keep the engine running for 15 minutes. For SHVS vehicles, start and keep the engine running with headlights on for 30 minutes,” a message by Maruti Suzuki said. Other companies have also posted advisories on their websites and apps. 

“Sometimes I fear that the car may not work in emergency. We don’t know how long the lockdown will continue. Even, post lockdown, the car may develop issues. These advisories are extremely helpful for us,” said K Pravakar, a Madhurwada resident.


