Lockdown love: Nagpur girl gets engaged on video call
2020-04-15
NAGPUR: Even a distance of over 1000 kilometres and a nationwide lockdown could not stop two lovebirds from keeping their solemn promise of getting engaged on the pre-decided date of April 12. Nagpurian Neha Sharma and her Delhi-based fiance Utkarsh Bansal took to WhatsApp video call, with families in tow, and exchanged rings and promises that will last them a lifetime.


Had it not been for the lockdown, 25-year-old Neha would have been decked up in a beautiful beige gown for the engagement party scheduled at a city hotel and attended by friends and relatives.

“On April 10 my fiance was supposed to arrive from Delhi with his family, and hence on that particular day I was feeling gloomy,” said Neha. “So my would-be mother-in-law cheered me up saying that on April 12 I must wear the engagement dress and join on video call. At that time, I took it lightly because I assumed it was meant just to perk up my mood,” she said. 

Sunday came and even though Neha and Utkarsh spoke on the phone, an e-engagement was not even discussed, as both were upset about not only missing out on the event but also the prolonged uncertainty. “It was almost around 11.30pm that I finally decided to wear my engagement dress after which I made the video call,” said Neha.

Her fiance was floored at what he saw. “She was looking very beautiful in that dress and I was speechless. My mother told me to also get dressed formally. Everything happened very fast after that,” said Utkarsh. Soon enough they ‘exchanged’ rings on the video call to complete the ceremony.

Neha laughed saying, “I wore his ring and he wore mine and it was an amazing feeling.” The atmosphere brought to fore the romantic side of an otherwise shy Utkarsh. “He said no matter if we are so far away, we will always be together and all that,” gushed Neha. With both families present during the e-ceremony, it was as good as it could have got given the current situation. 

The young couple will have to wait for some more time before their arranged marriage is solemnized. Utkarsh said, “We last met on January 22 for the roka ceremony. She was supposed to come to Delhi in March, but by then travel restrictions were in place. Marriage in Delhi is scheduled for May 19 with a reception in Nagpur the same week.” These dates too, may now get extended. 

Last heard, the couple has committed to follow social distancing with a firm belief that distance makes the heart grow fonder.


