Coronavirus lockdown fails to keep people indoors in Agra, DM warns of action
2020-03-24
AGRA: The state government’s announcement for a lockdown on 17 districts, including Agra, to prevent novel coronavirus from spreading proved to be ineffective on the very first day on Monday. People treated the day like a normal day throwing caution to the winds.


 
 
People in different parts of the city came out of their houses in the morning. Vehicles were seen standing in queues at the traffic lights on major crossings of the city. Citizens gathered at public parks and gardens. Young men on bikes went about the city defying the CrPC section 144. 

 
 
In afternoon, district magistrate Prabhu N Singh and senior superintendent of police Babloo Kumar inspected the city following after which, the lockdown was enforced strictly. 

Taking cognizance of the situation, the DM Singh has directed that legal action be taken from Tuesday onwards against those found on road or a public place without any valid reason. In such cases, an FIR will be registered under IPC section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant). 

Besides, the superintendent of police Babloo Kumar ordered deployment of Provincial Armed Constabulary personnel for strict enforcement of the lockdown. Traffic police was directed to ensure that no tripling takes place on two-wheelers. 

The DM said, “People are advised not to step out of their homes if it is not necessary. We will be taking legal action against those found on roads or public places without any valid reason. The purpose of the lockdown is to stop the novel coronavirus from spreading. Every citizen must cooperate in subduing the danger. We will be issuing special passes to people associated with essential services.” 

Municipal commissioner Arun Prakash said, “We are working on a plan to ensure that vegetables, bread, milk and egg, grocery and other daily use items are delivered by the sellers at their doorstep. Soon passes will be issued to such people to operate in a confined area. We will also keep a check that suppliers charge reasonable price for the products.” 

After the janata curfew called by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday, the state government had imposed a lockdown in Agra and 16 other districts. It will be in force till March 25. Essential services have been exempted from the lockdown. 

After joining the janata curfew, people appeared to have put their guard down against the coronavirus. On Monday, people rushed to vegetable markets, grocery shops, tobacco product sellers to replenish supplies. Vehicles were seen at petrol pumps, which were exempted from the lockdown. 

Police presence on roads remained thin till afternoon. People were seen catching up on road sides, public places and tea stalls. Young men took advantage of less crowded roads to drive around on their two-wheelers.

In afternoon, police finally intervened, stopping had to make high efforts to control the situation. People found loitering on roads were stopped and told to go back home. 

