Lockdown was tough in Kashmir, Goa is much easy: Brian
2020-04-04
PANAJI: Brian Mascarenhas was ready in the dressing room with his Real Kashmir FC teammates and waiting to run on to the pitch for their home game against TRAU FC when the I-League match was called off just before kickoff on March 14.

The coronavirus pandemic has forced many countries, including India, into a lockdown. To combat the deadly virus, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced a 21-day lockdown, while the All India Football Federation (AIFF) suspended all footballing activities.

Just before the national lockdown when everything came to a standstill and people were forced to stay indoors, Brian had fortunately packed his bags and had safely returned home.

While it is a huge test for most Goans to stay indoors, Brian is used to such a situation after spending two seasons in Kashmir where he weathered not only snow storms but also unprecedented curfews during the revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

“During that period, we didn’t have internet connectivity or anything. We were not allowed to even step outside the hotel premises. It was hard to train or contact my family,” Brian told TOI.

The midfielder moved to ply his trade outside the state for the first-time last season after six years at Salgaocar FC. The 28-year-old, however, doesn’t regret his decision, although his playing time is restricted.

“I knew it was going to be difficult, but I was ready for the challenge and still signed for Kashmir. This is a common situation in Kashmir, but it is very difficult to stay home in Goa. We are simply not used to this here. I try to do some workouts and spend my time with family,” said Brian.

During heavy snow-fall, the team could train off the field and had to mostly rely on indoor stadiums. Moreover, there were difficulties in even breathing.

Mohun Bagan have already secured their second I-League title but Real Kashmir still have five matches remaining. However, it is highly unlikely the I-League will continue given the current situation.

Players have to make a lot of sacrifices to play in Kashmir, but it is not deterring Brian, who is already committed to spending his third season in the valley next season.

“The situation there (Kashmir) is very unpredictable and one can’t guarantee what can go wrong. The club faces lot of difficulties too, but they take best care of the players in a professional manner,” said Brian.
