Lockdown makes procuring goods difficult for store owners
2020-03-31
Aurangabad: A host of issues is plaguing the owners and operators of stores selling essential commodities like groceries and medicines. Since they have to deal with many customers in a day, they stand a higher chance of getting infected by coronavirus. Moreover, the nationwide lockdown has made commodity procurement difficult. 

Procuring the products from wholesale markets and ensuring that people get access to essential commodities amid lockdown is not easy. However, the traders are doing their bit to ensure residents get what they need at the local stores and sometimes even at their doorstep.

Sangita Shirse and Pratik Shirse of Sandeep Provisions in Cidco N-3 said that they were trying to ensure that they have all the essential commodities so that citizens could get whatever they need under one roof. They are even facilitating doorstep delivery of groceries but are facing issues in procuring the essentials. 

“Due to difficulty in movement of goods, there is a shortage of supply at Old Mondha. We need to procure essential household products to keep up with the demand,” said Sangita.

 Owner of Dhiraj Provisions in Cidco N-5 is worried about infection spread. “We come in contact with hundreds of people everyday. You can’t tell who is infected,” said the owner. 

Some shopkeepers have placed a table infront of the counter to ensure 1 metre gap from the customers. Boards put up in shops asking people to cover their faces and stand on the markings to ensure social distancing is of little help, especially during sudden rush in the evening. 

According to Jadhav of Savji Bhaji market, the rush at the vegetable wholesale market in Jadhavwadi is concerning. “We follow the norms to avoid infection but there is no alternative to procurement of fresh produce for vendors like me. If the fruit and vegetable markets can be separated or different days are designated for their sale, the rush of customers can be reduced,” said Jadhav. 

Jagannath Kale, president of Aurangabad Jilla Vyapari Mahasangh, said that traders have held meetings with district supply officer (DSO) Mahadeo Kirwale ensuring that there would no shortage in supply of essential commodities. “We are seeing to it that commodities like oil, rice, wheat and sugar which are procured from other cities have a smooth supply.”

“We are coordinating with the local suppliers. Even the Aurangabad DSO is coordinating with his contemporaries in other districts to ensure that the trucks carrying these commodities are not stopped,” said Kale.

Suggestions were also being made to use the extra space available at Jadhavwadi market for vendors to sit away from one another to avoid rush, he said.

Meanwhile, with the salary day of most citizens drawing nearer, the district-level trader association has appealed to people not to engage in panic buying. “They can buy the essentials needed for a month. There is not going to be any shortage of essential commodities. This would avoid the gap in supply and demand,” Kale said.


