Lockdown: Citizens take liberties, police rest lathis
2020-03-28
Nagpur: After cops decided not to use force, Nagpurians seem to have taken to venturing out of their homes on various pretexts, ignoring the national lockdown for the Covid-19 crisis. On Friday, roads, despite generally wearing a deserted look, saw a lot of movement of citizens and vehicles.

Police maintained a strict checking schedule on the main corridors and junctions across the city. The enforcement of section 144 appeared to be somewhat fruitful, with motorists, bikers, cyclists and pedestrians required to furnish concrete reasons or produce passes procured from police stations to continue their journey in west Nagpur.

In stark contrast, the lanes in east and north-east Nagpur, like Kalamna, Pardi, Hiwri Nagar, Nandanvan, Quetta Colony and such places, were busy with humans and vehicles moving about almost at will. Despite police presence to enforce lockdown, there was even a murder at Itabhatti in Yashodhara Nagar slums in broad daylight. Sources stated gambling and bootlegging also continues in these slums.

Even in the slums and localities of Ganeshpeth, public continued to throng lanes and gathered at different places ignoring the social distancing norms.

On the streets, especially those leading to the national highways to Madhya Pradesh and other state highways leading to other districts, groups of labourers, along with their families, were spotted moving on foot. All of them are trying to return to their native places in the absence of any vehicles. Several such groups of labourers on their way to Seoni in MP on foot were helped by residents of Goa Colony near Gaddigodam.

Mayor Sandip Joshi expressed shock at the manner in which the people in colonies and slums are ignoring repeated appeals to stay in their homes and avoid gatherings. “I have decided to go around personally making announcements through public address system in the lanes and localities to abstain from gathering on the road,” he said.

The mayor also said he would take up the issue with city police chief BK Upadhyay. “People in the lanes and smaller localities are paying no heed to the social distancing issue, risking community infection,” said the mayor.

Upadhyay, admitting that too many people are on the road, said it is not possible to confine citizens inside house as it may have adverse effects too. “We have to allow space for workers of essential and emergency services to operate, so that these services are not disturbed. Still, we are making efforts to stop people from loitering aimlessly,” he said.

City police on Friday detained 73 violators, registered offences against four, and issued passes to 3,590 persons for emergency exemptions.

A 38-year-old man, Nilesh Bhati, was arrested by Ramtek police of Nagpur Rural for allegedly posting a remark on his social media stating that citizens can step outside their houses without any fear of corona infection as the virus does not sustain in high temperatures. An offence was registered against Bhati, a resident of Rajaji Ward, following a complaint by the tehsildar of Ramtek.


