Lockdown gets Bengalureans to try bio enzymes as part of sustainable living
2020-05-13
The lockdown, it would seem, served as the perfect time for a lot of people to scout their pantries and look for natural alternatives to items they would normally source from the neighbourhood store. One such activity that has been gaining popularity is making homemade bio enzymes. Not only are these chemical-free cleaners effective, but they are easy to prepare too.


What is bio enzyme?
Bio enzymes are cleaners made using natural ingredients that can be used to clean the floor, clothes, plants and dishes. 

Citizens show increased interest in bio enzymes

Vani Murthy, one of the founding members of Solid Waste Management Round Table (SWMRT), says that ever since the lockdown began, queries about bio enzymes and chemical-free cleaners have been on the rise. “Not many people are aware about bio enzymes and that they are easy to make at home. Anytime is a good time to make bio enzymes, but during the lockdown, people have been trying it, because they have a lot of time on their hands,” she says. 
Singer Bindhumalini is one of those who finally put her plan to make bio enzymes to action. “I always wanted to make chemical-free cleaning agents at home, but couldn't because of my schedule. The lockdown proved to be the perfect opportunity to take it up and I am already on my second batch,” she says.


Bio enzymes are effective and environment friendly
“Bio enzymes have multiple uses. You can wash clothes, clean your surfaces - tables, kitchen shelves, bathroom tiles and more. In fact, I use bio enzyme mixed with soap nut liquid as a conditioner when I wash my hair," says Vani, adding, "The best part about them is that since they are made of natural ingredients, they do not harm the environment."


Here’s how you can start making bio enzyme at home
“You can use any kind of citrus peels. I used orange and lemon peels. All you need to do is ensure that you remember to open the bottle to let the gas escape and close the lid again,” says Bindhumalini. 


Ingredients


 Cirtrus (lemon, orange) peels
 Jaggery
 Water
 Dry yeast (if available)

Method
Follow the proportion 1:3:10 (1 part jaggery, 3 parts citrus peels and 10 parts of water). For example, if you take 100 gms of jaggery, take 300 gms of peels and one litre of water. Mix all the ingredients and pour this into a plastic container. The plastic container should be a little big so that you allow the gas to form. Place the container in a cool, dark place. For the first two weeks, open the lid every day for a minute to let the gas out and close it again. The frequency of this process will decrease as time goes by. Two weeks later, the lid can be opened once in two days for the next two weeks and after two months, you can open it once a week. By the end of two months, a clear liquid will form, which you drain and use as cleaning agent. The pulp can be used in many ways such as washing brass vessels, cleaning the sticky grime over your chimneys and windows. It can also be composted. 


Note: If you have yeast, add a pinch of it when you’re mixing the remaining ingredients. With yeast the process should take a month. Without it, it takes about three months to prepare. 

 


