Bihar: Lockdown curbs take a toll on mental health of the elderly
2020-05-20
PATNA: Two months into the Covid-19 lockdown, elderly people have started missing their old routine of morning walks, meeting friends and regular visits to temples. Many claim that the curbs imposed on them are taking a toll on their mental health.

Sexagenarian Vimal Kishor, a retired professor, kept himself busy by participating in different activities before the lockdown. “My friends and I would go to the Eco Park every morning and do yoga. However, I have not stepped out of my house for the last two months. It was bearable in the beginning, but now, I feel depressed,” he told this newspaper.

Like Kishor, Saguna Mor resident Manorma Devi, who is a diabetic, used to go out for a walk every day. After the lockdown was imposed, the 61-year-old “accepted the new normal”. “Now, my friends and I meet on the terrace every evening, but make sure that we maintain proper distance. Those, with fever, cold or cough, are not allowed to be part of our meetings,” she said.

City doctors have urged senior citizens to be careful to avoid severe infections. Patna Medical College and Hospital general physician Pratyush Kumar said, “The number of elderly people getting infected by coronavirus may be less in the state, but on a global level, they are the worst sufferers. This is because of the underlying diseases and low immune system. They should, therefore, take precautions and stay indoors as much as possible. They should also consume juices along with a balanced and nutritious diet.”

He added, “Senior citizens should take care of their mental health too and stay connected with their relatives, friends and neighbours. Videoconferencing is a good way to avoid loneliness.”

Families with elderly members are making extra efforts to keep them safe. “My grandmother, who is 79 years old, suffers from diseases like asthma and arthritis. Since my father has started going to office, he makes sure that he does not come in contact with her,” said Abhishek Kumar, a resident of Kurji.


