Lockdown: Police limit city entry-exit points to six
2020-04-21
Thiruvananthapuram: The last minute confusion over relaxation of lockdown restrictions has troubled police and general public on Monday morning. Though relaxation was announced in the district, which comes under Orange B category, a late night update on Sunday cited that areas under city corporation limits, Malayinkeezhu panchayat and Varkala municipality are hotspots, where restrictions will continue. In order to enforce strict restrictions, police decided to restrict entry-exit points to city to just six. 

Maruthoor under Mannanthala police station, Vetturoad under Kazhakkoottam police station, Vazhayila under Peroorkada police station, Kundamankadavu under Poojappura police station, Pravachambalam under Nemom station and Mukkola under Vizhinjam station will be the entry-exit points to the city. The police will close other roads to prevent entry or exit into the city. It has also decided to intensify checking within the city limits after noticing increasing cases of lockdown violations on Monday. 

City police commissioner Balram Kumar Upadhyay said that all lockdown restrictions will continue in the city which is classified as a hotspot. Cases were taken against 118 persons and 93 vehicles were seized by the city police on Monday.

A team led by rural police chief B Ashok registered 358 cases for lockdown violations and arrested 356 persons. Around 302 vehicles were seized.

Sources in police department said that there were confusions over lockdown when vehicles started plying by the morning. Though odd-even number plate rule came into effect in rural areas, the vehicles which reached the city limits were turned back. This created huge traffic blocks in city borders such as Vazhayila. Police closed hotels, which were opened following confusion over relaxation.

There was also confusion over movement through hotspots. “For some, it was impossible not to touch Varkala to go to other areas. Similarly, movement of people in area like Kattakkada was difficult without touching Malainkeezhu. So it created lot of confusion,” said a police official. 

Rural SP B Ashok said that the situation was under control by around noon. He said that inspection of vehicles at inter-state and inter-district borders were held as usual. “Only 13 vehicles came at Parassala border and all of them were medical cases, which we allowed after checking documents. Vehicles from Kollam side were not allowed at Kadambattukonam and Thattathumala as Kollam is in Orange A category. Some cited that they came to work in essential sectors such as banks. We will direct such institutions to allow leave for employees from other districts,” he said. 

DCP K Karuppasamy said that city witnessed plying of more vehicles, but all returned following intervention of the police. “When we informed that there is no relaxation of restrictions in the city, they understood and returned. We are planning to intensify inspections in the coming days,” he said.


