Covid-19 dampens festive mood on Day 1 of Ramzan in Patna
2020-04-26
PATNA: Amid the Covid-19 lockdown, popular markets in Sabzibagh, Raja Bazaar, Phulwarisharif and Alamganj wore an uncharacteristically deserted look on the first day of Ramzan on Saturday. The aroma of delicacies like ‘sewai’, ‘sheer chai’ and ‘sheermal’ was also missing and only a handful of people could be seen buying essentials for the ‘iftar’ (evening meal with which Muslims end their fast at sunset). 


Traders and shopkeepers claimed that the lockdown was likely to hit their businesses hard. Mohammad Sonu, who runs a dry fruit shop on Ashok Rajpath, told this newspaper, “Almost 100 customers buy dates, dry fruits and other items from me on usual days. Their number goes up five times during Ramzan. This time, however, we may suffer losses.”

Patnaites, who wait eagerly for the holy month of Ramzan every year, pointed out that the lockdown had dampened the festive mood. 28-year-old Bilal Ahmed, a resident of Jamal Road, said, “It is sad that there will not be any social gathering for offering special prayers this time.”

Like Bilal, Phuwarisharif resident Mohammad Talha rued that he and his friends would not be able to come together for ‘iftar’ every evening.

Azimabad Colony resident Junaid Khan said, “I will miss ‘sheer chai’ the most this year.”

Mosques remain shut: With curbs on large gatherings and public ‘iftars’ in place, city mosques will continue to remain shut during Ramzan. Only the ‘imam’ (who leads Muslim worshippers in prayer), ‘muezzin’ (who issues the call to prayer) and administrators will offer ‘namaz’ at the mosques.

Imarat-e-Shariah general secretary Maulana Shibli Qasmi told this newspaper, “Mosques will be closed and ‘taraweeh’ prayer banned. People will, therefore, observe fast and pray at home.”

Meanwhile, police forces have been deployed near popular markets to ensure that social distancing norms are followed during Ramzan.

Pirbahore police station SHO Rizwan Khan said, “Two police officers and eight constables have been deputed in Sabzibagh locality. A large number of shoppers had gathered in the market, which opened at 6am and closed by 6pm, on Friday evening.”

