#LockdownMayhem:Closed hostels, homeless students, crowded state borders
Who is to blame?
2020-03-27
Even as almost all of Hyderabad went scurrying indoors after PM Narendra Modi announced the 21-day nationwide lockdown, thousands of anxious students and young professionals spilled out on to the streets of Hyderabad, bag and baggage. Evicted from their hostels and paying guest accommodations almost overnight, they were suddenly left with nowhere to go. No public transport and sealed state borders meant that they were left stranded and homeless in Hyderabad. 

That’s when news got out that Telangana Police was issuing ‘No Objection Certificates’ that would enable those stranded to get back home. By Wednesday afternoon, hordes of hapless youngsters started thronging police stations across the city demanding NOCs. After hours of waiting in queues — social distancing be damned — many of them managed to snag their copies. 

 
 
Their woes were far from over though. Armed with their NOCs, many hopped onto two wheelers or other private vehicles, and sped home. But their hope of reaching their towns/ villages were short lived as they were met with barricades at the AP border. Not only did the local authorities refuse to recognise this NOC, they also refused to allow the returning youth in, stating it’s a violation of the lockdown. Hours later, as the crowds at the borders increased, it was decided that those who came in will be quarantined for two weeks.

Meanwhile, back here in Hyderabad, late on Wednesday, the Telangana Police directed all hostel and PG managements not to evict their occupants. “Since the lockdown is under implementation, no permission/ no objection certificate shall be granted in this regard for any movement of people across the state till further orders in the overall interest of public health and public safety,” Telangana Director General of Police (DGP) M Mahendar Reddy said in a directive, adding that strict action will be taken against hostels and PGs that violate this order. 

 
 
As this news spread, there was yet another mass migration from AP borders back to Hyderabad. Now, we have thousands of students and professionals who’ve been needlessly exposed to COVID-19 risk. Who’s to blame?


‘WHY WERE THE NOCS ISSUED? THE TELANGANA POLICE HAS PUT OUR LIVES AT RISK’
Amidst the constant flip-flop between AP and Telangana governments, the biggest casualties were students and professionals who were stranded in between. Helpless, panic-stricken and far away from home, they say the uncertainty about their food and accommodation are their biggest concerns.

“As my hostel was shut, I collected an NOC from Banjara Hills police station and headed to Guntur on my two wheeler. At 11.30 pm, I reached the border near Jaggayyapeta. When I flashed my NOC to the Andhra police, they asked me to wait as the border was sealed. Within a couple of hours, around 200 vehicles gathered at the border and traffic was piled up for almost 4 kilometres. Looking at the huge crowds that had gathered, I feared for my safety as there was potential for the virus to spread. I decided to drive back to my hostel,” shares Chaitanya Kumar, a student from Gandhi Nagar. “Luckily for me, my hostel allowed me to stay. However, they made it clear that they will not provide any food. I will need to fend for myself. With most of the eateries closed, it’s not easy but I’m grateful to at least have a roof over my head,” Chaitanya adds. 

 
 
Madhusudhan Kankatala, an IT employee from Gachibowli, had an equally stressful experience. “Ever since the lockdown was imposed, my parents were extremely worried about me and asked me to return home to Kurnool so that we can stay together during this lockdown period. I obtained an NOC from Kukatpally Police Station and headed home. To my utmost horror, despite having an NOC, I was not allowed inside by the AP Police. I waited for hours at the border before deciding to return to my hostel,” he says, adding, “Why were the NOCs issued in the first place if we were never going to be allowed to go home? The Telangana Police should’ve communicated with their AP counterparts before issuing these NOCs. They have only made matters worse for us in this extremely difficult period.”


‘WE WERE ASKED TO VACATE OUR HOSTELS WITHOUT NOTICE. WITH ALL MODES OF TRANSPORT SHUT, AND BORDERS SEALED, WHERE WILL WE GO NOW?’
Many professionals who’ve come from other states to work in the city, are in an equally helpless situation. “I have been asked to vacate my PG accommodation in Gachibowli. With the country under lockdown and all modes of transport shut, I can’t even return home to Kerala. My parents are worried; I have nowhere to go. Thankfully, after the DGP’s directive, the owner has let us stay here for now, but there is no assurance regarding our meals. We are not sure when the meals might stop or when the owner might ask us to vacate. Times are really tough for those of us who are away from homes,” says Kavya B, an employee at a city-based IT firm. 

K Kotesh, another IT employee in Madhapur, says he was forced to vacate his PG, since the owner couldn’t afford to bear the expenses of running the place any longer. “The owner told me he cannot pay for groceries to provide meals or bear the cost of the electricity bill either, and told me to vacate immediately. Because I hail from Khammam, I somehow managed to return to my hometown, but there are many who are living thousands of miles away from home. What will they do? People must show some compassion during times like these,” he says.

 
 

THERE ARE 200 OF US STRANDED IN THE HOSTEL NOT KNOWING WHEN WE’LL BE EVICTED: UOH STUDENTS
A similar sense of anguish echoes across college campuses in the city, with hundreds of students from other states left feeling helplessness. Imsanglanimchen, a student from Nagaland who is studying Ocean & Atmospheric Science at University of Hyderabad (UoH), says, “We started panicking when the admin asked us to vacate our hostels. With airports and railways shut, I can’t even go home. For now, we have managed to stay with our friend who lives nearby but I don’t know how long we can stay here.”

Sumit Jha, another UoH students who hails from Patna, adds, “There are at least 200 of us living in hostels on campus. Luckily, we’ve been allowed to stay for now. We are getting basic food from the hostel mess but we don’t know how long this will last. The uncertainty is causing panic among the students.”

 
 

WE ARE OPERATING AT 10 PER CENT CAPACITY, WE’RE NOT ABLE TO AFFORD THE STEEP RENT AND WAGES TO OUR STAFF: HOSTEL OWNERS
Hostel owners, meanwhile, share that the only reason they are asking occupants to vacate the premises, is because they don’t have the economic means to run the hostels any more. T Subba Rao, who runs a hostel in Madhapur, says, “We pay a rent of Rs 2.20 lakh to accommodate 40 to 50 people in our hostels. However, only seven occupants now remain and it’s difficult for us to pay such a steep rent. Additionally, we need to pay power bill, water bill and Internet bill as well as salaries to the cook and other staff members. With such less occupants in the hostels, we don’t know how sustainable this will be. The police are asking us not to close hostels, but how can we run the hostel without funds? The government must support us.”

Bharat Kumar, another hostel owner in Madhapur, echoes similar views. “With 90 per cent of our occupants vacating the hostels and going to their respective homes, it’s become difficult for us to pay the hostel rent as well as wages to our staff. We are hoping the government will help us maintain these hostels. Last night, many students who were on their way to AP, returned to our hostels. Since they would have mingled with so many people, now it’s it’s our responsibility to keep them under quarantine here. But without funds, it will be really hard. We are in a deep fix at the moment,” he says. 


DO NOT EVICT ANY ONE AND CAUSE PANIC: KTR TELLS HOSTELS AND PGS
Taking stock of multiple complaints of students and working professionals, MA&UD, I&C and IT Minister KT Rama Rao directed hostel and PG owners not to evict anybody from their premises. Taking to Twitter, KTR said, “Request all Hostel/PG managements in Hyderabad city to NOT evict anyone & cause undesirable panic. I have already asked @CommissionrGHMC @bonthurammohan and @CPHydCity @cpcybd to ensure that you receive all support to run the facilities without problems. I request all of our Hyderabad city public representatives including MLAs, @bonthurammohan Deputy Mayor @Babafasiuddin and all the Corporators along with officials to visit the hostels in their respective areas to convey the same to students & hostel managements.”

Quote1: Although I had an NOC, AP police didn't allow me in. By midnight thousands turned up at the border. I began to fear for my safety and had no choice to come back. Why did the police not speak to their AP counterparts before issuing Nocs? Chaitanya Kumar, student










