Lockdown hastens rlys’ plan to merge cadres, curb losses
2020-06-12
Trichy: The shutdown triggered by Covid-19 seems to have speeded up the railways’ plans to merge cadres and responsibilities so that the number or posts can be cut to save money. This means, technicians will double up as ticket examiners and porters can double up as markers and fillers. There may not be separate cadres for waiting room and retiring room attendants.

Railways will now identify staff of various departments who can be considered for multi-skilling and can take up additional duties. A railway ministry circular dated May 8 says the department will constitute a committee to deliberate on issues relating to multi-skilling of staff and give recommendations. It will also consider the scope and details regarding training to be imparted to the staff identified for multi-skilling to eliminate various posts, officials said.

Faced with revenue loss due to the lockdown, railway board has decided to implement the idea of eliminating various posts and handing over the work to the staff of other departments engaging in similar work, said one official. Technicians can be utilized for checking tickets and maintaining coaches while commercial porter, marker and filler can be combined and handled by one person. Retiring room attendants and waiting room attendants can also be merged. In the mechanical department also, a number of employees work as artisans like blacksmith, fitter and welder. All these categories may be merged as technician (metallurgy). Similarly, carpenter, mason, painter, riveter can be merged into a single category. Pump driver and plumber can also be merged as one. 

As per the plan, train ticket examiners may be entrusted with additional responsibilities of supervising onboard house-keeping services, working as common facilitator to the passengers and providing first-aid, the sources said. A railway official said this was the way forward as staff have become redundant in many departments because of modernisation. 

Though railway unions are not happy, they seem to have accepted the proposed change. Union leaders said that railways have already started the process of merging cadres by eliminating postings. “Railway department is facing acute revenue loss due to the lockdown. The board has speeded up all possible ways to minimize loss by taking measures like merging cadres. The next step would be elimination of postings,” deputy general secretary of Dakshin Railway Employees Union (DREU), D Manoharan said.


