Tamil Nadu: Lockdown could impact temperature, bring pre-monsoon showers
2020-04-16
CHENNAI: The nationwide lockdown, imposed to control the spread of Covid-19, is also likely to impact the weather, say meteorologists.


The drop in pollution levels due to the shutdown of factories and vehicles off road may have an effect on temperatures, particularly at night, and may bring intense pre-monsoon showers in the coming weeks.

Y E A Raj, former deputy director general of India Meteorological Department (IMD) said the absence of carbon dioxide and aerosol particles in the air will help radiation from sun go back to space unhindered resulting in the land cooling up faster. “This will result in a drop in temperature. Presumably, lower by 0.5 to one deg C,” he said. “But other factors like the amount of incoming radiation during the day, humidity levels, CO2 and wind direction will also play a role.”

But it requires careful analysis of pollutants levels and observational meteorological data for a longer period before and during lockdown to see if there was a change in the weather pattern, he said.

IMD director N Puviarasan said clean air could also lead to an increase in day temperature, as the sunlight radiation penetrates earth directly. An earlier IMD forecast said TN was likely to experience normal maximum temperatures with a slight departure from normal, -0.5°C to 0.5°C, between April and June. The average maximum temperatures for the three summer months including May is generally 34°C-37°C. Now, temperatures hovering around a maximum of 35 degrees C and a minimum of 26 degrees C.

Factors like wind direction too play a role in daily temperatures. “Right now we have easterly or southeasterly warmers winds from the sea flowing through the night. So, we cannot say if the temperature is influenced by the wind or the lockdown. If the winds are calm and then we can study if the temperatures are dropping in the night,” he said. “Also that the maximum amount of gases in the atmosphere are nitrogen and oxygen, while CO2 is very less. So even if there’s a variation in temperatures due to the low pollution, it would be negligible,” he added.

The IMD on Wednesday forecast a normal southwest monsoon over the country, while Prof Sridhar Balasubramanian, climate expert from IIT Bombay, said the absence of air pollutants could bring intense pre-monsoon showers in April and May. “Particles suspended in the atmosphere trap the heat and let the clouds evaporate. The absence of aerosols will help clouds hang in for longer,” he said.

