Lockdown turned an opportunity for Gujarati actor
2020-05-27
Ahmedabad: Coping with lockdown is a challenge, and each dealt with it in one’s own way. But for some, it truly was an opportunity to transform themselves. Gujarati film actor, Pratik Gandhi, invariably remained fit and refused to give up workout, until he was asked to gain weight for a film. “Throughout my life, my weight never crossed 80kg and for this particular role for an upcoming film, I was made to gain weight. I was 88kgs through the shoot of the film and all the time, I was only worried about getting back in shape,” said Pratik (39), who had to give up his workout and martial arts practice only for the role.

Pratik’s film shooting wrapped up on March 4 and he thought gym would be the only option to get back in shape. “When the lockdown was announced, I was genuinely worried on how I will be able to lose weight. However, a friend who is a nutritionist and fitness trainer, guided me with some exercises I could do at home and helped me with a basic diet plan,” he said.

After exercising twice a day for a total of three hours, Pratik finally managed to not just reduce weight from 86kg before the lockdown to 76kg but also reduced his waistline by five inches.

The journey of being fit back again wasn’t really easy for the actor. “Since I gave up workout completely when I was supposed to gain weight, my metabolism and even my breathing pattern went for a toss. Recovering the normal form was difficult, especially the initial 15 days, when I felt like giving up. I just had my focus on the target and every day I kept on motivating myself to take one more step ahead,” said Pratik, who also suffered aches and minor injuries while attempting to get fit.

“It took me 58 days but I finally managed and I am proud of it. Usually if I have a project on hand, it is easier to keep myself encouraged however, this time, I felt I should take the lockdown as an opportunity to keep myself fit so that I am ready for other projects,” he added. 


