Lonara quarantine facility to be shut after last 50 complete 14-day isolation
2020-04-23
NAGPUR: Within 15 days of starting, the Lonara-based Central India College of Pharmacy has stopped taking anymore Covid-19 suspects and would be shut after the 50 inmates completed their 14-day isolation period. Over 250 persons used the facility.


Around 10 positive cases have been reported from the centre which was started on April 5. The remaining suspects are from Satranjipura and Mominpura links. On the first day itself, it ran into controversy after 12 foreign returnees were taken there but released the next day following apprehensions of getting infected. 

Unlike other quarantine centres, the college doesn’t have hostels and close contacts of Covid19 patients were kept in large classrooms and halls where beds were put up. The common toilets and bathrooms too were on the top floor forcing every person to pass through all the corridors to use the facility. 

Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar told TOI that it was already decided to shut the Lonara facility. “Our first preference is separate rooms. Our existing facilities are having enough space right now. The college doesn’t have rooms. Many are getting discharged from MLA hostel and other places after completing 14-day isolation,” he said.

Mehmuda Gramin Vikas Bahuddeshiya Sanstha mentor Anees Ahmed said even now 20 rooms would remain available for the administration to use them for quarantining people in emergency. 

“The number of suspects are going down and the administration is preferring government-owned facilities such as MLA hostel, Ravi Bhavan and Vanamati to quarantine people. In the beginning too we had offered our white building having 20 rooms for individual isolation but the sub-divisional officer preferred the red building with large classrooms. The red building didn’t have attached toilets so it was becoming a worry for all of us as people would mix up,” he said.

Meanwhile, the city police on Wednesday morning intercepted five migrant labourers who were travelling from Bangalore to their hometown Gwalior on foot. The migrants were intercepted at Chhatrapati Nagar from where they were sent to MLA hostel, said a cop who was present at the nakabandi. However, senior PI of Pratap Nagar police station said that the migrants were handed over to NMC officials at one of the shelter homes. It is not yet clear where the migrants were taken.

Recently, around 15 migrant labourers heading from Wani to Chandrapur and some from Bilaspur were taken to the Lonara quarantine facility by cops. As per officials, they were intercepted on state border. On Thursday, these 15 are likely to be given travel pass to reach their hometowns.


