Lonely senior citizens struggle to beat lockdown blues
2020-04-13
Pune: The lockdown to fight Covid-19 has come up as a major worry for Suhas Bhome, a senior citizen living a lonely life in Kothrud. 

At the age of 70, Bhome needs to run from pillar to post for finding cooked food. No children, non-availability of domestic helps, closed eateries and lack of resources are making it difficult for him to manage the daily meals. 

Bhome is one among many such senior citizens facing the same problem during the lockdown period in a city that has over the years earned the sobriquet of pensioners’ paradise. Social organisations and local groups are the lone lifeline for the likes of Bhome. 

“Since going out should be avoided in these days, one has to make sure that enough material is stored in the house. But storage of food is a big problem for me due to the lack of equipment like a refrigerator. Being a senior citizen, I have very limited options of eating outside. So I need to go out for getting vegetables and other stuff, which have be used that day itself,” said Bhome. 

Bhome, who suffered an injury to his right hand, said he has no option to somehow manage the things during the lockdown. He said asking relatives or other well-wishers to come everyday for solving the issue was also not possible due to limitations of travels. 

Medha Kulkarni, a former BJP MLA from the Kothrud area, said they have formed a federation of senior citizens’ clubs. Members of these clubs are in touch with each other to resolve the issues of these senior citizens. “The arrangement of food and other basic needs is being done. It has been made on the demand and supply basis. We get the details about the requirements and food is arranged,” she said.

According to the senior citizens’ federation, the two major concerns are food and medicines. “Our volunteers, in association with some youngsters, are reaching out to these people for all help, including food and medicines. Those who are living alone in their homes need special attention. We have started a tiffin service. Nearly 7,000 tiffins have been made available,” said Shriram Bedkihal, a member of the federation for the senior citizens clubs. 

As per the federation, the city has around 200 such clubs with each having a membership of 300-500 people. The P\population of senior citizens in the city, including those who are not members any club, is around 3 lakh. 

“The senior citizens have restrictions on venturing out in these days and it is the need of the hour. The young people are helping us out them during such tough times. But in some situations, we need go out. This should be allowed. At the same time, the authorities should entertain the real emergencies,” said Alaknanda Bhanu of the Erandwana Senior citizens club. 


