Mumbai: Lone elders bear brunt of lockdown
2020-04-13
MUMBAI: A 74-year-old diabetic patient and his wife, who live alone in a western suburb, had to stop their regular walks recently after their housing society imposed restrictions. "While our neighbours are helping us out with the essentials, we are unable to go for our regular walks. I am diabetic and have been asked to walk every day for half an hour at least. But this lockdown is making it difficult for us to venture out,” he said.

At the other end, a senior citizen who lives by himself in a residential complex in Mulund is dependent on two meals from the local MP’s network. “After out tiffin service was discontinued, the local MP stepped in to offer help. I am not on any major medication, but there is absolutely no help around for daily chores,” he said.

Senior citizens who live alone are among those hardest hit by the lockdown, both physically and emotionally. With no access to parks and gardens for socializing, restrictions on movement, no domestic help, they are battling anxiety issues. Many also are facing difficulties in purchasing essential supplies and medicines. 

The number of distress calls from senior citizens that psychiatrists receive has increased in the past one week. And when the city’s police commissioner took to Twitter to interact with citizens, some of the elderly living alone complained about not being able to get essentials. 

Psychiatrists recommend that housing society members, neighbours to step in and help them with daily necessities. Psychiatrist Dr Avinash D’Souza, who practises in Santacruz, said, “They are reading and hearing about he higher mortality rate among senior citizens. A lot of them are facing what we call death anxiety. Many of them have called and asked me if this is how their life might end,” he said. 

“Most live alone and their children are either abroad or in other cities. These senior citizens are finding it difficult to step out for daily essentials. They have never seen empty roads, some even say they fear walking out alone. ‘What if no one notices me, if I fall somewhere?’ These are some of the concerns they call me for,” added D’Souza, who assures them the phase is temporary and can be best dealt with by staying at home. 

He recommends they talk to people on the phone.

Dr S R Kumawat, former director of health services, who currently practises in Thane, said elderly citizens are unable to socialisz with their regular groups. "Many of them used to meet in the mornings or evenings to chat and socialize, now that is curtailed. Many are not even internet savvy to talk do video calls, so they are feeling emotionally suffocated. My advice to them is to take a solitary walk on the building’s terrace, if possible. A few of them should take the initiative in staying connected with one another through phone calls. Positive exchanges will help them in periods like these. They need emotional venting out,” said Kumawat.

The World Health Organisation suggests people with pre-existing mental health conditions to continue with their treatment and be aware of new or worsening symptoms.


