Longer incubation window throws up new challenge for Covid-19 fighters in Andhra Pradesh
2020-04-25
VIJAYAWADA: The recent cases of coronavirus in Andhra Pradesh have revealed that the incubation period of the infection in some patients was more than three weeks to a month. 


According to the Union ministry of health and family welfare, the maximum incubation period — the time from the moment of exposure to an infectious agent to the onset of symptoms — is 14 days with symptoms surfacing around the fift day.

While a shorter incubation period gives room to control the disease, asymptomatic carriers can unwittingly spread the disease. In a given situation, as soon as the patient gets sick or starts exhibiting any symptom, the patient in all likelihood seeks medical intervention without giving much scope for transmission. But as long as the patient remains asymptomatic, he continues with his normal chores.

For example, a 27-year-old woman, who tested positive for covid on April 23 in Visakhapatnam, was believed to have been exposed to the infection at least three weeks ago when her husband was tested for Covid on April 1. Four family members also contracted the virus from the same male family member, who had a travel history to Mumbai. But his wife had tested negative for coronavirus in the first test. All the five family members were recently declared cured and sent home. But the same woman, who first tested negative, was diagnosed with the disease on April 23 in the second test.

Another case in point would be the three Delhi returnees who tested positive in the last few days in East Godavari. A total of 35 people had been to Delhi in the first half of March from East Godavari. While two persons stayed back in Uttar Pradesh, the remaining 33 were screened in which three tested positive on April 2. But in the recent second round of tests, three more persons tested positive, raising concerns among health officials. Now, East Godavari district officials have identified about 245 first and secondary contacts of the patients who will be tested soon. 

Similarly, a 46-old-woman tested positive for the virus in the second round of screening on April 19 in Visakhapatnam. A group of 10 people from Tamil Nadu who had a travel history to Delhi, arrived in Visakhapatnam on March 15. Upon being tested, two persons were found to be Covid positive on April 6. Incidentally, on the same day (April 19) when the two persons were declared cured, the 46-year-old woman tested positive for the virus when the officials were supposed to discharge her from the quarantine facility after completion of her 14-day quarantine stay.

Senior genetics professor of Andhra University, Prof G Sudhakar, said the virus mutation spreading in India seems to be less virulent. “In general, the persons who contracted the disease start displaying symptoms within two weeks. But sometimes, it depends on the individual’s immunity and other factors such as age, genes” said Prof Sudhakar.


