Longer wait, fewer tables, masks: Dining out to be a changed, quick affair after lockdown
2020-04-28
KOLKATA: Dining out is set to be a halting experience post lockdown, with screening of guests at restaurant entrances, fewer seats to maintain social distancing and a longer waiting time for tables. Orders will now have to be placed quickly to reduce interaction with waiters and everyone must carry a mask, according to a set of instructions issued for restaurants, bars and nightclubs across Kolkata by the Hotel and Restaurants’ Association of Eastern India (HRAEI).

While the instructions were greeted by restaurants, they felt the directives, coupled with the Covid-19 fear that could persist for several months after the lockdown is lifted, will lead to an extended lean period. Restaurants will be operating at 35%-40% less than their capacity to maintain distance between tables, which will lead to an automatic drop in footfall, according to HRAEI secretary Sudesh Poddar. 

“Some tables will have to be removed to maintain at least 1.5m to 2m distance between them. Even though it will be mandatory for all staffers to wear masks and gloves, guests will be advised to place orders quickly to reduce interaction time. Waiting time for food will also have to be brought down to ensure that more people can get in. But all these measures will result in a drastic drop in footfall — by around 70% — across all restaurants,” Poddar added.

Once restaurants are allowed to open, temperature check will be mandatory at the entrances. If a guest has a temperature more than 98.6°F, he or she will be directed to the nearest medical facility. If a guest is not carrying a mask, it will be the restaurants’ or night clubs’ responsibility to provide one. Guests will be advised to wear masks even inside the restaurant till food is served. 

“The initial period could be difficult and it will take some time to get used to the new arrangements. For us, the major difference would be a longer waiting time for guests. We will try to neutralize it by shortening the waiting time for food. Our kitchen will be instructed to get cracking the moment an order is placed,” said Nitin Kothari, owner of Mocambo and Peter Cat on Park Street.

Some restaurants are planning to livestream their cooking on TV screens to gain customers’ confidence. It will help dispel doubts about cooking hygiene, felt Poddar, who is planning to introduce streaming in his restaurant Song Hai. 

“The quicker the lockdown ends, the better. But we will not be taking chances,” said Poddar.


