Long wait, no food, allege quarantined Satranjipura residents
2020-04-29
Nagpur: Around 500 Satranjipura residents allegedly went without food and water from Monday to early Tuesday morning after fasting the whole day as Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) team accompanying them to different quarantine centres asked to accommodate them elsewhere.

NMC’s ambitious plan to place over 1,000 residents in institutional quarantine from this Covid epicentre without taking the actual capacity into consideration not only left the residents tired, sick, and hungry but also kept its own officials on toes till small hours of Tuesday.

The residents had suggested they be quarantined within Satranjipura where a couple of state government and civic body buildings are available. “They didn’t listen to us. Most of us were observing roza (fasting). They picked up people of all ages and bundled us in buses. There was no arrangement and no management,” said the residents. 

Many residents own livestock like cows, buffaloes, and goats. “No one is willing to take care of our animals. With the owner quarantined, the cattle have not been fed,” they said.

NMC Satranjipura zone assistant commissioner Vijay Humne blamed the residents for the late night chaos. “Our team was ready with buses since 1pm. If we have to take 500 people and all of them come at one time what would be the situation? If this had started from 1pm things would have been smooth,” he said.

Residents countered Humne’s claims saying the departure was planned only after 5pm. “How can survey of 1,000 people be over in a couple of hours? NMC team took time till 5pm to complete the survey of people to be quarantined,” they said. 

Humne said the process of shifting started at 8.30pm. “People reported to the barricaded spot at 8.30pm. It is a time-consuming process. Entire work got over at 3am,” he said.

Regarding not providing food, Hume said, “Officials at Symbiosis centre were under impression these people would have eaten their dinner. In the next batch, hopefully these problem will not be there if all cooperate,” he said. 

He refused to divulge details of venues where next batch of residents would be shifted. He also said the cattle would be managed by NMC. 

Residents said, “We didn’t create this virus yet we are facing ostracization. We are cooperating with the administration. We can be accommodated in an NMC building lying vacant, another hall, a big hostel, and big buildings. But NMC refused to heed our request,” they said. 

Humne said the suggestions didn’t fit the norms. Residents said the alleged chaos had deterred others who had made up their mind to get quarantined.

“Baseless allegations are being made by a politician. It is the duty of the elected representative to come and talk to people. Anyone can come and ask the field workers. After iftaar, people with the entire families came out. Till 1am, seven buses were waiting outside Symbiosis. Later, three were diverted to MLA hostels and seven went to VNIT hostels. They just want to inflate numbers,” they said.


