Looking at near-normal, Punjab broadsided by sixth wave of coronavirus cases
2020-05-02
CHANDIGARH: Punjab, which few days back appeared to be limping back to normalcy, has been hit by another fresh wave of cases — the biggest — completely changing the state’s scenario.


This is sixth wave of cases faced by Punjab and largely relate to the pilgrims returning from Nanded in Maharashtra after spending about 40 days there.



Since the launch of colour coding system by the health ministry on April 15, most of the districts in Punjab recorded reduction in Covid-19 caseload and by April 27, the number of green districts had gone up from three to seven while number of hot spots with clusters (orange zone) came down from four to two districts.

However, the situation completely changed in next four days in which 255 cases were reported between April 28 and May 1, accounting for 43.58% of total cases reported till date. The number is expected to still rise as test results of more pilgrims are still awaited. The surge in cases led to increase in districts in red zones and orange zones, based on which the state government has to decide on the post-May 3 relaxations in the lockdown.

On April 27, there were only four districts in the red zone — Jalandhar, Patiala, Mohali and Pathankot — 15 or more active cases.


Barnala lone green zone in Punjab

The number of districts in the red zone has shot up to seven, with inclusion of Ludhiana, Amritsar and Ferozepur. Tarn Taran, which enjoyed the green zone tag till April 27, is just a case away from getting into red zone.

Three districts — Tarn Taran, Mansa and Kapurthala — are now in the category of hotspots with clusters (orange) while a total of 11 districts — Mansa, Hoshiarpur, Faridkot, Sangrur, Moga, Ropar, Gurdaspur, Muktsar, Fazilka, Fatehgarh Sahib and Bathinda — are now non-hot spot districts with positive cases. Barnala remains the lone green zone is the state with no active case. The number of green districts on April 27 was seven.



Only three districts of Punjab featured in the list of red zones issued by the Union health ministry on Thursday evening. However, as per assessment, as many as seven districts having 15 or more active cases are in the red zone.

The prevailing situation will force the government to redraw its strategy regarding relaxations and might have to take stringent steps, especially in the red zones in bid to contain the spread of virus.

With sudden spike in number of cases, the chief minister on Friday urged people not to panic and attributed the rise to large number of people coming back from other states.


Punjab reaches 585 mark

The total tally of Covid-19 positive cases in Punjab reached 585, including 20 deaths, on Friday. As per the media bulletin issued by the health department at 6 pm, a total of 105 cases were reported positive in last 24 hours, of which 59 cases were added to the count on Thursday night. As per the breakup of 105 cases, 83 were Nanded pilgrims of which 48 cases were from Amritsar, 15 in Ferozepur, 13 in Ludhiana, 5 in Mohali, 4 in Fazilka and one case each in Jalandhar and Moga. As many as 15 other fresh cases were reported in Jalandhar and one each in Mohali and Patiala. Of total 585 cases till Friday, 108 patients have recovered.

