Low testing keeps down new cases
2020-05-23
Vadodara: With two more Covid-19 cases linked to the Bhailal Amin General Hospital (BAGH) surfacing since Thursday evening, Vadodara now has 791 positive cases, along with 18 new reported on Friday.

However, in its wake, what seems apparent is the authorities’ new approach in combating the Covid menace. While the results of only 129 samples were available, the number of new positive cases also thus stayed low. Interestingly, more than 150 samples were tested in a single day earlier this week, which then kept falling down to 134 on Thursday and then to 129 on Friday. However, health authorities take refuge in the fact the testing is being carried out only as the ICMR guidelines. The number of patients who were discharged was also very low as only five patients were discharged on Friday. These include four from a Covid care centre and one from the GMERS, Gotri Hospital.

Sources said that a woman residing in Undera in Vadodara taluka and a man residing in Gorwa area of the city were tested positive for Covid-19 since Thursday night. They used to work at BAGH and were tested as part of the testing drive of those working at the hospital. The hospital has been closed for a week and will be sanitised. A man staying on Ratanpur road in Vadodara also tested positive for Covid-19. It has come to light that he used to work win the loan department of a major private bank in Vadodara.

According to the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) data, 279 persons remained under treatment after testing positive for Covid-19, including 11 on oxygen and six on ventilators or BIPAP machines. The number of deceased remained at 38 with VMC not declaring any fresh deaths. As many as 477 patients have been discharged so far. Also, 1,402 persons have been quarantined at home or at private facilities. These include those who have travelled to the city from abroad or from outside the state. Eight persons were found suffering from severe acute respiratory illness or influenza like illnesses. These included eight from the red zones of the city and one from the orange zone.


