Gurugram: Low wages, poor safety gear, say Asha workers on coronavirus frontline
2020-06-12
GURUGRAM: Even after three Asha workers tested positive in the district, these frontline workers claim that they’re still not being given good quality masks, gloves or PPE kits when they go out for Covid-19 survey or visit containment zones. These footsoldiers of the health department who have been carrying out Covid duties diligently since the outbreak, worry about their own safety and that of their families.


In order to get the government’s attention to their problem, Asha workers in the city have decided to stage a protest on June 12. Apart from protective gear and Covid-19 tests, they have also sought better wages. An Asha worker gets paid Rs 4,000 per month and an extra Rs 1,000 for the survey work.

 

“While the government has doubled the salary of doctors and other health workers, we are only getting an additional Rs 1,000. Aren’t we equally at risk?” said Manita Gulliya, who is with Asha in Laxman Vihar. She added that they do not even get money for the commute required for the surveys.

All 1,030 Asha workers in Gurugram have been provided safety gears but they claim that some are of inferior quality and do not serve the purpose. They also complained that three of their colleagues who got the infection were not given any special treatment and are recuperating by themselves at home.

“We want that all the workers be given good quality masks, and those going into containment zones be provided with reliable PPE kits,” said Pinky Rohilla, who works with Asha in Farrukhnagar. 

They also requested the government to conduct monthly tests on the workers on Covid-19 duties but these demands have fallen on deaf ears, they said.

Moreover, as recent incidents have revealed, patients at quarantine centres and at the homes they are surveying, often misbehave with these health staff. “Ever since the novel coronavirus broke out, we have been working on the frontline. We conduct the surveys, we take the patients into the ambulances and we even have to take the medical kits to those in home isolation. Many times, while doing these visits, people even misbehave with us,” said Meena Devi, who is an Asha facilitator in Pataudi.

Devi recalls that on a recent visit to a patient’s house, she found that both the husband and the wife had tested positive and were isolated. “The couple asked me to arrange for food for their children,” she smiled.

Risking their health and lives during this pandemic, these Asha workers hope that the protest will help them get the government’s attention towards their issues. “Ever since the pandemic broke out, we have been working tirelessly but the government doesn’t care for us at all. We do not even receive our salaries on time. There should be a proper platform for redressing our problems,” said Puspha, 40, who is with the Farrukhnagar team.

JS Punia, chief medical officer, Gurugram did not reply to requests for a comment on this. 


