Low testing of local people contested
2020-06-05
Madurai: Health officials from across the southern districts of the state have said that more Covid-19 testing are being done recently on those who are returning to their native places from other places than local people as per current protocol. On the other hand, in some districts, clusters of indigenous cases are cropping up, even if the source is an outsider, leaving room for concern for stepping up testing among local people. The total number of Covid-19 cases in the region has touched 1667, of which 735 cases are imported cases.

As per the protocol, in the region, those being tested for Covid-19 are people who had returned from other places, contacts of Covid-19 patients, ante-natal expectant mothers, those undergoing surgeries and those with Influenza-like illness (ILI) symptoms. “A majority of those being tested and turning positive are from other states or districts. So our focus lies there so as to ensure spread from them to locals is contained. Even the few indigenous cases can be traced to being contacts of those from other states or districts. There is no local spread,” said a health official from Virudhunagar, which has 45 local Covid-19 cases and 91 imported cases as of Thursday.

However, local testing is limited to contacts of Covid-19 patients, ANC cases, those undergoing surgeries and those with ILI symptoms, which remains a low number in a population of lakhs. Further, though a majority of Covid-19 patients have been asymptomatic, only asymptomatic people with some direct contact history are being tested. There have also been cases of those from other districts under home quarantine who tested Covid-19 positive only later after developing symptoms. In Tuticorin, a cluster of more than 35 indigenous cases has been related to two funerals in which one man from Chennai was found to be the source of infection in each of the two scenarios.

Similarly, several small clusters in Madurai district were related to those who had returned from Chennai and other states. “Last week, several contacts of a man from Chennai turned Covid-19 positive. We are trying our best to contain the disease, but when one case appears, it is inevitable that there are a few cases among the contacts. 


