Tamil Nadu: Lower positivity rate not good news when testing is reduced
2020-05-14
CHENNAI: A drop in the positivity rate – the number of people testing positive for Covid-19 over the total number tested – may seem like good news, but it makes epidemiologists and public health experts break out in a cold sweat.

 


In the past one week, the number of people being tested for the viral infection has not increased, although an average of at least 500 people are testing positive daily. “We must test more people and let the infection rate come down organically,” said ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology deputy director Dr Prahdeep Kaur. All international organisations have been advocating this, she said.

Epidemiologists say that when the number of tests is reduced, it will show an artificial decline in incidence. On May 6, when the state announced it screened 13,281 people, there were 771 positive cases (5.8%). Three days later, when the test numbers dropped to 12,999 people, positivity rate dropped to 4% after 526 people tested positive. After going down further to around 11,500 cases in the last two days, the state tested 12,666 people on Wednesday. Yet the positivity rate was 4%. “When tests are reduced there may be surprises. The last thing we want during a pandemic is a sudden increase in the number of cases. Countries that have been ramping up tests have been able to efficiently control deaths too,” she said. 

Data shows that in Chennai, there are at least 25 contacts for every person testing positive. At least five close contacts – people who have spent 15 minutes with these people in a closed environment – are tested. At the Covid-19 control room, the number of people doing contact testing has increased rampantly.

Scientists are finding that every infected person infects up to three others in Chennai. Greater Chennai Corporation special nodal officer Dr J Radhakrishnan said the aim is focused testing. “We screen the vulnerable population. All contacts at risk are screened, if we don’t we keep them in isolation.”

The corporation says nearly 4,000 people from the metropolitan area are tested daily. At least 9,000 people from the state were tested since Tuesday. Of this nearly 3,900 were from Chennai. “That is close to 13% positivity rate compared to single digits we had a few days ago,” a senior official said. About 70,000 people in the city, 1% of its population, have been tested. A total of 9640 per million people are tested in Chennai

Public health experts say it may not be a bad idea as long as people under quarantine follow norms. “The city can do more tests, its neighbouring districts are seeing more cases. But there isn’t a proportional increase in tests.”


