‘Lucknow’s lungs expanded the most in state during lockdown’
2020-06-02
LUCKNOW: The lockdown unlocked good news for air quality in various places.

There was a significant drop in air pollution levels in 11 cities of Uttar Pradesh which often figured among highly polluted cities in the country.



Air of Lucknow and Greater Noida, which are normally the most polluted in the state for the better part of the year, was better than most other cities during the lockdown. A study by Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board (UPPCB) monitored 11 cities for the comparison, taking the average of pre-lockdown days and during lockdown.

Concentration of PM2.5 in the air was under permissible limits in 10 cities out of 11 monitored by the board in its ‘impact assessment of lockdown on ambient air quality’. Barring Kanpur, where air quality improved significantly but the average micro pollutant level was a unit above the standard, the remaining cities—Agra, Varanasi, Noida, Ghaziabad, Bulandshahr, Hapur, Muzaffarnagar and Meerut—saw clean and breathable air during the period. UPPCB member secretary Ashish Tiwari said, “In a study by our team, it was found that concentration of both PM10 and PM2.5 dropped during the lockdown period in UP cities.” 

He said the study was conducted by comparing air quality during lockdown period in April with pollution level of March when activity was normal. Tiwari said that Lucknow had the best air quality—an average of 64—during the lockdown, making it figure in the ‘satisfactory’ category.

Lucknow also recorded the lowest average PM2.5 concentration of 37 micrograms per cubic metre of air during lockdown, witnessing a fall in air pollution level by 23% over regular days.

A stoppage in construction activity, industrial and commercial activities, reduction of vehicular load and other reasons contributed to the improvement.

The other cities that did well were Greater Noida and Hapur, each with PM2.5 concentration of 44 micrograms/cubic metre of air. 

Bulandshahr and Kanpur had the highest concentration of PM2.5.

The cities which witnessed maximum improvement in superfine particulate matter in air were Greater Noida, Ghaziabad and Muzaffarnagar. Maximum improvement in overall air quality was in Lucknow, Ghaziabad and Greater Noida during the lockdown.

“To continue with clean air, it is important to adopt ‘green methods’ like car pooling, covering construction sites with green nets, giving office employees work from home option to minimize vehicular load and check pollution caused by industries,” said a senior UPPCB official.


