Lucky to be born here: Covid-19 couple who came from France
2020-04-09
Thrissur: “We used to think healthcare services in Western countries were far superior than in Kerala. But after undergoing treatment here for Covid-19, we realize we are lucky to be born here,’’ said Harikrishnan from Kanimangalam who was discharged from the medical college hospital along with his wife Lakshmi, after testing negative twice for Covid-19. They had tested positive on their return from France on March 17.

Thirty-two-year-old Harikrishnan had completed his MBA in France and worked as a product analyst there. He got married to Lakshmi in December, last year, and the couple had flown to France the same month.

Lakshmi’s tourist visa was to expire on March 23 and so they decided to fly back together to India. “We were advised home quarantine soon after reaching home. We thought that after couple of days of isolation, we will be okay. We never thought we would test positive for Covid-19. Lakshmi had some fever and throat pain and was shifted to a hospital on March 20. Two days later, she tested positive for the disease. By then, I had developed some problems, like breathing difficulties and diarrhoea. I was allergic to dust and suffered asthmatic symptoms when I was young but they disappeared later. When I started to suffer from breathing problems, I feared those complications were returning. I was shifted to a hospital and tested positive for coronavirus later. And when the symptoms started appearing I was scared. I had developed pneumonia also. But Lakshmi was relatively stable during the hospitalisation period,’’ Harikrishnan said.

“The treatment we had received was excellent. Looking back, we feel, it was a blessing that we decided to come back together. I had initially thought to leave Lakshmi here and to go back to France,” he said.

Another Covid 19 patient Hazeena, the wife of a Gulf returnee from Pavaratty near Chavakkad area, was also discharged from Thrissur Medical College Hospital on Wednesday.


