Lucknowites turn hair stylists for family members during lockdown
2020-04-17
The lockdown due to Coronavirus has changed peoples’ lives totally. With every commercial establishment closed people are resorting to doing thingson their own. For example becoming salon gurus. With salons closed, a lot of people wanting hair cuts have no where to go. So stepping in for them are their family members who are turning salon gurus for them. Read on to know about some hair raising tales by a few such city folk...

HAIRCUT AND THE FAUJI - A COVID TALE
A singularly fauji trait is their penchant for haircuts, it’s a weekly ingrained ritual. Long hair on a fauji is a strict no-no. A week without his crew cut and it’s sheer sacrilege for a forces guy.
“But the nationwide lockdown happened and this holy ritual was broken,” shares Ritu Singh, a colonel’s wife in Lucknow. She adds, “Barbers were available but there were also strict orders not to take haircuts in public places. My husband, a typical fauji, tried everything to get a hair cut, even wielding the scissors himself to cut his own hair. But the end result was he ended up cutting his own self instead of his hair. That’s when I had to step in, and armed with a tailoring scissor and his razor, a work of art was created by me. I managed to do a fairly neat job, I must say.” 

Ritu Singh giving a hair cut to her husband (BCCL)

THIS ONE’S FOR YOU MY SON!
“Cutting my son’s hair was actually great fun!” says chef Pankaj Bhadouria, adding, “Well, my son needed a trim and was grumbling about his tresses growing a bit too long. And then, I was inspired to take to cutting and chopping, in another way. (laughs) He needed a little convincing, but then he allowed me to give him a hair cut. I must confess I did a pretty decent job of it.”
“My son is four years old and he came to India five months back. In winters, while having long hair was fine, but it is really hot now and my son was not comfortable with his tresses coming on to his forehead. Since because of the lockdown all salons are closed, I cut his hair slightly short, especially from his forehead,” shares Urfi Khan, a businessman from Lucknow.

Dr Ali Faraz Siddiqui gets a hair cut from his brother Jibran (BCCL)
Sharing the experience of cutting his sons’ hair, Ashwani Yadav, a government official sharess, “Since all the salons were closed, I decided to give a hair cut to my two sons. And though, my younger son Dhruv did not say anything, the elder one, Atharva, made a request that ‘Papa give me a haircut just like Guru Randhawa's’. Later, when he saw his hair in the mirror, his first question was ‘what kind of haircut have you done Papa? This does not look like Guru Randhawa’s style!’ So to calm him down I had to promise him that next time I will give him a Guru Randhawa waala haircut.”

Urfi Khan gives a hair cut to his son (BCCL)

MAKINFG THE WRONG CUT!
Not all hair cuts were a success. Take for example the haircut given to Dr Ali Faraz Siddiqui, a dentist, by his brother, Jibran, a lawyer by profession. “Initially things were going pretty fine. Till the time, Jibran was trimming the hair on the sides, it looked cool. In fact, we also consulted an online tutorial regarding a basic haircut. But as he started trimming it with scissors from the middle, it became a flop shop. The hair cut was so bad that I am now wearing a cap to hide it. I am just waiting for the lockdown to get over so that I can go to my barber and do some damage control,” he sighs. 
— With input from Farhan Ahmad Siddiqui

