Telangana: Lucrative on-site posts find no takers amid coronavirus fear
2020-02-14
HYDERABAD: In their attempts to keep employees safe, IT companies are discouraging travel to China and other countries affected by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), which has reportedly claimed nearly 1,200 lives in the neighbouring country.


Even employees working for companies with Chinese clients have refused to take on-site postings in Hong Kong. In many cases, these on-site postings offer employees three times their current salary.

 
 

While most IT companies in the state do not have business ties in China, the alerts are also meant to discourage employees from taking leisure trips to the country. “We are being told to name the destination of travel while making leave applications. The grapevine says that the human resource team is keeping track of all leaves being sought which are over three to four days. They are even trying to find out from other teams if a member has plans to travel abroad. Although our company does not cater to China or Singapore, many employees travel abroad for vacations,” said a software engineer working with an IT firm in the city.

Meanwhile, some companies which have on-site opportunities are finding it increasingly difficult to find interested employees for such postings. However, employees are playing it safe be it for personal or professional reasons. “In our office, an informal chat by a senior supervisor about a posting in Hong Kong resulted in five people calling in sick the very next day,” said a techie under the condition of anonymity. 

While on-site offers are the creme-de-la-creme when it comes to opportunities with postings generally meaning higher pay, IT professionals have declined several such lucrative offers in a bid to avoid being affected by the virus. “While IT companies in Hyderabad have very few clients in China, most of the on-site postings are in Hong Kong and these have been declined outright. In fact entire teams have turned down offers, leaving team leads in a fix,” said Telangana Information Technology Association (TITA)president, Sundeep Kumar Makthala.

