Made in Kovai sanitizers keep Covid-19 in check
2020-03-20
Coimbatore: Some city-based educational institutions and brands have begun developing their own hand sanitizer as there is a huge shortage for the same in the market to break the chain of Covid-19 by maintaining hand hygiene. They seem to have taken inspiration from Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH) that has come up with a hand sanitizer called Covai Rub. 

On Thursday, Sri Krishna College of Engineering and Technology (SKCET) in Kovaipudur and skincare brand Vilvah announced their own hand sanitizers. While SKCET plans to use the product on its campus itself, Vilvah would distribute its product to people at high risk of exposure to the virus free of cost. “This includes health care workers, delivery partners and scavengers in rural areas who are regularly in touch with patients,” said a statement from Vilvah. 

The two are, however, aware that they could meet only a fraction of the demand. Vilvah said, “We have developed only 100kg so far, but we have received emails requesting 1,000kg. So, we want to target rural healthcare workers first and then go forward.” 

J Janet, SCKET principal, said they had developed 2,000 litres of hand sanitizer, which they would fill in 100ml bottles to be placed in classrooms, library, laboratories, toilets, hostels, and halls, etc., for the use of students and staff. “The case is same with our group institutions. Our students also know they don’t need to buy sanitizer from market after they return on March 31. If we have extra, we can distribute it to the villages that we have adopted - Perur Chettipalayam and Arumugakoundanur.” 

CMCH is, meanwhile, producing 10 litres of Covai Rub a day to meet their requirements. While Covai Rub contains isopropyl alcohol, glycerin and hydrogen peroxide, SKCET’s hand sanitizer contains 80% alcohol and natural ingredients like aloe vera extracts, rose petals and lavender. Vilvah’s sanitizer has 70% alcohol and other ingredients. 


