Madhya Pradesh: Spirit goes out of liquor business in lockdown
2020-05-02
BHOPAL: As the government prepares to open wine shops after May 3, the liquor contractors have approached the government to ‘cancel the contracts worth about Rs 13000 crore.’ They are apprehensive of about Rs 2000 cr losses in this fiscal.


“Market is down and people, especially the lower class, which has migrated from other cities, doesn’t have money. This will lead to huge losses”, said one of the liquor contractors requesting anonymity. However, excise commissioner Rajesh Bahuguna said he was unaware of any such development. With an eye on the excise duty, the cash-strapped government wants to start the liquor shops at the earliest. However, a final decision is yet to be taken on how the shops would operate. Liquor trade went awry due to pandemic induced lockdown even before the new contractors could take over the shops on April 1.

Liquor contracts worth crores expired on March 31. “There was no mention of the pandemic, when the bidding was taking place for the liquor shops earlier this year. This year liquor contracts worth Rs 13000 crore were given, which is Rs 1000 crore more than last year’s figure of 12,000 crore,” said another liquor contractor on the condition of anonymity.

“We assumed normal business conditions and went ahead with higher amount, but in view of covid-19 crisis, the government needs to redefine the terms and conditions along with business rules. For example, in several red zone districts, it is uncertain how the liquor shops and ahatas would operate. But once the shops are opened, we would be expected to deposit the excise duty, irrespective of the sale. In fact, we have already been asked to deposit post-dated cheques as guarantee money,” he said.

Explaining difficulties in view of current situation, last week the contractors had written to excise commissioner, asking him to ‘cancel the liquor contracts’. “We foresee a loss of at least Rs 2000 crore in this financial year,” said a contractor Excise commissioner, however, said, “Though I have not received any such communication for cancelling the contract, let me tell you that liquor shops will be opened come what may.”

