Madhya Pradesh: Flyers on home stretch if no Covid symptom
2020-05-25
BHOPAL: With domestic flights resuming on May 25, the Madhya Pradesh government came out with Covid-control SOPs on Sunday mandatory quarantine for those with symptoms, the rest can go home.

The first commercial plane to arrive at Raja Bhoj Airport after a gap of 61 days will be an Indigo flight from Delhi, scheduled to touch down at 3.20 pm.

Arriving passengers need to fill a declaration form about their travel history, address and contact details, and go through a Covid screening. Those detected with Covid symptoms will have to go into mandatory quarantine at a paid facility or government-run one.

“They will be tested and sent home only if their report is negative. If their report is positive, they will be sent to dedicated Covid care centres and isolation ward for 10 days,” said airport director Anil Vikram.

Those who show no symptoms after seven days could be allowed to go home but they will have to be home quarantined for the next 7 days.

To travel home or outside Bhopal district, passengers will have to keep their e-ticket with them.

On the first day of flight resumption, IndiGo and Air India will operate four flights on the Delhi-Bhopal-Delhi sector. From May 26, six flights are expected to operate on Delhi-Bhopal-Delhi, Mumbai-Bhopal-Mumbai and Hyderabad-Bhopal-Hyderabad sectors.

Aarogya Setu app is a must for all fliers above 14 years of age. Masks and gloves are mandatory, of course, and fliers can take 350ml of sanitizer with them. Check-in will be contactless with CISF personnel checking ID card and e-tickets/boarding passes without touching them. Those who cannot print boarding passes or do a web check-in can use the self-check-in kiosks rather than going to a counter.

The Airport director said passengers must arrive two hours before scheduled flight time. They will be thermal screened at the gate and will be allowed in only Aarogya Setu app shows green and their body temperature is normal.

Private vehicles and select cab services will be allowed to take passengers and employees to the airport. Fliers’ baggage will be disinfected at the main gate. Fliers have to go through repeated rounds of hand sanitization prior to boarding.

