Coronavirus scare: Madrassas in Kerala shift to online learning
2020-03-17
KOZHIKODE: In an agile response to the restrictions placed following the Covid- 19 situation, many madrassas in the state have been quick to embrace online education to ensure continuity of their religious studies. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

With madrassas in the state temporarily closed following restrictions related to Covid- 19, many major Muslim religious organizations have announced plans to start online madrassa classes for students.

The Samastha Kerala Sunni Vidyabhyasa Board, which manages around 9,000 madrassas under the AP Sunni faction, has decided to start online madrassa classes for lakhs of students before March 21. The classes will continue till the end of the academic year scheduled to be held on April 20.

Sunni leader Kanthapuram A P Aboobakkar Musaliyar said that the move by the Sunni Vidhyabhyasa Board is aimed to enable safe learning for students by harnessing technology in the wake of the spread of Covid-19.

The live online madrassa classes will be made available online by Islamic Media Mission. The online classes on various subjects like Holy Quaran, Islamic history, Hadees, Islamic beliefs and rites etc., will be handled by experts.

Kanthapuram said the initiative will also help children of NRKs as normal life has been hit in many foreign countries following Covid- 19.

Sunni Educational Board general secretary A K Abdul Hameed said that madrassas which were to have classes till April 20 are set to lose many academic days as they have now closed following the government directive.

“We have been receiving numerous requests for putting in place an alternative mechanism to ensure continuity of classes. Also many Gulf countries have enforced shutdowns following the Covid-19 and we have been receiving calls over how to continue the classes. The online madrassa system will enable people access to classes imparted by experts in various subjects which are taught in madrassas by clicking the online link," he said.

The Ithihadushubbanil Mujahideen (ISM) too have made arrangements for online madrassa lessons through internet radio channel radio islam, an initiative under the IT wing of ISM state committee. Office bearers said that students can register for the classes and listen to the lessons on internet radio. The teachers will respond to the queries regarding the topics which can be raised through WhatsApp.

Madrassas, traditionally called Òothupallis, were once limited to rote learning of Holy Quran had started offering computer classes and has adopted modern pedagogical instruments for teaching science and maths under the central-sponsored madrassa modernization scheme implemented previously.


