Madurai malli gets special nod for inter-district transfer during lockdown
2020-04-06
MADURAI: Taking up the cause of jasmine farmers in the district during lockdown, Madurai district collector Dr T G Vinay has given special permission for inter-district transfer of flowers.


The Madurai flower market was forced to shut down for the first time in 50 years on the day of Janata curfew, and the consequent lockdown has resulted in thousands of tonnes of jasmine flowers, which is the livelihood of the farmers, going waste. Madurai and its surroundings have around 1,500 jasmine farmers, who produce flowers for sale through the year. Jasmine is produced in about 2,000 hectares in the state. On an average, a farmer picks about 300 kg to 500 kg of flowers from February to April, and during the peak season from April to August, they harvest about two to three tonnes of flowers an acre.

The lockdown has led to tonnes of flowers going waste and the farmers’ cause was represented by president of the Tamil Nadu Chamber of Commerce and Industry, N Jegatheesan, one of the directors of S Nagarathinam and Sons.

Enquiries were made and it was found that a perfume manufacturing company was ready to take 3,000 tonnes of flowers on a daily-basis and after obtaining special permission the first consignment was transported to Coimbatore.

The farmers in Ezhiyarpathi have been producing a lot of flowers. Other factories in the region were requested to take flowers and now the collector said that ten tonnes of flowers are sent to factories in Nilakottai and Coimbatore. Periyasamy, a farmer in Thiruparankundram, says that the collector’s move is a boon them in the difficult times. “We would have sold a kilogram of flower for about Rs 200 to Rs 350 or more this season in the market if it was open, but now we are selling it for Rs 80 to Rs 100, which is still manageable,” he said. Jegatheesan said that there had been a request from a Dubai firm for 1,300kg of fresh jasmines, and this first consignment is to be sent in a cargo flight from Chennai soon. 

