Madurai, Thanjavur report one death each as Covid-19 cases climb
2020-06-07
Trichy/ Madurai: The Central region of the state recorded a death of an 84-year-old man and 24 more new Covid-19 cases, taking the total tally to 992 on Saturday. Being a resident of Chennai, the man, a native of Vadaseri in Thanjavur district, tested positive on his return to Thanjavur on May 28. He died at government medical college hospital in Thanjavur on Saturday.

Meanwhile, a 72-year-old woman from Mela Anuppanadi in Madurai who died on Thursday was reported Covid-19 positive on Friday. The woman was suffering from Influzena-like illness (ILI) and had co-morbid condition of diabetes mellitus. Her death is yet to be officially declared in the bulletin even on Saturday.

In south Tamil Nadu, 50 more Covid-19 cases reported on Saturday taking the tally to 1,745. On Saturday, seven more Covid-19 cases were recorded in Madurai district. The seven cases included a 26-year-old man from CISF Unit Line at Madurai airport. Apart from the seven cases, four close contacts including three family members and a personal security officer of a 57-year-old Madras high court judge from Madurai bench also tested Covid-19 positive on Saturday. However, these four cases are yet to be included in the medical bulletin.

Thanjavur reported two cases, Tiruvarur district four cases and Nagapattinam six on Saturday. Karur district added six more cases to its count, which included a one-and-half-year old baby. Ariyalur reported five new Covid-19 cases on Saturday. Pudukottai district recorded a positive case with a Chennai-returnee.

In Trichy, a 25 year old Covid-19 positive man from Bangladesh was admitted to Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital on Friday. Booked in a criminal case in Chennai, he had been lodged in Puzhal prison and later shifted to the special camp in Trichy central prison recently.

Tuticorin reported 14 more indigenous cases. Kanyakumari on the other hand reported as many as 10 new cases. Fresh Covid-19 cases were also reported on Saturday in Sivaganga (2), Tenkasi (2), Tirunelveli (2), Virudhunagar (4), Ramanathapuram (4) and Dindigul (5).

In Theni district, as many as 32 samples of contacts of the two Covid-19 patients who tested positive on Friday have been sent for testing.


