Mafsu lab starts testing samples; one more machine reaches IGGMCH
2020-04-23
NAGPUR: The Covid-19 testing facility at Nagpur Veterinary College (NVC) of Maharashtra Animal and Fisheries Science University (Mafsu) has started functioning. It is testing samples from Wardha district. The city’s first test facility at IGGMCH also received one more Covid testing machine from the Regional Forensic Science Laboratory (RSFL) at Dhantoli.


Mafsu vice-chancellor Dr Ashish Patukar said their lab was formally inaugurated on April 16. “Our Covid-19 testing lab is already testing samples from Wardha district as designated by state health department,” he told TOI. Wardha is one of the four districts in Vidarbha where not a single confirmed positive case of Covid-19 has been found till date. Total 165 samples from Wardha have been tested, all turning out negative so far. Out of these, 55 were tested at the Mafsu lab. 

“We are getting 8 to 15 samples from Wardha every day from last four days,” said Dr Sandeep Chaudhari, head of the Mafsu lab. “Unlike other three laboratories in city attached to medical colleges, our lab is attached to the veterinary college. We had to undergo additional tests. To avoid false negative and false positive results, we used to send our samples for validation to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune,” he added. However, from Monday onwards, the reports are being validated and signed by an MD microbiology doctor in Nagpur itself. 

“For this, divisional commissioner Dr Sanjeev Kumar has appointed an MD Microbiology qualified doctor to our lab. Now, we are providing results the day we get the samples,” said Dr Chaudhari. “As there are few samples from Wardha, and none of them have tested positive, Mafsu lab is not getting highlighted in media,” he pointed out. 

Meanwhile, on Wednesday, city’s first Covid-19 testing facility at IGGMCH received an additional unit of RT-PCR testing from the RFSL. Dean Dr Ajay Keoliya said the new unit will start functioning in a day or two. “The new unit is being calibrated. We will complete the technical work soon, so we can test more samples,” he said. 

IGGMCH lab is testing samples from Nagpur city (NMC limits) and Nagpur rural (district limits). As more cases are being detected in Nagpur city since last three days, more samples too are coming in for tests.

Sources at RSFL said the unit they sent to IGGMCH is better than the machines available in medical colleges. Testing capacity of Mayo lab will double with this additional unit, they said.



