Maharashtra returnees among 536 fresh coronavirus cases in Tamil Nadu
2020-05-19
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu reported three deaths and 536 fresh Covid-19 cases on Monday, with people returning from Maharashtra being the only ones testing positive in some districts. The testing strategy continued to be a subject of debate with the ICMR releasing new guidelines and the state set to finalise its own by Tuesday.


The state tested 10,887 people on Monday, compared to 12,445 on Sunday. “We have not reduced testing,” said health minister C Vijayabaskar. The state was criticised for reducing the number of tests over the past week by epidemiologists, doctors and political leaders. “Our state has done the largest number of tests. We are following the ICMR protocol. We don’t plan the number of tests. It depends on the number of people who come into the city by road, flights or trains or the number of home contacts of a person who tested positive,” he said. So far, TN has tested more than 3.3 lakh people, including 85,000 in Chennai, which reported 364 cases on Monday. 

On Tuesday, a comprehensive testing policy will be released by the state health department, said health secretary Beela Rajesh.“We have high tests and recovery rate but low mortality. Let’s not hurt the sentiments of people who work hard,” Vijayabaskar said in response to a tweet by DMK president and opposition leader MK Stalin. The state has been testing people with influenza-like illness and people admitted to hospitals with severe acute respiratory infections. “Sometimes, we do more than what ICMR recommends,” he said. “We draw samples from all passengers coming by road at the district check posts. Samples are drawn for air and rail passengers too,” the minister said.

On Monday, ICMR published revised testing guidelines for all states under which returnees and migrants having influenza-like illness should be tested within 7 days of illness. All symptomatic individual with international travel history, health care workers or frontline workers involved in containment and mitigation of Covid-19, asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case, people with flu-like symptoms within hotspots, all hospitalised patients who develop flu-like symptoms, and all patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) should be tested, the ICMR protocol said. “No emergency procedure (including deliveries) should be delayed for lack of test,” it added.

“It will define the state’s testing policy for migrants, passengers, patients in emergency wards and close contacts of Covid-19 patients,” Beela Rajesh said.

The number of passengers from other states testing positive continued to grow on Monday. Vijayabaskar said 46 people who had travelled from Maharashtra to Tamil Nadu by road tested positive in the last 24 hours. Tuticorin, which reported one case from within, found 14 passengers travelling by road from Maharashtra positive. In many other districts, the only cases reported were from outside the state. Tirunelveli reported 12 cases from Maharashtra. Tenkasi and Ramanathapuram had six each while Salem reported five, Dindugul two and Cuddalore one.

Chennai, the most affected district of the state reported 364 cases, taking the city’s tally to 7,117. Its neighbours Chengalpet reported 43 cases, Kancheepuram 17 and Tiruvallur 19. Thirteen other districts reported cases in single digit. As many as 234 people were discharged on Monday. There are 7,270 active cases in the state now.

A 53-year-old woman and a 65-year-old woman died in Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital on Sunday while a 70-year-old woman died in Stanley Medical College Hospital on Monday.

Meanwhile, government hospitals in the state were waiting for protocols from ICMR to start the clinical trial on plasma therapy and the multi-viral Remdesivir for the drug trial, officials said.

