Maharashtra returnees taking detour to escape institutional quarantine
2020-06-11
BENGALURU: Much to the shock of health officials, several passengers from Maharashtra, which is a Covid-19 red zone, are flying into Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) via Mangaluru, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad to evade the mandatory seven-day institutional quarantine.

BBMP officials have traced over 75 such violators and booked cases against them.

On June 1, the state government declared that passengers flying into Karnataka from Maharashtra will go into a week of institutional quarantine, followed by home quarantine. 

According to sources at KIA, air passenger count from Maharashtra to Bengaluru was slowly reducing over the last ten days. “We noticed an increase in people flying in from Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Mangaluru. A detailed examination revealed some passengers from Maharashtra are flying into KIA taking a detour through these green zones in order to avoid paid institutional quarantine. They hide the first boarding pass and show the airport authorities only the one for the second leg of their journey,” revealed an airport official.

Thereafter, these passengers walk away with home quarantine seal on their hand. “The Seva Sindhu acknowledgement form doesn’t reveal the fact that these passengers had booked their tickets from Maharashtra. With a large number of disembarking passengers waiting to clear quarantine formalities and medical tests, it’s practically impossible to verify every person’s port of origin,” another airport official added.

BBMP sources said in many cases, members of Resident Welfare Associations called the Palike’s control room to alert about Maharashtra returnees skipping mandatory institutional quarantine. 

“The BBMP team sent many such people to institutional quarantine and some have even been booked for violating health department rules. In some cases, health officials inspected home-quarantined persons with elaborate details from Seva Sindhu portal and found that they had originally come from Maharashtra and took a detour to avoid institutional quarantine,” said a Palike official.

The seal for home quarantine, institutional quarantine and green or red zone is marked with indelible ink as soon as a passenger arrives at Bengaluru airport. But the ink is said to be of poor quality, resulting in it fading away. This poses a great risk as people can easily wipe the seal and venture out.

“Unlike the electoral inking process, which is a mark on the finger, the ink here needs to be poured on the pad and the seal is put using a rubber stamp. It mixes with the ink on the pad and gets diluted and the end result doesn’t serve the purpose,” said a health department staffer.


