Mahagathbandhan govt completes 100 days amid lockdown
2020-04-07
Ranchi: The Hemant Soren-led JMM-Congress-RJD alliance government on Monday completed 100 days in office amid a nationwide lockdown imposed to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus. The mahagathbandhan government is now facing poor health of the state treasury, along with a host of uncertainties, in view of the coronavirus outbreak. 

In less than a week, the state capital has reported two Covid-19 positive cases taking the statewide count to four as the health department is battling manpower and resource crunch to control the pandemic.

Health minister Banna Gupta said despite the crunch, the government is trying its best to tide over the crisis. He stressed on the need for more central assistance. “We have received only 5,000 testing kits against the requirement of 75,000,” he said, pointing out that more than one lakh are either in institutionalised quarantine or home isolation in the state. He added that there is also a crisis of ventilators and other medical paraphernalia.

Gupta, along with three other cabinet ministers from his party Rameshwar Oraon (finance and food and civil supplies), Badal (agriculture) and Alamgir Alam (rural development) attended a meeting convened by Hemant at the latter’s residence in the afternoon to take stock of the state’s preparedness against Covid-19 and also congratulate him for steering the alliance government since the change of guard in December last year.

Earlier in the day, Soren and a battery of senior officials met Governor Droupadi Murmu to apprise her about the government’s activities against the pandemic.

Oraon said that the alliance government had rolled out a series of welfare measures in sync with their poll manifestos within 100 days despite the challenges staring at them.

He said, “The government has decided to waive off farm loans, set up dedicated funds for farmers, formed a committee to review and recommend changes in the local residents policy, initiation of ground works for providing free electricity to the people. These are just a few key highlights of our 100 days. Due to faulty policies of the earlier regime, we inherited a frail treasury and are trying to set things right to steer the state’s economic growth.” He added that the state machinery’ focus has been on safeguarding Jharkhand from Covid-19 and ensuring that none goes hungry in these times of crisis. He said, “We have announced and began dispatch of two months advance ration, opened community kitchens at panchayat bhavans, police stations and doubled the number of Mukhya Mantri Daal Bhaat Kendras and given emergency funds to districts and mukhiyas.”


