Maharashtra schools face Covid-19 test: No exams for Std I-VIII
2020-03-21
NAGPUR: Maharashtra government has cancelled exams from Std I-VIII to make it easier for schools to manage their logistics during the period when preventive steps are being taken amid the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak.


School education minister Varsha Gaikwad said schools can declare results of these classes based on the combined assessment done throughout the year. Gaikwad’s decision came after chief minister Uddhav Thackeray on Friday announced a complete lockdown in select big cities of the state. 

The education minister said, “Schools can declare results based on the comprehensive evaluation done throughout the year for Std I-VIII.”

Though the state has the power anyway to announce such cancellations, provisions of Right To Education Act (RTE) gives it an added cover. Under the RTE, no child can be detained till Std VIII.

Gaikwad said, “Till Std VIII, you don’t have the traditional exams. It’s more of an assessment of how much the child has comprehended.”

When asked about board exams, Gaikwad said it will be held as per schedule. “There are two exams remaining for Saturday and Monday. It will proceed as planned,” said Gaikwad. For Std IX and XI exams, the minister said it will be held in April. “Around April 15 these exams may be held,” said the minister.

The immediate question for CBSE schools was whether this applied to them as well. Though Gaikwad was speaking about state board schools, technically the same may apply to CBSE as well. Reason being CBSE’s control over a school starts from Std IX only. CBSE has always maintained that schools must follow every directive of the state they are based in.

Many CBSE, ICSE etc schools in Maharashtra have already cancelled annual internal exams and considering the coronavirus scare, the education department is clearly looking the other way.

An education official, who did not wish to be identified, said “The technicality of jurisdiction for a CBSE school can be debated, but the state will always have the final word. Laws and directives of the state are applicable to all. And even if CBSE schools are cancelling exams (till Std VIII) on their own, we all know it is a special situation and nobody wants to get involved in the technicality here.”

With this decision, it seems schools are all set for an early vacation, but nobody wanted to officially say that. A school’s trustee said, “If exams are cancelled, why would parents now send children back to school? But it would be wrong for me to say so and declare a vacation without the government officially ending the academic session.”


