Maharanipeta gets wake-up call after three positive Covid-19 cases
2020-05-02
VISAKHAPATNAM: Reports of three positive Covid-19 cases from the city on Friday have more than shaken up the otherwise laidback neighbourhood of Maharanipeta. The locality is the administrative and health centre of the city with the King George Hospital (KGH), the district collectorate and the zilla parishad situated in the area. 


The two positive cases have been reported from Dandubazaar area, which is also known as Ramajogipeta. The third case is that of a 62-year-old man, who died of kidney ailments at the KGH. The deceased’s sample has come out positive.

“As of now, we are in the process of tracing all people the two positive patients came in contact with in the last 14 days. We are also following the same procedure with regard to the patient who died at the KGH. Containment measures within a three-kilometre radius will be taken up by Saturday morning,” said district collector V Vinay Chand.

The local residents are, meanwhile, worried over the developments as Maharanipeta is one of the major hospital zones in north coastal AP and also has vast residential colonies, not to mention a sizeable population of old people. 

“They must scan the entire city, quarantine the homeless people and subject them to RT-PCR tests. There should be no loose ends and wearing masks must be made mandatory. More importantly, any place with more than two cases should be cordoned off completely and treated as a red zone,” said EAS Sarma, a civic activist and former bureaucrat who is also a resident of Maharanipeta.

Sarma also demanded intense surveillance of all the deaths that were recently reported in private hospitals and also of patients with flu-like symptoms.

Meanwhile, the district collector assured that intense door-to-door surveillance would be taken up in the area from Saturday. On Visakhapatnam being classified as ‘orange zone’, the collector made it clear that this classification was dynamic and based on the number of cases being reported and their doubling rate. He, however, pointed out that GVMC limits were definitely within the containment zone. 

Vinay Chand further informed that the number of people tested in Visakhapatnam district has crossed 15,600 mark.


