Mahe woman is Puducherry’s first coronavirus positive case
2020-03-18
PUDUCHERRY: The Union territory of Puducherry, spread in four different geographical locations, has reported its first coronavirus case on Tuesday. A 68-year-old woman from Mahe, Puducherry's enclave in Kerala, who recently visited Gulf countries, has tested positive for Covid-19. 


Director of health and family welfare services S Mohankumar said the woman had returned to Mahe a week ago after visiting Gulf countries. She complained of fever and breathlessness. She was admitted to an isolation ward in Mahe government general hospital. Her swab samples were collected sent for medical tests to Kozhikode government general hospital. She tested positive on Tuesday. 

“We quarantined her in the Mahe Government General Hospital and kept her under observation for the past one week. The test results were out today (Tuesday). She tested positive. She is stable and responding well to the treatment,” said Mohankumar. Health directorate officials have started preparing the list of people who have come in contact with her. 

Meanwhile, chief minister V Narayanasam, who reviewed the preparedness of the government machinery to prevent the incidence and spread of coronavirus in the Union territory, told reporters that the government has declared a holiday for schools and colleges in the Union territory from Wednesday until March 31 to prevent an outbreak of the virus. However, public examinations for Classes 10, 11 and 12 will be conducted as per the schedule of the directorate of government examinations, Chennai or as per the schedule of the other boards. The government has directed the educational institutions not to hold any sports meets or other events inviting large gatherings. 

He said all the cinema theatres, malls and gyms will remain closed from Wednesday to March 31. The Sunday market will not function until further orders. He said the government will take a call on closing bars and restaurants in the next two days. 

Public meetings and processions by the political parties and non-political outfits have been banned. He said the government has earmarked Rs 11 crore for the department of revenue and disaster management and Rs 7.5 crore for the directorate of health and family welfare services to procure an adequate stock of life-saving drugs, masks and ensure availability of necessary equipment including ventilators at the hospitals. The government has made arrangements to screen the tourists and Indians from France reaching Puducherry, from Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Singapore and Malaysia reaching Karaikal, from Dubai reaching Mahe and from Saudi Arabia reaching Yanam for any infections. 


