Mahe Covid-19 patient dies, source of infection unknown
2020-04-12
Kannur: A 71-year-old Coivd-19 patient from Mahe, the Puducherry town bordering Kannur, identified as Mehroof P, died at Kannur Government Medical College, Pariyaram, on Saturday morning, where he had been undergoing treatment since on April 7. 

Mehroof, a resident of Cherukallayi in Mahe, was undergoing treatment for fever in Kannur and it was from there that the hospital authorities collected his specimen nearly one week after his admission and sent it for Covid-19 testing. However, the healthcare officials are yet to ascertain from where he contracted the disease as he had not maintained any contact with any Covid-19 patients in his knowledge.

It was on March 26 that Mehroof, who had kidney and heart ailments, was taken to a local hospital in Thalassery, after he developed fever and throat pain on March 23. Later, he was admitted there on March 31 and the same evening he was shifted to a super specialty hospital near Kannur. However, it was on April 6 that the swab was taken for testing and the next day, after he tested positive, he was shifted to the medical college.

Incidentally, on examining the route map of an 81-year-old patient, who is also undergoing treatment for Covid-19, it was confirmed that he had been admitted to the ICU of this super specialty hospital on April 2 and 3 with respiratory problems, before he was taken to the Kannur Government Medical College, where he tested positive. Though the hospital authorities claimed both of them had not come into contact with each other, as they were in separate wards, the health authorities are probing all aspects. The other patient got infected from his grandson who came from Sharjah on March 15.

“At this point we cannot say from where he got the infection, but we are probing it,” said Kannur DMO K Narayana Nayak. The patient’s contacts in Mahe and Kannur are being identified, and there are around 113 of them, he said.

Though Mahe is part of Puducherry, the place is next to Thalassery in Kannur. The body was buried at Koran Peedika Juma Masjid near Pariyaram in the afternoon. According to Union ministry of health and family welfare guidelines, the patient’s nativity and place of residence is considered while compiling the Covid-19 tally of a state. Hence, Mehroof’s is the first Covid-19 death in Puducherry.


