Maids face uncertain future due to lockdown, association asks for monetary help
2020-04-28
Kolhapur: Due to extended lockdown in the country, many city maids find themselves jobless and have to rely on government-provided ration for their survival. 

Ratna Shinde, who has been working at her employer’s residence for the last seven years, was suddenly asked not to come before the lockdown. She was given a half-a-month salary, which she spent at the start of lockdown on groceries. 

“I live in a rented house. I could not pay the rent. My husband too is out of work since lockdown. I don't know whether I will be called back to work. From June onwards, the school will also start and I have to pay the fees for my children. Sitting idle for more than a month is a frustrating experience,” said Ratna.

She added that some of her friends are doing small jobs once a week, where they have to prepare summer snacks and clean the garden. 

There are over 10,000 maids registered with the administration. The prime minister Narendra Modi and chief minister Uddhav Thackeray have appealed the employers to look after their maids humanely and take care of them during the lockdown. 

However, very few are providing rations and money to their maids to buy daily needs. Since most of them leave alone or have no relatives they have to pass the days in a lot of pain.

Sushila Yadav, president of the Gharelu Molkarin Sanghatana (housemaid association) said that they have written to the state government to provide a livelihood grant of Rs 2000 to each of the registered maids. “The government has approved the same amount to construction workers. Many are not likely to get their work back soon. What they will do then? We are trying to arrange the essentials for the maids, however, we too have limitations. Without government support, no one will be able to stay out for the work for a longer time."

Yadav said that since the lockdown no maids are not allowed to enter societies. While some welfare associations have decided to let the maids do other works by maintaining physical distance.


