Pune: Majority of Covid-19 cases restricted to five wards, seven civic wards share only 10% burden
2020-05-03
PUNE: At 151 cases, seven of the total 15 wards in the city have accounted for just 9.4% of the city’s Covid-19 burden, restricting most of the patients to five wards even as the case count in PMC limits soared past 1,600-mark on Friday.


The least-affected wards include Aundh-Baner, Kothurd-Bavdhan, Warje, Sinhagad Road, Kondhwa-Yevlewadi, Ahmednagar Road-Wadgaonsheri and Hadapsar-Mundhwa.



All these wards are spread in the city’s outskirts, barring some like Sinhagad Road that are closer to the core city pockets. The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has divided the city in 15 civic wards, which means remaining 90% of the Covid-19 cases have been reported from other eight pockets, including five worst-affected wards from Pune’s central areas.

Going by the geographical directions, Pune’s entire western region has reported a few cases so far. Besides, the areas in the south and east have also not recorded much of an increase in cases till now, the wardwise analysis showed.

Three wards that constitute the western region have reported just 16 cases collectively, with Kothrud-Bavdhan pocket recording lowest three cases till Friday. The areas under Aundh-Baner and Warje-Karvenagar ward offices have four and nine cases, respectively.

From the east region, Ahmednagar Road-Wadgaonasheri ward is the only area that has been able to contain the positive cases to 42 (see box), as against neighbouring Yerawada-Kalas-Dhanori and Dhole Patil Road pockets, which reported 172 and 246 cases, respectively, till Friday.

Sources from the civic administration said the seven wards with few cases had less number of slum pockets or congested areas, with a majority of the population residing in housing complexes. On the contrary, the central parts of the city, accounting for more than 70% of the total positive cases, had huge slum pockets, narrow roads and congested localities, making social distancing difficult to follow, the sources said.

