Major dip in pollutants during lockdown: Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
2020-04-08
PUNE: Particulate matter pollutants, such as PM 2.5, registered a sharp drop in the city between March 21 and 31, the period of complete lockdown, the updated data from the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology’s System of Air Quality Forecasting and Research (Safar) has revealed.


The data showed that Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx) produced from vehicular traffic, which came down by 45% till March 19, dropped further by 55% till March end. “PM 2.5 and PM 10 concentration dropped by 24% and 35%, respectively, from March 21-31 in Pune as against the same period last year,” the data revealed.

 

The major reduction in the particulate matter pollutants began from March 23 and continued till the last day of the month. Even between April 1 and 5 (during the period for which the data was made available to TOI), there has been a massive reduction in the three pollutants PM 10, PM 2.5 and NOx. The highest reduction has been in NOx, average concentration of which dropped by 62% during April 1-5 in Pune in comparison to the first five days of March 2020, the data showed.

Sources from IITM said NOx levels were mainly controlled by its major sources of emissions (vehicular traffic), although changes due to weather cannot be ruled out. “Vehicular traffic also increases PM 2.5 levels via fossil fuel and re-suspended dust emissions. Although, reduced vehicular traffic on streets had reduced PM 2.5 emissions from sources like fossil fuel till March 19, the reduction had got compensated by higher re-suspended dust emissions (PM 2.5 source) caused by faster speed of vehicles on almost empty roads. But due to complete lockdown, even particulate matter concentrations have reduced significantly,” a source said.

The sources said stopping of construction activities made a further dent in the concentration of particulate matter pollutants. Re-suspended dust from various human activities are also a source of PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions.

