Combating Covid-19 vacation windfall: Make it blessing in disguise, say experts
2020-03-14
KOCHI: The early summer vacation for students up to class VII, in the wake of Covid-19 scare, has left parents and children in a quandary. With restrictions on travel and shutdown of movie halls, parks, summer camps, etc, there’s little else to keep them engaged. Many working parents are struggling to find babysitters and some are even taking leave as leaving kids alone at home is not an option.

But psychiatrists and child specialists say that parents should view this situation as an opportunity to make children socially responsible and train them in homemaking and leading a healthy lifestyle. They suggest that parents should also use the opportunity to spend more time with children to help them develop social skills. Also, the vacation could be used to help kids develop good hobbies and nurture creativity.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“It is true that Covid-19 has derailed the plans of many families but I think parents can turn this into an opportunity and mould their kids into responsible homemakers. Children, irrespective of gender, could be trained in helping parents with household activities like cleaning, cooking, gardening etc. Also, as it will be an extended vacation, children might lose touch with academics, especially when there were no final exams. So, it is ideal to make them revise what they have learned over the last one year till the official vacation begins,” said Dr Philip John, senior psychiatrist.

Doctors said that children should be made aware of the health situation and trained to develop personal hygiene. “While younger kids need assistance in hygiene, elder kids need supervision. Parents should find time to make them aware of what Covid-19 is without scaring them and highlight the importance of hygiene. Coronavirus should not govern their personal hygiene, which should be made part of their daily routine,” said C J John, senior psychiatrist.

Experts caution against children being allowed to spend more time in front of screens and advise parents to screen the content they watch. “Most kids would prefer playing computers games, on smartphones and watching TV. Parents should not allow them more than two hours a day. Watching movies on online streaming platforms is quite common today but parents can choose the content for kids and restrict their viewing time. Otherwise, there is good chance of addiction. Also, don’t allow them to sleep during daytime as it will make them night owls,” said Philip John.


