Make Covid-19 test must for all patients who await surgery: Doctors
2020-04-23
TRICHY: After a minor boy, who was recently operated for appendicitis, contracted Covid-19 at government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur, federation of government doctors association (FOGDA) have insisted on making Covid-19 testing mandatory for all patients requiring surgeries in the state.


A 14-year-old-boy of Virkudi village in Nagappattinam district tested positive for Covid-19 on April 20. 

He was admitted at government medical college hospital in Tiruvarur for treatment and had undergone a surgery for appendicitis at the same hospital a week ago. 

The doctors wanted to take no chances and they, after much struggle with the administration, had put him through Covid-19 testing before surgery, which came back negative.

 The doctors said that some positive patients may show negative in the first testing. 

“Since there are theories that the speed of infection could be higher in the operation theatre than in open places, we decided to conduct the test on the boy also. Since he tested negative, we performed the surgery without wearing the personal protective equipment (PPE),” said Dr V Bharathidhasan, Tiruvarur district president of service doctors and post-graduates association (SDPGA), on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, the second test post the surgery on the boy came back positive for Covid-19. 

Following this, as many as 20 alert doctors and nurses, who attended to the boy during his treatment at the ward, underwent Covid-19 testing but they all tested negative.

“If the boy had tested positive in the first place, we would have done the surgery with mandatory protection like PPE and sterilized the theatre for 24 hours before allowing other patients for surgery,” said Bharathidasan.

Demanding for making the testing protocol for patients in need of surgery compulsory, state treasurer of SDPGA and coordinator of federation of government doctors association (FOGDA), Dr T Aruleeswaran asked the state government to take this issue seriously. 

“Frontline doctors and health workers are working under several constraints particularly risking their health. Their health should be protected. The state government should make the tests mandatory,” said Aruleeswaran.


