Malaria overlooked as AP fights Covid
2020-05-21
Visakhapatnam: With officials in the Visakha Agency busy battling Covid cases, the number of malaria cases has been rising in the area. One hundred and sixty-six malaria cases were reported in May last year. This year, however, 59 cases were reported in the first 10 days of May.

The Malaria season usually starts from April, but this years cases began surfacing since January when 32 cases were reported. The number rose to more than 110 in February and over 125 in March. Even before the season began, Visakha agency reported had 270 malaria cases which by the end of April was 388 and 447 by May 10. 

Every year, the medical and health department conduct two phases of disinfectant spraying in the tribal villages. Although the programme started from April 15, focus on Covid 19 has not given officials much room for the spraying work. Of the 2,150 high-risk villages only 1,100 have been sprayed so far.

Speaking to TOI, assistant DMHO Dr Leela Prasad admitted that the number of cases is on the rise compared to the previous year. “We have taken measures to control the menace. Mosquito nets were distributed and spraying was also taken up. But there is a trend that the number of cases rise every four to five years. Moreover, most of the staff are busy with Covid control measures,” he said. He added that staff are now focused on tackling malaria cases. 

Records show that 1.09 lakh blood samples were collected between January to May 10 of 2019. Of which 225 cases tested positive for malaria. This year 447 cases have tested positive of the one lakh blood samples collected.

Sources said there are more than 950 cases were reported last year. But this year, half of the 447 cases were reported in the first 40 days of this year.

“We have 6.5 lakh tribal populations in the 11 mandals of Visakha Agency and every year three lakh people suffer from various fevers. We were lucky that there were no rains last year in the Agency. Because of that the number of positive cases were less,” said Adivasi Hakkula Parirakshana Samiti convenor and Adivasi JAC convenor Ramarao Dora.


