Malayali dies of Covid-19 in Riyadh
2020-04-06
Malappuram: In a suspected case of Covid-19 death, a 41-year-old man from Chemmad in Malappuram district died at Riyadh in Saudi Arabia on Saturday night.

Puthiyakath Safwan, who suffered from fever and sore throat, was admitted to Saudi German Hospital in Riyadh last week and coronavirus infection was confirmed on Friday, his family said. But the government authorities in Riyadh are yet to officially inform this to his wife who is staying at Riyadh. The family members have been told that Safwan died due to cardiac arrest around 9pm on Saturday.

Safwan was working as a taxi driver in Riyadh. His wife Khamaruneesa, who arrived in Riyadh on tourist vista on March 8, was staying with Safwan and a three-member Malayali family there. After Safwan tested positive for coronavirus infection, authorities in Saudi collected swab samples from Khamarunneesa and the three-member family, including a two-year-old child.

Rafeeque Hassan from Malappuram, a friend of Safwan who is working in Riyadh, said the burial is expected to be held in Riyadh on Monday. “Indian embassy authorities are supporting us to complete the procedures,” he said.

Hassan said Safwan, who was suffering from breathing problems, approached two clinics for treatment two weeks ago. But the doctors had failed to identify the viral infection and they prescribed medicines for throat pain and fever. “It was after his health condition deteriorated that he decided to approach Saudi German Hospital where he undergone tests for Covid-19. Some medical staff of the hospital have already informed us that his sample was tested positive for coronavirus infection. But we are yet to receive official documents regarding this,” he said.

 Nurse dies in Ireland 

Kottayam: A 54-year-old nurse from Kerala died of Covid-19 in Ireland on Sunday. Beena, wife of George Paul, a Kuruppunthara native, was tested positive for Covid-19 two days ago. She was a staff nurse at Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda. She was under treatment for cancer for a long time. After her health condition deteriorated, she had gone on leave since last month. The funeral will be held in Ireland as per the Corona protocol, said relatives. Her two daughters are medical students in Bulgaria. 


