Malegaon has only 83 active Covid-19 cases now
2020-06-11
NASHIK: Malegaon has finally turned a corner in its fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. While at one time, it had 400 patients in various Covid-19 facilities, the textile town on Wednesday reported only 83 active patients in its wards.

The densely populated town was in the news for all the wrong reasons since April 8. The daily reporting of 5-10 Covid-19 cases suddenly shot up to more than 25 cases a day and peaked at 81 a day. 

“The situation was very tense. However, cooperation from citizens and elected representatives, and timely action by the health and administration officials helped stabilise the number of new patients reported each day. Now, the number has dropped to a single digit,” Nashik collector Suraj Mandhare, who handled the situation in the textile town, said.

Setting up of an emergency operation centre exclusively for Malegaon and putting assistant collector Pankaj Ashiya in charge of the same also helped.

Also, to remove misgivings and misconceptions among people, audio and video messages by religious heads and influential people were aired on social media and at mosques.

“The suspected patients – who might be positive – are now compulsory quarantined and rigorous contact tracing is done,” additional civil surgeon Nikhil Saidane, who was handed the responsibility of Malegaon, said. 

In the case of Malegaon, it was the middle-aged population that had been infected the most. “We analysed the situation and provided medicines, oxygen supplies and a protein-rich diet. All of this collectively helped improve the situation. The government guidelines of early discharge also brought down the load on the system,” Dr Hitesh Mahale, the additional civil surgeon, said.

Mahale added, “Tests are being carried out as per the ICMR guidelines, but the number of patients has dropped.” 

The police also lent valuable support. “We, along with the community leaders, decided to restrict people indoors during Ramzan. People’s sacrifice ensured the situation now getting better,” SP Arti Singh said.


