Malegaon needs more docs to treat Covid patients
2020-05-12
Nashik: The Malegaon Municipal Corporation (MMC) is in dire need of more doctors, nurses and paramedical staff to treat patients suffering from coronavirus. MMC commissioner Dipak Kasar had written to the state health department a few days ago requesting the latter to provide more doctors, nurses and paramedical staff as quickly as possible since Covid-19 cases are rapidly increasing in the textile town in Nashik district. MMC will require 30 more allopathic doctors, 50 Ayush doctors, 100 nurses, 10 X-Ray technicians and 10 path laboratory assistants.  “MMC will be requiring more doctors, nurses and paramedics since plans are afoot to set up more Covid care centres and hospital. The Covid care centre at the Haj House is almost ready. We will need doctors, nurses and other health care workers to start that new facility,” said MMC officials. Recently, Aasif Shaikh, the former Congress MLA of Malegaon Central, had requested the state health minister Rajesh Tope to provide more doctors and nurses for Malegaon as Covid-19 cases in the town was rising constantly. “Tope had asked me to instruct MMC to send a written request to his department about the additional manpower requirements. Following which MMC has sent its requirements. I am sure that the state health department would provide us with more manpower in the near future,” added Shaikh.12 fresh cases reported in MalegaonOn Monday, the textile town reported 12 fresh Covid-19 cases. With this, the total number of Covid-19 case rose to 547 in Malegaon. As many as 11 Covid-19 cases were reported on Monday afternoon and one more case was reported at 7pm on Monday.A 10-day-old baby girl is among the 12 patients.Other casesApart from that, two jawans of State Reserve Police Force, posted in Malegaon to enforce the lockdown, tested positive for Covid-19. A 5-day-old boy from Lasalgaon in Nashik rural areas and a person whose place of the residence is yet to be known tested positive.