Malegaon to get new Covid-19 facility, to get 160 beds
2020-05-06
Nashik: The Malegaon Municipal Corporation (MMC) on Tuesday decided to increase 160 Covid-19 beds looking at the alarming number of cases in the district. 

Acting on a petition given by the former Malegaon central Congress MLA Aasif Shaikh Rashid, the civic administration has firmed up its plans to establish a new Covid health centre at the Haj House in Malegaon. 

District collector Suraj Mandhare on Monday along with MMC officials inspected the Haj House where the facility would come up. 

Shaikh said that the MMC has cleaned the entire Haj House including a school and a sprawling hall that are within the same premises. "On this entire campus there would be 100 beds, including 60 ICU beds. MMC is also making arrangements to provide oxygen to patients who need it," he told TOI. 

MMC officials said that work is being carried out on a war-footing at Haj House to make it ready for use within the next three-four days. "The Haj House has adequate toilets, proper ventilation, lights and adequate water," said MMC sources. 

According to Shaikh, who is the son of the Malegaon mayor Tahira Sheikh, there was a meeting between the mayor and MMC officials including the civic chief Dipak Kasar on Tuesday afternoon. "The mayor has given her nod to the civic administration's plan to take over at least 25-30 beds in two private hospitals of the city to treat Covid-19 patients. The formalities between MMC and the hospitals would be worked out soon," added Aasif Shaikh. 

At present, there are about 150 beds in two hospitals that MMC use to treat Covid-19 patients. 

Malegaon has witnessed an alarming number of cases in the past few days. So far 338 cases have been reported from the textile town with 13 of them have succumbed while 28 have recovered from infection. 

Shaikh said that the situation in Malegaon is gloomy as cases are constantly increasing. He appealed people to remain indoors that would help in curbing the spread of the infection. 


