Mamata: Bengal ‘sensitive’ to lockdown pain points
2020-04-16
KOLKATA: Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday allowed more concessions in the state as part of her lockdown plan with a “human face”, balancing life and livelihood with a special focus on sectors that engage the largest number of daily labourers. 

And, like she has done before, she reiterated the importance of strictly following social distancing norms in the collective effort to win the war against Covid-19.

The chief minister, while not compromising with any of the “red zones” — the Centre has released a list of 170 districts across the country, which have such zones, including four in Bengal: Kolkata, Howrah, North 24 Parganas and East Midnapore — preferred to call them “sensitive” areas. “I urge the police to make doorstep delivery of food items in the sensitive zones that need micro-planning,” she said at Nabanna, wearing the now-mandatory mask. Banerjee spent a part of her press meet to show how one should cover one’s nose and mouth, and also how masks could be made at home with various kinds of readily available cloth.

The CM took no chance with children, repeating that all schools would remain shut till June 10, while allowing the most relaxations in daily labour-intensive sectors, such as road construction, real estate, irrigation and public health engineering. “Contractors may engage MNREGS workers in jobs,” she said, opening up opportunities for labourers in the rural sector, apart from crop harvesting, by relaxing norms in the construction of dwelling units, water harvesting, plantation in nurseries and rural industrial units. And she threw open brick kilns, which engage a huge number of daily wage-earners. 

Banerjee said the three HS papers that had to be suspended would be held in June and announced automatic promotion for Class XI students, on the lines of the earlier-announced move of promoting students between classes I and VIII. For college and university students, too, she had a relaxation: instead of holding examinations after each semester, teachers will start giving lessons for the next semester; and students will have to take exams after the final semester.

For industrial estates, Banerjee had a rider: individual industrial estates have to write to the chief secretary, seeking relaxations on operations. “The chief secretary will examine each proposal and give a go-ahead on a case-to-case basis,” she said.

Taking note of the MHA guidelines over the functioning of government offices, the CM rolled out a duty schedule for state government officers. “State government officers of the rank of deputy secretary and above have to attend office on alternate days,” she said. She also asked Swasthya Bhavan to prepare a rotational duty roster for doctors, nurses and paramedical staff on 24x7 duty in government hospital. 


