Kerala man sent back by MCH doctors tests positive for coronavirus
2020-03-14
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Even while the government was refuting the opposition’s allegation on lapses in dealing with Covid-19, officials concerned at the medical college hospital here seems to have acted in an unprofessional manner while handling a suspected case on Thursday. A man sent back home by the doctors after collecting swab samples for testing was later tested positive for Covid-19. 

This person had come to the medical college hospital from the outskirts of the city in an ambulance since he had fever and throat pain. But after taking the samples, the MCH authorities informed him that ambulance was not available to take him back and was asked to return on his own. It is learned that he had informed the hospital authorities of his willingness to undergo isolation but the hospital staff did not accept that. 

He returned in an autorikshaw to his house, which is around 20km from the hospital, and en route he visited a medical shop too. Now, the autorickshaw driver and the medical store staff have been quarantined. 

The man reached Thiruvananthapuram airport on Wednesday morning by QR503 flight of Qatar Airways from Doha. He had mentioned at the airport that he was coming from Italy and went to Munich before catching the flight from Doha. 

As the man had no symptoms, he was asked to go for home quarantine. But he developed fever symptoms the very next day (Thursday) and immediately contacted the health helpline. The emergency wing sent an ambulance to shift him to the hospital. At MCH, the doctors sent him back after collecting the swab samples. 

“It is true that he was sent back. He was not given an ambulance since it was not readily available there. Since he himself had taken enough precautions, he did not had any direct contacts with many people. He had direct contact with only five people after reaching Thiruvananthapuram,” said district collector K Gopalakrishnan. 

However, the district administration is facing the uphill task of tracing those who had travelled with him in the Qatar airways flight. There were 92 passengers, of which 31 are learned to have been traced. They have been asked to undergo home quarantine. 

Interestingly, there were 20 foreigners in the flight, who according to the district collector, are still in the state capital itself. The collector said they will also be asked to get quarantined at their places of stay. 


