Man dies of Covid-19 in Pudukottai, southern districts report 35 cases
2020-06-05
MADURAI/TRICHY: The central region of the state reported yet another Covid-19 casualty in Pudukottai and recorded 19 more new cases. Meanwhile, the ten southern districts reported 35 new cases, which included 22 indigenous cases from Madurai, Virudhunagar and Tuticorin. The total number of cases in the south has climbed to 1,667 on Thursday.

The deceased, a 64-year-old native of Peravurani in Thanjavur district, was undergoing treatment at a private hospital in Chennai for paralysis. He was residing alone in Chennai for two years. As his relative shifted him to the government hospital in Pudukottai, he was tested for Covid-19 and his test results were positive. Pudukottai reported two new positive patients on Thursday. One of them who tested positive was a contact of the 65-year-old patient who died on May 31, while the other one was a Chennai returnee.

In Trichy, a family of six of a railway travelling ticket examiner (TTE) tested positive for Covid-19. The Kottapattu native had a travel history to Chennai. All of them were admitted to Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital in Trichy. A Trichy resident turned positive for Covid-19 when he travelled to Tiruvarur. He was admitted to government hospital in Mayiladuthurai. With this, the tally of Trichy touched 100.

Virudhunagar reported eight indigenous cases. The cases included those who had returned from Chennai and their contacts. In Madurai district as well, which recorded seven cases on Thursday, two people were those who returned from Chennai by flight. The other cases included those from containment areas or contacts of Covid-19 patients. A 26-year-old woman from Keelapanangadi with no travel or contact history also tested Covid-19 positive.

Tuticorin too reported seven more indigenous cases, becoming the second district in the southern region after Tirunelveli to cross 300 Covid-19 cases. The majority of the recent local cases in the district have been related to two recent funerals. Three Covid-19 cases each were reported in Theni, Tirunelveli and Ramanathapuram. Two cases were recorded in Tenkasi district while Dindigul and Sivaganga reported one local case each. Kanyakumari did not have a single Covid-19 case on Thursday.

Nagappattinam reported eight positive cases taking the tally to 72. Among them, four people were Chennai returnees, while the rest have returned from Trichy, Mumbai, Telenganana and Kerala.

Ariyalur has reported two new Covid-19 positive cases on Thursday. The two are a couple who has returned from Koyambedu to Namangunam village on May 26. They were home quarantined and as the couple developed fever, they were tested at Ariyalur GH for Covid-19 and the results were positive.


