Bihar man killed in Kolkata on festival day for ‘protesting against drinking’
2020-03-11
KOLKATA: An argument on the evening of Dol led to the death of a 35-year-old man who had come to Kolkata from Bihar searching for a better prospect. The incident took place on Monday night in Sovabazar following which cops from the Burtolla police station have arrested two persons on the charges of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and serious hurt.


Police denied that the incident had any link with Dol, but locals said the victim, Pramod Shaw, had protested against some youths, allegedly involved in a parking syndicate, making obscene comments and drinking in the open during the celebrations.


 
The spot in Sovabazar where the assault took place

The Burtolla police station received an information around 8.30pm on Monday that one person was lying on the pavement in front of Aurobindo Sarani. “We reached the spot and took Shaw to RG Kar Hospital, where he was declared dead. An inquiry revealed an argument had broken out between Avishek Gupta (28) and Jibon Debnath alias Sanu (32), both residents of the area. As the altercation continued, Shaw tried to intervene. At some point, the argument snowballed into a fight and both Gupta as well as Debnath it Shaw, who fell on the edge of a raised structure on the pavement. Shaw sustained severe cuts and bleeding injuries on his throat that led to his death,” said joint CP (crime) Murlidhar Sharma. “The relevant pieces of evidence were collected, witnesses examined and accused—Gupta and Debnath—were arrested.”

The residents of the area TOI spoke to, however, presented a different version. According to Ranjit Shaw, a local, Shaw had protested when he saw Debnath misbehaving with a woman passing by. Gupta joined Debnath and the two together assaulted him. They allegedly dragged Shaw into an adjoining room, where they assaulted him till he fell unconscious. There were several marks of the victim being hit with a sharp and penetrating object, claimed Ranjit.

The family of the accused, however, denied all the claims. They said Shaw, too, was drunk and got involved in an argument with Gupta and Debnath. They claimed Shaw pushed Debnath away but he himself fell down and injured himself fatally.

Shaw, who is engaged in producing stitched bags, had come from Begusarai in Bihar to Kolkata almost three decades ago but he would often visit his hometown. He had married about a decade ago and his wife and eight-year-old daughter live in Bihar. “The accused has a major stake in the local parking syndicate. The police know about several instances, when they had threatened people. The two also flaunt their political connections,” Ranjit claimed. 

The local councillor, Sunanda Sarkar, said even she was aware of the background of the two accused and how they made trouble in the area. The political connections they flaunted, claimed the councillor, were all fake and fabricated to suit their needs.


