Man offers samples, tests positive, goes into isolation & prevents virus spread in Chandrapur
2020-04-12
Nagpur: After a lean day on Friday, Vidarbha recorded three positive cases of Covid-19 on Saturday. Two are of Nagpur and the third of Amravati. With this, the total number of positive cases in Vidarbha touched 75. It includes three deaths. 

The best news of the day is how a man insisting that he be tested may have prevented spread of the virus in his hometown of Chandrapur district which has no positive cases as of now. 

After the wife of the Chandrapur man tested positive on Saturday, TOI’s investigations showed that on April 6 the man had volunteered to get himself tested at the MLA hostel where the couple was in institutional quarantine on return from abroad. The reports showed that he was positive.

Immediately, samples of his wife and three other couples along with who he had gone to Indonesia on a Tablighi Jamaat were taken and tested. Results of the three other couples were negative.

The 39-year-old real estate businessman from Chandrapur told TOI that all of them landed in Nagpur airport on March 24 following which they were immediately quarantined at MLA Hostel. “We had no symptoms so our swab samples were not taken on checking in. On April 3, I saw doctors taking samples at MLA Hostel (13th day since his return from Indonesia and 11th day at MLA hostel) and gave mine too. I was told they were positive on April 6.”

His wife and the three couples were taken to GMCH on the same day. Samples were taken on April 8 (18th day since they came back from Indonesia and 16th day in institutional quarantine).

Reports of his 32-year-old wife landed on Saturday, the 21st day since the four couple returned back from Indonesia and 19th day in institutional quarantine. The incubation period of Covid-19 is considered as 14 days.

After landing in New Delhi, “we went to Nizamuddin Markaz and stayed there till March 24,” the Chandrapur man told TOI. The Markaz is now the epicentre of many Covid-19 cases in the country. 

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe said, “We ask discharged positive persons to observe home quarantine for 14 more days. It is to contain further spread.”

The second patient who tested positive in Nagpur is a 53-year-old male, a nephew of the Satranjipura man who died on April 4 and tested positive on April 6. Six family members of the deceased have already tested positive. His samples were inconclusive on Friday and re-tested at GMCH laboratory. 

The 67-year-old woman who tested positive in Amravati on Saturday is the mother of the 45-year-old deceased whose swab samples were tested positive on April 4. “She had tested negative earlier but her sample was collected on Thursday looking at her age and symptoms, which tested positive,” said Amravati district collector Shailesh Naval. 

The woman is already in the isolation ward along with other family members of the deceased. The Hathipura locality, where the family resides, and the adjoining Sakkarsath, home to wholesale grain and grocery market, has been put in the containment zone. 

Naval added that the 59-year-old Sufiya Nagar resident, who died in the isolation ward on April 6, had tested negative along with his six contacts, on Saturday. 17 Delhi returnees, who were in institutional quarantine at Walgaon, also tested negative along with 18 others housed there. 

In Yavatmal, the test result of a 56-year-old man of Karanjikhed village in Mahagaon tehsil turned negative. He died at the GMCH on Friday night of severe acute respiratory illness and pneumonia following which his swab sample was tested in Nagpur.

Doctors and the district administration heaved a sigh of relief at this. His body will now be handed over to his family for the last rites.

Meanwhile, one patient out of the eight positives in Yavatmal developed serious respiratory symptoms on Saturday. He has been put on ventilator. Though his condition is stable, he is critical, said doctors at Yavatmal GMCH. The patient is suffering from renal problems.

Chandrapur, Bhandara and Wardha have no Covid-19 patients. The positive patient from Gondia will be discharged on Sunday. With this, four districts in Vidarbha will not have a single patient of Covid-19. 


