Man, 58, dies of Covid-19 in Meerut, district’s death toll reaches 7
2020-05-04
Meerut: Nine fresh Covid-19 cases surfaced on Sunday in Hapur, where the tally is 44 now. At least three more tested positive for coronavirus in Meerut the same day, where the total number of case is 120 (including one admitted in Kanpur). One more case was reported in Saharanpur, where the tally is staggering 199 now (including 12 admitted in Lucknow).Apart from eight cases in Hapur, an ambulance driver also tested positive in the district. But, the district administration said it should be counted in Amroha tally as his sample tested just a day after he arrived from Amroha to Hapur. While a 58-year-old patient died in Meerut, taking the death tally to seven.“A 58-year-old patient from Kidwai Nagar in Lisari Gate area died at 1am on Sunday and was tested positive for coronavirus after his death. He was admitted in the emergency of LLRM Medical College. His contacts are being traced and containment activity being carried out. With this, the total number of deaths in Meerut reached seven. Two others tested positive, too. While one 30-year-old man belongs to Zaidi Farm (Manzoor Nagar) another 57-year-old man, a fruit seller, tested positive from Ravindra Puri (Naya Bazaar),” said CMO Dr Raj Kumar.Aditi Singh, district magistrate, Hapur, said, “Nine cases tested positive in Hapur. At least seven of them are from Kurana, an existing hotspot. Out of these nine, one is the 16-year-old son of a lab technician who had tested positive in Delhi and a 108 ambulance driver. However, since he joined here from Amroha on April 25, the same day his samples were sent for testing and have now tested positive, it will be added in Amroha’s tally.”However, controversy remained about addition of the ambulance driver case in Amroha’s tally.Umesh Mishra, Amroha district magistrate, said, “We are yet to receive any information in the matter from Hapur district administration about this case. After getting authentic information about the matter, we will follow it up accordingly. However, since he is working in Hapur currently, so he will be counted in their tally only.”Dr BS Sodhi, CMO of Saharanpur, said, “One more case tested positive in Saharanpur on Sunday. He is being shifted to a hospital for treatment.”