Man, 63, dead as south TN Covid tally rises by 19
2020-05-27
The total cases in ten southern districts rose to 1,301 with the addition of 19 more on Tuesday even as a 63-year-old man from Chennai, who died on May 24 in Tirunelveli, tested positive for Covid-19.

Health officials said the man was attending his son’s wedding at Koodankulam when he suddenly fainted. He was brought to Kanyakumari MCH where he was declared brought dead. Soon after, when he was tested for Covid-19 as per protocol, his results returned positive after which he was cremated in Nagercoil. The man had no known co-morbidities and could have suffered heat stroke, officials added. Investigations are on to ascertain how the man could have contracted the infection while his contacts are also being traced.

Meanwhile, Tuticorin district continued to see more influx cases as eight people who returned from Maharashtra and one person from Uttar Pradesh tested positive. The district now has 187 Covid-19 cases of which 132 are influx. Three people in Kanyakumari, a four-year-old boy in Dindigul and a 25-year-old man in Virudhunagar, all Maharashtra returnees, tested Covid-19 positive. In Ramanathapuram, a 46-year-old man who returned from Kerala tested positive. Madurai district reported two local cases, both contacts of infected patients. 

In the central region, a 58-year-old man hailing from Vilangudi in Ariyalur district who returned from Ahmedabad tested positive. The total cases in the district has now surged to 357 though there are only two active cases there now. There were no new cases in Perambalur or Trichy. Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital in Trichy discharged two patients. With this, the district has treated a total of 68 cases so far. The hospital had only eight Trichy patients under treatment besides one each from Perambalur and Theni. 

Meanwhile, 65 passengers from 13 districts who had landed at Trichy airport from Bengaluru on Monday night were sent home on the advice of 14 days home quarantine after they tested negative when the results were out on Tuesday.


