Man, 40, lands in prison for spreading rumour amid coronavirus scare
2020-03-19
MADURAI: Madurai district superintendent of police N Manivannan has warned against any attempt to create and spread rumours in the light of the Covid-19 scare. This follows the arrest of a 40-year-old man named M Selvam from Irungalur in Trichy for spreading rumours that 47 people infected by Covid-19 have been isolated in an unoccupied apartment at Rajakkur near Othakadai.


A team of officials had visited the building to explore the possibility of setting up an isolation ward when people from the locality staged a protest based on the rumours. Selvam has been booked under IT act and Disaster Management Act 2005 and remanded in prison under judicial custody. The SP said that social media will be monitored by the concerned cell and those who create rumours will be taken to task. Manivannan said that a round-the-clock control room has been set up in the rural police office located at Surveyor Colony to handle all issues related to Covid-19. Public can share any details regarding the disease and mischief mongers with the facility by calling 7708806111, he said. Similarly, a control room each in Melur, Thirumangalam, Kallikudi, Usilampattti, Vadipatti and Peraiyur taluks has been opened jointly with the help of revenue officials. People can visit the centres to pass information related to Covid-19. Information received through the centres will be brought to the notice of officials concerned, he said.

Kits containing masks, hand sanitizer and kerchief were distributed to police personnel and ministerial staff in the rural police office by South Zone IG K P Shanmuga Rajeswaran and Madurai range DIG Annie Vijaya on Wednesday in presence of Manivannan and additional superintendent of police S Vanitha. Manivannan said that police and ministerial staff have been sensitised on personnel hygiene and how to sneeze, cough without affecting others. All police personnel involved in traffic regulation and vehicular check have been told to wear masks without fail. At police stations, officials have been instructed to provide hand sanitizers to those coming to file complaints. 


