Man, 45, who returned from US first from city to test positive for coronavirus
2020-03-12
Nagpur: A man from Nagpur who returned from the United States recently has tested positive for Covid-19. The patient had got himself admitted to the Indira Gandhi Government Medical College Hospital (IGGMCH) on Wednesday morning and his swab samples were tested in a lab facility there.

“Reports came on Wednesday evening and they were positive. This is the first confirmed case of Covid-19 in Nagpur and there is no need to panic,” said district civil surgeon Dr Devendra Paturkar. The man is believed to be around 45 years old.

District collector Ravindra Thakare is expected to issue precautionary guidelines on Thursday.

Hospital sources told TOI that the patient had come back from USA via Mumbai on March 6. “He developed symptoms three days ago and reported to the hospital. After testing positive, he is now kept in the isolation ward (No. 24) of IGGMCH and being treated symptomatically. He has fever (99 degrees) but is showing no other symptoms,” they said.

Though it is not known from which city he boarded a flight to Mumbai, it is learnt that the man was not screened in Mumbai as travellers from US were not under scrutiny.

Meanwhile, three of the 40-member tourist team that travelled to Dubai with a Pune couple, which has tested Covid-19 positive, are from Nagpur. They were together in Dubai between February 24 and March 1. The Pune couple, their daughter, and their cab driver have tested Covid-19 positive. All these three patients are under home isolation.

On Wednesday, four other persons reported to the GMCH. One of them was a German woman who came to India as a tourist. She travelled to Delhi, Agra, Rajasthan and was in Tadoba on a jungle safari when she developed coronavirus symptoms. She reported to the GMCH and was admitted to the isolation ward. Her reports are expected to come on Thursday.

GMCH also admitted three Nagpurians having recent travel history to Dubai, Saudi Arabia and Italy in the isolation ward on Wednesday. Two of them, who travelled to Dubai and Saudi Arabia, came early in the morning. Their samples were collected and tested by evening. Both have tested negative. Reports of the person who travelled to Italy are still awaited.

Ten patients in Yavatmal 

Ten of the 40 passengers suspected to have Covid-19 are from Yavatmal. They accompanied the Pune couple who has tested Covid-19 positive on the Dubai trip. Owners of different agriculture stores in Kelapur, Ghatanji and Yavatmal, all these residents had gone to Dubai on a paid pleasure trip by a leading agriculture company.

As the Pune couple, their daughter and cab driver have tested positive, all have been asked to stay indoors for the next 14 days. Nine of the ten are presently inside their houses.

One of them, a young boy who studies in Pune went directly there and developed symptoms like cough, cold and fever. He also tested positive. Government authorities in Yavatmal are now keeping a tab on the other nine patients.

“Nine members from the group have been kept under home observation at their respective places of residences and the civil surgeon of Yavatmal is regularly monitoring them. None of them have any symptoms of coronavirus,” said Dr Milind Kamble, dean of Vasantrao Naik Government Medical college and hospital in Yavatmal. Three of the nine suspects said on phone that they will strictly maintain home isolation.

“We are not going out for any reason. We skipped Holi celebrations too. Earlier, the administration team was to collect our samples from homes. But, later, they asked us to wait as none of us developed any symptoms,” said one of them. 

Yavatmal GMCH has an isolation ward of 10 beds, but these suspects were not admitted there. Authorities said that the isolation facility is to meet emergencies only.


