Man found Covid +ve after death, family members yet to be tested
2020-05-09
Agra: In yet another case of medical negligence in Agra, 12 members of the family of a man who died on Tuesday and later found Covid-19 positive on Wednesday, have not been tested so far. 

According to the family members, even after two days of delay, they have not received any call from the health department for sample collection for Covid-19. The man's wife is a diabetes patient and is reportedly having problem in breathing. Besides, the family also has four children and a pregnant woman. Local residents further claimed that no sanitisation has been done in the locality. 

A 55-year-old resident of Nagla Fakirchand near Idgha bus stand had fever on May 3. His son brought medicine from nearby medical shop and gave it to him. The medicine brought temporary relief. 

According to family members, around 3am on May 5, the elderly man started having breathing difficulties along with mild fever. He was taken to a private hospital in Arjun Nagar locality which refused to provide treatment. At 5am, he was taken to SN Medical College. 

After being admitted at the emergency ward at 5:30am, the patient was provided oxygen and the treatment process began. 

His elder son, who was allowed to stay with him at the emergency ward, said, “After around two hours of being admitted, my father again started having problems in breathing. The oxygen cylinder attached to him had finished. I rushed to the reception for help. A staffer there assured me of looking into it. But, no one came to provide an oxygen cylinder even after 10 minutes of delay. I again went to the reception for help. The staffers told me not to come again and again, and an oxygen cylinder was being arranged. At 8am, I found my father dead, when I returned to his bed." 

“My father was found to be Covid-19 positive on Wednesday. Even after much delay no one from the health department has come to screen us. I am trying to get Covid-19 tests done. But, officials are not answering our calls. My mother suffers from diabetes. She is also having breathing difficulties. We also have four children and a pregnant woman in the family," the son added. 

“The health department should get all of the family members tested for Covid-19 immediately. We are already following home quarantine and need not be shifted to some other place," he added. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “I will look into the matter and check why there is a delay in the screening of the family members of a Covid-19 patient who died on May 5. Samples of all the family members will be collected for lab testing soon." 


