Man enters quarantine facility, tries to take couples for a ride; arrested in Bengaluru
2020-05-23
BENGALURU: Hundreds of people who have been sent to paid institutional quarantine on arriving in Bengaluru have been complaining of inadequate facilities in places where they have been housed. At lease one instance of a conman trespassing into a hotel quarantine and attempting to cheat gullible returnees has come to the fore.

The conman, Krishne Gowda, 56, from Mysuru Road has been arrested.

On May 16, two elderly couples were accosted by Krishne Gowda at the reception of a private hotel in Gandhinagar, which is an institutional quarantine facility. The couples had returned from Delhi and were among 70 people housed in the hotel with 20 hotel management staff.

Gowda asked the couples how much they were spending on their institutional quarantine. Sensing something amiss, the couples smartly turned on the recorder in their mobile phones and continued the conversation. “They told the man they were paying Rs 19,600 for the 14-day institutional quarantine, and Rs 4,000 per head for Covid-19 tests,” a senior BBMP health officer said. 

Gowda offered them a deal: “Pay me Rs 25,000 and I will get you tested and released from quarantine so that you can go home with a Covid-19 negative certificate.”


BBMP official alerted
“The couples backed out and immediately called Dr Nanda BY, BBMP medical officer (health). They narrated the incident to him and also shared the recordings. We immediately lodged a complaint against Krishne Gowda,” said Dr Ravi Surpur, special commissioner (health). 

“It is surprising how the man entered the hotel. We have ensured that no outsiders are allowed into institutional quarantine buildings,” Surpur said.

Upparpet police registered a complaint under various IPC sections and arrested Gowda on Friday. 

“We understand that many people are restless and want to go home. Once the institutional quarantine period is over, they will be sent home,” Surpur added. 


