Man ‘missing’ from Delhi lands in Goa, tests Covid positive-19, goes missing again
2020-06-12
PANAJI: In a strange turn of events, the state authorities have found that the person they were hunting for since Wednesday after he disappeared on testing positive for Covid-19 has a missing case registered against him in Delhi. He used to work in a tavern in Panaji before he went missing from here, too.


There is a missing report registered against him with Delhi police, health secretary Nila Mohanan told reporters.

Mohanan said they do not have any information on him other than what he has stated in his self-declaration form and that he came to Goa on a train.

“The address given by him was very vague and on verification it was found to be not valid,” she said.

Since Wednesday afternoon, the state administration and police have been trying to find his whereabouts and, during call tracing, it became known that he is officially a missing person, Mohanan said.

It can be assumed that he is a resident of Delhi, she added.

Meanwhile, Goa’s active count of Covid-19 cases increased to 350 on Thursday as 30 fresh cases were detected, 13 of which were from Mangor Hill and nine were contacts of those who tested positive.

Two members of the family of the ‘tea boy’ at the Covid hospital, who tested positive on Wednesday, have also tested positive. His wife and daughter have been admitted to the hospital. The other staff in the ESI hospital will be tested soon.

Mohanan said cases linked to Mangor Hill have been found in other parts of the state as people of the area were in contact with several from other areas. Additionally, Vasco health workers, post office employees as well as KTC staffers who tested positive are residents of different locations.

“People from Mangor Hill had come into contact with several people. The health workers themselves are residents of six to seven different locations. Then we have KTC and post office employees,” she said, replying to a query if they have found traces of local transmission other than in Mangor Hill.

Mohanan said in contact tracing investigation starts with the primary source of infection or a person who has tested positive. His family members and close associates and basically all who come in direct contact with him are termed as primary contacts. People who interacted with primary contacts are counted as secondary contacts, she said.


