Man bitten by snake in quarantine centre in Mayurbhanj
2020-05-16
BHUBANESWAR: A migrant worker staying in a quarantine centre in Balangir district was bitten by a snake while another committed suicide in a facility in Mayurbhanj district, highlighting the need for closer watch at such centres.

In Balangir district’s Sindhekela village, a person was bitten by a snake while he was sleeping in a quarantine home on Thursday night. He was admitted to Titlagarh sub-divisional hospital and is said to be out of danger.

“It is peak summer and many villages are adjacent to forest areas,” said Titlagarh sub-collector Sudhakar Nayak, adding the snake could have come from the forest. He said the man’s condition is stable. Balangir district has so far recorded two Covid-19 cases and both from Gudvela block. 

In a separate incident, a migrant who had returned from Andhra Pradesh and was quarantined at Dambarudhar village under Anla panchayat in Mayurbhanj district committed suicide on Thursday night. His wife, who had returned from Puttaparthi in Tamil Nadu, was staying in the same facility but in a separate hall. Police said the man was under stress ever since he came to the quarantine centre. He was found hanging from a tree close to the quarantine centre.

“It is being investigated how he came out of the centre. The body has been sent for post-mortem,” said SP (Mayurbhanj) Smith Parmar. The deceased was working in a factory in Andhra Pradesh. Mayurbhanj has so far recorded nine Covid-19 cases.

Meanwhile, Aska MP Pramila Bisoyi has demanded more security for migrants apprehending possible law and order problem. “There is possibility of law and order breakdown. There should be adequate deployment of security personnel at all quarantine centres. The quarantine centres don’t have sufficient carrying capacity. So, more such centres should be created. Besides enhancing security and safety of the quarantined people, basic amenities should also be ensured. Toilet and cleanliness facilities are not adequate,” wrote Bisoyi in her letter to Ganjam collector Vijay Kulange. Ganjam tops the list of positive cases with 264 and most of them are returnees from Surat.

EoM


