Unlocking Diaries: Pune's iconic Mahatma Phule Mandai and Tulshibaug reopen with all safety measures
2020-06-09
For over two months, Pune’s iconic vegetable market — Mahatma Phule Mandai, and the bustling shopping destination —Tulshibaug, have been unusually quiet and deserted, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, on Friday, both places resumed functions, albeit with a new set of rules, including frequent sanitisation, hygiene checks, social distancing, odd-even rule and using the govt’s Aarogya Setu app.


Maintain a safe distance, please! 
 While the mandai has close to 1000 small vegetables and fruit stalls, only around 100 were operational between 9 am and 5 pm on Sunday. With designated areas and social distancing markings, vendors were seen urging people to maintain a safe distance while making purchases. Gajanan Ladkad, a vegetable vendor, shares that he was happy to be back, but also adds that managing the crowd was a little difficult owing to the holiday. “In the 50 years that I have been selling vegetables here, this was the first time that the mandai was closed down for months. Today, we saw familiar faces, albeit covered by masks, and had quick conversations with our customers. We are following all safety norms- wearing masks, using gloves and hand sanitisers and asking everyone maintain social distancing. This is the new normal for us now,” shares Ladkad.


Business is important, but safety comes first 
 In Tulshibaug, where the shops have resumed operations on odd and even days, safety is of utmost importance too. One of the clothing shops at the vicinity is allowing patrons to enter only if they have the Aarogya Setu app installed and after checking their body temperature. “We want people to visit the shop and business to go on, but with all necessary precautions. We allow only one person to enter at a time,” says Gajendra Chouhan, from the shop.
Only around 30 shops are currently functioning in Tulshibaug and there are regular checks by police personnel patrolling the area. 
 
Unlock 1.0: Pune's famous Tulshibaug market opens after 2-month shutdown00:58

Adopting a third-person passing policy 
 Another vegetable vendor, Hrishikesh Talekar, says that while business is a little slow right now, they have to get innovative to keep going. He says, “We have a third-person passing policy wherein one of us passes the vegetables that customers select. We don’t let customers touch the vegetables. We wear masks and gloves and sanitise our hands regularly.”

 



Precautionary measures for shoppers  
 A regular at the mandai, retired ACP Pradeep Ashtaputre says that he has been purchasing grocery from here since 40 years. “Over the years, we have formed a relationship with the vendors. We trust them completely with the produce and hence we come here,” says Pradeep, a resident of Sinhagad Road.
Another shopper, Kishore Shahane, adds, “We are taking all precautionary measures while buying. On a regular Sunday, the market would be jam-packed with customers, but this Sunday there were fewer people.”
For extra precautions, some vendors, who are in touch with their regular customers through WhatsApp, are asking them to download the Aarogya Setu app as well. “We urge patrons to wear masks and hand gloves and download the app. We also give them details of what is available in the market and at what price so that they don’t waste time enquiring and bargaining,” says Devendra Kale, a vendor.

