Coronavirus in Jaipur: Mandis buzz with crowd, malls wear deserted look
2020-03-19
JAIPUR: With a mask on her face, 65-year Badam Devi is a picture in clear contrast to her community of vegetable sellers in Lal Kothi Sabji Mandi. Even on a working day afternoon, the market is reasonably bustling, and the fear of virus is conspicuous by its absence.


“Much has been made out of the virus, there is nothing to be so worried. After all, what is to happen will happen. We are not worried,” says Imtiaz, a vegetable seller. When asked whether government officials visiting the mandi and creating awareness about the deadly virus, he said not so far, and there is no need for it. 

But the scene changes as you step into World Trade Park, the city's showcase landmark for modern retail. “90% of the visitors have disappeared. We are pleading with the management to close the store. We are afraid of getting infected . Since morning till 1 o'clock, we have sold goods worth only Rs 800 from all the three floors of our outlet,” said an employee of Shoppers Stop at WTP. 

“We have closed down cinema halls and gyms as per government orders. Even the retail outlets are open, crowds have thinned out. Now it is only restricted to essential purchase,” said Gaurav Baradiya, promoter of an oldest mall in the city. 

After initial dillydallying, IT companies fallen back on the last option – working from home. Big names in the industry have reoriented their operation and others are in the process of testing to ensure no disruption to the service delivery.

“Many have remodeled their operations to allow employees to work from home. Others have started trial runs to ensure that workflow remains seamless. Everybody has realized that working from home will remain a reality for some time to come,” said Puneet Mittal, founder of a software company.

In Sitapura industrial zone is home to many textile units, making garments for leading brands in the country and also for exporting. Gem and jewellery manufacturers also have a significant presence. Thousands of workers enter the factory gates every day. But thermal scanning, body temperature checking, and other precautions remain largely missing.

Gaurav Gupta, promoter of a manufacturing unit, said, “We do thermal scanning and also have alerted our employees to report any sign of illness immediately. But I cannot speak for others.” 


