Covid-19 in Maharashtra: Mango trade likely to be hit as exports to foreign nations stalled
2020-03-18
KOLHAPUR: Mango growers in the state seem unfazed by coronavirus though exports to foreign countries have been stalled. About 40% of the fruit produced in Konkan region is usually exported to the USA, Gulf and European countries.


Farmers as well as exporters said that since there will be a dip in the production of mangoes this season, they will not face any problem even if mangoes are not exported, adding that the produce will be more than sufficient to cater to the domestic need.

Anand Desai, a mango grower and exporter from Ratnagiri, said, “The outbreak of coronavirus will surely impact the mango export business as air service to all major exporting countries has been stalled. Mango is exported to European countries, Japan, Australia and USA through airways and Gulf by the sea. Usually the export of mangoes starts after April 15, but the contractors start visiting our sites to sign contracts in March every year. However, this year, rarely any contractor has visited our place to sign contracts for exporting mangoes. If this situation persists, it will affect the export business.”

“However, the mango production is expected to dip by 50% this year due to climatic changes and unfavourable environment. So, the rates of mangoes will remain high in the domestic market despite the reduction in the export,” he said.

Prasanna Pethe, another farmer and exporter, said, “Usually, we export mangoes to the United Kingdom and Qatar in March. This year, due to coronavirus we could not export mangoes. The export to the US and other countries takes place in late April and we expect that by that time the coronavirus threat will be reduced and the exports will be streamlined. The mango export continues till late May and there are possibilities of exporting mango after situation becomes normal. If the situation worsens further, it will be difficult for us to export the mango. However, the dip in mango production will help in meeting the demand-supply gap. This year, also the supply of mangoes will be less and the demand will remain high even if we could not export it as the available mango will not be able to meet domestic requirement.” 

According to APEDA (Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority), the mango export in 2018-19 worth Rs 385.62 crore was 48470 metric tonne. The production and export of mangoes in the last three to four years varies depending on the climatic and environmental conditions. Along with fresh mangoes, sliced, dried and mango pulp is also exported from India. 

The government has granted Geographical Indication (GI) tag to the Alphonso mango from Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg and neighbouring Konkan region. 


