Covid-19: Mangor Hill cases cross 100 mark
2020-06-06
PANAJI: Goa’s active Covid-19 count rose to 131 on Friday after 30 new cases were detected, 26 of whom are linked to the Mangor Hill containment zone. Since the fisherman and his wife from the area tested positive for the novel coronavirus on Monday, Mangor Hill has accounted for 116 of the state’s positive cases. 


Chief minister Pramod Sawant said on Friday that the government has taken “maximum measures” at Mangor Hill to contain the spread of the virus, and that people in the containment area are being provided with essentials. There are 350 families living in the area, he said.

He also said that the state government has arrangements in place in case there’s a spike in positive cases.

While the health department collected swab samples of 400 persons at Mangor Hill on Thursday, no testing was done on Friday even as health secretary Nila Mohanan said that the department would continue testing people in the containment zone. 

Meanwhile, four travellers who returned from Dubai earlier this week and had been placed in facility quarantine have tested positive for Covid-19. Also, eight patients who were at the Covid hospital in Margao have been cured and discharged. They have been placed in facility quarantine for seven days, and after that they will be home quarantined for another seven. 

Sawant said that the swab samples of around 290 passengers who arrived by rail on Friday have also been collected and taken for testing. He added that the state has ramped up testing.

The CM also said that out of the total 196 cases reported in the state since March, 65 have recovered. He added that only ten patients had symptoms. “As of now, we have seen 100% recovery in patients reported positive,” he said. “That may be because Goans have a good immune system.” 

He said that asymptomatic patients are kept in isolation wards, and most of the time, they do not require any treatment. “They are discharged after eight days on testing negative twice for the virus,” he said. Sawant said that Covid-19 patients are not charged for treatment. 

On Friday, out of the 2,170 samples sent for testing, 1,023 returned negative while 1,117 reports are awaited. Three domestic travellers were placed in home quarantine and 415 in facility quarantine. Also, 19 suspects were admitted to isolation wards at various government hospitals.

Director of health services Dr Jose D’Sa said that the condition of all Covid patients is stable.


