Coronavirus outbreak: Manic buying, cash withdrawals in Lucknow
2020-03-21
LUCKNOW: The district administration’s order of lockdown in parts of trans-Gomti area, after four persons including singer Kanika Kapoor were tested positive to coronavirus, triggered panic buying and cash withdrawals on Friday.

Though the administrative order said ATMs, shops and stores selling essential commodities would remain open, people made a beeline at ATMs and stores.

From sanitizers, medicines to grocery and dairy products, people started buying things in bulk fearing that the lockdown could be extended to other services as well.

Panic buying may lead to rise in prices of vegetables by 20-30% in some areas like Aliganj and Nishatganj.

Through another order, the district administration directed closure of malls, restaurants, salons, cafes and parlours. However, traders in Hazratganj and parts of Old city, who did not fall in the purview of closure also downed shutters in view of coronavirus threat.

Police carried out pratrolling in many areas to ensure compliance of orders.

At a prominent medicine shop in Indiranagar, customers bought medicine for a month and purchased masks and sanitisers in bulk.

“I know that medicine stores will remain open but I am buying more than required because no one knows when the situation gets worse forcing closure of vegetable and medicine shops as well,” said Sushil Srivastava of Indiranagar.

“The situation is uncertain and I don’t want to take chances. I am buying everything required to last at least 15 days,” said Shipra Bajpayee of Kapoorthala.

Prateek Singh of Mahanagar said it was better to buy things in bulk and store at home than visiting crowded markets frequently for purchases as it would increase the risk of infection. Rimjhim Sharma, a housewife in Khurramnagar, said her milkman had informed her that he would not come for a week and vegetable vendors had stopped frequenting her residential area.

“If grocery stores announce closure for a week, what will we do? I have decided to play safe and buy all essential items,” she said.

Many people were seen withdrawing cash from ATMs using two debit cards. 

