Many visitors stranded in Mumbai even after end of quarantine
2020-04-11
MUMBAI: Arun Satheesh has had enough of hotel stays. The marketing professional landed in Mumbai from Russia last month and has spent 19 days hopping from one hotel to another, with no means of returning home to Calicut. Like Satheesh, scores of people from across India are stranded in Mumbai due to the lockdown. Their pockets are fast emptying and some have taken ill. With indications the lockdown could get extended, those stranded fear the worst.


Satheesh, 48, landed in Mumbai on March 21. He was asked to sign a document which forbade him for travelling home by air or rail. “Authorities appeared confused at the airport. While I wasn’t allowed to fly home, another airline carrying 30 Kerala-bound travellers was given the green signal,” Satheesh said. He was asked to self-quarantine for 14 days. With no relatives in Mumbai, Satheesh checked into a budget hotel in Andheri East. Within days, the national lockdown started, and the hotel’s owner and most of the staff left.

Cash has dried up, have changed three hotels, says stranded man

A few staffers of the hotel who had been left behind insisted that I make all payments in cash. Their cooking area was very dirty and I decided to only have boiled eggs. I offered them my card to purchase provisions from the market; but they refused. After nine days, my cash dried up and I decided to leave,” said Satheesh. He moved to another budget hotel for the rest of the quarantine period. “The room had no windows and the hotel had switched off the air-conditioner as all the guests staying there were being quarantined. After five days, I moved to a third hotel. My family in Calicut is very concerned,” he said.

An elderly couple from Kerala who had flown to Mumbai from overseas have been similarly stranded just the way Satheesh is. Parameshwaran K, 65, and his wife Suma, 56, landed in Mumbai from Canada on March 21 after a six- month stay at their daughter’s place. They were scheduled to take a flight to their home in Kannur when the authorities stopped them and sent them to SevenHills Hospital in Andheri for tests. Suma is an assistant nurse and was to join duty in her hometown on March 28. She was given permission to fly back home, but her husband was asked to stay back in Mumbai. The couple however wanted to be together and opted to be quarantined at a luxury hotel near the city’s airport. They both tested negative for Covid-19. But after running up massive bills at the hotel, they were forced to move. Presently, they have put up in a defence guest house in Goregaon.

“We have spent Rs 75,000 so far in this city. The only time we had come to Mumbai before was a decade ago, and we had come at that time as tourists. But this stay has robbed my peace," said Parmeshwaran, a retired bank officer. Suma said she had wanted to join work soon so she could look after Covid-19 patients but has no idea when she can do that.

In Mira Road’s Ram Rahim dormitory, 50-year-old Vijay Prithvani is waiting to get home to Chhattisgarh. He came to Mumbai in February for business and had hoped to leave by March 21. “The Janta Curfew was on March 22, but travellers like me were stopped from commuting even a day earlier. I was asked to move into a hotel,” he said. Diabetic, he took ill at the dormitory and was attended to by a physician. He has almost run out of funds and hopes he can go home soon.

