Many contacts of Palakkad Covid-19 patients yet to be traced
2020-04-23
PALAKKAD: Authorities who tracked the contacts of a driver from Salem in Tamil Nadu, one of the four people who tested positive for Covid-19 in the district on Tuesday, indicated that he had come into contact with at least 14 people, who are yet to be traced. They include the helper in the lorry and loading and unloading workers of Salem.

Besides his parents, wife and daughter, the other primary contacts include his brother, sister-in-law, their two children, employees and customers of a bakery, staff at Walayar check post, and one of his Mundur-based friend. 

The route map that showed where a Covid-19 patient from Thiruvegappura travelled to indicated that he got into contact with 23 people, including his father, sister, her husband and her sons. 

The travel history of a shop owner from Chennai who reached Palakkad in a goods vehicle and was admitted to Mangode Medical College after testing positive for Covid-19 was also released on Wednesday. 

He had reached Palakkad on April 18 in a lorry and was picked up from the streets by police who took him to a public health centre. It is almost impossible to trace his contacts authorities said as he had come into contact with lot of people before getting admitted to the hospital, including employees from Malappuram and Bengal who worked at his shop.

A guest worker from Uttar Pradesh who also tested positive for coronavirus on Tuesday used to work at Kanjikode industrial area and had come into contact with nine people, including an autorickshaw driver, his co-worker and roommates.

The route map of the Kavilpad resident, another Covid-19 patient, who came from Sharjah on March 14, shows that he came into contact with 10 people, including a taxi driver who picked him from Coimbatore airport to Palakkad. Meanwhile, a man hailing from Chathanoor in Thrithala, who was under treatment for Covid-19 in the district hospital, was discharged on Wednesday. Now, there are six Covid-19 patients under treatment in the district.


