Many help needy and poor celebrate Eid amid lockdown
2020-05-26
PATNA: Most people from the Muslim community celebrated Eid on Monday by helping those in need of food and other items. 

Shabana Imam (38), a resident of Raja Bazar, distributed food to hundreds of poor people on the occasion. “The essence of celebrating the festival lies in feeding the needy and poor, especially at a time when several people are going hungry,” she said.

Sadia of Sabjibagh said instead of letting the pandemic dampen their festivity, they decided to do something for the poor, especially those living in the slum areas. “We fed them with home-cooked meal, including chicken korma, and biryani,” she said.

With mosques closed and gatherings prohibited owing to nationwide lockdown due to Covid-19 spread, people remained confined to their homes. From sharing virtual hugs to sending ‘Eidi’ via online platforms and visiting only close relatives, people observed the festival in a different way this time. 

Even the congregational prayer service held at Gandhi Maidan every year on Eid was missing this time. Maulana Shibli Qasmi, general secretary of Imarat-e-Shariah, said: “It is the responsibility of every citizen to ensure social distancing and take precautionary measure to stop the spread of Covid-19. It was for the first time that special prayer service was not conducted at the mosques. But nothing is more important than life. Hence, we encouraged people to celebrate the festival at home.”

But that turned out to be an opportunity for many Muslim men and women to offer two rakats (units) of Eid special prayer at home with their family members this year. Phulwarisharif resident Md Talha (28) said: “Unlike every year, all my family members, including my mother and sister, offered namaz together.”

Few people, on the other hand, conducted small prayer service in their residential societies. Md Shamshad (54) of Boring Canal Road offered prayer along with other residents in the building. “As we were not allowed to visit the mosque, we decided to offer special prayer on our building premises while following social distancing norms,” he said.

Meanwhile, the aroma of the traditional dishes like biryani, sheer khurma and sewaiyan prepared on Eid pervaded the air on Monday. Amir Khan (33) of Bank Road said the lockdown gave him a chance to celebrate the festival in a different way. “In a bid to help my mother, I cooked sheer khurma this time,” he said.


