Many ignore Covid-19 curbs, Chennai cops clueless
2020-04-22
CHENNAI: Officially the lockdown in Tamil Nadu is still in force, but Chennai roads and markets did not have any sign of such movement curbs on Tuesday. With state and central governments adopting diametrically opposite stand on continuation of lockdown, police on field duty were confused as to whether to enforce lockdown or just remain a spectator to increased road activity.

Police did book cases of Section 144 violation (325 in the last 24 hours) on Tuesday as well, but it was sporadic and a fraction of the number of cases registered since March 24. Police had impounded 126 bikes, 11 autorickshaws and a car on Tuesday. However, on April 19-20, they had booked 738 cases and impounded 451 vehicles including 393 bikes, 53 autorickshaws and five cars.

The police department had deployed 2,700 traffic policemen on duty, in addition to about 6,000 personnel from law and order wing to conduct checks at about 188 temporary checkpoints in the city. However, as a large number of vehicle users came up with an excuse that they are office-goers, police could not stop many.

At Koyambedu wholesale vegetable market, more than 50,000 people turned up. Though the Greater Chennai Corporation has mandated wearing of facial mask mandatory for anyone venturing out of their homes, a vast majority of the visitors did not wear any mask. Several hundred vehicles, including two-wheelers and mini-vans, queued up at the market to buy vegetables for resale. Even the Market Management Committee’s warning that traders flouting police advisories would lose their licences did not have much impact. A police officer said though instructions flow from their wireless sets nudging them to nab all Section 144 violators, they are chided in case of complaints from road-users. "There is no proper communication between the police top brass and those on field duty," said a policeman.

A senior police officer confirmed that they have not instructed any policeman to stop people on roads, especially during the peak hours. "Our men have been instructed to go after lockdown violators after the evening peak hours," he said.


