Many having nothing to do with Tablighi meet also quarantined
2020-04-05
Nagpur: Wasim Pathan (name changed) is a staunch Barelvi sect member and holds top position in its local body here. Pathan is 83-year-old and had recently suffered a heart attack. Despite his failing health and belonging to a sect ideologically opposed to Tablighi Jamaat (TJ), Pathan now finds himself in institutional qurantine at Ravi Bhavan. Though Pathan had been to Delhi to pay obeisance to Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, a practice proscribed by the TJ, he has been allegedly bracketed in the same group since he is a Muslim.Similarly, two more Muslim youths belonging to Ahle Sunnat Jamaat have been quarantined at Vanamati. A newly married Muslim man and his friends too have been quarantined while the bride is stuck in Delhi. Some couples who had gone for honeymoon to North India are also being quarantined.Lack of understanding about these sects and their ideologies among government officials have led to their journeys to Delhi being attributed to TJ congregation.“It is blasphemous to being linked to TJ, which propagates the concept of Da'wah (invitation) and proscribes sufism,” says a Barelvi sect member. The feud over conveying Allah’s message through Dargah culture or Tabligh is centuries old and have kept the sects at loggerheads.Even the Tablighis are at the receiving end of government’s drive in isolating each Delhi returnee though the directorate of health department’s circular rules out quarantining most of these people. The circular categorically states people who are connected to Nizamuddin meet between March 8 and 10 must be traced and quarantined. The officials apparent overkill is quickly filling up rooms at MLA hostels, Ravi Bhavan and Vanamati beside straining the testing labs at Mayo hospital and AIIMS. On Friday, 60 TJs were quarantined at these three facilities though they have been in city since February 28. “The local administration has to show they didn’t leave anyone,” said a source. On Friday, the administration had asked Nagpur Markaz secretary Abdul Bari Patel to counsel Muslims at the quarantine centres. Bari himself was shocked when he met the Muslims who subscribe to different sects. “I appeal to the administration and police to clearly mention in the form before each name exact details of each person. If a Muslim has visited Markaz it must be mentioned in the form so that exact number of people who went to that meet is found out,” he said.Bari added, “What I understood from the counselling session at MLA and Vanamati that not all who returned from Delhi were at Markaz. I also found out that two had gone in individual capacity to Markaz”Bari said the police, NMC and revenue officials were doing excellent job.