Coronavirus lockdown: Many grocery, medical store owners cautious, leave public in the lurch
2020-03-24
LUCKNOW: People who did not resort to stockpiling of items of daily use had to face major inconvenience on Monday as grocery stores and medical stores in many localities remained closed despite being given exemption under the lockdown till March 25. 


The city had witnessed panic buying last week before Sunday’s janata curfew. However, following assurance by the administration that the sale of essential items like grocery, vegetables, medicines, fuel and dairy products will continue, many refrained from buying things in bulk. 

On Monday, though, huge crowds were seen at some grocery stores and medical shops because many of their counterparts decided to remain shut. Shops of vegetables, fruits, dairy products and petrol pumps did not witness rush as a sufficient number of them were open. 

“This is a difficult situation because we need to avoid public gathering. People are forced to make a beeline here because only a few shops of food items and medicines are open,” said Dheeraj Singh, who was standing in a queue outside a grocery store in Aliganj.

A TOI reality check found very few grocery stores and medical shops open in Mahanagar, Aliganj, Hazratganj, Aashiana and Indiranagar, among other localities. At many places, supermarkets were also closed. 

On Jopling Road, grocery shop owners suddenly began pulling down shutters around 1pm, saying police have directed them to do so. 

“We pleaded with shopkeepers to at least take our list of items so that we could collect them later but they did not listen,” said Aman Rawat, a resident. 

In Jankipuram, Nilesh Agarwal, who was forced to stand in the crowd to buy medicines, said, “The very purpose of lockdown is defeated. The load on this shop would have been distributed had others in the area been open.” In Indiranagar, Mohammad Kafeel said, “I did not find any medicine shop open in my area.”

About 60 barricades put up by police on major roads also caused inconvenience. 

Kanika Mishra was not allowed by police to go beyond Balu Adda despite requests that she had to attend to her ailing mother in Dalibagh. Joint commissioner of police, law and order, Naveen Arora said that barricades were meant to check flow of people towards places like commercial hubs or bus and railway stations. This, he added, was done because many people were coming with excuses that they did not know these places were shut.


