Many flout lockdown rules, visit markets to kill boredom
2020-04-14
Nashik: Many residents on Monday were seen flouting the lockdown regulations, as many took out their vehicles for non-essential activities and joyrides. Although barricades have been put-up at major junctions, which are manned by home guards, the lanes and bylanes were used by some over-enthusiastic residents. For few, a trip to the market was a recreation activity for their kids. “My child was bored to death after being locked up in the house for so long. Earlier, we would play in the basement and terrace. But after the police warned us, we stayed inside the house. So I got him outside for some time,” said Anil Sonawane, father of a six-year-old. Moreover, many bikers were seen speeding their bikes on half-empty roads. “We wonder how these people are allowed to drive their vehicles at the time when the lockdown is in force and we have found three Covid positive patients in city,” said Sayali Kamble, another citizen. Most people were seen visiting grocery stores and vegetable vendors to purchase their weekly quota of goods. “I am buying goods only after a week. Today, I have stepped out of the house with my wife and taking whatever is required by my family of seven at home for the next seven days,” said Harish Patil, a businessman and resident of the Panchavati area. But that is not the case with others, who are stepping out almost on a daily basis for non-essential things. “People are buying non-essential things almost every day. There are some serious buyers, who buy goods that are likely to help them for the next week or even the fortnight period. But we have people coming out only to by chocolates, ice creams and even biscuits alone,” said Rajesh Patel, a shop-keeper on Gangapur Road. The situation is no different in Cidco and adjoining areas of Trimurti Chowk. In the morning hours, the NMC has allowed shops to stay open for people to buy goods. People were seen following the social distancing rules. At vegetable shops and marts, people were seen handling the vegetables themselves “We are told to wear a mask and that is what we are doing. As far as getting infected by touching is concerned, we aren’t touching anything except the basket,” said resident Sunita Pathak. Manoj Bhamre, who runs a clinic at Nashik Road said people should understand their responsibilities. “Wearing a mask is preventing things from going into nose, mouth. But at the same time, it is important that people do not touch anything eg vegetables. Besides, children are most vulnerable as they keep touching things because they don’t know what is good and bad,” he said.