Coronavirus in Bihar: Many private firms ask their staff to work from home
2020-03-15
PATNA: Corporates and private firms have swung into action to prevent the spread of coronavirus. While some companies have asked their employees to work from home, others have started providing sanitizers to the staff and issued a protocol to be followed by them during office hours.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Nancy Priya, who works with a multinational company, said they have been advised to work from home from March 16 onwards till further notice. “We attend the official meetings through videoconferencing on the company’s own mobile application,” she said.

“Presently, we are preparing modules for the training of government schoolteachers on the concept of resilience. The training is scheduled to begin from April. However, if the coronavirus threat persists, we will have to postpone the programme,” Nancy added.

Some private banks in the city have provided sanitizers and medical soaps to their employees. Even the customers, who visit the banks, are advised to use sanitizers before reaching the counters with passbook, cash and receipts.

Deepak Kumar (32), who works with a private bank, said, “The bank branches can’t be closed down due to coronavirus as it will only affect the common people. Almost all the banks are using sanitizers as a precautionary measure. The employees are asked to use sanitizers every 15 minutes. People approaching the counters are also given hand sanitizers before being allowed to hand over passbook, cash and receipts to the bank employees.”

Shilpi Mishra (29), employee of a private firm, said the company has issued certain guidelines for the employees. “Use of hand sanitizers is must. We have to use it soon after entering the office. Towels have been removed from the washrooms and we have been asked to use our personal towels,” she said.

Even private schools are taking precautionary measures to ensure the safety of students and teachers. Entry of outsiders into the school campuses is restricted. In classrooms, one-metre distance between students’ desks is maintained at several schools.

Abha Chaoudhary, a senior teacher at Notre Dame Academy, said the number of board examinees per classroom has been reduced from 48 to 24. “Hand sanitizers are being provided to the examinees and teachers. Final examinations of secondary classes are also in progress,” she added.

