Rajasthan: 50% of Covid patients who died got admitted late
2020-04-30
JAIPUR: A disturbing trend is evolving around Covid-19 deaths. At least half of the victims were either brought dead or taken to hospitals at the last stage before they tested positive, indicating that detection and diagnosis could not be done on time. Early diagnosis and early treatment are key to fight the virus, just like swine flu to prevent mortalities. 

One such incident was of 60-year-old resident of MD Road who was rushed to Sawai Man Singh Hospital, Jaipur. When he reached the hospital, he was declared dead. The incident happened on April 22. Suspecting to be a case of coronavirus, the doctors took his samples and found him positive. 

A 24-year-old woman, resident of Haji Colony, was brought dead to Mahila Chikitsalaya on April 24. When doctors tested her for Covid-19, she was found infected the next day. 

A 50-year-old resident of Ghat Gate was brought dead to SMS Hospital on April 25. His samples tested positive a day later. 

In a similar case, a 55-year-old woman resident of Ghat Gate was declared brought dead to SMS Hospital on April 24. Her samples tested positive on April 26. 

Besides, there is a list of patients who were admitted to hospital but died before their Covid-19 report arrived. A 60-year-old resident of Ramganj, who was admitted to SMS Hospital on April 22 , died the next day. He tested positive the same day of his death. 

A 62-year-old Raja Park resident, who was admitted to a private hospital, died on April 18. He too tested positive the same day. 

So far, 55 persons fell prey to the virus. Out of those, majority of them were either brought dead or they were taken to hospitals in the last stage. Health officials claimed that almost all people who died had pre-existing diseases. 

Expressing concern about the increasing number of deaths due to Covid-19, the health department has launched a campaign for life saving (LISA) to prevent mortalities. “If one analyses the mortality data, it can be clearly seen that senior citizens, especially those with other underlying conditions like kidney ailments, hypertension and blood pressure, are more vulnerable when infected. Hence, we have decided to follow a segmented approach and have started identifying the vulnerable in containment zones. Increased monitoring and tests will help save lives. Their existing health records with the Ayushman Bharat scheme are also being checked for corroborating their vulnerabilities,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). 

After launching LISA in the state, 515 health teams conducted door-to-door survey to find out high risk group people in districts which have turned into hotspots such as Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota, Tonk, Bharatpur, Ajmer, Banswara and Nagaur. The teams found 6,401 high risk group people in these areas.


