Coronavirus: Many couples shelve ‘I do’ plans in Goa
2020-03-20
PANAJI: With pandemic coronavirus creating a fear in the minds of people, many aspiring couples who had planned their beach weddings in Goa, have either decided to call of their plans or make it a small family affair.

Many couples are still brooding over whether to go ahead or call the plans off.

Goa is one of the finest beach wedding destinations across the globe hosting over 120 wedding celebrations and around 1,000 conferences on an average, annually.

It’s a trend among people to perform the Pheras (saptapadi) ceremony on the beach and sangeet (musical events) in the hotel ballrooms.

Speaking to TOI, Munna Ruknuddin, director of Bullseye Entertainment, who hosts around 30 wedding and 100 conferences annually said the coronavirus has hit not only weddings, but even conferences too.

“Around 10 conferences and three wedding celebrations in five-starred facilities have been cancelled,” Ruknuddin said, adding, his clients are mainly from Delhi, Rajasthan, Punjab, Mumbai etc.

On an average, the state receives 100 applications for beach weddings.

Couples who have decided to stick to their pre-planned schedule, may not make it a grand affair and instead may restrict it to a small family affair.

“Once they finalize the muhurth (auspicious time) and a new date for wedding, they will get back to us for other planning,” Ruknuddin said.

Another wedding planner Mackenzie Eudes Pereira of EMC Event Management said they organized around 15 wedding celebrations and 20 conferences in Goa.

He said that most of their clients are non-resident Indians (NRI). “There may cancellation of two or three wedding events. Still we are unsure,” he said.

After the coronavirus outbreak, bookings for hotels rooms have seen a sharp drop. Some hotels even took renovation work as the footfalls of customers reduced drastically.

“There will be huge losses. People who are moving to Goa from Thailand or Dubai have already paid advance amounts. We are slowly getting queries. They may double if the government sends a loud message that Goa is safe,” said a wedding planner. 


