Coronavirus in Pune: Many firms drag their feet on work-from-home option
2020-03-18
PUNE: Many companies operating out of Pune are still in two minds about offering work-from-home option to their employees, citing lack of clear directions from the government.


This is happening in spite of Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram’s appeal to the IT companies to allow their employees to work from home. 


 
“We appeal to all IT and other private companies to allow their employees to work from home because this social distancing measure is a very important proactive measure to contain the coronavirus spread,” Ram said in a video message on Monday.

Soon after the message was put out, some big companies in Kharadi and Hinjewadi allowed their employees to work from home, while others remained open.

 “There are about 50 listed firms operating out of Pune. Of these, only a dozen have allowed their employees to work from home,” said an IT industry insider.

With several companies still not warming up to work-from-home option, those still going out to their offices to work are finding themselves and their family members vulnerable to the Covid-19 infection.

 “My husband is allowed to work from home, while I have to go to work. Eventually, if one looks at it, my family not protected against the infection in any way,” Pimpri Chinchwad resident Shruti Narayanan, who works in Kharadi, said.

A senior executive of the firm where Narayanan works blamed the clear directions from the authorities for the situation. 

“They (the company) are saying some people can work from home, while others cannot and that we will be receiving more communication on it. Don’t know what is on their mind since the plan to this effect was readied around three weeks ago,” the senior executive said.

Some companies have gone for split work-from-home option, under which employees interchange the option every week. 

At a large manufacturing firm in Pune, office staff have been told to come to work every alternate day — leaving many to wonder about the efficacy of the move. 

“I don’t know if it will help, but looks like they are attempting to keep distance between employees,” a senior marketing executive of the company said.

In a meeting held with the divisional commissioner on Monday, small industries said they were ready to shut if there was an order. 

“For now, the officials have told us that we must follow sanitation measures, which we are. They have told us that only if we (the authorities) are not ready to contain (the spread), will there be a shutdown,” Sandeep Belsare, president, Pimpri Chinchwad Small Scale Industries Association, said, adding that in the manufacturing sector, there was no work-from-home option.


