Bhopal: Rendered jobless due to lockdown, many now take to selling veggies
2020-06-13
BHOPAL: Suresh Vishavkarma ran a loading auto in the pre-lockdown times. He had an understanding with three-four traders of M P Nagar, who gave him work of loading and unloading goods for their customers. But, today he is selling vegetables using the same loading auto to keep stocks of fresh vegetables.

“For sometime after the lockdown, I could not decide what to do. Initially, we had thought it would be a matter of a few days, but it went on and on. We are ‘hand to mouth’ people. Some other people in our colony started selling vegetables, the only thing we could have done during the lockdown period and I followed suit,” said Vishvakarma, who stands with his loading auto ahead of Manisha Market.

Vishvakarma said that markets have now opened, but shops are opening only for a couple of days in a week and that is why he has decided to continue with sale of vegetables for now. 

Vishvakarma is not the only loading auto driver, who is selling vegetables. Many others were doing the same thing during the lockdown period. And, not only loading auotos, even passenger autos and mini trucks were used by their owners/drivers to sell vegetables/fruits during the crisis period and continue to do it as things are still not ‘normal’, as one of them, Dinesh Gurjar, said.

“People are seemingly avoiding hiring an auto. But, vegetables and fruits are things which everyone buys and you at least know you will get back home with some money. I sat in my auto the whole day for two days after autos were allowed on the roads, but did not get a single passenger. Then I thought I should continue selling vegetables for now.”

“You don’t know how many people became jobless during the lockdown and still continue to be largely jobless, let alone roadside vendors and autowallas. A plumber, who sat at a hardware shop, an electrician, who sat at the electricity shop, a domestic help, who is not acceptable to her ‘didi’ anymore, workers at various shops, those occupying shops/stalls in hawkers’ corners, barbers, paan shop owners. Here I am only referring to those who earn daily to make ends meet. Many of them took to vegetable/ fruit selling to sustain their families during the lockdown,” said an official at Mantralaya, who said the domestic help, who worked at his home, is herself selling vegetables nowadays.

The sight of a kiosk with the quality of its chowmein written all over it or talking about tasty chaat or cool ice cream standing by the roadside stuffed with variety of vegetables or fruits is no rare sight even as Unlock.1 is underway and the market is opening up.

Santosh used to sell kulfi, branded ‘Ma Santosi Kulfi’ on the Kolar main road. For over two months, he has been selling vegetables/fruits on the same thela.

“I am new in Bhopal. I had come from Rajasthan and started selling kulfi. I was doing well, but then the lockdown ruined it all. Then I saw that people are earning reasonably good money selling vegetables or fruits, so I converted my kulfi thela into a vegetable/fruit shop. The margin may be less, but if you are able to exhaust the entire stock during the day, you have made enough to largely compensate your pre-lockdown regular income,” he said.

During this season, farmers coming in their tractor trolleys to sell bags of onions on reasobaly cheap rates is not a new phenomenon. But, there are too many people selling bags of 20-kg onion for Rs 200 to Rs 400. They are everywhere, occupying the footpath and the roadside. Anyone can make out that not all of them are farmers.

When asked whether he was a farmer, Sanjay, who was selling onions near 1100 quarters, said, “No. I have bought five such bags. I worked in a tea stall. If I am able to sell them all today, I would be able to make Rs 500, which I didn’t earn from the tea stall daily.” 

Thelas full of garlic is another sight you will not miss while going around the city.

Sighting a thela full of only lime should not surprise you either because a good, juicy lime is costing Rs 5 to Rs 10.per piece.

In the last fortnight, people selling tamarind, dry red chillies, coriander and other spices by the roadside have also joined the crowd of vegetable/fruit sellers and are attracting good customers too.

When asked where are they from, a couple selling spices in Bittan Market said, “We are from Gujarat. In fact, most of us are from Gujarat.”


