Coronavirus scare in Pune: Many schools cancel non-board exams
2020-03-14
PUNE: Educational institutes are busy deciding how to go about their scheduled examinations with chief minister Uddhav Thackeray on Friday announcing that schools in the city and Pimpri Chinchwad would remain shut till further orders following the spread of Covid-19 in the state. 


A circular issued by the education department to all schools stated that teachers, students and other staffers were supposed to remain indoors during the closure period. “If students, teachers or others are found roaming outside, appropriate action will be taken against them by the administration or the police,” the circular stated, adding that the board examinations (standards X and XII) would continue as per schedule.

Hutchings High School and Junior College principal Rita Katawati said she has cancelled the ongoing examinations for the non-board classes. “We have cancelled the examination on Saturday. We will wait and watch how long the schools remain closed. We will accordingly decide on re-examination or cancellation of examinations,” she said. 

A statement issued by Amanora School to the parents read: “With the perceptible threat of pandemic caused by the outbreak of coronavirus and following the orders issued by the Maharashtra government, the Amanora School shall remain closed till further notice for all its students (Nursery to X). Grades III-VIII will be awarded average marks for the exam scheduled tomorrow (Saturday). Parents will be notified of the subsequent updates via the school website and home app.”

Vishwashanti Gurukul, an IB World School, has decided to remain closed indefinitely and told its students to study at home. “We request the parents of our boarding students to kindly make travel arrangements for their ward and update the respective ‘house master’ or ‘mistress’ about the same. We advise our boarding students to carry their study material for the Term 2 examinations,” the school said. 

The institute added that it would keep the students posted on the status of the Term 2 Examinations, if the schools were permitted to reopen. The school requested its Standard X and Standard XII students to remain in the country “as the IB board examinations will happen as per the schedule on the school premises”.

HDFC School principal Amruta Prabhu said the scheduled examinations were over and the institute was planning to conduct extra-curricular classes from next week, which stand cancelled now. “We will wait and see how long the schools have to stay shut. Our academic session starts in April. If the closure period extends, we have a contingency plan to conduct online classes and send worksheets to the students,” Prabhu said.

The Savitribai Phule Pune University said the authorities would take a decision on the scheduled examinations on Saturday after a review of the situation. “Most of the theoretical examinations were supposed to start after April 10. But other examinations, including viva and practicals, were scheduled. We will take a decision on exams and our future course of action by Saturday afternoon,” said Mahesh Kakade, director of the board of examinations and evaluation, SPPU. 

Vidya Yeravdekar, principal director of Symbiosis Society, said the school managed by it and the Symbiosis International University would also remain closed and support students through online learning.


