Many Indians still stranded in coronavirus-hit Italy desperate to return home
2020-03-16
KOCHI: Three months pregnant Akshita (26), who is stranded in Italy, is almost in tears as she seeks the Centre’s help to get back home. She is in pain, but getting medical help in the Covid-19-hit country for non-Italians is almost impossible, she says. 


The woman from Bengaluru is among the 100-odd persons from India still stuck in Rome, even as 218 Indians were airlifted from Milan the other day. “I desperately want to be with my husband. I tried to take a ticket on Saturday but there weren’t any available. There was one flight on Sunday, but I couldn’t book as I wouldn’t have been able to make it to the airport on time from the place I am staying,” says Akshita, a robotics developer as she speaks over the phone.

A Malappuram native who is also stuck in Italy, with whom TOI managed to talk to, says a medical team from India arrived the other day and that their swabs were taken on Saturday. “Embassy officials told us it would take a few days for them to get the results from India. We are stuck in a very dangerous environment without basic necessities, including medical care,” says Muhammed Safvan, who is pursuing MBM in Italy, adding that he has been going to airport every day for the past five days, hoping to reach home.

“I took an Air India ticket on March 11, hoping that there wouldn’t be an issue with the Indian flight. But many who bought tickets of other private airlines, were allowed to go. We were barred from flying because we didn’t have a Covid-19 negative certificate. Getting such a certificate in Italy, where the disease is rampant, is impossible. We are now staying with a Malayali, who lives here. However, there are at least a dozen who haven’t left the airport in the past five days. I gave the samples for testing on Saturday, some say that it would take three to seven days for the results to come,” says Safvan.

Meanwhile, Shyam Kurup, a volunteer based in Kochi who has been sending SOS messages on social media urging the Centre to bring the stranded Indians back, says those who booked Air India flights were the ones who got stuck because the general of civil aviation had issued a circular that they need to obtain certificates of having tested negative for Covid-19. Now, they don’t have money to buy another ticket.

“Many private airlines were not insisting on such certificates. So, passengers who booked their tickets in those flights were able to leave Italy. But those who booked Air-India flight were stranded. Now, without a refund, they can’t book another flight,” Shyam says.Another NRI stuck in Rome, Diyana Kasturi from Indore, says on phone that she doesn’t understand why some people were evacuated without test results when they were asked to stay back till results arrive. “Why are we not told when results would come,” she asks furiously, adding that in Rome, they could be fined 280 euros if they venture out for food more than twice.

