Markaz member from Nagpur tests positive for Covid-19 in Chhattisgarh
2020-04-05
RAIPUR: A 16-year old Markaz member from Nagpur tested positive for Covid-19 in Chhattisgarh’s Korba district on Saturday, sending health officials scrambling to find how he caught the virus when he hadn’t travelled to Delhi.

The boy hails from Kamptee area, about 20km from Nagpur, and was staying in Katghora town of Korba for past month, says sources. Now, there are six active Covid-19 cases in Chhattisgarh till Saturday.

“The teenage is a Markaz member, who came to Chhattisgarh from Nagpur in the first week of March. He was in a group of 16 people from Maharashtra. We are tracing his travel details but as of now there is no record of him visiting Delhi in the past month,” said Korba Collector Kiran Kaushal.

Last month, Korba administration learnt that two religious groups, of 14 and 16 members, had come to the state from Maharashtra, which was then already topping the Covid-19 chart. One group arrived on February 25 and the other in the March. The teenage, the only minor, was in the second group.

Since they had come from a corona hotspot, the Korba administration in mid March ordered them to remain in home isolation, say officials. They stayed put in two mosques in Katghora town, said a Korba official.

Last week, when scores of attendees of the Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi turned out Covid-positive and the Centre alerted states, Chhattisgarh administration identified 101 people who had returned from the Delhi congregation in Nizamuddin Markaz. Hence, the Korba administration isolated these two mosques immediately. Though these 30 people were not on the government’s list of 101, they were isolated separately on the possibility of their being primary contacts of Covid-19 suspects from Korba.

All of them were tested for Covid-19 and the minor was the only one positive. He has been admitted to AIIMS-Raipur.

However, Korba collector Kiran Kaushal said that the identified 17 people of Korba, those who had returned from Nizamuddin’s Tablighi Jamaat are still in quarantine centre and their Covid-19 sample test report is awaited.

Talking to TOI, Korba SP Abhishek Meena said, “It is yet to be confirmed if these 30 people came in contact with Korba residents, who have returned from Tablighi Jammat in Delhi. The teenager hails from Kamptee police station area near Nagpur and as he is in quarantine for Covid-19 treatment, the police investigation has to follow medical norms of distancing. Hence, we are yet to ascertain his family background and other information."

The 16-year old is the second corona case from Korba, the SP said, adding that this group had not attended the Tablighi Jamaat in Nizumuddin between march 12 and 15.

