Marriage venue owners stare at losses of up to Rs 80 crore due to lockdown, seek Uttarakhand government's aid
2020-04-22
DEHRADUN: Anticipating a cumulative loss of nearly Rs 80 crore in Dehradun alone due to the lockdown, the joint body of more than 100 wedding halls and resort owners has decided to approach the state government requesting to ease out business operations and help in recovery of losses.


The business owners claim that the cancellations and postponements have not only dent their business but have also affected the livelihood of over 25,000 daily wagers who are associated with the wedding industry in Dehradun.

Talking to TOI, Anil Chaddha, owner of a marriage venue, said “We have decided to approach the state government with suggestions to bring relief to our business as paying salaries to our permanent staff would also become impossible beyond a certain point.”

One of the primary suggestions given by the joint body called “Dehradun Wedding Point Association” includes allowing marriage events for a span of 9 to 10 hours during the day. “We will cater to not more than 20 guests at a time while maintaining the norms of social distancing. With this arrangement we will able to host small gatherings which will help us in recovering some losses and in supporting the livelihood of other daily wagers associated with us,” added Chaddha.

Echoing the same, Sameer, owner of Nine Palms garden, told TOI, “The state government must come to our rescue because losing on events for one complete season will cause unimaginable losses. Our suggestion would be to either completely waive off or at least allow some concession from the 18% GST that we have to pay even during such crisis. In addition to that, municipal taxes have also become a liability. We must be allowed to pay the dues in installments over a period of two years.”

Owners of marriage venue in the city say that these measures are not only in their interest of businesses but will also bring relief to daily wagers who work as waiters, housekeeping staff, flower suppliers, and caterers.

Bhanu Chaudhary, owner of a marriage venue in the city, said “Though we are still supporting our staff with salaries, relief must also come to us soon. Some of the people who have worked for me for past many years call me for help and it is really difficult for me to say no to them. We can support our staff only when we make some earning.”


