Mary Kom breaks quarantine: Boxer attended breakfast hosted by President
2020-03-22
NEW DELHI: Ace boxer MC Mary Kom has landed herself in a soup. It has come to fore that she broke the mandatory 14-day self-quarantine protocol after returning to India from Amman, Jordan on March 13.

Mary, who secured an Olympic quota at the Asia-Oceania Olympic Qualifiers in Amman, returned home and was supposed to be in self-isolation till March27. But the 37-year-old, who is also a Rajya Sabha MP, attended a breakfast get-together hosted by President Ram Nath Kovind at the Rashtrapati Bhavan on March 18.

At the same get-together, BJP’s Dushyant Singh, who had earlier come in contact with Covid-19 positive Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor, was also present. Singh is now in self-quarantine.

In one of the four pictures tweeted by the official Twitter handle of the President on March 18, Mary can be seen standing alongside other MPs.

Mary was quoted by IANS as saying, “I am home since I came back from Jordan. I only attended the President’s event and did not meet Dushyant Singh or shake hands with him.”

Sources told TOI, “The President had invited Mary personally. This was done a long time back. She (Mary) couldn’t say no to the President. She had to honour the commitment as she is a Rajya Sabha MP. It has been an extraordinary set of circumstances. Very difficult to point out who is right and who is wrong.”

India’s chief boxing coach, Santiago Nieva had said on Friday that members of the Indian boxing contingent, who represented the country in Jordan, are all under the mandatory 14-day selfquarantine.

“Earlier, we had planned for 10 days but now it is mandatory 14 days for everyone. So, after 10 days, I will work on a training programme that I will send to the boxers after their self-quarantine period is over. They can get back to practice mode, starting with that. If things remain the same in the country even after two weeks, then we will have to continue with the training programme,” Nieva had said.

Earlier on Friday, Mary said she had “self-isolated herself at her Delhi residence” since returning from Jordan. “I am chilling, doing my exercises, taking care of my fitness and playing with my children after being away from them for almost one month. That’s the best part of this isolation. I am with my family throughout the day without having to think of anything.

“My appeal to everyone is don’t panic, try and stay at home if you can and spend time with your family. In my case, I have felt a sense of freedom with this isolation. I have realised that I am not feeling the stress of a daily schedule right now,” she was quoted by PTI.

