Masjids adopt Covid-19 measures with Friday prayer
2020-03-21
NAGPUR: Masjids across the city curtailed the Friday prayer ‘Jumma’ and Khudba (sermon) duration from 45 minutes to just 10-15 besides shutting waduhkhana (abulation taps), removing carpets and towels in their bid to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19).


Though many turned up in large numbers for the Jumma, many reached masjids only at the start of prayers and left soon after. As per Islamic tenets, offering prayers five times a day is must for Muslims with mouzen giving calls (Azaan) as many times in the day. While rest of the prayers can be offered at home or as per convenience, Jumma congregation is a must mainly because of sermon and weekly advisory (bayaan) which takes over 45 minutes. 

At some places, volunteers requested the Namaazis to maintain social distancing guidelines and not to crowd the premises. 

Several imams included the WHO and government guidelines on hygiene and precautions to be taken to control community outbreak. They also appealed to elderly members aged above 60 and those suffering from cold, cough or fever to pray at home.

Lawyer Mohammad Fazal, who offered Jumma at Ahbab Colony in Anant Nagar, said human life is paramount in Islam. “Coming to masjid is important but community health is equally important,” he said. 

He said Muslims are being convinced to strictly follow the guidelines on the basis of Islamic teachings. “One of the charactersitc of Islam is good hygiene. The sermon also on supporting the government regarding Covid-19 virus. Imam sahib covered the important aspect of stopping rumours. One of the Prophet Mohammad (PBUH) hadith (teaching) is to verify any information coming to you before forwarding it,” he said. 

Fazal said the Ahbab Masjid and others in the city have removed carpets while prayers are offered directly on the floor. “After every prayer, the floor is being sanitized,” he said, adding that people have been advised to use handkerchief for prostrating. 

Mominpura-based Hafiz Sohel Athar said Muslims were already cooperating the government and administration in keeping hotels and shops closed. “ The khudba and bayaan were cut short and it took just 15 minutes to complete the Jumma prayers,” he said. 

He said the Waduhkhanas were shut but open only for emergencies and for travellers. 

“To maintain hygiene, skull caps, carpets and towels have been removed in masjids in our area. Toilets and bathrooms are being regular cleaned,” he said.

Athar said he observed that as the coronavirus has instilled fear among people, more are coming for prayers. “People are coming in large numbers seeking forgiveness from Eshwar (God) and protection from the disease,” he said. 

A cleric from Jaffar Nagar said several police stations had asked them to avoid congregation and they agreed to it. “Everyone agreed that it is for our own safety,” he said. 


