Jaiupur: Masks get facelift as Covid-19 digs in heels for long haul
2020-05-20
JAIPUR: If you think masks constantly remind you of corona, conceal your face and have become an everyday drudgery, the days are numbered even as the pandemic keeps raging around the world. 


Already buyers from overseas markets have reached out-of-work garment exporters with specimens that are going to add another assessory to your outfit, if not the wardrobe. 

Demand for block-printed masks in various colours and designs with motifs and messages, skin-friendly fabric and fashion quotient are growing, say garment exporters in Jaipur. Buyers from the US, Europe and Japan have already begun sourcing from countries like Bangladesh, Indonesia and Vietnam. 

So far, India was not the choice for buyers as the country had banned export of masks in on January 31 fearing shortage in the country. But last Saturday, the Centre lifted the curbs for exporting non-surgical and medical masks after the industry lobbied. “Exporters have been approached by buyers from different countries with specimens. Enquiries have come for 5 lakh pieces in the short period following the lifting of the ban. They want masks made of pure cotton and some of them even asked for organic dying and printing. While it is a low margin business, the volume is humongous. For many of us, it can certainly give us a start while we keep our fingers crossed for our core business,” said Naveen Advani, vice-president of Garment Exporters Association of Rajasthan.

Designer masks have already found a market in the country. One can buy them online and they come in various styles and colours. But Saurav Gupta, a garment manufacturer in Sitapura, who has already supplied 3 lakh masks said masks matching with kurtas is beginning to be a new trend.

“We make masks in many colours and designs. But masks matching with kurtas, like in case of dupattas, are beginning to gain traction. Buying houses and big retailers in India are now adding masks to their order of kurtas. While transactional volume is very marginal, certainly it is a trend that Covid-19 has forced on us,” added Gupta.

Medical masks have better fabric density to protect virus which are 3mm in size but they cannot be washed and reused. In case of the non-medical or surgical masks, which can be reused after a wash, the fabric is of lower density but can provide a fair level of protection if not fully from the virus. Gupta said it is not only masks, but aam aadmi PPEs are going to be a new trend. 

PPEs are used by medical and health professionals but they also be used by people when they go out. “In recent weeks, we have started making PPEs for common man who can wear it when they go out. Generally, the virus gets stuck in the clothes and we don’t wash them every time we come back home. In this situation, comfortable wearable PPEs, in sizes of kurtas, can be used. They also don’t look out of place when you wear them,” added Gupta.

