Delhi: Mask, Covid app must for bus travel?
2020-05-13
NEW DELHI: Wearing a mask and having the Aarogya Setu app on your phone might become mandatory for travelling in buses, which are likely to run at 50% capacity to ensure social distancing. Delhi government is working on a standard operating procedure (SOP) for buses and para-transit vehicles to resume public transport.

“Sanitisation and social distancing will be the two terms around preparation of the SOP. For resumption of taxi and autorickshaw services, the directions of the central government will be followed,” said a Delhi government official.

The government has finalised that there will be no standing passengers in any Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) or cluster scheme bus. After each trip, the bus will be thoroughly sanitised.

“Discussions are still on regarding seating arrangements. Ideally, there should be 50% occupancy with one person in every alternate seat on far corners. However, that would mean the requirement of a large number of buses, particularly during peak hours. We are yet to zero in on the number of passengers per bus,” the official said.

An awareness campaign would be carried out for staff deployed in buses and at depots as well as passengers on the protocol for sanitisation, social distancing and other dos and don’ts. To minimise physical contact, use of common mobility card would be encouraged for payment of fares. However, cash payment from passengers who don’t have smart cards won’t be refused.

It is also likely that route rationalisation would be implemented to cater to the high demand areas and according to peak and non-peak hours. “The entire DTC and cluster scheme fleet will operate during peak hours. People waiting at queue shelters will be informed about the next bus in case there isn’t enough space,” he said.

Other modes of para-transit vehicles, such as Gramin Seva, Phat Phat Seva, Eco-Friendly Seva, etc might not be allowed to operate soon. “We feel that any form of shared mobility should be discouraged at this point of time as such operators have the tendency to overload and there is no way to keep a check on them,” said the official. “Cabs and autorickshaws are preferable as they are hired by one or two passengers for point-to-point travel,” he added.

The final SOP or guidelines would be issued only after directions from the Centre and Delhi government.

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said that it was in a state of readiness even during the lockdown. It would commence services as soon as it was directed by the government. It would follow all guidelines stipulated by the government regarding resumption of its services.


