Coronavirus outbreak: Masks, sanitizers in short supply in Patna
2020-03-14
PATNA: There is acute shortage of masks and sanitizers in the city market following steep rise in their demand in view of coronavirus (Covid-19). Soaps and different brands of handwash are also in high demand.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

There is also shortage of N95 masks and alcohol-based sanitizers. Diwakar Prasad, owner of a chemist shop near Gola Road, said people are buying masks and hand sanitizers in large numbers. “Taking precautions is all right, but stocking products at home is not advisable,” he said and added that there has been 80% rise in the demand of self-hygiene products. “The alcohol-based sanitizers at my shop are out of stock. Besides, there are very few N95 masks left in stock,” Prasad said.

Malls and supermarkets are also finding it difficult to meet the increasing demands of hand sanitizers. In addition, soaps, handwash, mosquito repellent cream, wipes, roll-ons, coils, mats, vaporisers and sprays are in high demand following the rumours about the spread of Covid-19.

Ghanshyam, a sales executive in a mall on Boring Road, said, “Earlier, people in the city didn’t take the virus seriously, but after seeing so many positive cases in several parts of the country, they have become conscious. No wonder, we are facing shortage of self-hygiene products, especially hand sanitizers, soaps and handwash.”

Wholesalers also made similar claims about the shortage of sanitizers and other products “There has been a higher demand of personal care products in the last fortnight. Earlier, people asked for simple sanitizers but now they look for alcohol-based ones,” said Kumud Sao, a wholesaler of Kadamkuan.

Residents also feel scarcity of masks and hand sanitizers following the rise in Covid-19 cases in the country. “Last night I went to buy masks for my family and myself, but the seller offered me a very low quality mask at a very high price. The government should provide sufficient numbers of self-hygiene products in every city,” said Sanjay Kumar of Lohanipur.


