Coronavirus scare: Mass gatherings a big no to contain contagion in Pune
2020-03-07
PUNE: Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar on Friday advised people against holding any mass gatherings, while directing district collectors not to grant permission for such events in the wake of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) scare.


“We have also told hotel and lodge owners to inform us if any foreign national staying at their establishments presents flu-like symptoms,“ Mhaisekar said.

 
 

While the state has not reported any confirmed coronavirus case so far, 31 people have tested positive for the contagion in different parts of the country.

When contacted, Pune district collector Naval Kishore Ram said people should avoid crowded places as far as possible. “I will not give any permissions to clubs or for events for mass gatherings, even for Holi celebrations,” he told TOI, while adding that he had not received any requests for mass celebrations or gatherings so far. 

“Even if such a request is sought, it will be rejected as a part of the precautionary measure in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak,” he said, advising people to celebrate the festival of colours with family members only, instead of venturing out to crowded locations.

Earlier, the state government had advised people against Holi celebrations with water at crowded places. “The virus may survive little longer in wet environment so it is advisable to avoid Holi events with water, especially at crowded places,’’ divisional commissioner Mhaisekar said. 

He said 10 international flights were arriving at the Pune airport every week and they were keeping a close watch on the flyers. 

Both the divisional commissioner and Pune collector assured that the administration was fully prepared to handle any situation, while urging people not to spread any rumours. 

People seeking any information regarding the contagion can call on toll free number 104, besides reaching out to the control room on 020-26127394, which is operational between 8am and 10pm.

