Mass screening to check spread of coronavirus starts from Sinhagad Road, Manjari Budruk
2020-03-12
PUNE: Health officials on Wednesday conducted mass screening of citizens living in and around a housing society on Sinhagad Road and in Manjari Budruk, where a couple, their daughter and a cab driver tested positive for the novel coronavirus live.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

At least 610 households in and around the housing society on Sinhagad Road were covered during the first day of the mass screening from 8am to 2pm. The screening is a part of the cluster containment strategy the health officials adopted to check the spread of novel coronavirus (Covid-19) in the community. 

The strategy entails screening of people living within a 3km radius of any housing society where an infected person lives.“The cluster containment strategy is being implemented on Sinhagad Road and also in Manjari Budruk near Hadapsar. The couple and their daughter, who tested positive for the Covid-19 infection, live in a housing society on Sinhagad Road,” a state health official said.

“The private cab driver, who ferried the couple and their daughter from Mumbai to Pune, also tested positive for the contagion. He lives in a housing society in Manjari Budruk. We have also started screening people living in and around the society where the cab driver lives,” he said.

Agra was the first city in India to implement the strategy after six residents contracted the infection from their relative who had returned from Italy. The five positive cases of Covid-19 in Pune — four travellers and a private cab driver — in two days underscored the need to curb the spread of the virus within the community as well.

Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday called upon states to adopt the cluster containment strategy, making district collectors more accountable, and laid emphasis on contact tracing and strengthening (district) surveillance teams to avoid widespread community transmission.

“In the cluster containment approach, we immediately start checking and sensitising every household within the 3km radius of the house of an infected person and also those who have come in contact with the affected to prevent the community spread of the virus. We will implement the strategy in the city through the Pune Municipal Corporation’s (PMC) health officials,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate said.


