May extend lockdown, says health minister; Maharashtra sees 67 new cases, toll 26
2020-04-04
MUMBAI: On a day 67 Covid -19 cases were reported in the state, of which 80% or 53 cases were from the Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) and 43 from within the city itself, health minister Rajesh Tope said the nationwide lockdown, which ends on April 14, may be extended in some parts of Maharashtra, especially in cities like Mumbai where the number of cases is high. Tope said this was his personal opinion.


The state also confirmed six deaths—four from the Mumbai metropolitan region, taking the toll to 26. It has also emerged that the 56-year-old from Dharavi who died on Wednesday had come in contact with a bunch that had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi.

He said the decision would take into account the number of cases in the state and select cities at that time. “Lockdown in cities like Mumbai may not be lifted completely on April 14. It may be extended by a few weeks,” he noted. 

The state on Friday recorded six deaths, taking the toll to 26. The state tally reached 490 cases, of which over 50% cases (278) are from Mumbai alone.

The state’s tally has more than doubled in the past four days. The number of positive cases on March 30 were 220, with 10 deaths.

Of six new deaths reported by the state on Friday, four were from MMR and one each from Pune and Jalgaon. Of these six deaths, four were earlier reported by TOI. The ones not reported were one from Jalgaon and one from Badlapur.

Eleven CISF personnel posted at Mumbai airport have tested positive. While 5 tested positive on Thursday and are at Kasturba Hospital, 6 among those quarantined at MGM hospital in Kamothe tested positive on Friday. 

It has also emerged that the 56-year-old from Dharavi claimed by Covid-19 on Wednesday had come in contact with a bunch of people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi in mid-March. Five women who arrived in the city on March 22 from the markaz had stayed in his flat and he had interacted with them, said authorities.

The Jalgaon patient who died on Friday was a 63-year-old man who was in contact with other positive patients in Jalgaon. He was a diabetic, had hypertension and had been operated for angioplasty a month ago. He succumbed at a government hospital. 

The death reported from Badlapur was of a woman admitted in a private hospital. She had been bedridden for a while with complications like hypertension and a fractured spine; she did not have any travel history.

Among other deaths reported by the state on Friday was that of a 68-year-old Vasai man with no travel history, who died at a private hospital in Nalasopara on Thursday. He was admitted to a private clinic on March 29 after he complained of chest pain. Residents of the building where he lived have been home-quarantined and the area sealed off. The other deaths previously reported by TOI were of a 62-year-old Saki Naka man who died at home on Tuesday. The man had a history of cough, fever and gastritis. Another death was of a 65-year-old Malwani resident who had a history of kidney problems. He passed away at the Bal Thackeray Trauma Care Hospital in Jogeshwari.

Mumbai on Friday reported 43 cases, which included 14 cases tested positive in the metropolis between March 24 and 30. 

A young couple from MHB colony in Gorai, Borivli, tested positive on Friday, triggering panic in the colony housing nearly 80 families. The wife showed symptoms of Covid-19, after which she underwent a series of tests at a private clinic. The civic authorities sent her and the husband to Bhabha hospital, said former corporator Shivanand Shetty. The area has been sealed off.

Local residents said the state administration’s move to relocate over 30 families from Mahul, near Chembur, to a transit camp near MHB colony may have aggravated the problem for the locals. “There was no need for authorities to relocate 30 families,” said MNS functionary Prasad Kulapkar and Shetty.

A family of three, including a child, in Charkop were found to be suspects. A BEST employee has been detected positive, ringing alarm bells for the undertaking, and officials have stepped up precautionary measures especially for 5,500 drivers and conductors who ferry essential services staffers daily. The employee who was found positive works as a foreman in the electricity supply division of BEST in the island city.

Around 10 new cases were detected from outside of Mumbai. After a 66-year-old man from Kalyan was found positive, the health team from KDMC on Friday sent his five family members, including a six-months-old grandson and another six-year-old grandson, to a private hospital in Mumbai for a test. The other three members were his wife, son and daughter-in-law.

Sources said the 66-year-old man did not have any travel history but had been to his village in Jalgaon, from where he had returned to Kalyan on March 6. 

Health minister Rajesh Tope said so far, over nine lakh people in the state have been surveyed for symptoms under the state government’s cluster containment action plan.

Meanwhile, home minister Anil Deshmukh on Friday said vehicles found plying on the roads without any reason will be seized. “The government has repeatedly appealed to the public not to be be on the streets without any reason. If they do not listen, we have no choice left,” said Deshmukh.

