Coronavirus in West Bengal: MCH starts drawing up corona hospital plan
2020-03-24
KOLKATA: With the state government asking the Medical College Hospital, Kolkata (MCHK) authority about the feasibility of converting the entire institute as the centre for isolating Covid-19 suspected patients and also treating the confirmed cases, the hospital administration has started taking steps to make it ready for the purpose.


“We have not received any letter yet. But we have been told verbally to work on it. Therefore, we have started drawing up a plan on how to relocate the patients who are currently getting treated in different departments,” said an official at the state-run hospital located on College Street.

The hospital currently has 2,200 beds, that includes 300 beds at the newly constructed superspecialty building that has not been utilized yet. MCHK principal Manjushree Ray had suggested during CM Mamata Banerjee’s meeting with government and private hospitals in Nabanna a few days ago that the 300 unutilised beds could be used during this crisis.

But with the three patients testing positive for Covid-19 on Sunday and the death on Monday, health department officials apprehend the crisis to hit the roof in the days ahead. The ID Hospital in Beliaghata is also running out of beds due to the rush.

“The number of confirmed cases so far has not reached the double digit. But imagine the number of people who had come in direct contact with this seven. Ideally, instead of keeping them at quarantine centres, these high-risk category people should be kept under hospital isolation and get their swab samples tested. That is why the need for a totally dedicated hospital for the purpose,” said a health department official.

Out of the 40-odd departments in MCHK, about 30 admit patients (who need hospital treatment) from its OPD in addition to the patients from the emergency wing. The rest of the departments like pathology, anatomy and forensic do not have much to do directly with patients.

“We have asked all department heads to draw up the number of patients admitted in their respective wards and also prepare a separate list of patients who can be kept under home care for now,” said another administrator at MCHK. “We are also working out with other hospitals on how many patients we could shift to their facilities. . Things will take a proper shape in the next three days,” he added. 

Sources said the number of operational beds — 1,900 — remain mostly occupied with departments like medicine being the most busy one. “Luckily, there has been a dip in patient rush for about a week now. The occupancy currently will be about 70%,” said an official.

