MCH to soon become Covid treatment centre
2020-03-23
Kochi: District administration is on an effort to convert Government Medical College, Ernakulam, into Covid-19 treatment centre, an exclusive and first-of-its-kind facility in the state for the treatment of the disease. Around 400 beds will be made available in the hospital for the purpose.

Patients who have already been admitted to the hospital with other ailments will be shifted to other hospitals in the district. “We will be convening an urgent meeting to chalk out the plan in this regard on Monday morning,” said medical college superintendent Dr Geetha Nair. Apart from the Covid-19 treatment centre, emergency outpatient services and dialysis centre only will function from the medical college.

Authorities have identified Ernakulam General Hospital, Mattancherry taluk hospital, Indira Gandhi Cooperative Hospital and some other taluk hospitals for shifting the patients. “The chances of increasing the number of Covid-19 positive cases and suspected cases are going up. Due to the proximity of airport and certain other features, patients from other districts also are being admitted to the medical college. That’s why it was decided to set up such a centre,” said National Health Mission district programme manager Dr Mathew Numbeli. “There are already some Covid-19 positive cases admitted to the medical college. They will have to avail the facilities like CT scan, x-ray, laboratory, cath lab, etc. This creates problems. Once the centre is converted into a Covid-19 treatment centre, the treatment of the patients can be streamlined,” Numbeli said.

The hospitals like Indira Gandhi Cooperative hospital have facilities on par with a medical college to a certain extent. “Moreover, some patients having complexities and require advanced treatment will be shifted to a couple of private hospitals. Most of such cases are reported from the paediatrics department. There are certain schemes which help cover the cost and so there won’t be need of additional funds for the treatment at the private hospitals. The private hospital authorities have also promised to offer free treatment to some patients. More private hospitals have promised to offer their facilities. We are considering their offer too,” Numbeli said.

Officials with Ernakulam general hospital said they have started preparations for the purpose. “We have a well-equipped gynaecology and paediatrics department. So, patients in these departments can be shifted to general hospital,” said hospital superintendent Dr Anitha.

As of now, the medical college has around 500 beds, including the intensive care units. There are 30 beds dedicated for isolation facility for Covid-19 cases. The new facility will also help imparting training to more doctors, nursing staff, paramedical staff and others.


