Kolkata: MCH admits 4 positive Covid-19 patients on 1st day as tertiary facility
2020-05-08
KOLKATA: Medical College Hospital (MCH) Kolkata took in four Covid-19 positive patients on Wednesday, the first day of its operation as a full-fledged tertiary-level facility for Covid-19. The hospital also got 18 new ventilator machines on Wednesday. These will be used to treat patients in need of intensive care facilities.

As many as 29 Covid-19 suspects have been admitted to the hospital. Their swab samples were sent for confirmatory tests. Earlier, the hospital would shift confirmed patients to Covid-19 designated hospitals. 

“Our chief minister has chosen this hospital as the tertiary-level hospital for Covid-19 treatment. All departmental heads will be involved, along with junior doctors, in treating Covid patients,” said Nirmal Maji, chairperson, Rogi Kalyan Samity at MCH. 

On Wednesday, the hospital held an orientation programme on managing Covid patients for all senior faculty members and junior doctors. The hospital brought in tropical medicine specialist at School of Tropical Medicine Bibhuti Saha, critical care specialist Sugata Dasgupta of RG Kar Medical College and infectious disease specialist Yogiraj Rayfrom ID Hospital, Beliaghata for the programme. 

“Director of medical education Debasis Bhattacharyya and college principal Manjshree Banerjee, too, were present. It was part of our initiative to encourage the doctors who will be taking care of Covid patients,” said Maji. 

All the four Covid-19 patients have been admitted to the 200-bed super-speciality building that includes 25 CCU beds. The suspected cases or SARI patients are being admitted to the Green Building, where 150 beds have been reserved for an isolation ward. With 150 beds at the Eden Ward and 50 beds at the mother and child ward being part of the Covid hospital, sources said these could be used exclusively to treat pregnant women, many of who are turning positive during delivery. But no decision has been taken yet. As many as 20 more beds in the surgical ward will be part of the Covid facility. “The hospital has 2,200 beds. So we can raise the number of beds as and when required,” said a source in the hospital.

On Wednesday, few OPD patients turned up. The hospital will stop OPD services on Thursday. But the emergency wing will continue to tend to critical patients. 


