MCH turned to a Covid-19 hosp
2020-03-26
Kozhikode: District medical officer Dr V Jayashree here on Wednesday informed that Medical College Hospital block has been converted to a Covid-19 hospital till it issues further orders.

DMO said that the Kozhikode Government Medical College hospital authorities have made arrangements to streamline its Outpatient services. She said that Kozhikode Beach general hospital will render all the services except gynaecology and Paediatric departments. The gynaecology and paediatric service will be available at the Kottaparamba Women and Children hospital.

DMO said that except those suffering from Covid-19 suspected symptoms, all other can approach the nearby taluk hospitals and Community Health Centres to avail treatment for all other types of ailments. DMO informed that the health department has extended the OP consultation time at the CHCs and Primary health Centres up to 6pm. DMO said that general hospitals and taluk hospitals in Kozhikode will provide round-the-clock treatment. DMO also informed that the health department is actively considering a proposal to introduce in-patient treatment facility at the community health centres.

Azhiyur grama panchayat on the day decided to launch telemedicine facility to people kept under home quarantine. A decision pertaining to it was taken at a meeting chaired by Azhiyur grama panchayat president P V Vijayan with the medical shop owners.

Those who have been in home quarantine and are showing symptoms of Covid-19 can contact the medical officer over phone. The medical officer will prescribe the required medicine over WhatsApp. The medical shop owner on getting medicine prescription will conduct door-to-door delivery of medicine after cross checking the details with the medical officer.

Azhiyur grama panchayat also conducted special drive in the market to ensure essential groceries to public and to avoid exorbitant price charge by the traders. Kozhikode corporation special squad also conducted inspections covering major markets in its limits to eliminate incidents of over pricing by traders and vendors for fruits and vegetables.


