Med stores inflate N95 mask price amidst corona scare
2020-03-12
Visakhapatnam: Even as health experts raise alerts against the efficacy of N95 face masks to guard against coronavirus, a pharmacy store under a well-known chain with several outlets in the state was found selling N95 masks at Rs 150 per mask against its maximum retail price (MRP) of Rs 25 per piece. The MRP on a pack of 20 masks was marked at Rs 500.

With the rise in demand, most pharmacies in the city have run out of stock of N95 and surgical masks. 

A private employee in the city, V Bhavani Shankar, purchased two N95 masks from the pharmacy outlet in MVP Colony on Tuesday. “I was shocked when they charged Rs 300 for two masks from a pack of 20 though it should be Rs 50 for two masks. The manufacturing date and MRP have been blacked out. I took an empty 20-pack box and removed the ink, which revealed the pack originally costs Rs 500. When I questioned the pharmacist for charging such a high price over MRP, he justified it by stating that local retailers and other stores are charging even higher.”

When TOI inquired at the Siripuram outlet of the pharmacy chain, the pharmacist said, “After two days, stocks may arrive and each mask is priced at Rs 150 as they are of high quality.” 

Inquiries at another pharmacy chain revealed that though face masks were out of stock, N95 were being sold at Rs 25 per piece while surgical masks were even cheaper but a standalone medical store at Lawson’s Bay Colony said the masks would cost between Rs 200-Rs 250 but were currently out of stock.

Speaking to TOI, medical superintendent of Government Hospital for Chest and Communicable Diseases (GHCCD), Dr KVV Vijaykumar said, “There is no high and low quality N95 mask even if packaging may differ. Escalating the price to this extent is unfair when there is not a single COVID-19 case in the city, nor any requirement for the public to wear it. A three-layer surgical mask is enough for those suffering from cough and cold.”

Dr PV Sudhakar, principal of Andhra Medical College said, “N95, which should not be priced more than Rs 20-Rs 30, is recommended only for hospital staff and health workers. Those with asthma, pregnancy or cardiac problems should avoid wearing these masks unnecessarily. Drug inspectors should take action against pharmacies for over-charging.”


