Med colleges to be Covid hospitals: CM
2020-03-27
Bhopal: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Thursday thanked Prime Minister Narendra Modi for announcing relief package for corona-affected people and appealed everyone to take precautions to prevent the outbreak of Covid-19. 

The chief minister said, social distancing and supply chain will be strictly monitored, and government will help all those who are staying outside the state.

"The state government has made necessary arrangements to check coronavirus spread making arrangements to provide immediate medical assistance," said Chouhan after a review meeting, on Thursday. 

He said medical colleges and other hospitals of the private sector will function as specific hospitals in the state to control Covid-19. Arrangements have been made for essential medicines, masks, PPE kits as well as ventilators, he said. 

The chief minister also instructed strict monitoring to follow the instructions of isolation. He said people should cooperate in keeping themselves healthy. He also said that there has been information about some citizens returning from abroad. Efforts were being made to eliminate the possibility of contamination of their family. 

The chief minister also reviewed preparations for Rabi procurement, keeping in view the Coronavirus pandemic. He also discussed possible steps to be taken for the procurement. 

"Government will ensure necessary measures for the safety of farmers’ health and their interest. A decision will be taken soon to decide the dates of the procurement,” he said.

Guv asks varsities to help students from out of state: Meanwhile, governor Lalji Tandon has directed all the vice chancellors to provide necessary help to the students, pursuing studies outside their home towns keeping in view the Corona virus pandemic. He said that university administration should get in touch with all the students through every mean of communication and help students in making arrangement for food and essential commodities. He said that arrangements should be made in a way that needy students contact them for help.

The governor said that the IT cell of the universities should train and inspire students to work from home. Engage them in information, education and communication activities to handle the corona crisis.


