Med practitioners designated as Covid-19 care consultants
2020-05-05
Vadodara: The Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) on Monday designated medical practitioners including members of both allopathic and AYUSH councils as Covid care consultants who will be advised to start home-based Covid care if they were contacted by any patient with suspected symptoms. 

Officials said they will have to provide details in a prescribed format to the surveillance officer of the civic body and follow the guidelines prescribed for such care. The medical practitioners will be provided online training this week.

Meanwhile, three more persons died and 35 tested positive for Covid-19, taking the total number of deaths to 28 and cases in the district to 421.

VMC officials said that reports of 228 tests were available since Sunday evening. Among the new cases, the north and the east zone recorded the highest numbers.

A bulk of the cases earlier were reported only from the north zone where Nagarwada, the worst-affected area was located. Now, cases are being reported from the east and south zone too. North zone registered 15 new cases, followed by east zone with 12 cases and then the south zone with eight cases. 

In south and east zones areas like Panigate, Wadi, Ajwa Road and Waghodiya Road have been affected. Wadi and Panigate areas, in particular, are witnessing a large number of cases.

The positive cases included a final-year lady resident doctor of the SSG Hospital. She, however, was not on Covid-19 duties and may have caught the infection due to some other reason.

The deceased include Sarfaraz Qureshi (38), a resident of Jubelibaug, Kanti Patel (65) from Navapura and Shaukat Saiyed (70 ) of Nagarwada.

Sources said that Saiyed had died while being brought to the hospital and his sample was collected for testing later. While he had died on Sunday, he tested positive on Monday.

Condition of 233 patients is stable, eight are on oxygen and five on BiPAP or ventilator machines. As many as 540 remained home quarantine.


