Medical team at forefront of fight against the coronavirus
2020-03-23
MUMBAI: A team of 137 doctors which has been at the forefront for the last 20 days to welcome thousands of passengers arriving from Covid-19-affected countries found Sunday a bit relaxing as only two flights landed at the city airport.


This team of doctors has been dealing with passengers flying into the country, including those who could possibly be affected.

These doctors, most of them interns from the civic-run Sion, Nair and KEM hospitals, had to convince their family members and relatives who were concerned about their safety. They have been posted on duty at the airport to examine every passenger arriving at the airport.

BMC’s deputy executive health officer Dr Santosh Revankar was heading the team of doctors and 24 counsellors who deployed at the airport in three shifts.

Dr Revankar said that the relatives of the interns as well as several of his own friends and acquaintances kept calling him to enquire about the situation prevailing at the airport. “Even my family members would keep calling to ask about messages circulating on WhatsApp. I only advised them to avoid reading such messages or watching videos as these only end up creating unnecessary panic.”

The medical team had a tough time over the last week especially as some unscheduled flights also landed at the city airport, adding their workload, said Dr Revankar. He added, “But we ensured passengers that their screening would be done between within 25 seconds to ensure minimum waiting period. Sometimes, multiple flights landed one after another, thereby increasing sudden load at the screening counters.”

Although they suggested that passenge give their details so that it can be easily available with the doctor. But many labourers returning from the Middle East had a difficult time filling up forms after which airport operators asked to arrange few men for assistance.

After medical clearance, the passengers were counselled. Suspect cases were immediately shift them to Kasturba Hospital. Senior citizens were taken to Seven Hills Hospital for quarantine and the rest were recommended self-quarantine.

Revankar said, “Sometimes we didn’t get proper sleep. We were so occupied with the work, there was no fear in our mind. What guided and inspired, “’Ours is not to question why, ours is to do and die’.”

