Medicos struggling to stay fit while treating Covid-19 patients
2020-04-19
Nagpur: Doctors and health workers in the Covid-19 isolation wards are not only shouldering the important responsibility of treating the patients but are also dealing with challenges to keep themselves fit and free from infection. 

Mostly resident doctors, and those under 45 years of age, are given responsibility to take care of Covid-19 patients. TOI spoke to such health workers in Nagpur, Yavatmal and Akola, places having more than 10 Covid-19 patients admitted in government hospitals there. 

“PPE kits are not the problem, at least in the isolation wards. We are getting proper kits while working in Covid-19 wards. But wearing the entire protective gear continuously for four hours is tough,” said a resident doctor from GMCH. 

Earlier, these doctors and nurses working in Covid-19 wards had six hours shift, which was reduced to four hours recently. Currently, 26 Covid-19 positive patients are admitted at GMCH. 

More teams of doctors are now being engaged in the Covid-19 ward. Each team works here for 14 days, after which they get a break and duties in other wards. During this 14-days, doctors have to quarantine themselves in the hostel rooms or at homes. 

Many doctors in Nagpur GMCH and IGGMCH told TOI that they avoid mixing up with their family members and stay in separate rooms. They also have their lunch and dinner separately. 

According to a doctor from Yavatmal GMCH, wearing and removing personal protective equipment (PPE) kits is also a task. “Right from goggles to face shields, gloves, hair covers and masks, everything is to be worn and removed as per protocol. We can’t leave the ward for any personal work during the four-hour duty. If there is emergency, we have to first arrange a replacement,” she said.

Nurses and support staff, including sanitary workers have their own issues. “Doctors get proper PPE gear but not all nurses and support staff. Many of us get only masks and hand gloves,” said a nurse from Yavatmal. 

One nurse working in Yavatmal GMCH isolation ward has already developed symptoms and was tested negative. Health workers in GMCH get themselves tested on a regular basis.

“In case we develop symptoms, testing is the only option. But there is no protocol to test every doctor or nurse working in Covid-19 ward. In fact it should be there,” said another resident from Nagpur. 

Doctors in Nagpur will get proper face shields soon.


