Coronavirus scare: Medical tourist arrivals to Kochi drop by almost 75 %
2020-03-12
KOCHI: Coronavirus has hit medical tourism to the city, with most of the hospitals reporting 75-80% drop in arrival of foreign patients. Most of the hospitals said advance bookings have stopped as uncertainty looms over the spread of Covid-19 globally and even those who are in Kochi now for treatment are leaving mid-way. The patients made the decision after their embassies directed them to return home, said hospital managements.


“We have not received any new patient in the past 15 days. Already, medical tourism to the city has dropped by 80%. Since Monday, after more Covid-19 cases were detected in Kerala, even those who are here are anxious,” said Dr Sunny Orathel, medical superintendent, Rajagiri Hospital.

 
 
Most of the hospitals receive most of their foreign patients from Gulf countries, especially Dubai and Oman. They also have few patients from South East Asia, Africa and Europe. Also, persons of Indian origins (PIOs) plan treatment when they come for holidays during the months of July to September. But this season, even advance bookings from PIOs have dipped.

“It seems everyone has adopted a wait and watch approach. Foreigners are reluctant to come to our hospitals in the prevailing situation,” said VPS Lakeshore CEO SK Abdulla.

Since Monday, there has been a drop even in the number of patients who come for executive medical check-up offered by major hospitals. From an average 10 foreigners and 20-25 locals undergoing the medical check-up on a normal day, the numbers have dipped to 1-2 foreigners and 2- 3 locals this week.

This is critical as medical tourism accounts for 25-30% of the earnings for most of the hospitals. “There is a significant fall in arrivals from foreign countries but the arrival of local patients has grown over the period. This is a trend across Kerala and is mainly due to the travel restrictions amidst corona scare. People now prefer to postpone elective procedures,” said Dr Harish Pillai, CEO, Aster Hospitals and Clinics, India.

Though the first Covid-19 case was first detected in December 31, 2019, in Wuhan, its impact is being felt by the hospitals here only now. “Travel has been hit as flights have reduced operations. Now, the impact is being felt and it is very big,” said Dr Sanjeev Singh, medical superintendent, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences.

“People are not willing to travel unless it is a medical emergency. Most of these cases are elective procedures. Hence, many are postponing the procedure,” added Dr Singh.

Incidentally, those who have made advance payments are not keen to postpone despite many hospitals making the offer. This is mainly because they fear that the wait will be too long. Most of the hospitals work through medical agents abroad and patients have to make full payments on booking. Those who approach the hospital directly, have to pay about 50% advance. Now, the hospitals will have to return the money of those who cancel bookings.

Incidentally, even ayurveda hospitals are badly hit. “After floods and Nipah, medical tourism flourished here. But now, again, we are hit. Patients who have been seeking treatment have left midway and the few who are here are anxious. We have lost Rs 1 crore in cancellation in less than a week,” said Dr Anvar AM, chief physician, Raha Ayurveda Hospital.

