‘Medical board will take call on ending quarantine’
2020-02-12
Thiruvananthapuram: Though the state is gradually overcoming the coronavirus threat, the health department is continuing the quarantine of people who arrived from virus-affected countries to the state. At present, 3,447 persons are under observation in Kerala. 

The three positive cases reported from the state are stable. A medical board, comprising experts from the Union health ministry, will take a decision on ending the quarantine of the two patients who tested negative. 

“Since positive cases in the country were reported only from Kerala, the Union health ministry must take a decision on when and how to end the quarantine of positive cases. The NIV results also have to come before arriving at a conclusion that they are healthy and the ilness has been cured,” said Dr Amar Fettle, state nodal officer of public health emergency. 

Dr Fettle said that the state health department will not be taking a decision on discharging them now since the concurrence has to come from the Union ministry. The Union ministry is likely to constitute a team of experts to analyze the condition of all three positive cases. 

Of the 3,447 persons kept under observation, only 27 people are in hospitals. Of the 380 samples sent for testing at the National Institute of Virology in Pune, 344 were negative.

One more person admitted to Kozhikode hospital: A person who arrived from Malaysia has been admitted to Kozhikode Government Beach Hospital coronavirus isolation ward on Tuesday.

The person approached the beach hospital with throat infection and cough. Hospital authorities have sent the swab sample collected from the admitted person to NIV laboratory at Alappuzha government medical college hospital. At present, two people have been kept under observation in the isolation ward. Hospital authorities also discharged two persons on the same day. 

According to health department officials, as many as 398 people who arrived in the district from coronavirus-hit countries till Tuesday, remain in isolation at their homes and at the hospital in the district. This includes two people who arrived in the district on Tuesday. Out of the 398 arrivals, 396 of them have been kept under home quarantine by the health department.

District medical officer Dr V Jayashree also held a video conference and assessed the measures taken against coronavirus at government hospitals and community health centres in the district.

Two arrested for spreading fake news: Two more people have been arrested in Thrissur for spreading fake news about coronavirus infection. Police arrested Pazhancheri veetil Rejil (30) and Poluveetil Athul (22) of Engandiyoor near Thrissur. A total of 16 people have been arrested for spreading fake news about the virus, said officials.

 As per the latest data, 233 people are under home quarantine and 8 are admitted at Thrissur Medical college hospital, General hospital and Chalakudy taluk hospital.


