After quarantine, medicos to be monitored for 14 days
2020-02-20
BAREILLY: The district health department will monitor two medical students who were kept in an isolation ward in Manesar after they were evacuated from China. Following the spread of novel coronavirus (nCov-2019), New Delhi had evacuated students stuck in China, and afterwards quarantined them for possibility of affliction by the deadly disease at the army base camp in Manesar near Gurgram. 


Additional chief medical officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “Both students from Bareilly who were evacuated from China and kept in isolation, have tested negative for nCov-2019 and their condition is stable. But, we’ve been asked to monitor them for a few more days as a precautionary measure.”

District epidemiologist Dr Meesam Abbas said, “Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) unit of Bareilly will monitor them for the next 14 days. If any symptoms appear, samples will be collected and sent to a Lucknow laboratory for tests.”

According to officials, the two students are expected to return to Bareilly by Wednesday night. Father of one of the students told TOI, “My 22-year-old son is a third year MBBS student at a college in Siyan, China. He arrived in India on February 1, and was discharged now after 18 days. We are waiting for the situation in China to normalize before he can return to continue his studies.”

Meanwhile, the sample of a five-year-old girl who caught fever after returning from Thailand, tested negative for nCov-2019 on Wednesday. The child was among seven people who had travelled to Thailand last month and are being monitored by the health department. The girl’s sample was taken on Tuesday after she had fever. 

In Bareilly, health department has collected samples of five suspected cases for nCov-2019. All of them have tested negative.

The incubation period of the virus begins from the date of arrival to India. The health team takes daily updates to check if any symptom has appeared, including fever, cough, difficulty in breathing, chest pain, pneumonia and rapid heartbeat.


