Bihar: Paramedics face wrath of coronavirus suspects
2020-04-07
PATNA: Apart from battling the coronavirus, healthcare professionals in the state are having to face the wrath of suspected patients who are refusing to follow mandatory quarantine orders.


Two youths got into a verbal duel with doctors and paramedics at the Saharsa sadar hospital on Monday demanding that they be released from the isolation facility as they do not have the symptoms.

Saharsa SDPO Prabhakar Tiwari along with town police station SHO R K Singh had to intervene to bring the situation under control before it escalated. “Those trying to create a scene at the isolation ward were asked to follow the diktats of the doctors attending to them. They were pressuring the doctors to release them despite the fact that their reports are still awaited,” SDPO Tiwari said.

This is not an isolated case. Last Saturday, a group of people created ruckus at an isolation centre in Siwan district ransacking the quarantine centre at government middle school, Rajpur. An FIR was lodged against four of the detainees on Sunday under the National Disaster Management Act and other sections of IPC.

Raghunathpur BDO Santosh Kumar Mishra said, “The detainees at the isolation centre were demanding their immediate release from the facility as medical test reports declared them negative.”

He added: “The doctors and paramedical staff tried to convince them that they will be released after the completion of the 14-day quarantine period, which they refused and turned violent.”

Altogether 78 migrant labourers were kept at the facility and provided food and lodging free of cost.

“The matter turned for the worse when they started hurling abuses at the doctors and para-medical staff. The situation would have taken an ugly turn had the administrative and police officials not timely intervened,” an eyewitness said.

The eyewitness, who did not wish to be named, claimed that the furniture and utensils in the school were badly damaged by the protesters, who also shouted slogans against the BDO.

Earlier, a similar incident was reported from Munger district where coronavirus suspects damaged furniture at Goenka Dharmashala, which has been turned into a shelter. Altogether 35 suspects were kept at the facility. Munger district welfare officer H N Das, who is also the nodal officer for Covid19, said, “They were demanding immediate release from the facility. How can we release them when there is no order from the district authorities?” he asked.

Other such incidents were reported from Narkatiaganj in West Champaran, Nalanda and Sheikhpura districts.

Taking a strong exception to rising incidents of protests at shelter-cum-isolation camps, DGP Gupteshwar Pandey said instructions have been issued to SSPs and SPs to lodge FIRs against such people and take legal recourse against them.

Referring to the Siwan incident, the DGP said, “FIRs have been lodged and the accused will be sent to jail after completion of mandatory 14-day quarantine period. The message is loud and clear and nobody involved in such actions will be spared.” 


