Medicine, anaesthesia docs under stress due to Covid work, say state Govt
2020-05-22
Nagpur: Doctors treating Covid-19 patients are exhausting and they need assistance now, a circular issued by the state government said. The circular, issued by state medical education and drugs department on May 19, states that the doctors of medicine and anaesthesia departments are under stress as they have to treat Covid-19 patients in government hospitals. On the other hand, doctors from other clinical departments are not contributing, the circular adds. It has directed deans to include doctors of all streams and assign them periodic duties. Signed by the assistant secretary of medical education and drugs department, this circular mentions that the government has observed the fact that doctors other than medicine and anaesthesia departments are not coming to the hospitals and conducting their designated duties. “Apart from treating Covid-19 patients, the doctors have other works like information sharing, online data management, updating ICMR portal, coordination with the district collector and other officials, and assistance to the treating doctors. Hence, the doctors other than medicine and anaesthesia departments are directed to remain present daily in their duty hours and perform the work designated by the dean,” reads the circular. TOI tried contacting two government medical colleges in Nagpur for fact checking. A senior officials refused to comment on the issue. But, a very senior official of one of the two GMCs in Nagpur told TOI that doctors of several other departments as well as non-medical staff, who are not involved in the Covid-19 service, had started running their departments on 50% staff. Now, after this circular, the deans of medical colleges may issue internal notices to these doctors. The circular further states that doctors and health workers who deny performing duties designated by the dean may face strict disciplinary action. “Doctors and health officials will face action if they remain absent without reason and fail to perform duties designated by the dean. They will be penalized under the Epidemic Act,” the circular reads. At present, the frontline workforce that has been treating the Covid-19 patients in both the GMCHs in city are resident doctors. Senior doctors of medicine and anaesthesia departments are also working. These doctors have been working since last two months tirelessly. If they get exhausted just ahead of the peak of Covid-19 which is predicted to happen in next two weeks, it would be a disastrous situation for the citizens. 