Jaipur: Medico tests negative for coronavirus, another quarantined at SMS Hospital
2020-01-30
JAIPUR: While 25-year-old medical student tested negative for coronavirus, tension prevailed as another 21-year-old person who went to learn Chinese returned to Jaipur from China, was admitted to Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital with symptoms of the virus on Wednesday.

The 21-year-old belongs to Chomu of Jaipur district who was under watch of the health department officials since he returned from China on January 27. He had gone to China to study Chinese language in Wuhan City, which is epicentre of coronavirus. He has been quarantined at SMS Hospital as he was suffering from influenza-like illness (ILI), symptoms of coronavirus.

Amid the scare of coronavirus, there is a sigh of relief for the health authorities as the first coronavirus suspected person of the state, a 25-yer-old medical student, resident of Sanganer of Jaipur, studying in Hubei University of Chinese Medicine in Wuhan of China, who was quarantined on January 25, has been tested negative for the disease.

So far, 20 persons returned from China recently are under watch of the health authorities. Earlier, 18 were under surveillance but as two more persons reached Rajasthan from China recently, one belongs to Barmer and the other belongs to Chomu of Jaipur district, the total increased to 20. Taking precautionary measures, the health department will keep monitoring their health for 28 days from their return from China.

Among 20, two of them are undergoing treatment being quarantined at SMS Hospital with symptoms similar to coronavirus. Despite the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune has issued the report which was received by the state health authorities on Wednesday showed that the 25-yer-old has not been discharged from the hospital. 

Taking precautionary measure, the health department has decided to re-check if the patient is actually tested negative for the disease. The health department sent the samples to NIV, Pune again on Wednesday. The patient will remain quarantined till the report of samples send by the health department arrives.

According to the health department officials, one more person was found suffering from coronavirus like symptoms having fever, cough and runny nose on Wednesday. Acting promptly, he was rushed to the SMS hospital where doctors admitted him to isolation ward. The suspected coronavirus patient had returned from Chine on January 27. He had gone to China to study Chinese language but as he has returned from Wuhan, which is in the grip of coronavirus causing death of more than 100 patients in China, the health authorities are taking measures to ensure that he is not infected with the disease. 

“His samples will be send to National Institute of Virology for coronavirus diagnostic test,” said a health department official.

Confirming it, SMS hospital medical superintendent Dr DS Meena said, “I have issued directions to quarantine the patient and to provide him treatment accordingly as per the guidelines issued by the ministry of health and family welfare.”

Since coronavirus is fatal, health department is treading cautiously to identify suspected coronavirus cases at Jaipur airport. Two thermal scanners have been provided by the Centre, which the doctors and nursing staff are using to identify suspected cases. The health department started thermal screening of passengers at airport from Tuesday night. Till Wednesday evening, they conducted screening of 541 passengers of four flights.

“We have deployed five doctors and five nursing staff at Jaipur airport. Moreover, healthcare employees have been provided with personal protective kits and N95 masks,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health department. 

Moreover, the health department is asking the passengers to submit self-declaration certificate about their health.


