Coronavirus: Medical team from India to test students stranded in Rome
2020-03-13
VISAKHAPATNAM: With Air India not letting the stranded Indian students in Italy board their flight without a certificate that says they’re COVID-19 negative, hundreds of students in the airports at Rome and Milan have been left in the lurch.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

On Thursday, the Indian government announced that it would be sending a medical team to Italy to solve the medical certificate issue. The team will collect samples at the Indian Embassy in Rome and will return to India for the final result. However, amidst this confusion and a lockdown in Italy, the students’ hopes of immediately returning to their homeland were dashed as Air India flights were cancelled till March 31.

 
 
Air India, which barred hundreds of students with confirmed tickets from boarding their flight on Wednesday morning, has cancelled all its flights till March 31 and the airlines has asked passengers to take their ticket refund and cancellation charges have been waived. The students could not provide mandatory ‘medically fit’ certificates from designated government institutes as hospitals were too busy catering to patients and had no time to issue fit certificates.

As the students’ situation came to light through media reports and social networking sites, the Indian government announced sending a medical team to Italy. The external affairs minister Dr S Jaishankar had announced, “We are sending a medical team to Italy to the check the Indians stranded there and bring them back at the earliest.”

A self-declaration form will be given at the time of sample collection in the Embassy. Test samples collected by the Indian medical team at Rome will be sent to India and it will take approximately one week for the results to be received. Those testing negative will be allowed to travel to India but will be in mandatory quarantine of 14 days in the government specified facilities in India upon arrival.

As on March 9, Italy—the worst Coronavirus-hit country after China—had reported over 9,172 cases and 463 deaths. In less than 72 hours, by March 12, the number of cases have gone up to 12,462 and death toll rose to 827. 

Over 10,000 Indian students are pursuing higher studies at various Italian universities. After travel restrictions were announced in Italy, hundreds of students found themselves stranded in the country. Through social media, the students kept requesting the Indian government to do the needful and are also being briefed by the Embassy about any updates.

