Coronavirus in Bihar: Medical teams put on alert at Nepal border
2020-03-13
MOTIHARI: A high-level meeting was held on Thursday on the campus of Integrated Customs Checkpost (ICP) near India-Nepal border at Raxaul in East Champaran on Thursday to review preventive measures being taken by the administration to check the spread of Covid-19 virus.


The meeting was presided by East Champaran DM Shirsat Kapil Ashok and attended by the civil surgeon, SSB commandant, SD,O Raxaul, deputy commissioner of customs, medical and immigration officers among others. The DM said that the district administration has taken various preventive measures at the India-Nepal border and several other places in the district to check the spread of the virus as thousands of persons come from Nepal and cross the checkpost everyday.

SSB commandant Priywart Sharma of 47 battalion said that the SSB has initiated an awareness drive about Covid-19 in villages near the border. “Our jawans are alert on the border and screening all persons who cross the border on various transit points. Cross border movement of people and goods is normal at present,” the SSB commandant said.

East Champaran civil surgeon Rizwan Ahamad said more than 37,000 persons, including foreign tourists, have been screened for symptoms of Covid-19 at the customs checkpost and immigration checkpost at Raxaul on India-Nepal border by the medical teams over the last 20 days but not a single positive case has been found. 

Meanwhile, a six bed isolation ward for Covid-19 has been made in Duncon Hospital at Raxaul. Truck drivers coming from Nepal are also being screened there.

The civil surgeon said that a person from Kesariya village in the district, who returned from Nigeria last month, had come to Motihari sadar hospital with suspected symptoms of Covid- 19. “He has been referred to Bettiah Government Medical College Hospital for test,” Ahmad said.

Raxaul SDO Amit Kumar said, “Gram sabhas (village meets) are being organized in each panchayat for creating awareness among villagers.”

