Meerut’s doubling rate of active Covid-19 cases at 10.3 days is higher than national average
2020-05-20
MEERUT: Nearly two months into the lockdown, at 342 (including one admitted in Kanpur) cases on Monday, Meerut accounts for the second highest number of Covid-19 cases in the state. Agra tops with the highest number of cases.


According to an analysis of the number of cases by TOI – on the basis of the data available till Monday -- it was found that the doubling rate of active cases in Meerut is 10.3 days, which is faster than the national doubling rate of 23 days. 



The doubling rate was calculated on the basis of the average growth rate of active cases over the last five days.

According to the data, out of the total 342 Covid-19 patients, as many as 146 have been discharged and 20 people have died here. At present, the total number of active cases is 176 here.

The active cases in Meerut are increasing at a rate of 7% - every five days- in contrast with the country’s rate of 3%. The average growth rate is calculated on the basis of growth rate every five days.

While the growth rate in the last five days of active cases is 7% in Meerut, the growth rate in the last five days of total cases is 4% and the doubling rate of total cases is 15.6 days. 

With 20 deaths in Meerut until Monday, the fatalities here account for 5.8% of the total cases – which is higher than Agra’s death percentage of 3.31%. This is when Agra occupies the top spot in the state with maximum number of cases and deaths.

It should be noted that the doubling rate of active cases was 16.1 days as on April 30. Thereafter, the rate started dipping in May. 

Doubling rate refers to the rate at which the cases will double if the growth continues to be at the same rate. 

The lesser the doubling rate means that the time taken to double the cases will be less, and higher the doubling rate means the time required to double the cases will be more.

TOI had earlier reported how the number of cases rose in the month of May after vegetable vendors and other people linked with essential supplies started testing positive. 

