Meerut reports 2nd Covid-19 death, 11 fresh cases in region
2020-04-18
MEERUT: Meerut recorded its second death due to novel coronavirus early on Friday. With this, the death toll in the state rose to 14. A 57-year-old man, contact of a Tablighi Jamaat member who was traced from Jali Kothi area and admitted at LLRM Medical College on April 12, died early on Friday. 

Meanwhile, one person tested positive in Meerut and Shamli each, two tested positive in Bulandshahr and seven tested positive for Covid-19 in Saharanpur on Friday. with the fresh cases, the district tally of Meerut reached 70 (including one admitted in Kanpur), Saharanpur 63 (including 12 admitted in Lucknow), Shamli 18 and Bulanddshahr tally rose to 16.

Meerut district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, “The 57-year-old patient who died was traced from Jali Kothi area and was a case of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). He suddenly collapsed early on Friday, after which his last rites were performed in the presence of limited people as per the norms. He was contact of a Jamaati.”

The first death in Meerut was that of a 72-year-old man – the father-in-law of the Bulanddshahr man who was the first case in Meerut and had travelled from Amravati to Meerut in two trains. His body was wrapped in three layers and his last rites were completed as per the norms.

Chief medical officer Dr Raj Kumar said, “One person tested positive for coronavirus in Meerut on Friday. He is from Lakhipura area, which is being sealed and contact tracing being done there. He is also contact of a Jamaati.”

Saharanpur CMO Dr BS Sodhi said, “As many as seven cases tested positive in Saharanpur on Friday. All of them had returned from a Jamaat in Gujarat and are being quarantined in Deoband.” 

Bulandshahr CMO Dr KN Tiwari said, “Two cases tested positive in Bulandshahr on Friday, taking the total tally to 16. One of the two positive patients is the brother of an already Covid-19 positive person who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat. His contacts have been put into quarantine and sampling is being done.”

The LLRM Medical College microbiology laboratory tested one positive case in Meerut, Shamli and Bulandshahr each, and other reports came from Aligarh and Noida.

Meanwhile, one 71-year-old man recovered from Covid-19 in Bulandshahr.


