Covid-19: Meerut reports one more death, toll reaches 18; infant, Asha worker & gunner of SP’s escort among 8 positive
2020-05-17
MEERUT: One more death due to Covid-19 was reported from Meerut district on Saturday, taking the death toll to 18. A 52-year-old woman from Rashid Nagar died at the Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial (LLRM) Medical College. Meerut reported eight new cases on Saturday, taking the total tally to 321 – including one admitted in Kanpur. On the other hand, seven new cases were reported from Saharanpur taking the total tally to 212 – including 12 found in Lucknow.

The positive cases from Meerut included – a one-and-half-year-old infant who is a contact of a patient from Multan Nagar, an Asha worker who was involved in Covid-19 duty in the district from Khair Nagar and a gunner of Meerut superintendent of police’s escort. Quarantine process for police officials is under progress.

The positive cases from Meerut included a one-and-half-year-old infant – contact of a patient from Multan Nagar – and an Asha worker, involved in Covid-19 duty in the district from Khair Nagar.

“A 52-year-old woman from Rashid Nagar died at the LLRM Medical College on Friday afternoon. She was admitted with liver and respiratory disease syndrome on Friday afternoon and tested positive at 11 pm on Friday after her death in the afternoon,” said Dr SK Garg, principal of the medical college. He added that the matter was made public on Saturday due to some technical glitch.

Meerut district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, “As many as eight new cases were reported in Meerut on Saturday. The positive cases include one from Multan Nagar (Baghpat Road), three from Lakhipura and one from Bhajanpura, Dalampara (Budhana Gate), Khair Nagar and Kaanch Ka Pul each.”

Saharanpur chief medical Officer Dr BS Sodhi said, “As many as seven new cases were reported in Saharanpur on Saturday. Four of them had returned from Mumbai to Deoband, one person had come in a media car and two others had returned from Indore.”


