Meerut hotel doubling up as quarantine centre stops service, docs shifted out
2020-05-19
Meerut: A high-end hotel in Meerut that doubled up as a passive quarantine centre for government health staff for the past 45 days has stopped its services with immediate effect due to alleged non-payment of dues amounting to Rs 1.3 crore late on Sunday night. In a hurried action, the doctors were shifted to another hotel in the city. 

The hotel management claims they have not been paid a single penny despite repeated reminders to the authorities concerned. In contrast, the district authorities claimed that the hotelier had himself allowed the establishment to be used as a quarantine facility for free. The administration has now agreed to pay accordingto government rate of Rs 1,500 per day per room, which adds to Rs 33 lakh.

Jitendra Bajwa, owner of Godwin Hotel, said, “I had allowed the hotel rooms to be given out for free only for the initial 14-day lockdown period, that too when only a week of lockdown was left. My philanthropic gesture was not meant to be considered a free service for indefinite period. If the government had decided on paying Rs 1,500 per day for one room, I should have been informed about this in advance. Who is supposed to bear the losses now?” 

Meerut district magistrate Anil Dhingra said, “The hotel owner had promised to provide 'a free quarantine facility'. Even then, we are ready to make the payments. But we can pay only according to the government norms, the amount for which has been fixed at Rs 1,500 per room per day. A committee has been formed and the payment will be made. As far as the meals are concerned, food was provided by our own contractor and he (hotel owner) himself agreed to provide complimentary breakfast.”

Meerut chief medical officer Dr Raj Kumar said, “We have the data of doctors who stayed at the hotel for quarantine purpose, and we will pay up accordingly. This is even when the owner had promised us that he would allow the hotel to be used as a quarantine facility for free.”

Bajwa said, “According to my records, a total of 189 health staff stayed here for a combined total of 2,255 nights, for which the charges add up to Rs 1.30 crore -- if I charge Rs 5,800 without taxes per night. If the district authorities knew that the government will not be able to afford our hotel, they should have opted for a cheaper hotel.”


