Meerut reports two new Covid-19 deaths, toll now 13
2020-05-10
MEERUT: Meerut reported two new Covid-19 deaths on Saturday, taking the death toll to 13. Also, there were 21 new positive cases in Meerut, and one fresh case was reported in Amroha on Saturday.

Two new Covid cases were reported in Shamli as well. These included a 50-year-old woman and a 32-year-old man from Panchariyan area of Shamli. Both are contacts of earlier Covid-19 positive fruit trader.

Meanwhile, with the fresh cases, the total tally in Meerut reached 231, including one admitted in Kanpur. In Amroha, the tally rose to 32. Alarmingly, out of the 21 new Covid cases in Meerut, 17 belong to one cluster of previously tested positive cases from Ravindra Puri. While 16 are his family members, one is his physician.

Meerut district surveillance officer, Dr Vishwas Chaudhary, said, “Two new deaths were reported in Meerut on Saturday. They included a 67-year-old man from Budhana Gate area who died of a heart attack after receiving his Covid-19 positive report, and a 68-year-old Islamabad resident – who died at LLRM Medical College during his treatment.”

Further detailing about the 21 positive cases, Dr Chaudhary said, “As many as 21 new cases were reported on Saturday. While 16 out of the 21 cases are family members of the previously tested positive case from Ravindra Puri, one is his physician and one is from Swami Pada area in Budhana Gate. Meanwhile, three are admitted at LLRM Medical College.”

The death rate in Meerut is on a continuous rise as the city reported two deaths on Friday and then two more on Saturday.

On Saturday, there were also various videos and audios of the patients’ ordeal at LLRM Medical College, which surfaced. Inquiries were set up.

In Amroha, an 80-year-old woman tested positive for coronavirus, taking the tally to 32. Dr Megh Singh, chief medical officer, Amroha, said, “One new case tested positive in Amroha, taking the total to 32. Contacts of the 80-year-old woman are being traced now.”


