Meerut gets 18 & Agra 10 Covid-19 patients
2020-06-08
Agra/Meerut/Bareilly: At least 18 fresh cases of Covid-19 surfaced in Meerut by Sunday evening where the tally reached 521, including the one found in Kanpur. Fortunately, no death was reported and the toll stayed at 34 there.

But, in Agra, a 60-year-old Covid-19 positive man died at SN Medical College.

In Meerut, a few children were also among the 18 affected. “At least 18 new cases were reported in Meerut on Sunday including children in the age group between 2 years and 15 years,” said Dr Vishwas Chaudhary, Meerut’s district surveillance officer. While in Agra, the patient who died was suffering from severe anemia and acute encephalopathy. So far, 50 Covid-19 positive patients have died in Agra district. 

And, at least 10 new Covid-19 positive cases surfaced in Agra on Sunday evening, taking the district tally to 967. 

Out of these four cases were related from a family of Pinahat block. Meanwhile, five Covid-19 patients were discharged on Sunday. Out of the 967 cases reported in the district, 84.4% have been declared cured and discharged. There are 99 active Covid-19 cases in the district. Chief medical officer RC Pandey said, “So far, 818 people have been cured of the infection and discharged. Besides, people who have come in contact with Covid-19 patients are being screened. Health department teams are conducting door-to-door check-up of the people in hotspot areas, and samples of suspected patients are being sent for lab tests.” 

While in Bareilly, a seven months pregnant woman was among four persons tested positive for Covid-19. It took the district’s tally to 69 with 31 active cases. Bareilly has seen two deaths so far while 36 have been discharged.

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “Four persons tested positive and they have been admitted to hospital. We have quarantined their close contacts, and their samples would be sent for testing.” 

Two persons were tested positive for Covid-19 in Shahjahanpur while no case surfaced in Budaun district on Sunday. While Pilibhit reported one case. A 30-year-old man of Chausar Hardeo Patti village was tested positive for Covid-19. He had come from Delhi on June 3 and was home quarantined.

District magistrate Vaibhav Shrivastav has issued orders to convert the village of the infected man into the containment zone. According to him, the total number of containment zones has gone up to 32 here.


