Mehta to oversee fight against virus
2020-04-01
Thiruvananthapuram: With the nationwide lockdown throwing life out of gear and multiple government departments forced to act on a war-footing in an effort to restore normalcy, the government has appointed additional chief secretary (home, vigilance and water resources) Vishwas Mehta in charge of overall coordination for fighting the outbreak.

The government entrusted him with the responsibility under section 24 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. He will coordinate with various department secretaries and line department heads and would give instructions from time to time regarding various steps needed to fight the pandemic. He will be assisted by secretary (ports) Sanjay M Kaul and would submit a daily report to the government regarding steps taken and progress being made.

The government has appointed various officials in charge of the war room functioning round the clock. While overall charge of the war room is with principal secretary (transport and general administration) K R Jyothilal, he is being assisted by Sanjay Kaul. KMRL managing director Alkesh Kumar Sharma has been deputed to Kasaragod to supervise containment activities with the district administration. While local self-government department special secretary K Biju, also being former labour commissioner, will assist incumbent labour commissioner Pranab Jyothinath with the welfare and accommodation of guest workers, MNREGS mission director Divya S Iyer will assist secretary (food and civil supplies) P Venugopal in provisioning and procurement of vegetables and essential food items.

Meanwhile, the police have appointed IG (crimes) S Sreejith as assistant nodal officer for the welfare of guest labourers. He visited the labour camps in Paippad on Tuesday. He said that the camps he visited did not have any shortage of food and they also agreed to cook food for a group instead of cooking individually, so as to reduce wastage. State police chief Loknath Behera has come up with video clippings featuring himself, in Bengali, Odiya and Hindi, explaining the situation and the steps taken by the state government for the welfare of guest labourers.


