Mercury rising: Lockdown casualty is the humble cooler
2020-04-13
Nagpur: The ongoing lockdown is a reason that in many Nagpur homes, an annual ‘cool’ visitor has still not arrived. Usually by first week of April, majority of homes install desert coolers to beat rising temperatures, but the lockdown means that a cool relief is still elusive. 

With electrical shops closed and movement of electricians also restricted, old cooler panels continue to gather dust while new ones still remain locked in the showrooms. 

Rakesh Awachat, director of Ram Coolers, said, “Almost 85% of cooler sales happen between mid-March to May. Dealers have already stocked inventory in March, but due to lockdown no sales are happening. If we open in May, sales season may be salvaged else inventory will spill over to next year.” This way, manufacturers will take a hit in 2021 as well. 

Demand for coolers is high as ever with calls coming from customers, who are panicking due the extended lockdown and rising temperatures. Even a manufacturer like Awachat is receiving calls directly from desperate customers. “A lady called saying she is pregnant and urgently needs a cooler to be installed, but I am helpless,” said Awachat. 

An electrician who specializes in cooler installations told TOI that select customers are being serviced discreetly. “We usually go early in the morning and only to individual homes, not apartments. But on Saturday, a few electricians were rounded up at Sadar police station for going to install coolers, and that message spread fast in our circle due to which no one is taking the risk,” he said. 

Cost of ‘wood wool’, the cheap and popular replacement for khus that was used in panels, has also risen. The electrician said, “It’s selling for Rs100 per kg near Teka Naka (Kamptee Road), up from last year’s Rs60 a kg, at certain shops which still operate somehow.”

Nitesh Agrawal, an AC dealer, said, “Many customers are awaiting repairs. On an average, we get five calls daily asking for repairman to be sent for servicing. We know they are in trouble, but there is nothing which can be done.”

Some netizens have appealed to the police for opening up cooler and electrical shops so that they can prepare for the summer ahead. Awachat said, “This problem can be solved if we are given permission to take orders online, over the phone, and directly ship the cooler to customer’s home.” 


