Delhi Metro gets Covid-19 marshals for safe construction sites
2020-06-14
NEW DELHI: Among the 14,500 people employed by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, apart from the thousands of workers deployed at its construction sites, some of the most crucial jobs are those of train operators, station controllers etc. However, the role of a Covid marshal might become more crucial in the coming days. 

At present, Covid marshals have been deployed at different construction sites of DMRC, which include the extension of the Airport Express Line in Dwarka, extension of the Grey Line (Dwarka-Najafgarh) in Dhansa and Phase-IV project.

“In order to ensure complete compliance of all the guidelines issued to workers to prevent the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic at DMRC’s construction sites, dedicated Covid marshals have been nominated for all the sites,” said Anuj Dayal, executive director (corporate communication), DMRC.

Dayal said these marshals are generally labour welfare or human resource officers from the contractor’s end who are well-versed with the various guidelines and directions, which have been issued to combat the spread of Covid-19. “At least one such official has been appointed for each site,” said an official.

Each site has one Covid marshal, who is assisted by a deputy Covid marshal and Covid stewards. “The responsibility of this team is to ensure that all guidelines are stringently followed by the workers as well as engineers at the sites. Non-conformances, if any, are immediately reported to DMRC officials and action is taken as per the standard operating procedures,” he said.

The Covid marshals have been provided with a different high-visibility jacket so that they can be recognised easily at the sites. They have been designated as the single point of contact for issues related to Covid-19 at the sites. “Apart from checking any violation of the guidelines, they may also be contacted for issues such as medical checks, availability of masks, sanitisers etc.,” Dayal said.

When Delhi Metro resumes operations, a similar role would be performed by customer facilitation agents at stations. However, it is not sure if any of these agents will be wearing such a jacket, the way marshals at sites are wearing. One of the major responsibilities of these agents at stations would be to ensure social distancing.

DMRC has taken a host of safety measures at its construction sites, which includes around 100 hands-free hand washing as well as sanitiser facilities that are ‘foot operated’.


