Coronavirus scare: Delhi Metro riders want to stay far from madding crowd
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: During her daily metro commute from her home in northeast Delhi’s Mansarovar Park to her Nehru Place office, sales executive Smita Sharma (35) prefers to drown out the drudgery by plugging in the earphones and listening to her favourite songs. 


For nearly a week now, the music is out as she remains alert through the one-and-a-half-hour journey for the slightest hint of a sneeze or a cough.

“Common cold or flu is normal at this time, but this novel coronavirus scares me. I couldn’t find N95 mask in the market and am making do with a surgical one, as something is better than nothing,” Sharma said. “You can’t avoid crowds during office hours...I hold my breath for as long as I can whenever someone sneezes or coughs,” she said. “Also, I use a sanitiser immediately after getting out of the metro station.” 

Like Sharma, several other commuters can be seen wearing masks of all types, shapes and sizes — and the number of people covering their nose and mouth with handkerchiefs and dupattas is almost as high.

“It is not unusual to find many metro users wearing masks during winters when the air quality dips in Delhi. But this time, it’s different,” said Ramesh Ahuja, a Sheikh Sarai resident. “I’m avoiding touching common surfaces, such as handrails, elevator switches, handles (hand grips), poles etc, to avoid any kind of infection,” he said.

Avinash Mathur, a Dilshad Colony resident, is, in fact, practising travelling without taking his hands out of the trouser pockets, except while using the smart card. “I look for a corner in the train that I can lean on without the need to touch a pole or a handle. But it is not always possible when the train is crowded,” he said.

Shilpi Kumar, a Laxmi Nagar resident, has stopped boarding trains that are crowded even if it means being late to work. “My office is in south Delhi and I can’t afford an auto-rickshaw or a cab ride every day,” she said. “I avoid touching any surface that others might have touched,” she said.

The Blue Line, which is the busiest in the city and sees a daily footfall of 16 lakh, saw a thin crowd on Thursday. A group of women who got in from Janakpuri East Metro station was surprised to manage seats. However, they could be heard talking about going for alternative means of travel. “I will surely be spending a little more on cabs than I usually do than when I travel by metro, but then at least I will not have to worry about catching the infection,” said Sakshi Tanwar, a 32-year-old woman heading to Tagore Garden. 

Another passenger, Arpita, who wore a mask and entered the metro station at Rajouri Garden, said she didn’t have the means to afford a personal mode of transport. “I can only ensure that I take all steps to not catch the flu. I will be extra cautious,” she said. 

For its part, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation is taking several precautionary measures. A DMRC spokesperson said they had increased the frequency of cleaning the premises and the trains. Metro is also running do’s and dont’s instruction in English and Hindi on digital screens at busy stations, such as Rajiv Chowk, Kashmere Gate, Central Secretariat, Chandni Chowk and New Delhi.

“In the wake of identification of a few cases of coronavirus in recent days by the authorities in Delhi-NCR, Delhi Metro has decided to undertake several measures. Delhi Metro staff have been sensitised and guidelines circulated regarding dos and dont’s to prevent the spread of coronavirus,” a statement issued by DMRC read.

