Covid-19: Metro shut till end of month; just 25 per cent of DTC buses to ply
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: With the capital getting locked down from 6am on Monday, all public transport in Delhi will also come to a grinding halt, except for one-fourth of Delhi Transport Corporation buses, which will also ferry only those involved in essential services.


Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday evening announced the lockdown to ensure that the spread of Covid-19 is minimised in the capital. Earlier in the day, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) had already announced that its train services, which were closed on Sunday too, will be suspended till March 31. Delhi government added all public service vehicles to the list while announcing the lockdown.

Other modes of transport such as autorickshaws, app-based cabs, kaali-peeli taxis, private buses, e-rickshaws, cycle rickshaws, Grameen Sewa, maxi cabs, eco-friendly, Phat Phat Sewa etc. will not be permitted to operate either. Movement of interstate buses have been suspended and train services were deferred till the end of the month earlier in the day by Indian Railways.

Delhi government has allowed only 25% buses of the DTC fleet to operate from Monday. As a result, around 950 buses will ply in the capital, only for helping those involved in essential services to reach their workplace and then back home. Private vehicles ferrying those involved in essential services will be exempted from the lockdown order. People who come out to provide essential services shall be allowed on their self-declaration.

In neighbouring Noida too, public transport services, interstate trains and buses have also been suspended till March 31. The Noida Metro Rail Corporation, which operates the Aqua Line, has announced that all its metro and the city bus services will not function. 

Delhi Metro, which is the lifeline of the capital and also connects it to neighbouring Gurgaon, Noida, Ghaziabad and Faridabad, had announced earlier on Saturday that its train services will remain suspended till the end of March. DMRC had already announced a slew of measures to reduce footfalls in metro trains on Thursday and then said it will not operate trains on Sunday in the wake of janata curfew, followed by the announcement that metro services for general public will be only available for six hours on Monday. Finally came the announcement of a complete closedown

“The Delhi Metro system will continue to be powered for essential internal operational maintenance activities during this duration and security of the system will continue to be taken care of by CISF,” a DMRC spokesperson said.


