MGMGH ready with over 600 beds to handle Covid-19 cases
2020-03-26
TRICHY: As the number of Covid-19 suspects has been rising, Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) in Trichy has kept the entire six-storey super specialty block ready to accommodate over 600 patients.


MGMGH had a total of 13 patients including 10 men and three women with the symptoms of Covid-19 admitted at the isolation ward as of Wednesday evening. The hospital administration has taken the swab of all 13 patients to put them through Covid-19 tests at the newly-opened testing facility at MGMGH attached to KAP Viswanatham government medical college (KAPVGMC) in Trichy.

Medical superintendent of MGMGH, Dr R Yeganathan said that the results of all the patients will be out on Thursday. Till now, the tests were done at viral research and diagnostic laboratory (VRDL) in Tiruvarur.

Keeping in line with the number of cases, MGMGH has kept 640 beds in the general ward and 60 beds in intensive care unit (ICU) in the six floors of the super specialty building. The patients in the wards have been either discharged or shifted to the old block depending upon the necessity for emergency treatment. However, the hospital administration has left eight patients in the burns ward on the fourth floor of the super specialty block undisturbed.

The hospital administration said that a total of 85 ventilators have been kept ready, of them, 40 were being used while the 45 others were available.

MGMGH already has 32 beds including 12 beds in the isolation ward and 20 beds in the de-addiction ward converted into isolation ward.

On Wednesday evening, Trichy collector S Sivarasu said that the screening has been done of the 483 quarantined people, who came to Trichy through the Trichy international airport and 141 quarantined people, who reached Trichy by other modes of transports after landing at airports in other cities.

Trichy district administration has received Rs 10 lakh each from four MLAs in Trichy district towards Covid-19 prevention measure, said the collector.


