MGNREGA work turns out be only option during lockdown for this teacher
2020-05-25
JAIPUR: Ramavtar Singh Rao (41), who was a teacher at a private school in Asalpur village (Jobner) around 50 km from here and earned a little more than Rs 15,000 a month, now has to make ends meet by working as a mate under the MGNREGA scheme earning Rs 235 a day or Rs 7,050 per month. 

Rao, who has been working as a mate since April 16, had done his masters in political science from Rajasthan University in 2001 and BEd in 2009. The job of a mate is to assign tasks to the labourers and work-site management. 

The lockdown has left several people like him unemployed, forcing them to work under MGNREGA. As on Sunday, 39.64 lakh labourers were engaged under MGNREGA work in the state. 

“Due to the lockdown, we haven’t been paid our salaries after February. Therefore, we are going through a financial crisis now. Also, we couldn’t go anywhere as there was no means of transportation. Since, there was no other option left, we had to go for MGNREGA work to run the family. It’s not easy to make ends meet with a big family, but somehow we manage,” said Singh, who has 10 members in his family, including his parents, wife, two brothers, their wives and children. 

“Others in the family are not able to go anywhere for work due to the lockdown. At least, I have to earn something for the sustenance of the family. At times, we have to borrow money from others. I have been in teaching students for the past 24 years. At Asalpur village school, I used to teach Hindi till 12th standard,” he added. 

Praising the MGNREGA scheme, Ramavatar said it had turned out to be a lifesaver for people living in the villages. “It has provided a relief to those families in the villages where the male bread earners are not able to the city for work. So, the female members go for NREGA work. We thank the government for running the scheme in the state. It is a good source of employment in the villages and the scheme should not be stopped,” he added. 

Like Ramavtar, there are a few other graduates in the village who are also working under the scheme. Sita Verma, 30, who works as a MGNREGA worker, has completed her graduation in Arts in 2019. “Since my husband’s ( a teacher) school is closed, he can’t go for work now, so I decided to work under NREGA. At least, one has to work to run the family. I had also applied for a teaching job in a private school before the lockdown was imposed. It is a big family. So, my sister-in-law and I decided to go for NREGA work. The scheme has helped provide work to the villagers,” Sita told TOI. Suman, from the same village, is also a graduate and works under the scheme. A MGNREGA labourer earns Rs 220 per day.

Among the 260 works under NREGA, special focus is given to plantation and development of pasture lands (grazing grounds), playgrounds, model ponds and crematoriums/cemeteries; development of water bodies, nursery works and individual works (apna khet, apna kaam). 


