Lockdown: Mighty shrines face heat as coffers dry up
2020-05-16
NEW DELHI: The lockdown seems to have hit man and God alike.

As doors of major shrines across the country remain shut for over 45 days now, their daily collections have hit rock bottom, so much so that some temple managements are even struggling to meet regular expenses. Some are meeting the shortfall by dipping into their reserves.

Kerala’s Sree Padmanabhaswamy Temple, which used to see an average monthly income of around Rs 3 crore, is now netting a mere Rs 7.5 lakh. The temple needs Rs 1.1 crore to pay salaries to its 307 employees and meet other expenses. Senior officials of Travancore Devaswom Board, which runs the temple affairs, didn’t explain how they were meeting the shortfall.

Similarly, Guruvayur temple has witnessed its monthly collections nosedive from around Rs 5 crore to Rs 1.5 lakh. The temple is now meeting its routine expenses of Rs 10 crore per month largely from the interest from its fixed deposits of Rs 1,529 crore. Its reserves include about 700kg of gold.

The lockdown has caused a loss in revenue of around Rs 100 crore to Sabarimala temple in Kerala. Travancore Devaswom Board, which manages the temple, cancelled the 10-day festival that was scheduled in March and the Vishu in mid-April. It was also forced to cancel two monthly pujas.

The hill shrine of Lord Venkateswara at Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh, considered the richest Hindu temple in the world, too, has taken a hit. Pre-lockdown, the temple’s monthly income was Rs 200 crore, which has now come down to zero. Its monthly expenses are around Rs 150 crore, which the temple board is now managing from some “surplus funds”. The temple has a cash reserve of Rs 14,000 crore.

In Maharashtra, the famous Saibaba Temple at Shirdi, which used to earn Rs 22 crore monthly pre-lockdown, is now seeing “negligible” revenue. The Sai Sansthan, which has a monthly wage bill of Rs 18 crore for its 6,000 employees, was unable to pay salaries for the months of March and April. The Sansthan has decided not to reinvest the matured fixed deposits for paying salaries. The temple has a deposit of Rs 2,500 crore, apart from a sizable gold reserve.

The Siddhivinayak Temple in Mumbai, which has 250 employees, has been forced to pay the monthly wage bill of Rs 85 lakh from the management fund. The temple’s monthly income of Rs 8 crore has completely dried up. The trust, which has a fixed deposit of Rs 350 crore, is confident of sailing through this phase.

Mumbai’s iconic Haji Ali dargah is being maintained with the reserve funds as no collection has come during the lockdown. Earlier, Haji Ali would collect between Rs 25 lakh and Rs 30 lakh monthly.

Similarly, Dargah Ajmer in Rajasthan is banking on its savings and interest to meet monthly expenses of Rs 55-60 lakh. The Dargah’s earnings have nosedived since lockdown. The Dargah management refused to share details of its monthly income without permission from the ministry of minority affairs.

Up north, Mata Vaishno Devi temple in Jammu has been managing its affairs with its own reserves. The temple has 3,000 staff working for it. To shore up its daily collection, its board is planning to start “paid prasad” services online. On an average, the daily collection at the shrine used to be Rs 1 crore, which has come down to almost zero.

Assam’s Kamakhya temple has seen its average daily collections of Rs 1.5 lakh-2 lakh become “nil” now. Its monthly expenditure before the coronavirus crisis was around Rs 40 lakh. Now, the temple board is managing the expenditure from its reserves.

Closure of the famous Jagannath Temple in Puri, Odisha, has taken a heavy toll on its collections, which has fallen to Rs 1,000-2,000 daily from nearly Rs 3 lakh. The total loss to the temple so far is estimated to be around Rs 1.65 crore. The temple’s cash reserve is around Rs 600 crore, from which the administration is meeting the monthly expenses of Rs 5 crore.

The Golden Temple in Punjab has also been hit badly. Its income crashed from nearly Rs 7 crore a month to just Rs 4 lakh. It, however, quickly improved as the state allowed some relaxation in lockdown.


