Delhi coronavirus lockdown: Migrants stop to fill up at hunger centres, march on
2020-03-30
NEW DELHI: Even before a civil defence volunteer at a hunger relief centre in northeast Delhi’s Bhajanpura could fill a plate with kadhi-chawal, Mohammad Anees snatched it from his hands. The 29-year-old, a native of Budaun in Uttar Pradesh, had not eaten since Saturday morning when he left his shanty in Sonipat in Haryana for his village on foot.

“This will give me the energy to walk faster. I want to be with my family at the earliest,” Anees said. Within minutes, he was seen asking the volunteers for another helping.

Delhi government has set up 568 hunger relief centres in schools across the capital for lakhs of people left with no food due to the lockdown.

Najafgarh SDM Saumya Sharma said, “We are serving lunch and dinner to over 30,000 people in southwest district with the help of social organisations. We are also providing dry ration packs and toiletries to poor families.”

A large number of daily wagers, who live in north Delhi owing to the wholesale markets, Azadpur Mandi and Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar, are being provided food by district officials. “We feed 25,000 people at our centres and another 3,500 in various pockets. Most food packets come from agencies that provide midday meal to government schools,” said Krishan Kumar, SDM (headquarters), North.

DM (East) Arun Kumar Mishra said they were serving cooked food to over 22,000 people daily. “If required, we can scale up operations,” he added.

Abhinandita Mathur, who is leading the hunger relief efforts of the AAP government, said the pockets where the poor live have been mapped and food is provided even if they get a call at midnight. “We are also giving dry ration to families that cannot come to the centres. We are monitoring the entire operation closely,” she added.

Meanwhile, After witnessing huge crowds at Anand Vihar ISBT on Saturday, Delhi government turned a school in Ghazipur into a shelter by setting up tents and providing durries to the migrant population to stay till the lockdown was in effect. Though several people turned up to take rest and even slept overnight, they moved on for their destination in the morning.

When TOI visited the school on Sunday afternoon, there were just two people sleeping there, while another two checked in a little later. “I’ll rest for a couple of hours and then leave for my village in Bhagalpur in Bihar,” said Gopal Das, who had come from Bhiwadi in Rajasthan. Vinod Kumar, a painter from Uttam Nagar, said even he was going back to his village in Samastipur, Bihar.

