Migrants account for 30% road deaths during lockdown: Study
2020-05-07
MUMBAI: A study conducted by SaveLIFE, a non-profit committed to road safety, has found that there were 25,000 helmetless riding cases registered in Maharashtra during the first two phases of the lockdown. The country recorded more than 600 road crashes and 140 lives were lost in the past five weeks to road accidents, of which 30% were that of migrants travelling home. 

Maharashtra recorded the maximum violations under the Motor Vehicle Safety Act.

The period of study was between March 24 and April 14, and from April 14 to May 3.

Further analysis of these road crash deaths reveals that around 30 percent of these victims were migrants travelling back home. Almost 57 percent of the deaths were of people driving during the lockdown. The most common causal factor was speeding. The rest of the deaths were of essential workers like doctors, who were travelling either from or to their places of work.

“While there has been a dip in the absolute number of road crash fatalities during lockdown due to suspension of public transport and general mobility, the rate of deaths in road crashes has remained unchanged, highlighting how unsafe Indian roads are even when the country has been under restrictions,” said Piyush Tewari, Founder and CEO, SaveLIFE Foundation.

He further said, “India has the highest number of road crash deaths globally each year. Though there will be a dip in that number this year due to the lockdown, 140 deaths in over 600 crashes goes to show that the gains achieved will be lost as soon as things go back to normal.”

The third phase of the lockdown is a golden opportunity for states to fix engineering faults in our roads and institute mechanisms for electronic enforcement so that when things become normal, we can keep road fatalities low, he suggested.

Many states have issued Standard Operating Protocols (SOPs) for the inter-state movement of people. Governments should also prioritise road safety while notifying these SOPs, since a large number of crashes have involved vehicles ferrying people across states.

“The health system is already over-burdened. It is imperative that we stick to safe driving practices to ensure that the health workers are not further burdened with preventable road crash cases,” he added.


