Migrant workers coming from other states to be quarantined for 14 days
2020-04-27
Jaipur: Additional chief secretary (Home) Rajeeva Swarup on Sunday issued directions to the collectors on the entry of natives of Rajasthan from other states and instructed that those who are returning must be quarantined in their houses or outside facilities for 14 days and their registrations be done.

He said checkposts will be set up at the border districts, where the visitors will be screened and their registration will be done during which their names, addresses and mobile numbers will be recorded. “There is also a possibility that some people may use personal vehicles to reach their homes and the administration will not know about it. Therefore, the collector will have to create a strong information system in localities and villages so that if any new person arrives, the local administration should be informed about it immediately. This will help in ensuring that the person stays in home quarantine for 14 days," it states. The order states, “Each Patwari will be responsible for its patwar area. If he gets information about a person's return to the village, then he will inform about this to the tehsildar/sub-divisional officer. The BLOs (booth level officer) will assist patwaris in this work. The same arrangement will also be done for urban areas.”

“Public awareness must be created at the community level that for their benefits. It must be ensured if any outsider arrives, the villagers should inform the local administration about it. The person should be home quarantined for 14 days. If anybody violates it, the same should be immediately reported to the local administration. The person will be shifted to the administration's isolation centre,” it added.

It also said, “If villagers object to their entry to the villages, in such a situation a quarantine centre will be set up in a school or any other building. People coming from outside will be lodged in those centres. Local people will be responsible for their food and other needs.”

Transport commissioner Ravi Jain said, “We have got adequate number of buses and staff for facilitating movement of workers to their districts. We are waiting for the government’s nod.”


