Migrants increase Covid-19 count in east UP
2020-05-15
VARANASI: There has been a spurt in Covid-19 cases in Ghazipur, Azamgarh and Jaunpur with the arrival of migrant labourers as many of them are now being found infected.

On Thursday, seven new Covid-19 cases, including six in Ghazipur and one in Azamgarh came to light.

Earlier, four cases were reported from Chandauli, Ghazipur and Jaunpur on Wednesday, all being migrants who returned from Mumbai, Surat and Delhi.

District magistrate Ghazipur Omprakash Arya said, “Six new positive cases were detected in the district on Thursday. Three migrants had returned from Mumbai, two from Surat and one from Delhi.”

Other new cases are from Rajupur village of Nandganj, Mohanpurva of Birno, and Chaukudi of Bhudkuda.

“The threat of Covid-19 cases increasing in the district has increased due to return of migrants from cities. People have to stay alert and follow social distancing and other precautions,” Arya added.

“In Azamgarh district, a man of Jiyapur village in Mehnajpur area, had returned from Mumbai a week ago and stayed at home without getting screened. He tested positive on Thursday,” said DM Azamgarh N P Singh.

“He has been admitted to isolation ward of government hospital while his family members and other contacts have been quarantined. The village has been sealed,” Singh added.

“In Jaunpur, a 48-year-old man of Khutahan, who had returned from Mumbai by car a week ago, has tested positive,” said DM Jaunpur Dinesh Kumar Singh.

“The infected man has been admitted in Varanasi hospital while the other youths who travelled with him in the same car have been quarantined,” he added.

On Wednesday, Chandauli, which was Covid-19 free, also joined the list of affected districts with detection of infection in an auto driver who returned from Mumbai.

DM Chandauli Navneet Singh Chala said, “The auto driver from Moinuddinpur village had reached home on May 11. He came from Mumbai with three others. He has been admitted to a hospital in Varanasi and his companions have been quarantined.”


