Migratory birds breaking lockdown silence in Bihar
2020-05-07
PATNA: As the air and noise pollution levels have dropped significantly and residents remain indoors due to the nationwide lockdown, birds chirping and fluttering their wings are enjoying freedom unbound. 


Migratory bird Greater Adjutant, a member of stork family, is easily spotted on the banks of Ganga and Kosi rivers and other water bodies. Otherwise, they are generally seen in Bhagalpur area in winter season.

Birdwatcher Arvind Mishra says many people are sighting hundreds of Greater Adjutants even near small ponds in Bhagalpur, Khagaria and bordering districts. “These birds usually fly back to their homes in March-end. Sighting of these birds even in May is rare,” he said.

Arvind, who is also the state coordinator of Indian Bird Conservation Network, said, “In Patna, the population of garden birds like tailorbird, francolin, woodpecker, purple sunbird, bulbul, white-eyes, oriental magpie robin and various species of dove has increased amid the lockdown.”

He added: “To see these birds, we have to go to less populated areas or on the city outskirts. But these days one can easily spot a variety of birds even in our backyards or gardens.”

Sighting of other water birds like grey hornbill is also an eye candy for people farming near the riverine area owing to no boating and fishing in the rivers.

Navin Kumar, another birdwatcher, said he sighted 24 varieties of common birds from his home at Rajendra Nagar. “Many of them are spotted rarely in the city area due to air and noise pollution. The population of several common birds has increased,” he said.

“Golden oriole and oriental white-eye birds are generally not seen in human habitats. But they are now being sighted in residential areas. Asian koel, black kite, rufous treepie, shikara, spotted owlet, rose ringed parakeet and cattle egret among others are easily sighted in the city area. Most birds are more active in morning and evening hours. But amid the lockdown, they remain active for a considerable period of time,” Navin said.

Meanwhile, the colourful butterflies are the eye candy for lepidopterists. Rahul Kumar, who has been doing research in this field for the last two years, said due to low pollution and clear sky, they are coming out in large numbers. “If lucky, one can spot species like painted lady, peacock pansy, jezebel, oak blue, Pierrot, great eggfly and tiny grass blue as well,” he said.

He added: “In other days, we only spot common jay, common crow, grass yellow and plain tiger.”


