Andhra Pradesh: Migrant workers continue to bear the brunt of lockdown
2020-05-10
VIJAYAWADA: Continuing their protest for the fourth consecutive day, around 200 migrant workers from Odisha and Jharkhand in Satish Dhawan Space Centre – Sriharikota Range (SHAR) protested demanding food, transportation back home and their pending wages from the contractors in Nellore on Friday. 


Protestors said that the officials at SHAR had already sent several migrant workers back to Bihar but neglected other state workers. Soon, tension prevailed after cops reached the spot and tried to control the situation. Tempers flared as some of the migrant workers allegedly vandalised window panes of a bus. Cops then lathicharged the workers and later brought all of them outside SHAR. The situation still wasn’t under control as heated arguments continued between them. 

The workers alleged that they are yet to receive four months of pending wages. The space centre employees had taken suo moto cognisance and took care of their minimum needs. Gudur DSP B. Sriharsha, circle inspectors from Sullurpet, Naidupet, and sub-inspectors from Sriharikota and Tada are monitoring the situation. 

The protests have been going on since May 6 when almost 1,000 workers staged a dharna at the space centre. Overall, 2,000 migrant workers—from Odisha, Jharkhand, and a few other states—are working at SHAR, where many of them have already had their travel arrangements sorted and are heading home. 

“The lockdown took a toll on our livelihood and our life. The management has completely ignored us, has failed to provide proper food, and has not taken any steps to send us home,” said a migrant worker while addressing media during the protest. 

Meanwhile, National Highway 16, which passes through the city, is seeing hundreds of migrant workers walking hundreds of kilometers to their hometowns. 

“I never thought that I would walk for 880 kilometers to meet my beloved family at my native place in Vizianagaram. This is the toughest challenge of my life. I have no alternative except to accept it,” said Janni Kumar, a migrant worker walking to his home town in Vizianagaram district from Chennai city in Tamil Nadu.

Janni Kumar and five of his friends, who work in a small scale industry in Chennai, lost their jobs due to the lockdown. They managed to stay for forty days in Chennai without any income, but problems arose after their savings started to drain. 

“I migrated to Chennai a couple of years ago. I’m happy there and am sending some money to my parents and family. But the lockdown has drained me of all my savings. The Tamil Nadu government failed to provide transport for us, so we started walking on May 4 and reached Vijayawada today,” Kumar said. 

