Surat: Migrants get Covid-19 information in their native languages
2020-04-30
SURAT: Considering the large population of the migrants, which is at a high risk of contracting the deadly coronavirus infection, the Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) has started an awareness campaign in their own languages.


The civic body has printed attractive pamphlets in various languages including Odiya, Telegu, Bengali, Marathi and Hindi, targeting the migrant population residing in different parts of the city. The pamphlets, contain information on the do’s and don’ts are being distributed in the migrant-dominated areas through the health workers and civic staff.

Sources said that city’s Limbayat zone has recorded the highest number of 223 Covid-19 positive cases out of the total 555 recorded in the city. The zone has maximum concentration of the areas dominated by migrants from other states. The areas including Umarwada, Mithikhadi, Udhana Yard, Navagam, Dindoli, Magob, Parvat, Godadara etc have the majority of the population from states like Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Odisha.

The civic body has also prepared video messages for spreading awareness among the migrant population in their own languages. In one of the video, Municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani, who is from Odisha, has personally addressed the migrant population on the precautions to be taken to combat the deadly infection.

A senior officer of SMC said, “The aim behind the awareness campaign is to cover large number of migrant population living in the city. If they have pamphlets and video messages in their own language, it becomes easier for them to follow the do’s and don’ts to fight the disease. The migrant population is more vulnerable group.”

“Covid-19 cases are increasing among the migrant population in the city. So, we felt the need to spread awareness in their own languages. We have explained all important information in their own language to combat the virus,” said deputy municipal commissioner, Dr Ashish Naik.

