Migrants from Maha, Guj add to Covid-19 cases in east UP region
2020-05-12
Varanasi: Eight new Covid-19 positive were detected in four districts on Monday. Most of them were newly detected infected migrants who had returned from Mumbai, Ahmadabad and other cities, most of them by private vehicles.

In Varanasi also, two compounders of Jamia hospital were tested positive on Monday late evening. Before it a mechanic returned from Mumbai was tedted positive and an FIR was also lodged against him under sections of Epidemic diseases Act

Meanwhile, with the arrival of fresh report Ballia has also come on the map of Covid-19 cases recording its first Covid-19 case on Monday.

District magistrate Ballia Hari Pratap Shahi said that a 16-year-old migrant boy of Chandpur Diyar village of Bairiya area was tested Corona positive. This migrant boy, who was asymptomatic, had reached Jaunpur from Ahmadabad on May 4 and reached Ballia on May 5. His sample was collected at quarantine centre on May 7. Sample of nine other persons taken along with him had been found negative. The boya was sent to Azamgarh hospital’s isolation ward.

In Jaunpur, three migrant labourers, who had returned home by motorcycle and car in past one week, were tested positive, said DM Jaunpur Dinesh Kumar Singh. One youth of Chhagapur village of Ramnagar block, who had left Mumbai with two others of his village on a motorcycle on April 28, had reached home on May 4. His sample had been taken on May 5 and the report confirming him positive was received on Monday.

Another youth of Lakhapur village in Ramnagar block had returned from Mumbai with four others in a car on April 30. Another youth Satyam Singh of Prithvipur in Rampur block had returned home on motorcycle with one companion on April 30. Sample of these two had also been sent for laboratory test on May 5.

DM Jaunpur said that following the arrival of the reports of their samples, all three had been sent to DDU district hospital’s isolation ward in Varanasi while their villages have been declared hotspots. Before confirmation of these three cases, Jaunpur had eight Covid-19 positive cases. These eight persons had been discharged from Varanasi hospital by Sunday after getting cured.

In Ghazipur, a youth of Nasiruddinpur village of Mardah block, who had returned from Mumbai on May 5 with his father, was tested positive on Monday, said the officials adding that he has been sent to Varanasi for treatment. The total number of coropnavirus positive cases in Ghazipur has reached to eight now. Of these six had become cured.

In Varanasi, a 46-year-old motor mechanic was tested positive on Sunday late night. He had returned from Mumbai with his 13 relatives of Mirzapur district by two vehicles on May 4. He belongs to Pratappur village of Mirzamurad area and came on radar of the Varanasi officials after his three relatives, who had returned with him, were tested positive in Mirzapur, said chief medical officer Dr VB Singh. With these new developments Pratappur village has become 27th hotspot of Varanasi. An FIR against the mechanic was also lodged by the police under sections of Epidemic diseases Act.

Besides, the repeat sample of a Delhi returned elderly cancer patient was also tested positive, said the CMO. Other 92 reports of Varanasi received from BHU lab on Monday were found negative. Total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Varanasi has now reached to 83, he said adding that of them 48 had been cured and discharged from the hospital by Monday evening while one had died on April 3. Now active cases in district are 34, said the CMO.


