Migrants undergo Covid test to get rooms
2020-05-01
Ahmedabad: On their return after a failed attempt to reach Uttar Pradesh during lockdown, some migrant workers were not allowed inside their residences on Thursday and neighbours insisted that they should come with certificates proving they are Covid-19 negative. This led eight such workers to undergo the test and wait for the result. 

Four of them spent the day at the Sola Civil Hospital and four others landed in the Civil Hospital at Asarwa. Those whose samples were taken at the Civil Hospital were shifted to quarantine facility at Nikol. 

Jitendra and Daljit Vishwakarma had a different issue. Their landlord was not ready to give them the room back, which they had surrendered three days ago when they set off for their native place on motorcycles. 

The vehicles were seized by the authorities on Gujarat-Maharashtra border. “We had to call the police to get the key. Now we are settled here,” Jitendra said. 

On the governments now readying to facilitate migrant workers reach their natives, Jitendra said, “We do not have anything to do here in this situation. We got the wheat sold in our village to secure money to return. But we could not go. I will not miss any chance to go home.”

However, Jitendra still wants to go home on his bike which has been seized by officials in Madhya Pradesh near the state border. “It will be difficult, but I will try to get it released and go to my native on my motorcycle,” he said.

Eight of Jitendra’s companions were not lucky enough. They had to go straight to hospitals for Covid-19 tests. “While we were returning yesterday, we got calls from our landlord and neighbours that they would not allow us inside our rooms on return. They are insisting that we should not return, if we do not get medical certificates showing us to be Covid-19 negative,” Ajay Vishwakarma said. He was at Sola Civil Hospital along with Amit, Ravi and Shivam Vishwakarma waiting for test results. Ajay said, “There are people whose landlords are considerate. They got their rooms back in Vadaj, Meghaninagar and Kaligam.”

Similarly, Pankaj Vishwakarma and three others were in Nikol’s quarantine facility. “We went to the Civil Hospital for test. They collected our samples and sent us to this quarantine centre. Now they say we will be kept here for 14 days,” Pankaj said.


