Gujarat: Village mutes lockdown woes with loudspeakers
2020-05-09
RAJKOT: The biggest bane of the lockdown is the total lack of entertainment which is making people restless and tensed. But welcome to Sanjanasar, a village located 18km from the temple town Palitana in Bhavnagar district, which is keeping its population of 2,000 not only happy, but productive too. Here’s how.

As soon as the nationwide lockdown was announced the village panchayat hit upon an idea to kill two birds with one stone. It installed a public announcement system in the entire village, through which it will keep people entertainment and also disseminate important information during the lockdown period. 

Twelve speakers were installed across the village at the cost of Rs 1.1 lakh which were connected to the panchayat office from where it could provide important information from time to time. Even villagers contributed Rs 40,000 for the system, while the remaining amount was borne by the taluka panchayat. Soon, this became a major source of wholesome entertainment for people. 

Mornings began with the system waking people up with ‘Prabhatiya’ — with bhajans, folk songs, among other popular hymns keeping the people refreshed during their daily chores. Throughout the day, the panchayat broadcasts Gujarati movie songs, Lok Dayro besides religious sermons too which lessens the boredom of staying indoors. 

Pravin Gohil, a teacher in the village, said that the public announcement system created by the people with the aim of ‘Sarvajan Sukhay Sarvajan Hitay’ has been providing guidance, information and wholesome entertainment to the residents.

Talking to TOI, sarpanch of the village, Vikas Barad said, “People are thoroughly enjoying the lockdown period. Many have told me they love to listen to the ‘Prabhatiya’ while milking their cows in the morning or while carrying out other routine chores. We are using the system also to spread useful information to the people including news about ration, seeds for sowing and also the importance od maintaining social distancing.” 

Vishnu Vyas a trader said that it is through the system that villagers and traders are getting information when to open shops and what shops will be allowed to remain open at specific hours.


