Lockdown in Mumbai region: Minimum staff at banks, long queues at petrol pumps
2020-03-24
Fuel pumps to operate from 7am to 7pm 
Petrol pumps were packed across Mumbai, Thane and Navi Mumbai on Monday after several cars and bikes came out on the roads.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Pump owners in Mumbai region have resolved to keep their outlets open only for 12 hours, beginning Tuesday, from 7am to 7pm. This means even in an emergency at night, one will not be able to get fuel, be it petrol, diesel or CNG, said sources. 


Coronavirus in India: FAQs 

M Venkat Rao of Petrol Dealers’ Association, the umbrella organisation of a majority of pumps in the region, told TOI there was a serious “health hazard” for those working at the pumps in view of Covid-19. He added while on one hand pumps will serve essential needs, they will also protect their employees.

He said petrol pump attendants were finding it extremely difficult to get food as all restaurants were closed. Many have gone back to their naive villages. 

There were reports of some pumps in other districts across the state keeping a ceiling of Rs 1,000 for buying fuel and few insisted that the customers wear masks.

 
Banks offer basic services 

Mumbai’s bank branches operated with skeletal staff as several employees found it a challenge to attend office in Mumbai. 

While banks made it clear that services would be only basic—cheque and cash deposit and government payments—several customers came in demanding other services such as locker access. Several private banks, including HDFC Bank, Bandhan Bank and Federal Bank, said they would restrict work hours. Although banks accepted cheques for clearing, customers said they were told it could get delayed as there weren’t enough personnel to carry cheques to the centre. Some branches kept their shutter’s semi-open as there was not enough staff. 

Public sector banks asked smaller branches to operate with a manager, cashier and sub-staff.


HC benches down to just 2 

In a further drastic reduction of benches and court hours as preventive action in view of Covid-19 and the lockdown, Bombay high court on Monday notified that only one bench each would preside for two hours now on March 26 and March 30 for extremely urgent cases. This would be across all benches at Nagpur and Aurangabad and the HC at Goa.

Chief Justice of Bombay high court B P Dharmadhikari had the notice issued after taking stock of the situation on Monday. The bench would comprise only a single judge. The matters to be brought before the court on the next two dates have to be only of an extremely urgent nature. The last notice HC issued on March 19 had said the court would preside with limited seven benches, including division benches for urgent matters twice a week for two hours.

The change is that only two judges would preside for both dates. Justice S S Shinde for all criminal matters and Justice K K Tated for all civil matters will preside on Thursday and next Monday in HC principle bench. In HC’s Nagpur bench, it will be Justice S B Shukre for all civil and Justice R B Deo for all criminal matters while in Aurangabad bench the CJ has nominated Justices S V Gangapurwala for civil and T V Nalawade for criminal matters. In Goa Justice M S Sonak will preside.


Garbage collection dips

With almost everyone staying indoors on Sunday due to the Janta Curfew announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the difference could be made out in the total amount of garbage the city generated. There was almost a 40% reduction, civic data showed. On an average, Mumbai generates 6,700 metric tonne of garbage in a day. With almost all commercial establishments shut, on Monday, it totalled 3,714 metric tonne. Officials said it was the first time in years that it was so low. 


(Inputs by Somit Sen, Mayur Shetty, Swati Deshpande & Richa Pinto)

