Minister tests negative for Covid-19
2020-03-31
Nagpur: Rumors about firebrand leader Bachchu Kadu being home quarantined for 14 days spread across Vidarbha on Monday. Kadu, who is Maharashtra’s minister of state for water resources, school education, and women & child development is suffering from cough, cold, and fever from past five days.

Kadu’s office clarified that the minister got himself tested twice for coronavirus and he tested negative on both the occasions.

Monday also brought a big relief for Amravati as both sons of a Covid-19 positive couple tested negative. The couple had tested positive in Meerut (UP) on March 22. They left Amravati by train on March 18.

The health administration was on toes since the news of city couple found Covid-19 positive in UP came. The Amravati Municipal Corporation (AMC) had started door-to-door surveillance in a locality where the couple resides. The locality was in a shock. Fear was apparent as people had confined themselves to home.

While one of the sons tested 100% negative, the other one, despite testing negative, will have to undergo another test on April 1, the administration said. Both sons are in the isolation ward in Amravati.

Fear gripped the locality as rumours of one of the sons found positive started getting viral on social media. The administration warned of action against rumour mongers on social media and urged people not to trust such stories.

Apart from Nagpur, all other parts in Vidarbha heaved a sigh of relief on Monday as no new positive case was reported from the region.

In Yavatmal, where three positive patients recovered and were discharged on Saturday, no new admission was reported in the isolation ward of GMCH. Now, the hospital only has one presumptive patient, whose reports are awaited. Till date, 91 people are in home quarantine in Yavatmal. 

Gondia, where a 23-year-old youth, a confirmed positive case of Covid-19, is under treatment, also reported no new case on Monday. In fact, 13 close contacts of the positive patients were tested negative, which came as a big relief.

In Chandrapur, ten suspects got themselves admitted and swab samples of nine of them were collected. Eight of them were tested negative while one result is pending.


