Misinformation, racism more dangerous than coronavirus: Education department to students
2020-02-13
PANAJI: The directorate of education, in an advisory to schools on coronavirus, has said that misinformation and racism are more dangerous than any virus. “The panic and hysteria... is fuelled by racism and xenophobia, not evidence or practicality,” states the note issued to schools. Students have also been asked not to fall prey to panic over the virus, or to engage in ‘rude’ and ‘insensitive’ jokes which may be racist.


The advisory seeks to bust the ‘myths’ surrounding the ailment. The advisory also says that we need not all “panic and blame China for this emergency”. 


 

“Nothing justifies being rude to others,” it states.

The circular also asks schools to inform students that they should not believe everything they read online about coronavirus because it may not necessarily be factually correct. 

“Check for references and look for evidence, not ideology,” the advisory states. While informing students that they need not “buy a hazmat suit and an n95 mask to stay protected”, the advisory issued by director Vandana Rao states that “washing hands and sneezing into elbows is the best practice” to keep infection at bay. Clarifying on the ‘myth’ that “coronavirus is the most dangerous virus on earth”, the advisory counters it with the ‘fact’ that ‘the common flu kills 60 times more people annually than coronavirus’”.

“Only 2% cases have reported deaths, and most of these deaths are associated with weaker immune systems (e.g. old age),” states the advisory, clarifying that being diagnosed with coronavirus does not mean that death due to it is inevitable.

The circular has been sent to heads of all government, government-aided and unaided schools from the primary to the higher secondary level. 

“Bring this advisory to the notice of the students, teachers and non-teaching staff of the respective school and put it up on the notice board,” Rao said in the circular issued on Tuesday.

