‘Mission Begin Again’: Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray says dump ‘lockdown’ in bin
2020-06-01
MUMBAI: Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray continues to steer course taking a cautious approach despite pressure from within the ruling alliance to introduce more concessions for economic activity during the lockdown.


In a televised address on Sunday, Thackeray said while the lockdown was “a science”, allowing concessions was “an art”, and it has to be achieved in a gradual manner.

“…some people are in a rush and want the lockdown revoked completely. We have seen examples of countries where there was no lockdown and of countries where they had a lockdown, and what happened after it was revoked. We don't want to relax something and then revoke it. We have to take our next steps very carefully,” said the CM.

Avoiding comparisons between the Centre and the state’s strategies—in recent speeches, the CM was at pains to underscore “lack of support” from the NDA regime—this time, he thanked the railway minister for his support and then zeroed in on Maharashtra’s plan to exit the lockdown.


Newspapers can be delivered door-to-door from June 7: Uddhav
 Thackeray 

Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray on Sunday said the state government will allow door-to-door delivery of newspapers from next Sunday (June 7). He said the boys who deliver newspapers should be given masks and hand sanitisers and “their safety should be taken care of ”. Newspaper delivery has remained disrupted in some parts of Maharashtra since the lockdown began.


CM: Field hospitals at BKC, NSCI will be on stand-by in future

Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray said on Sunday that the priority of the state henceforth will be on healthcare and education. He said field hospitals set up at BKC and NSCI will be kept on stand-by even in future while regular activities like exhibitions and conventions are resumed. "In case it is required, all this machinery can be set up in 2-3 days there," he said.

He also dwelt on his government’s position vis-à-vis the lockdown saying Maharashtra has to be watchful in allowing relaxations. He later referred to the Centres’ guidelines allowing re-opening of malls, restaurants, religious places and even barber shops, which the state government has not allowed.

He also snubbed the BJP's state unit saying there were people who claimed the situation in Mumbai was out of control and that the Army should be called in or presidential rule should be imposed in the state. "It saddens me when our own people give a bad name to the state. But I have the support of the people, I don't worry about losing power," said Thackeray.

He also thanked railway minister Piyush Goyal for providing 800 trains and said so far nearly 16 lakh migrants in the state had left for their hometowns, of which 11.5 lakh boarded trains. Thackeray and Goyal had engaged in a bitter spat a few days ago over coordination issues linked to supply of trains.

