Mixed bag: New Covid-19 cases cross half century, recovery hits a century in Kolkata
2020-04-24
KOLKATA: The highest number of Covid-19 cases — 58 — were reported on Thursday. But there was a silver lining as well with the count of patients discharged after Covid treatment crossing the century mark. 

“Kolkata remains a challenge for us,” chief secretary Rajiva Sinha said during the evening briefing on Thursday as several cases were reported from the city. The Kolkata figures came from different containment zones under the KMC, making it difficult to identify spots where the virus has hit hard. “The Covid cases in Kolkata are scattered. We are trying to trace the contacts and isolate them,” Sinha said. 

The remaining fresh cases come from Howrah and North 24-Parganas. The chief secretary held that all these three districts — Kolkata, Howrah and North 24 Parganas — have a high density of population and also a high mobility.

The redeeming feature in this grim situation is that the number of Covid patients released after cure has crossed the century mark, taking the total number of released patients to 103. As many as 24 Covid patients were released on Thursday.

According to Sinha, five of the total 150-odd containment zones under KMC haven’t reported any Covid case in last 14 days. The scene is slightly better in Howrah and North 24 Parganas. “As many as 10 of the total 60-70 containment zones in Howrah haven’t reported Covid cases since April 12. Eight of the 40 containment zones in North 24 Parganas didn’t report a Covid case since April 14,” he said.

The state has ramped up trace and test, particularly in the Red Zones. The state had performed only 58 tests till March 16. It has vigorously increased tests in the last one month taking the total test figures to 953 on April 23. 

“The state has already placed orders for 50,000 Viral Transport Medium (VTM) kits, 14,000 RNA extractors. But we have to get the Real Time-PCR kits from the Centre only. The supply from the Centre is far below our requirements. We began with one ICMR approved laboratory during the initial days of testing and have added 11 more laboratories including the private. Chittaranjan Cancer Institute laboratory at Rajarhat, a new addition to the list of laboratories, has performed 23 tests today. RG Kar laboratory is likely to begin tests from tomorrow,” the chief secretary said. Sinha will talk to the Union health ministry on Thursday seeking its help on supply of kits. Sinha reassured doctors and health workers that the health department has adequate protective equipment. 

“We have distributed 4.3 lakh PPEs to hospitals when the number of health workers, including safaiwallahs, diet boys is 20,000. Of them, 3,000 are frontline health workers attending to Covid patients. We salute them. The state will make all necessary arrangements to protect them,” the chief secretary said. The state health department is also providing food to the health workers including those who are on a seven-day leave in medical hostels. 


