Mixing of close contacts of patients, others irks quarantined
2020-04-10
Nagpur: The concerns of those placed under institutional quarantine at MLA hostel, Ravi Bhavan, Vanamati and Lonara college do not seem misplaced.

Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) seems to have overlooked directives of quarantining yet-to-be-tested close contacts of Covid-19 positive patients only at the privately-run Lonara college and those with travel history at the three government centres.

This was to ensure there was no cross-infection among the two sets of people as Delhi returnees had no known direct exposure to patients. Two persons – one each from MLA Hostels and Vanamati - have since tested positive for coronavirus last week. 

TOI has been consistently reporting about the concerns raised by mostly Delhi-returnees who are worried about sharing rooms with local suspects. Around 40 foreign-returned people figuring in Mumbai list faced the harassment of being picked up by NMC on Sunday night, only to be released next day. 

Last week, over 197 people were traced and quarantined within days of receiving the list from Delhi by NMC. Of these, many demanded they too be allowed to return home as they had returned over 20 days ago like the group of 40.

In the last two days, NMC started bringing all close contacts at the three government facilities though there was space at Lonara centre. Realizing the threat, some people spoke to officials and also forwarded audio clips of their conversation with them to TOI.

In one such conversation when a Delhi returnee informed him about the situation, the official says, “Directives have been given to isolate only those who test negative in city and close contacts at Lonara. Don’t worry.”

The close contacts being high risk category are also kept at Mayo hospital or GMCH isolation wards till their test reports arrive. 

The person then informed the official that samples are taken being taken after close contacts are brought here. “We are told that now on they will be taken to Lonara but continuously people are being brought here. Some influential people were released too,” the person said.

“Six days have passed, but we are not informed about our results. The sample was taken at Vanamati,” the person said.

The official, requesting not to be named, said most Delhi returnees would be released after a second Covid-19 test on seventh day of stay. “Unless we have second test results in hand we can’t tell them anything. It will create ruckus as everyone wants to go home,” the official said.

Most of these people are also agitated because they have been tagged with Tablighi Jamaat. District collector Ravindra Thakare said, “All persons who were present in that area during TJ, whether Muslim or a non-Muslim, could become infected. So out of abundance of caution all have been quarantined. Earlier two Hindus of Nagpur who had travelled from Delhi to Nagpur for their business were found infected. So all ofus need to take care.”


