MKU researchers developing filters for Covid-19 prevention
2020-05-12
Madurai: Madurai Kamaraj University (MKU) researchers are developing copper-based filters that disinfect and destroys SARS-CoV-2 virus so as to aid in the prevention of spread of Covid-19. 

The project was recently sanctioned by the department of Science and Technology (DST) through Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under special project call on Covid-19.

The project, for which Rs 25 lakh has been sanctioned as initial funding, is being headed by Dr Ramasamy Mayilmurugan, School of Chemistry and Dr P Gopal, department of Plant Biotechnology at MKU. Sources said the research for the filters will be carried out at the labs in MKU School of Chemistry and that support is also being sought from Theni Government Medical College for getting samples and testing the filters. 

According to Dr Mayilmurugan, the ‘bioinspired copper-based virus filter’ can arrest the catalytic site of virus. Both filtration and virus disinfection take place simultaneously with the use of copper-based filters, allowing the filter to reduce the risk of infection by removing contamination from the air or surfaces.

“The filters can remove pathogens including Covid-19 effectively as well as to interrupt human-to-human transmission by killing them completely. It will be useful in confined places such as educational institutes, hospitals, transportation, waiting areas, shopping malls, and meeting halls,” he explained.

MKU vice-chancellor M Krishnan said that these filters, which would be developed at the university, can be rapidly prototyped and tested. “This would help facilitate a middle-of-the-road approach without lockdowns to keep the day-to-day life lively at all levels. The filters would provide safer alternatives to surgical masks, N95 respirator masks and other filters available in the market,” he said.

He also added they are now looking for industrial partners to bring findings into products for the public service. The project has been sanctioned for one year after which it may be extended depending on the progress made.


