Nagpur: MLA hostel receives 14 new flyers, 25 leave for home-quarantine
2020-03-21
NAGPUR: The quarantined facility at MLA hostel received 14 new patients on Friday. All of them were sent for a mandatory 48 hours quarantine after which they would be offered a choice to go home for self-quarantine or stay on the premises.

According to sub-divisional officer Shekhar Ghadge, who is looking after the temporarily built facility, all 14 of them arrived in a Qatar Airways flight. “We will retain the senior citizens for 14 days, as per the government’s orders. Other would be provided choice of home quarantine after two days,” he told TOI.

Other officials informed that 25 international flyers were released for home quarantine after their 48 hours mandatory stay ended. “In total, we’ve released 39 flyers after this facility was set up about a week back. Most of them are students or IT professionals. One of them was admitted after his condition deteriorated, but now he’s fine. So far 65, flyers have been brought in this facility from the airport since beginning,” they said.

After rap from the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court, the administration started a police check post and also improved on its facilities to be offered to the visitors. Even Wi-Fi kits were provided to the occupants so that they could continue their official work.

The SDO informed that they would get more flyers after Friday midnight through Air Arabia’s Sharjah flight. But number of passengers is reducing with each passing day. From Sunday, the government of India has banned all international flights, so their numbers wouldn’t increase after that, at least for a week. 

“We’re allowing them to leave after stamping on their hands and also explaining them the procedure on how to go for a self-quarantine. If they flout rules, they could be punished,” Ghadge said.

The administration has already been offering facility to flyers to reach their homes in government vehicles only to stop spread of virus to cab drivers and others. They’re not allowed to use any public transport. “If flyers are found with slightest of symptoms, they are straightway taken to Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) for tests,” the officials informed.


