Gujarat: MLAs testing Covid-19 positive a worry for parties
2020-06-05
Gandhinagar: With the crucial Rajya Sabha election barely a fortnight away, both the BJP and the Congress are worried about their MLAs testing positive for coronavirus. Just ahead of the high-stakes election, three BJP MLAs have tested positive for Covid-19 and are being treated while one Congress MLA has recovered after being hospitalized for Covid-19.

Both the BJP and the Congress are hopeful that the Election Commission of India will allow proxy voting in case MLAs cannot remain physically present for voting in the state assembly on June 19. However, the representation of peoples act (RPA) allows only physical presence of eligible voters.

S Murali Krishna, chief electoral officer (CEO), Gujarat, said, “The RPA act allows only physical assistance during voting if the voter requests in advance however he/she has to come at the voting booth. There is no provision in the act of allowing proxy voting. Postal ballot voting is allowed, but that has to be requested before the nomination process ends. Period for allowing postal ballot vote is over now. If one cannot come for voting due to coronavirus infection, we cannot do anything as per the present law. However we will arrange for a health check up at the voting area and if anyone has symptoms we will make special arrangements for voting.”

Jitu Vaghani, state BJP president, said, “An extraordinary situation has arisen because of the coronavirus outbreak. We will request the ECI to allow proxy voting or make arrangements to ensure that an MLA can vote even if he or she has tested positive for Covid-19. This issue is affecting all parties across the country and we are hopeful that the ECI will take this issue into consideration.”

State Congress president Amit Chavda said, “MLA from any party is likely to be infected by coronavirus. Even ECI staff can get infected by the virus. The ECI ought to look into this matter and allow for proxy voting or make some arrangement where MLAs who are Covid positive can cast their vote.”


