At 214 cases/million, Goa’s Covid-19 rate higher than national average
2020-06-10
PANAJI: For every 1 million or 10 lakh persons, Goa has 214 positive cases, higher than the national average of 200 confirmed cases per million, data shows.


Ever since the first cases were detected at Mangor Hill, Goa has seen a spike in the number of new infections, with a 45% average growth in the past one week.

Despite the jump in cases, Goa’s mortality rate remains zero. As on Tuesday morning, of the total 330 confirmed cases, Goa had 263 active cases, of which authorities say around 90% are asymptomatic and 67 persons or 20% of the cases have recovered.

Data published in the directorate of health services’ (DHS) bulletin on Monday evening showed that 31,455 tests have been conducted in the state since January 29, indicating that 20,425 individuals have been tested for every million or 10 lakh residents.

This number is way higher than the national average of 3,291 tests per million. From April 26 to June 8 alone, Goa conducted 19,830 tests on individuals.

“You need to increase the capacity of testing, there is no doubt about that,” said a doctor with the DHS. “They have got machines to enhance testing, but the manpower in the labs also needs to be increased. The staff is stretched.” He chose to remain anonymous since the state government has prohibited personnel from speaking to the media.

According to the UIDAI website, Goa has 16.6 lakh registered unique Aadhar numbers generated for the state. 

The National Commission on Population pegs Goa’s population at 15.4 lakh for 2019-end.

However, authorities point out that most individuals who have tested positive arrived from other states, mainly Maharashtra and Delhi.

The state’s earlier standard operating procedure made it mandatory for people arriving by train or road to undergo mandatory testing, but as the numbers began to swell, the state diluted its stance.

From Wednesday onwards, people will no longer have to undergo mandatory TrueNat Covid-19 tests and could instead opt for home quarantine.

The stringent testing regimen followed by the DHS helped the state post high testing figures, but also put a strain on the state’s medical infrastructure.

“They were making rules but finding it difficult to comply with the rules,” said the DHS doctor.

“The government said test everybody, but at the end of the day it’s the doctors who have to test. If you have just one entry point and a limited number of people, you can have 100% testing, but with the borders open and trains coming in, it was becoming very difficult to test.”


