Mobile unit to collect random samples for Covid testing from vendors, hawkers and chemists
2020-04-23
Bareilly: The Bareilly health department has deployed a mobile medical unit in crowded localities of the city to collect “pool” samples for random Covid-19 testing of vegetable and fruit vendors, hawkers, chemists, etc.

In Bareilly, six members of a family tested positive for Covid-19. They have recovered after treatment and have been discharged from hospital, leaving the district with no active covid case as of now. There are, however, 13 Covid-19 positive cases from neighbouring Budaun who are currently undergoing treatment in Bareilly’s Covid Level 1 hospital.

Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “The mobile medical unit will be stationed in crowded areas of the city. We’ll collect nasal swab samples from fruit and vegetable vendors, hawkers, chemists and grocery store owners on a voluntary basis. These people are exempted from lockdown norms as they provide essential services, and thus interact with most number of people. The aim is to check if they have come in contact with any covid positive patient.”

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “The mobile medical unit visited Mandi Samiti and railway hospital on Wednesday, and collected seven samples whose reports are awaited. Already, around 30-40 of the vendors and chemists who have been given lockdown passes, have approached the district medical team for their samples to be collected and tested. Meanwhile, reports of 31 suspects tested on Tuesday arrived on Wednesday. They had all come in contact with positive cases. But all of them turned negative.”

According to officials, the mobile medical unit will collect pool samples. One pool contains 10 samples. Explaining the procedure, an official said, “If a pool tests negative for Covid-19, it means all 10 people whose samples were in the pool are negative. However, if a pool is found positive, all 10 persons have to undergo individual tests for Covid-19.”

The health department on Wednesday also collected 22 pool samples from journalists working in the area, and 45 individual samples from suspects. All of these will be sent to the Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) for testing on Thursday.

Officials said 47 teams conducted door-to-door survey in the buffer zone around the house where the family of six that tested positive live, and screened 3,440 houses on Wednesday. Though they did not find any suspect, they identified 25 people who have returned to Bareilly from elsewhere, and advised them to self-quarantine at home.


