Mobile med units at Pilibhit, Kheri checkposts on Nepal border to screen people for coronavirus
2020-01-29
Bareilly: The health department has set up mobile medical units at checkposts in Pilibhit and Lakhimpur Kheri districts to screen people entering India through the Indo-Nepal border for novel coronavirus, that has claimed 106 lives in China alone and is spreading to other nations. According to a Nepal-based daily, one confirmed case and two suspected cases have surfaced in Nepal.

Health officials said people entering India are being checked for symptoms of pneumonia, seasonal influenza (flu), bronchitis, disorientation and dizziness. Two isolation wards have been set up at Bareilly district hospital here. Not much is known about the virus but experts say, the main symptoms are fever and in some cases, difficulty in breathing.

Though an alert against coronavirus has been sounded across UP, but special attention is on the districts bordering Nepal to prevent coronavirus from spreading in India.

Additional director (health), Bareilly division, Dr Rakesh Dubey told TOI, “A mobile medical unit each has been deployed at two checkpoints -- Dhanara Ghat and Naujalia Nakta -- in Pilibhit. Our health staff will check all persons who enter Pilibhit through Nepal. If any person shows suspected symptoms, his or her blood and throat swab samples will be taken.” The sample will be sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune and further action will be taken on the basis of the report.

Both Dhanara Ghat and Naujalia Nakta are situated on the opposite sides of river Sharda. 

Dubey added, “No case of coronavirus has been detected so far in the country. However, cases of influenza, which is a common viral infection, are being reported in the region.” 

Additional chief medical officer, Lakhimpur Kheri, Dr Ashwani Kumar said, “We have deployed a team of two members at each of the four checkpoints -- Gauriphanta, Tikuniya, Chandan Chowki and Khajuriya -- in Lakhimpur Kheri district. Each team comprises a medical officer and paramedical staff. Besides, 108 ambulance is stationed at four checkpoints. We are following the format given by supervisors for checking suspected cases. The screening of people crossing the border is done in association with Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB, immigration and Customs departments.” 

Meanwhile, officials have reserved two isolation wards at district hospital in Bareilly. Chief medical officer, Bareilly, Dr Vineet Shukla, said, “We conducted a meeting with staff at district hospitals, community health centres and primary health centres and informed them about coronavirus. We are on the alert and have proper logistics to deal with it.” 

According to health department officials, after cluster of pneumonia were reported from Wuhan city of Hubei province in China in December last year, Chinese authorities identified it to be caused by a new type of coronavirus (2019-nCoV). It has infected more than 2,700 people and caused 106 deaths in China. 


