Modi remains in touch with world capitals for global fight against coronavirus
2020-04-26
NEW DELHI: Through the ongoing Covid-19 crisis, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has maintained a steady stream of diplomatic engagements, pushing for India’s medical needs, ranging from equipment to PPEs and testing kits, as also assuring all help in the global fight against the pandemic. 


On Friday, Modi spoke to Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong about the state of migrant labour, who are being held responsible for the second wave of Covid-19 infections in the city-state. An MEA readout of the conversation said, “Prime Minister promised to provide all possible support for maintaining supplies of essential goods, including medical products, to Singapore. Prime Minister also expressed his appreciation for the support being extended to Indian citizens in Singapore.”

India is also sourcing face masks from Singapore, especially through Indian-run fashion set-up Zilingo.

On Thursday, Modi spoke to Leo Varadkar, PM of Ireland, from where India is sourcing a big batch of testing kits. “Prime Minister Varadkar appreciated the role being played by Indian-origin doctors and nurses in fighting the infection in Ireland. Prime Minister thanked Varadkar for the care and support being extended to Indian citizens present in Ireland, and promised to similarly facilitate Irish citizens in India. The two leaders agreed that India and Ireland can leverage their strengths in the pharmaceutical and medical fields to contribute to the global fight against the pandemic. They also deliberated on the potential for strengthening India’s cooperation with Ireland, as well as with the EU, in the post-Covid context,” said an MEA statement.

The PM on Tuesday spoke to Ibu Solih of the Maldives, which is one of the two places where India has sent medical teams besides Kuwait. 

Modi has also spoken to Cyril Ramaphosa, president of South Africa which has received consignment of anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine from India.

Egyptian President Abdul Fattah Al-Sisi spoke to Modi as well. India has promised to send essential medicines, like hydroxychloroquine and paracetamol to Egypt to help in their fight against the coronavirus.

