Modified lockdown in phased manner from April 21: Gehlot
2020-04-16
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Wednesday said modified lockdown would be implemented across the state in a phased manner from April 21.

He said the state government had allowed agriculture activities like harvesting from April 15. According to the new guidelines issued by the home ministry, industrial activities in the rural areas and in dedicated industrial areas were allowed with social distancing practices in place. This would be a big relief to the migrant labourers who are stranded at different places without jobs.

Gehlot gave these directions at a high-level meeting held at his official residence.

He said if factory owners provide residential facilities to workers in urban areas, then work could commence from April 21. But he said restrictions on the movement of labourers will continue to be in force. The chief minister directed the officials to coordinate with various agencies so that work at the factories could be commenced without any hitch. “The district administration, RICCO, district industry centres and police have to coordinate so that factories don’t face any hiccups,” said the chief minister. He also asked officials to make arrangements for issuing passes to workers in these factories.

The chief minister also gave direction to reopen government offices gradually. Currently, only essential services are functioning. The offices of other departments should start with the presence of group A and B officers, he said. Gradually, one-third of other employees should be permitted on rotation so that the administrative machinery slowly gets to full steam in due course. He said in corona hotspots where curfew was in force, nobody including government employees would be allowed for inward or outward movements.

Gehlot said in rural areas, work will start with PWD and irrigation department. He said MGNREGA would also kick off from April 20. The government’s priority was to provide jobs and income opportunities to the rural population.

Gehlot said the guidelines issued by the Centre had to be strictly implemented and the state had to work in coordination with the Centre to make the lockdown till May 3 announced by the central to save the life of people and restart the economy a success. 


