Modified lockdown breathes some life into city, keeps cops on toes
2020-04-21
Jaipur: On the first day of modified lockdown on Monday, a significant number of government employees with masks on were seen driving to their offices.At some areas, police had to intervene when people unnecessarily came out of their houses. Some of the eateries and more number of vegetable and grocery shops were opened across the state. However, on the highways, the opening of dhabas gave a sigh of relief to truck drivers transporting essential commodities. At some of the areas, shops selling meat and chicken were also opened.At Raja Park, some people were seen wandering on the roads. When police asked if they had any permission to come out or any valid reason, they could not give a convincing reply. “At some of the places people were seen roaming unnecessarily and were sent back by our teams,” said Pushpendra Singh, assistant commissioner of police, Aadarsh Nagar.At many places police personnel with folded hands were seen asking people to go back to their homes. “Some believed that lockdown is over. Thus we seized their vehicles as they were found roaming without any reason,” said a senior officer of traffic police.Other things which were opened included flour mills, puncture shops, and more number of grocery shops and vegetable vendors.Good number of officers came to their offices at the Rajasthan Housing Board, Jaipur Development Authority and other government offices. At a few offices thermal screening of those who arrived was also done.At the state secretariat, officers up to deputy secretary rank also abided by social distancing. At the entrance of government offices, guards offered sanitizers to employees who arrived for work.The modified lockdown also increased supply of goods in the city, especially grocery, fruits, and vegetables. “It helped us as many trucks which were stopped by police have started arriving. We got plenty of vegetables from the local farms,” said Pappu Lal Prajapat, a wholesale vegetable dealer at Mohana Mandi.However, many factories at the Jhotwara industrial area were closed due to lack of employees while service stations for automobiles were opened. “I had given my car to the garage prior to lockdown. I got it back today,” said Gaurav Sharma, a native of Jhotwara. 