PM Narendra Modi checks lockdown mood in six-minute talk with Pune village sarpanch
2020-04-25
PUNE: A six-minute conversation between Priyanka Medankar-Choudhari, Medankarwadi’s 28-year-old woman sarpanch, and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, covered the steps that the village has taken to check the coronavirus and the lockdown mood in the hinterlands.


Medankarwadi, near Chakan, is about 34km from Pune on the Nashik highway, interacted with Modi on a live television programme to mark Panchayati Raj Diwas on Friday. 

Just after she had apprised him about the measures, Modi said,“Priyankaji ab to gaon wale thak gaye honge, logon ko gussa aata hoga yeh Modiji kaise hai, itne dino se band karke rakha hai.” (People in your village must be tired now and might be angry now about what Modi has done and why he has kept them confined to home all these days). 

Medankar replied, “Logoko ghar pe rehne ki aadat nahi hai isliye gaon vale thak gaye hai, par unko pata hai ki humare desh ke Pradhan Mantri jo kar rahe hai wo humare desh ke liye kar rahe hai. Log samajte hai.” (People are not used to sitting at home and hence are tired of it but they know and understand that you have done this for the safety of the nation)

Medankar has been the sarpanch of the village of 12,500 residents according to Census 2011 since 2015, and the 45,000 migrants since the village falls in an industrial belt with automotive multinationals. 

On Thursday night, she was too excited to sleep. She went online for ‘videos of the PM talking to common people’. She also recited a poem she wrote for him.

She told the PM that they had distributed soap to all households and sanitised the village, kept open the shops every alternate day for grocery and vegetables were directly delivered to housing societies.

“The Asha health workers distributed over 7,500 sanitary napkins and the women self-help groups made over 5,000 masks for the poor,” she told Modi. 

He praised the work done by the farmer producer organisations in Maharashtra and encouraged her to use e-National Agriculture Market and GeM to help farmers get a better price for their products and for women self-help groups to be able to sell directly to the government without commission or tenders.

Medankar also told the Prime Minister about a survey that identified 5,000 families to give ration kits to last a fortnight. As of Friday, 2,000 kits had been distributed through CSR efforts.

