Modified lockdown in Rajasthan from today, follow protocol strictly, says Ashok Gehlot
2020-04-20
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Sunday appealed to the people to “follow lockdown protocol strictly” even as limited relaxations kick in from Monday. While asking people to stay indoors, he requested religious leaders to ensure that Ramzan and Akshaya Tritiya be observed within their homes later this month. He said the “earlier decision to call 33 per cent staff on rotational basis to government offices has been kept in abeyance”.

The CM also stated ‘modified lockdown’ doesn’t mean people should come out of their houses.




He said only those government officials up to the level of deputy secretaries, secretaries, heads of departments and their personal staff would report for duty in the districts and at the secretariat.




“Everybody knows about the significance of Ramzan and Akshaya Tritiya. It is the responsibilty of religious leaders to appeal to their communities and people to pray at home during Akshaya Tritiya and not gather at a place in large numbers during Ramzaan. Their responsibility increases in this regard. Earlier too, they supported us in all possible ways to execute the lockdown during the recently-concluded religious festivals. We will request them again. I hope the entire society will act responsibly in fighting the disease,” Gehlot said. “Self-discipline is the need of the hour and people should not give police the opportunity to take action against them. There will be no relaxations in curfew zones and hotspots,” he added.

“I want to remind people that modified lockdown is by no means a relaxation. They should not have any misunderstanding about it and must follow the protocol of a lockdown. I hope by now people have understood the importance of lockdown and severity of infectious diseases and will adhere to it in future. The current rules will remain in force with limited relaxations and various conditions till May 3. Nobody should have any confusion on this. Barring people from sectors/activities which have been allowed to function, others are advised not to come out of their houses,” he said.

“The earlier decision to call one-third of the officials to office has been kept in abeyance for now. We will think about that later. Until May 3, we will take decisions (to withdraw) on restrictions in a phased manner. Industrial work can resume outside Nagar Palika areas. In rural areas, construction works, industrial works and mining can start. Within the cities, only those industries will be allowed where the workers will be restricted within their premises/boundaries. If they don’t follow these norms, their permission will be withdrawn,” he added.

He said that people should ensure maintaining social distancing and wear masks in ‘mandis’, shops, mining sites, industries, real estate, construction and business sites.

Gehlot further said, “One doesn’t need to apply for new passes for three months. For new ones, one can apply for e-passes online. The guidelines issued by the home department on April 15 will apply during the modified lockdown.”

The chief minister also said laboratories for sample collections under cooperatives departments will start to function from Monday and the sale of mustard and ‘chana’ on MSP rates would begin on May 1 in the state.


