Molecular structure of Covid-19, HIV mostly similar, say experts
2020-03-17
Jaipur: The molecular structure of HIV and Covid-19 are similar to some extent, the health department claimed justifying the use of medicines, which are useful in treatment of HIV, for the treatment of Covid-19.

Three persons have already recovered from Covid-19 who were provided with the antiretroviral therapy, which include lopinavir/ritonavir — two commonly used for the treatment of HIV.

Additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh said, “First the SMS Hospital provided the Covid-19 patients with drugs useful in treatment of swine flu and malaria. Since the molecular structure of HIV is similar to Covid-19, the doctors at SMS Hospital tried a cocktail of drugs useful in HIV treatment. It seems that it is working.”

However, he said that the use of two drugs useful in HIV treatment can be used in public health emergency. There are provisions for using them in such emergency cases. “If it has to be widely prescribed for treatment of Covid-19, there is a need to follow a process, which is a regulatory process of randomised controlled trails. The trail should be done on large sample size of patients. We have used the drugs for emergency, if it has to be prescribed in the market, there is a need for randomised trials on a large scale,” said Singh.

Besides, the health department has informed the Italian embassy that the Italian couple, who have undergone treatment for Covid-19, are free from Covid-19 and they can go back to Italy.

However, no new positive case reported in the state has been reported. All 290 evacuees from Iran are at the Army Wellness Centre in Jaisalmer and out of those, no one has tested positive for the disease.

The sample of the tourist who died of cardiac arrest at the Chittorgarh resort two days ago has also tested negative.

All the districts have been asked to focus on disinfection of public places and hospitals, intensive awareness specially advising people to avoid large gatherings and keep adequate social distance, a health department official said.


