Mominpura woman in trust-run hosp tests +ve; 36 staff quarantined
2020-05-12
Nagpur: Yet another woman from Mominpura, the city’s second Covid-19 hotspot, had been admitted to a trust-run hospital at Sitabuldi, and tested positive on Monday. A team of 36 doctors and staff from the hospital were quarantined at Pachpaoli Institutional Quarantine Centre. Among other patients, a 29-year-old positive person from Pandhrabodi, who tested positive on May 7, died at GMCH Isolation Ward and was cremated at Ambazari Ghat on Monday.A private hospital at Kamal Chowk on Kamptee Road was temporarily closed down for fumigation on Monday as a 60-year-old woman from Mominpura had been admitted here, and later tested positive on Sunday. A team of 48 doctors and staff of this hospital were quarantined at a private hotel on Central Avenue on Monday.Thus, 84 doctors and staff of two hospitals have now been quarantined. Swab samples of all quarantined doctors and staff will be taken and tested for Covid-19 on Tuesday.Doctors and staff of another private multispecialty hospital at Shankar Nagar on North Ambazari Road too are likely to be quarantined on Tuesday. A 50-year-old woman from Mominpura was taking dialysis for kidney treatment. She went to the private hospital at Shankar Nagar complaining of vomiting and loose motions on May 8.Since she was taking dialysis from trust-run hospital at Sitabuldi, doctors advised her to get admitted there. “She was admitted at the trust-run hospital. Swab samples were sent by the hospital to IGGMCH, which tested positive,” NMC additional medical officer health Dr Praveen Gantawar told TOI.Gantawar added, “Trust and state-run hospitals should handle patients from containment zones with outmost care. The same should be done when they receive patients of SARI or high-risk category,” he said.The trust-run hospital has become the sixth whose doctors and staff had to be quarantined for handling patients who later tested corona positive. First one was Jaripatka-based hospital followed by cancer hospital on Kamptee Road, Parvati Nagar, Congress Nagar, and Kamal Chowk.Mominpura has been a containment zone since April 4. The NMC is doing door-to-survey daily to find suspected, high-risk patients. Also, the civic body is tracing close contacts of positive patients almost every day. With latest two cases, it has again become clear that people are not giving correct information to NMC teams.A 30-year-old man quarantined at Vanamati Institutional Quarantine Centre also tested positive on Monday. He is also a resident of Mominpura.Thus, the district’s total cases increased to 298. The tally of Mominpura is 147 which, is 49.32% of district’s total cases. The number of cases from Satranjipura, city’s first hotspot, has remained at 116. These two localities account for 88.25% of total cases in the district.With a large number of cases came from Mominpura and Satranjipura, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and CP Bhushan Kumar Upadhyay have restricted shops selling essential commodities to six hours in a day. Only one or two entry points are open.Also, 14 more patients of SARI were admitted at GMCH on Monday and will be tested for Covid-19. In last few days, some SARI patients, including one from Pandhrabodi, have tested positive. He died on Monday.The NMC arranged his funeral at Ambazari Ghat. A patient with comorbidities, the deceased was cremated in the LPG crematoria as per Covid-19 guidelines. Sources said 28 family members, relatives and friends of the deceased have already been quarantined on May 8 and 9.Meanwhile, four more corona positive patients were discharged on Monday after recovering totally. All four are from Satranjipura, of which three were discharged from IGGMCH and one from GMCH. Total number of recoveries from the district has increased to 96.