Coronavirus scare: Monuments, discotheques & pubs in Pune temporarily closed
2020-03-17
PUNE: District authorities on Monday issued orders for the temporary closure of pubs, live orchestras and discotheques in the limits of all municipal corporations, councils and nagar panchayats till arch 31. 

The move was aimed at containing the spread of Covid-19. Officials said restaurants and hotels would remain functional.

The administration also banned herbal hookahs, which are be a potential source of infection transmission as the pipe is shared, district collector Naval Kishore Ram told TOI on Monday. “Restaurants and hotels will remain operational as many in the city depend on them daily for meals. The same is not true for pubs, live orchestras and discotheques, which are also places where people come in close contact. Hence the order for temporary closure,” said Ram.


 

In Pune, youngsters throng hookah parlours in areas like Koregaon Park, Kalyaninagar, Kondhwa and Mundhwa. While the serving of hookah has been banned, a Pune Restaurants and Hoteliers Association source said the Bombay high court had last year allowed some establishments in Mumbai and Pune to offer tobacco-free herbal hookah.

“Hookah bars and serving of herbal hookah in restaurants will have to stop immediately. Serious action will be taken against those establishments found to be serving hookah of any form, including herbal hookah. We are discouraging any activity where there is a chance of the spread of the virus,” Ram said.

Recently, Saudi Arabia had banned shisha or hookah in its cafés and restaurants as a precaution against the spread of Covid-19.

The district authorities have also issued orders to close museums and monuments with high footfalls in the city. Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) officials said Shaniwarwada and Aga Khan Palace were shut on Monday. By the evening, ASI officials extended the temporary closure (till March 31) to all ticketed monuments and museums in India. 

“Both Aga Khan Palace and Shaniwarwada witness a huge rush on a daily basis — an average of 600 visitors to Aga Khan Palace and around 1,600 Shaniwarwada daily. Hence it was decided to close these two monuments temporarily to prevent the spread of the virus,” an ASI official said.

The government has imposed the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, giving local authorities the powers to take any measure necessary to arrest the spread of the disease. 

Ram said that the authorities were closing places where people tend to assemble in large numbers. This includes the closure order for monuments which usually have high footfalls. “Broadly many public places will be closed including museums,” he said.


