Moradabad girl tests negative for Covid-19, to be discharged soon
2020-04-07
Bareilly: The Moradabad health department has confirmed that the first Covid-19 case in the district — a resident of Mundha Pande in Moradabad who had tested positive in March — has tested negative for the infection on Sunday.

The sample of the girl, a student, was sent to Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College in Aligarh earlier this month. Another sample will be sent for examination. If that too tests negative, she will be discharged, said officials.

Speaking to TOI, Moradabad chief medical officer (CMO) Dr M C Garg said, “An earlier sample, which tested positive, was collected on March 28. However, a recent sample report has found her negative for Covid-19. One more sample will be collected and sent for examination. If that too reports negative, she will be discharged following due process.” 

The 19-year old, who had travelled to France, tested positive for Covid-19 on March 21. Since then, she has been admitted in the isolation ward of district hospital for treatment. She had returned from France, where she studies, to Delhi on March 15, and was later diagnosed with Covid-19 in Moradabad, after the district administration tracked residents with recent foreign travel history, collected their samples and sent them for testing to JNMC. 

The CMO added, “The final sample will be sent for testing shortly. This will decide further course of action. If the second report is negative, hopefully, she will be discharged. Her family was also home quarantined soon after their daughter returned from France, but no one has complained of flu-like symptoms in the 14-day quarantine period, which they have completed. Yet, we’ll ask them to take adequate precautionary measures and follow routine checkups once the patient is discharged.” 

Moradabad district administration in March tracked down around 200 locals with recent travel history to foreign countries, of which only one Covid-19 positive case was reported.


