More than half of all positive cases showed no signs of Covid-19
2020-04-09
BHOPAL: More than half of the people who tested positive for COVID-19 in Bhopal were categorised as asymptomatic, meaning they did not show symptoms. The finding has alarmed health experts. Major symptoms and signs at the time of admission were reported as ‘NIL’ in 31 positive cases, going by a health department factsheet. As of April 7, there have been 83 corona-positive cases in Bhopal.

Almost all of these persons have been hospitalised. Medical experts are calling for a relook at the need for hospitalisation of all positive patients and instead rationalise the use of precious resources like personal protective equipment (PPE) and masks before the surge in coronavirus cases.

However, guidelines on hospitalisation differs between those sent out by the ministry of health and family welfare (MoHFW) and private super speciality hospitals. MoHFW guidelines say that persons testing positive for COVID-19 will remain hospitalised till such time as two of their samples are tested negative as per the discharge policy. Private hospitals, on the other hand, suggest hospitalisation only for severe cases or those with pre-existing conditions.

Some medical professional are sounding the alarm bells and demanding that the state government save on life-saving ‘PPE, gloves and masks’ now and hospitalise COVID-19 patients as per protocol.

In the past week, a huge number of people have been admitted in private and government-run hospitals after testing positive for COVID-19. “We are yet to hit the peak curve of COVID-19. It is anticipated that life protecting essentials for medical professionals and their staff would be in great demand in the near future,” said a consultant on condition of anonymity.

The health department has admitted that there is a shortage of PPE and other protective gear. This is the armour that would be used by health professionals to fight the war against COVID-19, the consultant added.

