More companies pledge funds to fight virus, provide relief
2020-03-28
NEW DELHI: ITC, TVS, Ola and Reckitt Benckiser (RB) have joined the list of players of India Inc setting aside funds to help in the ongoing battle against the novel coronavirus.


While ITC has pledged Rs 150 crore, Dettol-maker RB has earmarked a global fund of Rs 300 crore, a portion of which will percolate to India. Venu Srinivasan-controlled TVS Motor Company and Sundaram-Clayton have announced spending of Rs 30 crore to support the nationwide efforts to curb the spread of Covid-19.

The announcements come against the backdrop of several members of India Inc, including the Bajaj Group and the Godrej Group, committing funds for the same. Even Ola founder Bhavish Aggarwal on Friday said he will set aside his next year’s salary, along with Rs 20 crore from the cab aggregator and its employees, to help drivers with no income in the current situation.

“This fund will be utilised primarily to provide relief to the vulnerable and most needy sections of society who have been harshly impacted by the pandemic and have faced significant disruption in their livelihoods,” said Sanjiv Puri, ITC chairman and managing director.

RB’s global CEO Laxman Narasimhan said, in India, it will donate 10 million bars of Dettol soap to the most vulnerable, 3.5 million N95 (medical grade) masks to frontline health workers as well as one million litres of disinfectant products like Lizol surface cleaner and Harpic toilet cleaners to aid public health institutions and frontline health and sanitation workers in different states.”

Even Munich-headquartered Siemens said it is using its global network to locally deliver critical medical equipment such as analysers, testing kits and ventilators. “In addition, we are in discussion with some state governments to offer and equip some of our facilities as isolation units. We shall also be setting up a testing lab to equip the National Cancer Institute at Jhajjar, which is converting its entire 800-bed hospital into a Covid Critical Care Unit,” a Siemens spokesperson said.

Kansai Nerolac said it will do an early disbursement of funds to its painter community falling under the Nerolac Premium Painter Pragati (NPP Pragati) Programme, where over 30,000 painters can benefit from Nerolac’s initiative, for up to Rs 36,000 (one-time payment) approximately.

