More beds for quarantine & isolation wards in Nashik
2020-03-19
NASHIK: The district administration and Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) on Wednesday jointly decided to substantially increase the number of beds in the isolation and quarantine wards.


While the number of the beds for isolation has been increased from 16 to 76, a total of 78 beds have been kept ready for quarantine. Although no positive case of Covid-19 has been reported in the city, the district and civic administrations are taking every measure to monitor situation in case the number of suspects increases.

Nashik district collector Suraj Mandhare, municipal commissioner Radhakrishna Game and district civil surgeon Suresh Jagdale on Wednesday inspected some of the hospitals and municipal corporation buildings to review the arrangements of beds for isolation and quarantine.

Mandhare and Game also took review of the arrangements of isolation and quarantine of Covid-19 with district civil surgeon and health officials during a meeting held after the visit.

“Travellers coming from 10 most-affected countries like Dubai, UK, France, Germany, Dubai, Iran and Italy are to be quarantined in the hospitals, while those coming from other countries are to be quarantined in their homes,” Jagdale said, adding the positive patients are to be treated in the quarantine wards.

Apart from the existing 16 beds for isolation in district civil hospital, arrangement of 60 more beds have been made at Dr Zakir Hussain hospital and other private hospitals. There will be 40 beds for quarantine at Dr Zakir Hussain hospital, while arrangements of remaining 38 beds have been done at six private hospitals.

Meanwhile, the NMC has started spraying anti-biotic in public places across the city as part of preventive measures.

The civic administration has started spraying of anti-biotic on experimental basis at Rajiv Gandhi Bhavan — headquarters of NMC, Central Bus Stand and district collectorate. The spraying was done on floor, railings, office tables and chairs.


