Delhi: More than half of Covid-19 beds in hospitals occupied
2020-04-13
NEW DELHI: Delhi’s designated Covid-19 facilities run by both the centre and the state have a total capacity of just 2,406 beds. Only a few beds are available in the private hospitals. Meanwhile, the spurt in cases in the state over the past month has left the system overwhelmed.

 

As per the latest report on Covid-19 hospital status, only 44% of the total number of beds in public hospitals designated for Covid-19 treatment are vacant at present. This percentage is likely to reduce further as more than 2,000 Covid-19 suspects are under quarantine in isolation facilities being run by the state. If they test positive, some of these patients may also have to be shifted to hospitals, officials said.

“At present, we are in stage II of Covid-19 spread. Transmission is being noted mostly among those with travel history and who came in contact of positive cases. A few cases of local transmission has also been observed. If the disease spreads in communities, more hospital beds will be needed,” said a senior official.

Delhi government had initially planned to make Lok Nayak, which has around 2,000 beds, and G B Pant, which has around 800 beds, dedicated facilities for Covid-19 treatment to augment the infrastructure. However, G B Pant Hospital had to be removed from the list keeping in view the difficulties faced by general patients who are receiving treatment at G B Pant Hospital in super specialty streams.

In an order issued last week, the state government said Lok Nayak hospital will create an additional 500 beds capacity by utilising the OPD spaces and newly constructed block of Maulana Azad Institute of Dental Sciences, in lieu of beds proposed to be designated in GB Pant Hospital. On Sunday, the state issued new orders directing the authorities at Guru Nanak Eye Centre to hand over 200 beds immediately to the head of Lok Nayak hospital with the existing paraphernalia.

After Maharashtra, Delhi is the second-most affected state by Covid-19 with 1,154 cases and 24 deaths. Eighty five cases and five deaths were confirmed by the state government on Sunday.

Among the new cases, 34 are related to the Nizamuddin cluster, but in order to avoid profiling of positive cases, the government has put their data under a new category called ‘positive cases – under special operations’.


