More migrant workers test positive for Covid-19 in western UP, 1 death in Agra, 15 new cases in Meerut
2020-06-01
AGRA/MEERUT/BAREILLY: At least 15 people tested positive for Covid-19 in Meerut on Sunday, taking the tally to 434, including one found in Kanpur, while seven new cases surfaced in Agra, taking its tally to 899. Also, a 70-year-old provisional store owner died in Agra. The man - a resident of Lohamandi who was suffering from fever and breathing difficulties - was under treatment at a private hospital and was found positive. Importantly, several cases of migrant workers getting infected by the virus were also reported from across western UP.


The new cases in Agra included three patients of SARI, a patient suffering from chest pain at SN Medical College, another with fever at district hospital, and two cases related to family of those tested positive earlier. They mainly belonged to Kuberpur, Lohamandi, Jaipuriya colony, Jaghishpura and Etmadullah.

Four patients were discharged. Out of the 899 cases in Agra, 87.65% have recovered. There are 67 active cases. Chief medical officer (CMO) RC Pandey confirmed, "So far, 788 people have recovered. Health department teams are conducting door-to-door checks in hotspots."

Meerut CMO Dr Raj Kumar said, "As many as 15 cases tested positive on Sunday. These include one resident of Ishwarpuri and Ahmed Nagar each, two from Asoura House, Purva Shekhlal and Moripada each. Total active cases are now 93."

Five people were found positive in Bijnor district on Saturday night. They are migrant labourers. Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav, "Total tally here is now 100. Out of them, there are 50 active. These patients were found in Noorpur and Chandpur areas. Their family members were quarantined and contact tracing is on."

In Aligarh, eight people, including three migrants and four health workers, with a professor and a senior resident of TB and chest department of AMU’s Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, tested positive on Sunday, taking the district’s tally to 156, with 16 deaths. At least, 82 patients have recovered so far. While four migrant workers, two each in Mathura and Mainpuri, also tested positive.

Talking to TOI, Chief development officer Anunay Jha said that three migrant workers, who recently returned from Maharashtra and Gujarat and a primary contact of the Covid patient, tested positive. Till now, 58 are active.

Principal of JNMC Prof Shahid Ali told TOI, all heath workers, including a professor, senior resident doctor and nursing staff were asymptomatic with no high risk factor, hence they were advised to be home quarantined. He added, "We are trying to find out the source of infection."

According to health officials in Mathura, two migrants, who recently returned from Haryana and Telangana, tested positive, taking the district’s tally to 77 with 20 active cases.

In Mainpuri, two youths who recently returned from Delhi and Aligarh, tested positive and were admitted to an isolation ward of a hospital in Bhogaon. Till now, 40 people have been found positive. Of these, 14 are under treatment.

In Sambhal, 13 fresh Covid cases were reported on Sunday, taking the tally to 101, with 46 active and 55 discharged. Of the 13 new cases, most of them are migrants who returned from Delhi and Maharashtra. Sambhal CMO Dr Amita Singh said, "The new cases are mostly migrants. They even include children between age of three and six. The infected ones belong to Panju Sarai, Rajpura and Baniyakhera block Faridpur localities of Sambhal district."

Two more migrants who recently returned from Ahmedabad and were quarantined at 300-bed hospital of Bareilly were found positive on Sunday. District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, "Two among 57 samples sent for Covid-19 testing were tested positive. Both of them are symptomatic and sent to L1 hospital for treatment. Migrants are continuing to test positive in Bareilly. So, we are appealing to locals to share more information with us."


