More than Covid, snakebites keep Simdega villagers on toes
2020-05-31
Gumla: More than the Covid-19 outbreak, snakebite casualties are keeping villages in Simdega on the edge. While no one has died of the virus in this district, three persons, including a child, have died after being bitten by snakes in the last week. With the number of such cases rising in the district, people said they are not geeting any help from government health centres despite the availability of anti-venom.

Until Saturday morning, Simdega recorded 10 coronavirus cases since the first patient was diagnosed on May 19. Of these, eight are migrants who have returned home recently. Of the total, eight cases are active and two have recovered. The district has not recorded any Covid-related death so far.

On Thursday, 33-year-old Brismani Devi of Karwajor village in Kesrai block was bitten by a snake. When her family members took her to the sadar hospital, the doctors allegedly referred her to Rims, citing lack of anti-venom. The woman died on her way to the hospital. On the same day, four-year old Kartik of Parkala Tongritoli village in Kurdeg block died on his way to the community health centre in Kurdeg after suffering a snakebite. On Wednesday, 32-year-old Padmani Singh of Targa Mahuwatoli village, who was also a ward member of the Targa panchayat in Bansjor block, died after a snake bit her while she was sleeping.

Deputy commissioner Mrityunjay Barnwal ordered Simdega civil surgeon P K Sinha to conduct a probe into the death after district council member Sanjay Sindhia complained about the incident. Accepting the lapses, Sinha said, “There is no shortage of anti-venom and on-duty doctors should treat all patients. The doctor on duty on Thursday said the hospital did not have the facilities to treat the vivtim and he referred her to Rims after her attendants agreed to take her to Ranchi. A detailed report on a probe conducted by a team of doctors is awaited.”

Simdega MLA Bhushan Bara questioned the negligence and demanded the administration to ensure availability of anti-venoms at panchayat levels and primary health sub centres before the onset of Monsoon to prevent further casualties in the rural areas.


