Covid-19: More than the virus, they are scared of mindless criticism
2020-03-15
KOTTAYAM: The Covid-19 patient admitted to the isolation ward of the Medical College Hospital (MCH) here is fed up with the criticism he and his family have been facing on social media. “Once we overcome the disease, I won’t stay here for long. I will go abroad,” he said.

The 34-year-old man along with his wife aged 28 and four-year-old daughter is confined to a small room in the isolation ward. While the husband and wife are diagnosed with Covid-19, the girl has tested negative. “Her first sample was negative. They have again taken her sample on Friday,” said the father over phone. 

Meanwhile, the family is very happy with the care they are getting at the isolation ward. The only difficulty is passing the time. The small room with an attached toilet does not have a television. They solely depend on their mobile phones for passing time. “We watch news on our mobile phone and go through social media. Though we don’t usually give the phone to our child, now we are forced to give her. She is bored with the stay here,” the father added. 

One day he opened the window of the room which was facing a compound. Some men who were working in the compound noticed it and shouted to close it as they were scared. “I have never opened it after that,” he said.

The trio had gone to pick up the family from Ranni, who arrived at Kochi airport from Italy. The family from Italy has been facing the brunt of the criticism for travelling and meeting people without reporting to the medical department. The 34-year-old man, who is the son-in-law of the couple from Italy, said that he has made up his mind to remain in the isolation ward to ensure that others won’t get infected.

“I know several people in my locality are being home quarantined just because of me. But I am helpless. I never knew such a thing will happen,” he added.

His in-laws and brother-in-law have been working in Italy since 2000. The brother-in-law is a radiologist and an employee of the Italian government. “They were supposed to come next month only. But my father-in-law’s father, who is 92, wanted to see his son at the earliest. He told his son that he was not sure whether he will be alive by the time he arrives in April. So, the family advanced the trip,” he said. 

The 92-year-old man and his wife, both Covid-19-infected, are also admitted to the isolation ward of MCH. “I wanted to meet them. Though I requested the doctors, they did not allow me. However, they showed me a video clip in which they were seen talking to each other,” he added.


