Covid-19 in Pune: More than 800 restaurants down shutters for three days
2020-03-18
PUNE: A majority of restaurants and bars in Pune city have decided to voluntarily down shutters for three days from Wednesday till Friday in an attempt to arrest the spread of Covid-19. Many restaurants in the city had decided to batten down from Tuesday itself.


While the commissioner of police told TOI that the police has suggested restaurants continue parcel and home delivery services for customers dependant on the establishments for daily meals, Pune Restaurants and Hoteliers Association (PRAHA) said that restaurants may take a call such services if it was viable. 

A quick check on online food ordering and delivery platforms showed that many restaurants in the city were unserviceable on Tuesday. Nevertheless, many others, like fast food chains, remained functional on Tuesday.

After a meeting with the police commissioner on Tuesday and appeals sent out by the police to shut establishments that see high footfall, PRAHA decided to send a ‘closed for business’ call to all associated restaurants for the next three days. Earlier on Tuesday morning, the police requested several restaurants, including Vaishali, Roopali, Good Luck, Wadeshwar, among others, on FC Road to close. This was followed by a meeting between the Pune police commissioner and PRAHA members, where the decision was taken.

Pune commissioner of police K Venkatesham said, “We are following instructions issued by the Union government on maintaining sanitation, personal hygiene and social distancing. Wherever this can be followed, those establishments can open. But, as we are aware, maintaining social distancing may not be possible in case of restaurants if they are functioning. Hence, we requested restaurateurs to close establishments temporarily in view of the current situation. Out of their own volition, restaurant owners then decided to keep their establishments shut for three days.”

Venkatesham added that because the city is home to a number of people dependent on restaurants for meals, parcel and home delivery services will be available. “The feasibility of this should be decided by the restaurants because the priority here is to opt for social distancing and other measures to avoid the stage-3 of Covid-19 outbreak,” he said.

PRAHA vice president Vikram Shetty said, “The police authorities have told us to cooperate in the endeavour to curb the spread of infection and we have decided that keeping the restaurants closed for three days is best in the current situation. Oftentimes, people do not understand the gravity of a situation and throng restaurants considering it to be a holiday. Hence, the association has made a conscious call to ask members to remain closed till Friday.”

Ganesh Shetty, president of the association, said, “It was decided that all restaurants and bars will voluntarily close for business from March 18 to 20 initially. We will assess the situation and decide on Friday if there is need to extend the closure.”

Sources from the Pune Hoteliers’ Association added that hotels too have curtailed their restaurant operations in the wake of the decision.


