Kochi: More Covid-19 centres likely to be established in district
2020-05-08
KOCHI: As hundreds of thousands of Keralites are expected to return home in the coming weeks from abroad and other states, the district administration and the health department have taken measures to increase the number of Covid-19 treatment centres. Government Medical College, Ernakulam, is the only Covid treatment centre in the district now and preparations are underway to convert more hospitals into Covid-19 centres.




Facilities will be arranged at PVS Hospital and the taluk hospital at Karuvelipady to convert them into Covid hospitals. A convention centre near the airport and a private medical college will also be turned into Covid centres.

Officials with the health department said new Covid centres will be opened in the district depending on the number of coronavirus cases.

“We expect only a section of those coming from abroad to test positive for Covid-19. Those who are asymptomatic can be sent to facilities arranged by the government while those with symptoms can be sent to hospitals. All those returning home will be tested for Covid-19. Only those who test positive for the disease will require treatment at Covid hospitals,” an official with the health department said.

Only 2,150 NRIs are expected to arrive in Kochi on the 10 flights specially operated by the Union government as part of the first phase of evacuation. Among them, only a small number will be belonging to the district. So, the authorities do not think more facilities need to set up for accommodating the NRIs.

But as many as 1 lakh Keralites living in other states also have registered with Norka for returning home. A sizeable chunk of them are expected to be Ernakulam natives. They will also have to be accommodated in the quarantine facilities and hospitals in the district.

Authorities have already ramped up facilities at the Government Medical College, Ernakulam. “We are planning to open an ICU with 40 beds in a couple of days,” said Ganesh Mohan, resident medical officer, Government Medical College, Ernakulam.

Similarly, a four-floor gynaecology and neonatology block has been set up for Covid patients and suspects. “Separate wards and diagnostic machines will be set up for both the groups,” Ganesh Mohan said. “As of now, there are 30 bath-attached isolation rooms in the hospital,” he added.


