More studies needed into long-term effect of Covid infection: AIIMS-Bhopal director
2020-05-03
BHOPAL: Chronic conditions following a more acute case of COVID-19 will start coming to the fore only after June 2020, said AIIMS-Bhopal director, Dr Sarman Singh. In effect, the long-term damage caused by COVID-19 needs more investigation and study.


Dr Singh’s remarks came in the backdrop of several patients complaining of brain fog and depression after having recovered. When asked if the virus is going to have long-term effects and causes chronic fatigue syndrome or other illnesses, he said, “Brain fog-like condition is similar to when you want to navigate your car through heavy fog on the road. In other words, when you cannot focus your thoughts and you feel lost and confused. This condition is not specific to COVID-19. This type of manifestation is seen in many clinical conditions due to any cause.” 

Most of the consequences can be defined as short-term and long-term sequalae. The long-term sequalae will start coming only after June 2020. Sequalae is a pathological condition resulting from a disease, said Dr Singh. For testing this, molecular tests are the standard for routine diagnosis. As for antibody-based tests, they have a longer window period to become positive.

“This is also the reason that these antibody-based tests are being advised only for surveillance studies, as the antibodies will take 5-7 days to develop in the blood. If the antibody tests are done within the first 5-7 days, these will miss the infection and patient may have false sense of not being infected and can continue to spread infection. which can be disastrous. The window period of RT-PCR is only 2-3 days,” Dr Singh explained.

“It is difficult to answer this question at this stage until we have another test to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the test, called accuracy of any test. These evaluation studies are done either by culturing the infectious agent (nCOV) or by sequencing or sequentially performing the test in clinically symptomatic cases. In the want of first two options on routine basis, the third option is being used. However, it is important that when the RT-PCR was developed, enough quality controls, including the confirmation through in-vitro viral culture and sequencing were done and only after that these kits are marketed,” he said.

Nevertheless, validation/specificity of all these tests in many conditions like cancer, autoimmune disease, HIV, TB and cross positivity with other viral infections are yet to be published. 

Some experts point out that many people will have scarred lungs after having contracted the virus and that could have an impact on Indian cities with very high pollution. Main pathology of the COVID-19 disease is micro-embolism of the lung interstitium. This leads to microscars in the lungs.

“If these scars are less in number, the patient may not have any manifestation as the healthy tissue can compensate the oxygen supply to other tissues. But if the scars are numerous and larger, the patient presents with clinical condition, in the form of breathlessness,” said Dr Singh.

When asked about how long is the fever known to last in positive patients, Dr Singh said, “corona, and other viral diseases, the fever lasts only for a few days, but usually not more than 3 days, said Dr Singh.

Brain fog-like condition is not specific to COVID-19. This type of manifestation is seen in many clinical conditions to any cause


