More distress calls from women during lockdown
2020-04-24
DEHRADUN: The department of women empowerment and child development (WCD) said the distress calls have been rising ever since the lockdown was imposed on March 21, as 157 complaints were registered via 181 number till April 20, compared to 124 complaints in March and 84 complaints in February.


According to an official in the WCD department, among the complaints filed by distressed women, majority of them have been related to domestic violence, followed by food security and transport issues.

According to the data of the WCD, 27 cases of domestic violence were recorded in February, which soared to 40 in March. And till April 20th, 17 cases of domestic violence have been reported.

Citing lockdown as the trigger for rising domestic violence cases, Manish Chhetri, supervisor of 181 helpline service in Uttarakhand, said, “Ever since lockdown was imposed, we have been witnessing majority of cases related to domestic violence. Lockdown has had an adverse impact on the lives of women, be it, professionals or housewives.” 

The data further states that 181 helpline number received 71 calls from women seeking food while 22 calls related to repatriation services and one linked to health service under Covid-19 case type category.

“In some cases, we received calls from women seeking information on ration, and also from those women who are migrant labourers from Uttar Pradesh. These calls came mostly from Haridwar district, which is an industrial area and in proximity to Uttar Pradesh,” said Akhilesh Mishra, district program officer, WCD, Dehradun.

With Uttarakhand witnessing a surge in calls from distressed women over the last three months, the WCD department has launched a WhatsApp number (9411314257) for them to register their complaints. 

Officials said despite the already active 181 national helpline number, the new number was introduced to help the women, who were finding it difficult to lodge their complaints at the help centres because of the restrictions due to lockdown.

Speaking to TOI, Jharna Kamthan, director, women and child welfare department, said, “As per protocols, a woman in distress has to walk-in at one of our help centres after calling 181 to give a written complaint. But now, they can send a voice record or write a message to this number (9411314257) to register their complaint. We hope that this number will provide a huge relief to the women who were otherwise having trouble to lodge a complaint due to movement restrictions.”


