Covid-19: More beds in Patna isolation wards soon
2020-03-20
PATNA: From increasing beds in isolation wards to creating quarantine facility in hotels, the state government has taken a slew of measures to curb Covid-19 spread in Bihar, which is yet to report any positive case.


Apart from the 356 beds in isolation wards of various hospitals across the state, the government plans to add 100 extra isolation beds at two government hospitals in Patna. There are 274 ICUs with ventilators earmarked in government hospitals, but health experts termed them inadequate.

In another positive development, the Indian Council of Medical Research on Thursday gave permission to the Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital to carry out the Covid-19 test. As of now tests are only being done at Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences.

“While 60 beds will be added in PMCH, 40 beds will be added in Infectious Disease Hospital (IDH), which comes under the administration of Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH),” said additional secretary of state health department Kaushal Kishor. 

He added, “40 beds in IDH are ready, while 60 beds are being set up in a building of PMCH, where skin department was earlier functional, but is now a part of Patna University. Cleaning of the building is underway and it will be ready by Saturday.”

Sources said isolation ward of PMCH, which has 20 beds as of now, was full to its capacity on Thursday night and two suspects, who had returned from Nigeria, had to be sent to NMCH.

Apart from the isolation wards , quarantine facilities have been set up in three government hotels as well. One such hotel is Pataliputra Ashoka with 200 bed facility. Two other hotels are in Bodh Gaya with 72 and 30 beds facility each. Gaya district magistrate Abhishek Singh said people who have returned from seven Coviud-19 affected countries will be quarantined in the two hotels.

As per data shared by the state health society, nine medical college and hospitals have sample collection centres. Officials said samples are being tested at four centres —Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna Medical College and Hospitals, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences and AIIMS-Patna.

Till Friday, 23,8369 people had been screened at 49 transit points on Indo-Nepal border and 20120 had been screened at Patna and Gaya airport. As per the information shared by health department, no positive case had been reported in Bihar till Friday evening.

Medical college and hospitals have 10 to 20 beds in isolation wards and district hospitals have five beds. “We have total 356 beds in isolation wards and it is in the process of being increased,” said Dr Ragini Mishra, who has been made state nodal officer for Covid-19. She added that 100 additional ventilators have also been procured lately.

Health experts on the other hand, claimed that such measures were far from the resources required to tackle any major outbreak. “In a government system, they will take at least a month to procure ventilators. If any outbreak happens, then Bihar will not be able to cope with it,” said a doctor associated with Indian Medical Association.

Senior paediatrician, Dr Arun Shah who has worked extensively on AES in Muzaffarpur, said, “Number of ventilators in government hospitals in Bihar are not enough to face any major outbreak. We are still in stage- two with regard to Covid-19 spread, but situation will turn grave, if we enter stage 3 and 4 and as we all know that elderly people are more vulnerable and they will need ventilators.”

Explaining different stages, he said stage 1 is when positive case comes from outside the country. “When these positive cases come in contact with a person and transmit the virus, it leads to stage 2. Stage 3 occurs when there is community transmission and stage 4 when there is outbreak.” 

Suspect escapes: A Covid-19 suspect, who was admitted to the isolation ward of Biharsharif sadar hospital on Wednesday, escaped on Thursday but was later found at his home by the police and brought to the hospital. Nalanda civil surgeon Ram Singh said the suspect was identified as Jahendra Kumar, who had recently returned from Nepal and his blood samples had been sent to lab for tests.


