More attention to non-Covid patients
2020-05-28
Kochi: The health department has asked government medical colleges to come up with a revised strategy for treatment of non-Covid patients amid concerns that these patients were not getting enough attention in the wake of the pandemic. They have also been asked to ensure smooth conduct of MBBS classes.

A meeting chaired by principal health secretary Dr Rajan N Khobragade on Monday discussed the matter and decided that the treatment of non-Covid patients shouldn’t be compromised. It has been proposed that each medical college should keep aside only 30% beds for critical, suspected or confirmed Covid patients. Covid patients with mild symptoms should be treated in other government hospitals and private hospitals, it said.

The meeting, attended by officials from both the directorate of health services (DHS) and the directorate of medical education (DME), decided to ask each government medical college to come out with a comprehensive plan.

“With lockdown relaxation, the number of non-Covid patients approaching medical colleges for treatment has also increased. They need to be treated along with Covid patients while classes should also begin soon," director of medical education Dr Remla Beevi said.

Sources said the Kozhikode medical college had -- in a plan already submitted to the district administration and the DME — proposed that only critical Covid patients needing tertiary care should be admitted to medical colleges. 

Incidentally, only Ernakulam and Manjeri government medical colleges are designated as Covid hospitals but the remaining medical colleges also have not been encouraging non-Covid treatment. Almost 70% beds in their ICU and ventilators as well as paid wards have been kept aside for Covid patients while a majority of staff have been assigned Covid duty. 

It is estimated that almost 50% people in Kerala seek treatment in government hospitals. “We are conducting a study on the medical behaviour of non-Covid patients during the lockdown period, as about 50-70% of them didn’t have access to treatment in medical colleges,” Dr Beevi said.

The Kerala high court had on May 25 directed Alappuzha medical college to ensure medical review, and procedure if needed, for a petitioner -- a non-Covid patient -- at the earliest. The petitioner belonging to BPL category, Radhakrishnan R (58), had moved the court for bypass surgery. 

"We had taken our father twice to medical colleges for bypass surgery as he had coronary artery disease with angina but was denied the same stating that priority is for Covid patients. In private medical colleges, a bypass surgery would cost Rs 10 lakh," his son Sooraj R said.


