Covid-19: More Mumbai schools suspend ops, move classes online
2020-03-14
MUMBAI: Though the state government has not yet called for closure of educational institutions in the city as a preventive measure to stave off Covid-19, at least 10 more top schools decided to suspend classes from Friday and continue education online.


Nikhat Azam, principal, Billabong High International School, Santacruz, said, “The attendance in our school has been optimum in spite of the outbreak. All precautionary measures have been taken to contain the spread of the virus. But keeping in mind children’s safety, our management has decided to keep the schools closed from March 14 to 31. The online education system would be adopted to ensure that learning continues within the safe environment of home. Worksheets and learning resources would be shared with the parents through the online portal to keep the students fruitfully engaged.”


Coronavirus outbreak live coverage

At VIBGYOR Group of Schools, parents received a message saying they would continue to function until a formal directive for closure is received from the state. By the end of the day, though, the school decided to close operations for all students from Monday until further notice. “All internal examinations have been cancelled for now. However, board examinations will continue as per schedule and there are no changes to the same,” read a message.

Among other schools that have given students a break are Lilavatibai Podar School, Santacruz, HVB Global Academy, Marine Drive, Campion School, Fort, Bai Avabai F Petit Girls’ High School, Bandra, New Horizons Scholars School, Thane, and Sunitidevi Singhania School, Thane. “Even though students will not be physically present in school, we will continue with some academic activity where teachers will share videos and links, for simple topics, through the flipped classroom technique for students of the primary and secondary sections,” said a mail to parents from Bai Avabai F Petit Girls’ High School principal Daina Marfatia. Pre-schools such as Podar Jumbo Kids called for closure too. Aided schools affiliated to the state board continue to wait. “Nearly 30% students aren’t coming in but we can’t suspend classes,” said Uday Nare, teacher, Hansraj Morarji Public School, Andheri.


