More equipment, kits to help fight Covid-19: Eatala
2020-04-01
With a sudden spike in the number of coronavirus positive cases and six deaths in the state, Telangana health minister Eatala Rajender said the district administrations and health department have already started identifying the people who participated in the religious meet at Nizamuddin, in Delhi. The process would be completed by Tuesday evening. Here are some excerpts from the interview with Koride Mahesh.

n During lockdown, aren’t new cases a cause of concern to the government?

Though new cases are a cause of concern, there is no need to panic. Our chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao has announced that plans are in place and arrangements were made to treat as many as 12,000 people in various hospitals. A three-pronged approach of home quarantine, isolation and treatment is being implemented, depending upon the situation and requirement. They have yielded good results also.

n How many persons had gone to Delhi for the religious programme?

 People from almost all the districts went to Delhi and final figures are yet to come. District collectors, health department officials and other departments are in the process of identifying them, their family members and primary contacts. Once all the persons are identified, they would be shifted to isolation wards in the respective district hospitals and tests would be conducted. Positive cases would be referred to Hyderabad for treatment. Family members of those who test positive will be put under home quarantine as per the protocols.

n There were reports that many who went to Delhi have not come forward to inform the government? 

Though people have not reported that they are symptomatic, the government has begun identifying them and their primary contacts. Government will provide free treatment to those who test positive. I appeal to them to cooperate with us and not risk their and their families’ lives.

n Do we have sufficient beds and wards, if the number of cases surge?

 Over 4,000 beds are ready in 12 hospitals in the city, including 1,000 beds in Gandhi hospital alone. As of now, treatment would be given only in Gandhi hospital. New cases will be referred to Gandhi. Later other hospitals such as King Koti hospital, ESI hospital at SR Nagar and Gachibowli stadium will be utilized, if required.

n What is the status of Covid-19 testing facilities and medical kits?

 The Centre has permitted six coronavirus testing laboratories such as Gandhi hospital, Fever hospital, NIMS, IPM and MGM at Warangal. Though the central government has permitted Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB) where 800 to 1,000 people can be tested a day we are not utilizing their services immediately.

n What about the availability of healthcare equipment?

 The state government had indented 500 ventilators and 45 have already arrived. We are expecting more in a week’s time. There is no dearth of medicines and other equipment. The health department has already begun the process of identifying and preparing a pool of retired doctors and other supporting staff.


