More tech can help small business survive Covid, says Zinnov
2020-05-13
BENGALURU: Technology should be used to combat the effect of Covid-19 on small and medium businesses, consulting firm Zinnov has suggested. SMBs have severely suffered on account of lengthy closure procedures and lack of demand from original equipment manufacturers (OEMs).


SMBs in manufacturing, retail and services are about 75 million in number and employ nearly 130 million people across the country. Manufacturing is the worst hit by the pandemic. Most factories making non-essential goods are still closed or have just opened, and working capital remains a challenge due to delay in receivables as large OEMs have put payments on hold.

“To mitigate the effects of Covid-19 and ensure the survival of the SMB sector, it is critical for the government, the SMBs, and the technology companies to work together to formulate concrete strategies and deploy them. All three stakeholders need to prioritise spurring consumer spending, which acts as an engine of economic activity and growth,” Zinnov said in a report.

For manufacturing SMBs like textile, automotive, pharma and electronics, technology providers should provide easy credit options, tracking solutions for goods, and communication solutions to get in migrant labourers who have moved back to their villages.

As retail is set to change in the post-Covid environment, Zinnov says retailers are expected to use a gamut of technology solutions to better connect with customers virtually. These include better digital interfaces which are well supported on mobile and website as more customers are expected to shop online than visit a physical store. 

Technology companies need to enable contactless payment and contactless delivery through app-based solutions and payment gateways, the report says. With high demand fluctuation, leveraging data analytics to enable SMBs to target the right customers is expected to be crucial going forward. Digitisation of inventory and building digital interfaces and digital storefronts to enhance customer engagement will prove beneficial for retail SMBs, the report said.

While services industry has been the least affected, the need to enable secure remote working wherever possible, by leveraging collaboration tools and security solutions will be critical in ensuring business continuity for several services SMBs.


