More Covid-19 cases come forward, administration tracking chain of contacts
2020-04-09
TIRUPATI/VIJAYAWADA: With 13 more Covid-19 cases reported in the state on Wednesday, the authorities are making all efforts to trace, test and treat all those who were linked to the new patients.


The new cases are from Anantapur (7), Chittoor (3) and Kurnool (1), Guntur (1) and Krishna (1) districts.

At Anantapur GGH, two doctors and two paramedic staff tested positive after attending to a patient who died due to coronavirus. The district medical and health department have begun tracing all those who have come into contact with the four.

In Chittoor district, three positive cases were reported — one in Tirupati and two from Nagari, closer to the Tamil Nadu border. Two students and a teacher from TTD’s Dharmagiri veda patashala were admitted to SVRR Government General Hospital in Tirumala with symptoms on Wednesday. Their swab samples were sent for tests to SVIMS.

With one new case, the number of Covid-19 cases in Kurnool went up to 75, the highest in the state. District collector G Veerapandian and SP Kaginelli Fakeerappa urged people to remain indoors and stay away from religious and non-religious events.

The officials are yet to establish the source of virus contraction in the new cases reported from Machilipatnam, Guntur and Kurnool.

While the patients in Machilipatnam and Kurnool died with infection, one in Guntur is under treatment. All the three patients do not have history of foreign travel nor have primary contacts with foreign returnees.

The patient who died in Machilipatnam had serious co-morbidities and died with other complications. Tests conducted after his death confirmed Covid-19 infection, putting officials on their toes to trace his primary and secondary contacts and the source of contraction.

Similar cases were reported from Guntur and Kurnool where officials are yet to establish the source of virus contraction.

The Guntur district administration has shut down the city with additional restrictions. District collector Samuel Anand Kumar said that people should not come out of their homes unless it was extremely urgent. He also urged people to buy essential commodities like vegetables sufficient for at least four days and the relaxation time has been reduced from 11 am to 9 am.

Red zones have been set-up with three kilometre perimeter and movement of people in these red zones has been restricted so that outsiders will not enter the area and those living within the red zone will not leave the place. The officials have made arrangements to supply essential commodities at the door step in these areas.


