More beds in West Bengal private facilities to treat Covid-19 patients
2020-05-01
KOLKATA: With the number of corona cases increasing rapidly, some private hospitals have already scaled up the number of beds while some others are working on adding more Covid beds. Currently, majority of the private hospitals that are treating Covid patients are running out bed. 


Peerless Hospital had initially started with a makeshift isolation ward with seven beds. Now, it has converted an entire ward that earlier accommodated nearly 50 beds to a Covid ward with eight isolation beds and four CCU beds for patients who need intensive care. The hospital is now working another ward for Covid patients. Labours have been put up inside the hospital premises to create the ward.

 

“We cannot covert a ward into a Covid ward overnight since these call for specifications like single rooms and negative pressure air conditioning. Even despite the lockdown, we could bring in labours. But we still need some materials. We are working on a war-footing. Let us see how many beds we will be able to carve out of this ward,” said Sudipta Mitra, spokesperson of Peerless Hospital.

“We have already added six more beds to deal with an increasing number of patients coming with Covid symptoms,” said pulmonologist Raja Dhar, who is heading the Covid team at Fortis Hospital. The hospital started with eight beds.

“Since addition to the isolation facilities also needs special infrastructure and AC systems, we have been working on the same despite the lockdown and difficulties in obtaining labour and civil materials. We are confident of fulfilling the needs of the state with the evolving situation, keeping in mind the safety of non-Covid patients,” said R Venkatesh, facility director at RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences. 

Chief secretary Rajiva Sinha told reporters that Kolkata now has five Covid hospitals. Private hospitals said that many a times they are having to refer patients to Covid designated hospitals as all their isolation beds are occupied most of the time. The West Bengal Clinical Establishment Regulatory Commission (WBCERC) had urged private hospitals to reserve 10% to 20% beds for Covid patients. “Private hospitals have assured that they will do their best and hence we are expecting them to reciprocate to our appeal,” said Justice (retired) Ashim Kumar Banerjee, WBCERC chairman.

Private hospitals said they were keen to scale up their Covid beds, but the numbers suggested by WBCERC may not be practical as they are tending to other patients as well as they expect patients to other ailment to start rushing in once the lockdown start easing off gradually. Hospital administrators also wondered why government Covid-designated hospitals like MR Bangur was not pressed into full operation. “The occupancy is low in some Covid-designated hospitals. But it is also a matter of preference of patients desiring to get treatment in a particular hospital. We have appealed to private hospitals to scale up their preparedness so that they can take in patients who wants to get into a private facility,” said Sukumar Mukherjee, WBCERC member and also a member of the state’s global Covid committee.

