More trauma: Family of Covid-19 patient in Lucknow flooded with crank calls
2020-03-16
Lucknow: The 12 individuals in city who have been advised home isolation for 15 days after they came in contact with a Covid-19 patient have been receiving multiple crank calls, suggesting that their personal details have been leaked on social media from the CMO’s office. 
LUCKNOW: 

Angry and frustrated, some of them described it as a violation of their right to privacy and threatened to move court. CMO Narendra Agarwal has ordered an inquiry into the alleged leak, saying strict action would be taken against anyone found guilty. 

The crank call victims are all relatives of the Toronto-based doctor who tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday. The CMO’s office had prepared a list of the doctor’s contacts, including their names, age, address and phone numbers for collection of samples and other precautionary measures. 

“We have been receiving 150-200 calls a day. We get calls from various parts of UP and other states like Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. While most are curious about symptoms, a few presume we are already infected. They ask us how we contracted the disease and if we are noticing any physical changes . One person even blamed us for spreading the infection,” a member of one of the three families in Gomtinagar told TOI.

The person said his family was even apprehensive of an attack or ostracism after they spotted a few men taking pictures of their house on Saturday. “I alerted health officials on the helpline, but nothing has been done to save us from this harassment,” he added.

A 31-year-old doctor in Indiranagar, who is also on the list, said the leak was blatant violation of their right to privacy. “I will sue the authorities if people continue to call and ask questions that they should not. We have already tested negative and are in self-isolation at home as precaution,” he said.

Another Gomtinagar resident said their personal details had been leaked on social media, which triggered the flood of crank calls. “That is when we realised that our names, addresses and numbers have been leaked,” the victim said.

A family in Vikasnagar said their neighbours were supportive, but the calls had left them terrified. “Health workers have sanitised our home. Neighbours bring us essential items. But, we don’t know how to handle these callers,” said a member.

“I have received complaints from families and ordered a probe. We’ll lodge an FIR against anyone found guilty,” CMO Agarwal said.


