Morgue mess: AP hospital swaps Covid-19 negative body with positive one
2020-05-13
TIRUPATI: In a shocking goof-up, staff at the government general hospital in Kurnool swapped bodies of a person who had died of Covid-19 with that of the body of another person who was not suffering from the coronavirus.


To make matters worse, the staff performed the funeral of the non-Covid-19 body mistaking it to be that of the Covid-19 victim. At the same time, the body of the Covid-19 positive person was handed over to the wrong family. This happened even as a central government team was is in Kurnool to study the Covid-19 scenario.

Enraged family members of the non Covid-19 deceased, identified as A Ram Babu, staged a protest at the hospital demanding that the management hand over the right body to them.

Kurnool district collector G Veerapandian has now appointed a three-member committee to probe the goof-up. 

The panel comprises Kurnool GGH superintendent Dr Narendranath Reddy, Kurnool medical college principal Dr Chandrasekhar and district medical and health officer Dr Ramagiddaiah.

According to family members, Ram Babu, 66, a resident of Kurnool city, was admitted to the hospital on May 7. He died on May 9. His Covid-19 tests which arrived two days later on Monday confirmed that he was negative and that he died of other causes.

After hospital staff called Ram Babu’s family members to claim the body, they ere shocked when they were shown the body of another man at the mortuary.

Taken aback, when the family members asked about Ram Babu’s body, the hospital staff confessed to their goof-up. According to hospital sources, apart from Ram Babu, a 36-year-old patient with Covid-19 symptoms from Kurnool city was admitted to the hospital on May 9. The 36-year-old patient died on May 10 and his tests revealed that he was Covid-19 positive.

The family members of the 36-year-old patient were present at the funeral rites. The body was buried in the city outskirts.

The goof-up was finally exposed on Tuesday after the family members of Ram Babu, the non-Covid-19 patient, said the body being handed over to them was not Ram Babu’s.

‘‘Will officials exhume the body and hand it over to us?” wondered Ram Babu’s son Ramesh.

