Maharashtra: Most viral pneumonia cases in hospitals test Covid-19 -ve
2020-04-02
PUNE/MUMBAI/NAGPUR: Viral pneumonia is a classical complication caused by Covid-19, but only sporadic cases of coronavirus infection have been recorded by private hospitals treating pneumonia patients in Mumbai, Pune and Nagpur. 



A reassuring sign is that most patients with pneumonia and associated symptoms have tested negative which is also indicative of the limited spread of the contagion in the community,the doctors TOI spoke to believe. 

In Pune, four private hospitals that tested 61 such patients in the last 11 days reported that three were positive for Covid-19.

Three private hospitals in Mumbai reported just a single positive case of Covid-19 after testing several patients with viral pneumonia. 

In Nagpur, none of the 20 patients with viral pneumonia treated by four private hospitals tested positive for the contagion. 

“We tested the throat swab samples of 15 patients with viral pneumonia and other classical symptoms, including respiratory distress, in the last five days. Barring one, the remaining 14 tested negative for Covid-19. This,indicates a limited spread of the infection as of now. The lockdown is expected to further break the chain of transmission,” surgeon Dhananjay Kelkar, medical director of Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital in Pune, told TOI.

Sahyadri hospitals, also in Pune, tested 26 admitted patients with viral pneumonia and breathless. Of these, two have tested positive for Covid-19. 

Ruby Hall Clinic, another hospital in Pune, tested 13 such patients. None of them was infected. Inlaks and Budhrani Hospital sent throat swab samples of seven such patients and none of them was positive for Covid-19.

Private hospitals in Mumbai also had similar findings. Chest physician Salil Bendre of Nanavati Hospital in Mumbai confirmed that none of the viral pneumonia patients undergoing treatment under him have tested positive for Covid-19. 

“We have sent quite a few samples of admitted patients. None tested Covid-19 positive so far,” Bendre said.

Respiratory physician Sujeet Rajan, who consults with Bhatia Hospital in Mumbai sent samples of 10 pneumonia patients to Kasturba Hospital and a private laboratory.

“All have tested negative, so far. The larger concern is the turnaround time for tests, which is between 48-72 hours,” he added.

Patients of chronic lung disease are bearing the brunt. “Most have symptoms that mimic coronavirus and are quarantined and thus spending 2-3 days with suspect cases. Many may end up getting the infection,” he said.

KEM hospital's dean Hemant Deshmukh said, “A patient came to the hospital with respiratory distress, gasping for breath. She was put on ventilator support. She tested positive for Covid-19 in her report that arrived after she passed away.” 

Private hospitals in Nagpur are reporting viral pneumonia cases to the government hospitals and sending their swab samples for testing to designated labs. So far, none has tested positive for Covid-19.

National Cancer Institute, Nagpur, sent samples of two patients with symptoms of viral pneumonia. Both tested negative, hospital's medical director Anand Pathak said.

Lata Mangeshkar Hospital in Nagpur sent one sample which tested negative.Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences in Sevagram sent six samples and all tested negative, medical superintendent S P Kalantri said.

Eleven samples from Datta Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences in Sawangi also tested negative.


