Most of the Covid isolation coaches in the state back in service in Shramik trains
2020-06-05
Kozhikode: Around 75% of the coaches converted by railways into Covid-19 isolation wards are back in service, mostly in Shramik trains. The coaches in the two railway divisions in the state were not used for isolating patients.

Of the 92 coaches converted to isolation wards under Palakkad and Thiruvananthapuram railway divisions, around 70 are used in special trains after removing the additional fittings made for converting them into isolation wards.

Palakkad railway division had converted 32 coaches into isolation wards and Thiruvananthapuram division had created 60 isolation wards using non-AC general and sleeper coaches.

Division railway manager of Palakkad railway division Pratap Singh Shami said most of the coaches that were converted to isolation wards have been pressed into service in Shramik trains. “Until now there has not been requirement in the state to use the coaches as isolation wards. The coaches used in Shramik trains can be redeployed as isolation wards if need arises,” Shami added.

Officials said the middle berth in the sleeper coaches, which were removed to convert them as isolation wards, has not been re-fixed to enable social distancing of passengers in Shramik trains.

An official of the Palakkad division said mosquito nets fixed on coach windows of isolation wards have been removed along with additional fittings installed to fix oxygen cylinders. However, one toilet in the coach that was converted into a bathroom is maintained as such in the Shramik rakes.

The conversion of coaches into isolation wards under the Palakkad division was carried out in the maintenance sheds in Mangaluru and Shoranur.

Thiruvananthapuram railway division officials said 40 of the 60 three-tier sleeper and general class coaches converted to isolation wards are now being used in Shramik and other special trains on need basis.

Railway board had recently decided to use 50% of the around 5,000 isolation coaches in the country to run Shramik specials trains.

Meanwhile, Confederation of All India Rail Users’ Association has urged the state government to intervene to retain the isolation coaches as such as the state is likely to witness need for more quarantine facilities in view of return of people from outside the state.


