Most Haryana Covid-19 cases have Delhi link, high court told
2020-05-12
NEW DELHI: The Haryana government has defended its decision of sealing its borders touching Delhi saying a majority of Covid-19 cases in its districts came from the capital.

Responding to the court’s last week notice, the government also raised the issue of jurisdiction on the ground that any challenge to an executive order of Haryana should lie in Punjab & Haryana high courts.

The Haryana government’s affidavit filed on Monday listed a break up of Covid-19 cases in Faridabad, Gurgaon, Jhajjar and Sonipat claiming that more than half of these had a Delhi link. For instance, of the 100 positive cases in Sonipat till May 9, 84 have Delhi connections, the government in its reply said. In Jhajjar, of the 75 positive cases, 74 are linked to Delhi, while in Faridabad 37 of 94 cases have Delhi links, it added.

“As is clear from the above table, many of the corona cases in the bordering districts of Haryana are due to their Delhi connection, therefore, it became imperative in the interest of public, to impose stricter restrictions on the movement of daily commuters to contain the spread of the virus,” the government said.

While claiming that movement of essential goods and services and people involved in essential services across the border was continuing, the reply filed through additional advocate general Anil Grover argued that “any laxity in the movement of people from the containment zones in Delhi into the bordering districts of Haryana runs the risk of rapidly spreading the contagion.”

The Haryana government has also blamed Delhi for failing to issue special passes to employees working with Delhi government and commuting from neighbouring districts. It claimed that while no restrictions on movement of essential service towards Delhi from Sonipat were in place, the district magistrate was left with no option but to restrict the movement of farmers from Sonipat to Azadpur mandi, as of the 19 positive cases in Sonipat, at least 14 appeared to have a connection with the visits to the mandi.

The court last week had observed that the order by Haryana authorities preventing movement of doctors, nurses, court staff and trucks to and from Delhi to Sonipat prima facie infringes upon the right to freedom of movement and sought an explanation from the government.

