Mother-in-law of first Covid-19 victim in DK dies of the disease
2020-04-24
Mangaluru: The Covid-19 fatality rate doubled in Dakshina Kannada, within 96 hours, after a 75-year-old woman died due to the disease at Wenlock Hospital, on Thursday. The deceased was related to P-390, the first person who died due to Covid-19 in Dakshina Kannada, on Sunday. This septuagenarian, tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday, and died later in the day, in the same circumstances in which her daughter-in-law died.

The septuagenarian was being treated at First Neuro Specialty at Padil, on the city’s outskirts, after suffering from a stroke, since March 18. She was admitted to the ICU of Wenlock Hospital, with severe breathing issues, on April 22. Her throat swab was sent for testing, after she was admitted at Wenlock Hospital, and she tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. She was pronounced dead a short while after the report confirmed that she had contracted Covid-19. The district administration has already declared a 100-metre radius around First Neuro Specialty to be a containment zone, and has also declared it a supervised isolation centre.

With the day’s development, the district has recorded a total 17 Covid-19 cases. While 12 of these Covid-19 patients have been discharged, three of them are undergoing treatment. Deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh, in the official district bulletin, stated that there is no change in the health status of P-409, the neighbour of P-390, who is on ventilator support in the ICU of Wenlock Hospital. She was the 16th positive case that the district recorded on Tuesday.

The district administration has sealed Kasba village in Bantwal taluk, from where P-390 hailed, following her death on Sunday, and declared it a containment zone. The district administration has shifted 50 people from this containment zone since then, including a person who was shifted on Thursday, to the isolation facility set up at the National Institute of Technology Karnataka (NITK) campus at Srinivasnagar, some 23km from here.


