Move over big fat weddings; minimalist ceremonies could be the norm after Covid-19
2020-05-14
When the lockdown was initially imposed, it created quite a stir among the country’s many to-be-married couples, whose wedding plans had to be postponed indefinitely. This lot also included people in Bengaluru, who had to either cancel ceremonies or push them to a later date. With the pandemic still looming large, some wedding planners eventually resorted to the concept of minimalist, intimate weddings, which can be conducted even in one’s house. We spoke to a few couples and wedding planners in the city to take stock of the situation and understand what goes into planning and curating small-scale celebrations amid the shutdown…

From lavish venues to private terraces
If things had unfolded as planned, Manish and Paniz would have had a grand wedding at Gayatri Vihar, Palace Grounds, this summer. But it turned out to be a simple, terrace wedding at the groom’s residence on May 5. The event was curated by wedding planner Zubair Abdul Waheed. “We thought of having a temple wedding and even tried our luck at gurudwaras, but all these places were closed. That’s when I reached out to Zubair, and we eventually decided on having a terrace wedding at home. We had all precautionary measures in place, took permission from the police and ensured that not more than 30 people gathered at the venue at the same time,” says Manish.


Getting innovative with limited resources
Limited resources and workforce mean that the set up and decorations for these weddings also remain basic. At Manish’s wedding, for instance, Zubair had to settle for artificial flowers. “We needed quite a lot of fresh flowers, but it seemed like a crazy idea to arrange for those many. So, we went ahead with artificial flowers instead, and it worked quite well,” Zubair explained.
Food is an essential part of every wedding ceremony, but the lockdown had a dampening effect on that too. City-based caterer Azeem Ahmed is struggling to serve the food orders that he has been receiving during this time due to a lack workforce and even the necessary ingredients that are required to cook the special dishes. “But having said that, we are trying to innovate and come up with whatever best we can in this time,” he explains.


Small ceremonies are a big step towards sustainability
Another city couple, Mohammad Muzammil and Sara, are planning to have their wedding in the first week of June. While the rituals and ceremonies will be held at home, if Covid-19 crisis settles down by then, they plan to host a small reception for their relatives at a wedding hall. “We want things to be simple and minimalist. It’s a step towards sustainability. Intimate ceremonies testify that close-knit weddings can be equally fun and successful. And most importantly, it saves people from overspending on lavish things,” says Muzammil.


Intimate weddings are the way forward – Bt07-Weddings-Zubair
According to wedding planner Zubair Ahmed, more couples have approached him after they saw the pictures from Manish’s terrace wedding in Bengaluru recently. “People are realising that when done with proper planning and execution, small ceremonies can be carried out smoothly and more efficiently than big fat weddings. Given the wave, minimalist celebrations may become the way forward in the post-Covid world,” he says.


Rules to be followed strictly during the lockdown…
The Ministry of Home Affairs has now given the go-ahead to small-scale execution of wedding rituals and activities at home. The number of attendees at these functions cannot exceed 50, and the permitted head-count may vary depending on which area the wedding is being held in. The rituals are not allowed to be conducted in public places, not even within a housing society. Permission from local authorities, like the Residents Welfare Associations (RWAs) and the local police station, need to be taken in advance. All other necessary precautionary measures need to be taken during the course of the event.

 

 

 

 


