Coronavirus scare: Movement restricted across India-Bangladesh border
2020-03-14
KOLKATA: Urging people not to panic, chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday advised people to remain cautious and avoid large gathering.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

On Friday, the Centre and the state stepped up measures, including restricting entry/exit through all check-posts along the India-Bangladesh border and deciding to prosecute any retailer caught hoarding masks and sanitizers under The Essential Commodities Act, 1955, which is a non-bailable offence with a seven-year prison term. 

 
 
Speaking at the ‘Khel Samman’ programme, the chief minister said there was no need to panic but safeguards must be taken in wake of the global coronavirus outbreak. “So far, no medicine has been discovered to cure Covid-19 but experts are suggesting a 14-day rest period at home in case of high temperature, not shaking hands with anyone, and keeping 5-metre distance from a person during a conversation,” Banerjee said. “I am no expert, but some people are saying if the mercury rises, it (coronavirus) can be controlled to a great extent. Let's see. No handshakes until the virus goes, greet each other with a Namaste,” she added.

Later in the evening, state consumer affairs minister Sadhan Pandey said raids will continue to probe complaints of mask and sanitizer shortage in some pockets. “Strict action will be taken,” he said. An officer said ESA will be slapped against unscrupulous practices by anyone. 

The India- Bangladesh border in Bengal has been sealed with permission for restricted movements across borders. Only four India-Nepal border check-posts will remain operational. Though the Kartarpur Corridor is currently open, the government will take a decision on it by Saturday. “India-Bangladesh passenger buses and trains will remain suspended till April 15. Along the India-Nepal border, four check posts will remain operational. For citizens of Bhutan and Nepal, visa-free entry to the country will continue,” Anil Malik, additional secretary in the Union home ministry, said. 

“While diplomats will be allowed to move, restrictions will be imposed on movement of Indians into Bangladesh and Bangladeshi nationals into India. Indians, now in Bangladesh with a valid visa, will be allowed to enter before expiry of their visas. Similarly, a Bangladeshi national with valid document and visa will be allowed to leave India,” said an BSF officer. “But apart from Indians, no one will be allowed to enter,” said RR Sharma, BSF DIG.

Earlier in the day, the CM spoke at length on the issue. “Please don't start thinking that you are affected by coronavirus if you start coughing. That is a common symptom of any flu. But if there is high temperature for a prolonged period, get yourself treated by a doctor,” the chief minister said. 

(With inputs from Roshan Gupta in Siliguri)


