MP Aparajita Sarangi fined for violating Covid norms
2020-06-05
BHUBANESWAR: The commissionerate police here on Thursday fined Bhubaneswar Lok Sabha member (BJP) Aparajita Sarangi and 20 other BJP workers for allegedly not wearing masks and defying social distancing norms on Wednesday. Police swung into action after photos, featuring the bureaucrat-turned-MP and several BJP party workers in a large gathering without masks, went viral on social media. 

Aparajita is perhaps the first high-profile violator of the Covid-19 regulations after the state government intensified the enforcement drive from June 1. As government apprehends Covid-19 may peak this month, DGP Abhay earlier directed all police stations to step up enforcement against people, who do not wear masks and violate social distancing norm. 

The violators also included BJP’s newly appointed Bhubaneswar organisational district president Babu Singh. “It came to our notice that social distancing and wearing of masks were not followed in the political congregation at Bhubaneswar. Fines were collected from 21 identified participants, who included MP Sarangi and Singh. We request all to follow the social distancing norms scrupulously,” additional commissioner of police Anup Kumar Sahoo said.

An official said police imposed penalty of Rs 100 on each of the BJP politicians even though the state government on June 1 announced to increase the fine amount to Rs 500 for first two offences and Rs 1,000 for the third violation by a same person. “We did not impose Rs 500 fine as the government has not yet notified the stricter penal provisions. We still go by the old order that allows us to impose fine of minimum Rs 100 and maximum up to Rs 500,” another police officer said. 

Before the police action, the woman leader came in for heavy criticism from different quarters and was trolled on social media for throwing the social distancing norms to wind and not wearing mask. “We admire her dynamism and leadership skills. But violation of the Covid-19 rules by an elected representative sent a wrong signal,” said Prashant Mishra, a retired lecturer. 

Aparajita admitted she violated the social distance and mask rules. “Under very special circumstances, I went to the residence of Sri Jagannath Pradhan, BJP leader, yesterday (Wednesday). I fully appreciate & respect people’s concerns regarding adherence to Covid-19 norms. It is a good sign. Acknowledging my duty, I have volunteered to pay the fine due,” Aparajita tweeted. 


