MP booked for violating lockdown norms
2020-05-01
Thiruvananthapuram: Attingal MP Adoor Prakash was booked by Nedumangad police on Thursday on charges of violating lockdown norms after he took part in a public event to distribute essential commodities to poor families. 

The event was organized by Lawyers’ Congress at Nedumangad to distribute essential commodities to families of advocates’ clerks who were affected by the lockdown as the courts are not functioning. The event was held in front of the Nedumangad Judicial First Class Magistrate Court complex at 11 am. 

The police have booked around 50 persons, including MP Adoor Prakash, who had attended the event. As many as 11 advocates have also been named in the FIR along with Adoor Prakash. They are Unais Khan, Mahesh Chandran, Anadu Jayan, Shafeer, Abhilash, Sreekumar, Abin, Sudheer, Arji and Kallara Balachandran. 

The police have invoked sections of IPC 143, 147 and 149 (unlawful assembly), 188 (disobedience of order promulgated by public servant) and 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), section 118e of Kerala Police Act (causing violation of public order) and section 4(2)(a) of Kerala Epidemic Diseases Ordinance (prohibition of activities like public gathering, celebration or worship). 

Adoor Prakash has termed the police action as a politically motivated one. In a post uploaded on his social media page later on the day, he asked why there was no action against minister Kadakampally Surendran, who had also attended a similar event on the same day. He wrote that social distancing was maintained in the event in which he attended. The police too were present on the spot.

He also alleged that the act committed by Kadakampally Surendran was more serious as the event he participated was held in a school at Pothencode where a Covid-19 death was reported. It was a purely political event in which students were also forced to attend in the name of receiving financial aid raised by the students. The event was nothing but a veiled attack on the principal of the school, who had taken part in the symbolic protest against the government’s move to defer salary of government employees, said Prakash. 


