MP Covid-19 count jumps to 15; 6 in one day
2020-03-26
INDORE/BHOPAL/UJJAIN: Madhya Pradesh’s Covid-19 count shot up by six on Wednesday, with Indore getting its first four cases in a bunch, and Bhopal and Ujjain recording one each. The Ujjain patient — a 65-year-old woman — died within hours of testing positive.

There are 15 Coronavirus patients in MP now and five cities under curfew, the latest being Indore and Ujjain.

In Bhopal, a 55-year-old journalist who had attended the press meet of former CM Kamal Nath on March 20 — the day he resigned as chief minister — has tested positive, sparking jitters in the fraternity. Most of the city’s senior reporters were at the press conference, and they are now in home isolation.

Nath’s media advisor dismissed rumours that he was in self-isolation. “Kamal Nath ji is perfectly alright and is keeping a watch on the Coronavirus situation,” he said.

The journalist’s daughter is Bhopal’s first Covid-19 patient and is being treated at AIIMS. In the past five days, the scribe met several people in separate locations in the city. Police are scanning CCTV footage to identify those who came in contact with him and are tracking them via GPS, say sources.

The death of the Ujjain victim has caused alarm as she did not have a travel history and is Ujjain’s patient zero. Her son said she had not left her locality for four months. She was admitted to an Ujjain hospital with cough and cold on March 22 and referred to MY Hospital in Indore when her condition deteriorated. Due to her symptoms, doctors had her tested for Covid-19 and it came back positive on Wednesday morning. A couple of hours later, she was dead.

“Her oxygen saturation level was low and her condition was complicated by diabetes and respiratory issues. She passed away on Wednesday,” the Indore collector said. “Her body was covered in a body suit and disinfected. The staff involved in preparing the body wore protective gear,” he added. Ujjain collector Shashank Mishra clamped curfew and issued strict instructions to residents to remain indoors. At least 40 people in the woman’s locality have been quarantined. Indore woke up to the shocker that five residents had tested positive. “Detection of four Indore locals as Covid-19 positive is not good news. Now, people need to strictly avoid coming out of their houses unless there is an emergency,” said collector Lokesh Kumar Jatav. All four patients live in a 3km radius. This area has been declared a containment zone while a circle of 5km is marked as the buffer zone, said zilla panchayat CEO Neha Meena. “Everyone in the containment zone will be screened, followed by those in the buffer zone,” said Meena, adding that these areas will be sanitised and fumigated. 


