Lockdown: Madhya Pradesh dairies feed milk to cattle
2020-04-14
BHOPAL: Lockdown enforced in the state to prevent spread of Coronavirus has had a toll on milk producers in the state. With supply disrupted due to lockdown at most places and demand taking a hit, dairy owners and milk suppliers in Madhya Pradesh are feeding the white nutritious liquid to the cattle, in true sense of ‘gau seva’.


Normally during summers, milk production dips and demand goes up. But, this year has been very different. With supplies taking a hit, there is hardly any demand for milk products as well, say dairy owners. We cannot afford to throw away the precious milk, neither can we store it beyond a point in these harsh weather conditions, said a dairy owner.

In northern and western parts bordering Rajasthan, farmers from the state supplied milk across the borders. Now, with state borders sealed, supply across borders have stopped. Large number of Gurjar families from Rajasthan have settled down in over 25 villages of Sheopur district in MP for the past many years. They own more than 1 lakh Gir cows — a popular cattle breed, known for high milk yield.

In the dusty hamlets of Patalgarh, Simronian and Cholia villages where the Gir cows are reared the early morning hustle-bustle, the clunky noise of milk utensils and dust clouds kicked up by the motorbikes and jeeps transporting the milk is missing.

The milk produced daily is fed back to the cattle after local use. Besides fodder, we have been feeding milk to all the cattle and enjoy the sight when they drink it, Nanda Gurjar, a community head told TOI.

The milk from the area was supplied to a big milk brand of Kota and a factory producing butter, paneer and mawa in Sheopur, besides supplying it to Sanchi cooperative.

Refusing to “quantify the loss incurred by the lockdown,” Gurjar said, “We produce thousands of litre of milk every day. In the normal times, we would have hundreds of vehicles including two, three and four wheelers carrying milk to and from the villages. But, now there is no business transaction.”

