Madhya Pradesh declares Covid-19 a ‘notifiable disease’
2020-03-19
BHOPAL: The Madhya Pradesh government on Wednesday declared novel coronavirus (Covid-19) as an infectious disease for the entire state. In the midst of political crises in the state, making a disease legally notifiable allows for intervention to control the spread of highly infectious diseases.


A notifiable disease is any disease that is required by law to be reported to government authorities. The collation of information allows the authorities to monitor the disease and provides early warning of possible outbreaks. Any failure to report a notifiable disease is a criminal offence and the state government can take necessary action against defaulters.

According to the notification issued by the Department of Public Health and Family Welfare, the action has been taken under Section 50 of the Madhya Pradesh Public Health Act 1949. 

On Wednesday, MP chief secretary M Gopal Reddy directed all district collectors to take measures prevent the spread of Covid-19. Two people were placed under quarantine in Ujjain. The couple have a travel history to Thailand. Five others, including those suspected for Covid-19 in Bhopal on Tuesday, were still under isolation. Test reports of all are still awaited, said a health department official. 

“With the mutual consent of the common people, make effective efforts to keep the crowd low at social and religious events,” said Reddy, according to a government press release. He was reviewing the ongoing activities to prevent the spread of novel coronavirus infection in the state through a video conference in the ministry.

Principal secretary, MP health department, Pallavi Jain Govil, informed that continuous screening of passengers coming from the countries affected by the novel coronavirus is being conducted. In this context, Madhya Pradesh has strengthened the surveillance and control measures against the disease. MP has not reported any Covid-19 positive case so far.


