MP has sufficient capacity to conduct Covid-19 tests, says CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan
2020-05-17
BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh can handle the volume of samples for Covid-19 tests coming from across the state and there is no need to send the samples out of state, now, said chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan.


Chouhan was reviewing the coronavirus situation in the state at mantralaya here on Saturday.

He directed for compulsory health screening of migrant labourers returning from different states at the state borders. The chief minister also issued directives to district officials to make sure proper transport arrangements for the migrant workers “There should be no overloading in vehicles and social distancing norms must be maintained,” he said.

Chief minister said as per the announcement of Prime Minister Narendra Modi free ration for two months is to be given to migrant workers of all states. Appropriate arrangements should be made for this. Chief secretary Iqbal Bains directed to prepare lists of such beneficiaries in all districts.

During the review of Panna district, it was informed that a single Corona patient had come to the district from Mumbai who was now discharged after recovery. Now Panna is free of Corona infection.

Additional chief secretary, health, Mohammad Suleman informed that record 5,828 Corona tests were conducted the in the state. Of these, 3,924 tests were done by 14 test labs and remaining 1904 in the labs outside the state. He informed that two Corona testing machines have arrived in Indore and one in Bhopal. Now there will be no need to have tests conducted outside the state. He said that Contact Tracing App is very useful for Corona related surveillance. It may be used in urban as well as rural areas.

Additional chief secretary Manoj Shrivastava informed that employment has been given to about 20 lakh labourers under MNREGA. Wages are being paid to them. Chief minister directed that if migrant workers from other states seek job in MP, their job cards should be prepared and employment be given to them. Appropriate arrangements should be made to continue some works under MNREGA during monsoon.

Principal secretary Sanjay Dube informed that so far over 3.4 lakh e-passes have been issued for movement in different places of the state. Now the number of calls for e-pass has reduced.

DGP Vivek Johari also attended the meeting. 


