MP intervenes after people stop AMC from taking Covid-19 patient to hosp
2020-05-10
Aurangabad: Chaotic scenes were witnessed at the Town Hall on Saturday after some local residents allegedly refused to allow the squad of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) to take a Covid-19 positive patient child from the locality to the Covid Care Centre for treatment. 

Subsequently, Aurangabad MP Imtiaz Jaleel reached the spot. Criticising the municipal corporation, Jaleel said that they are stigmatising the patient and the family by bringing police to the area. 

According to Aparna Thete, head of the Covid-19 task force of the AMC, the team of the health workers were denied access to a child from Town Hall who tested positive for Covid-19. She said that the child tested positive along with other close contacts after a Covid-19 case was detected in the locality. 

“The boy tested positive for Covid-19 on May 1 and, subsequently, our team tried to take him to a Covid Care Centre where he can be treated for the infection. However, the family is unwilling to admit the child in the health facility and has denied any treatment either. The parents have given a written undertaking that the child will be in home quarantine and has been for the last nine days. We have tried to convince the parents to at least let a paediatrician conduct a check-up of the child, but in vain. They are saying that the child is asymptomatic.” Thete said. 

Dressed in personal protective equipment (PPE), the team of health professionals of the AMC along with police personnel had reached the locality on Saturday. However, they were met with severe resistance from the locals. MP Jaleel was also called by the residents asking for his intervention in the matter. 

Subsequently, the MP met with the child’s family. After the meeting, the MP said that the child has been in self-quarantine for the last nine days. “The people are resisting for the same issue I have raised with district authorities and with the chief minister. If you have taken the throat swab samples of a person, why aren’t you giving me the report? This is a matter between the patient and the doctor. Why are you bringing the police in between? They are not criminals and this is not a crime scene in which police interference is needed. The municipal corporation should counsel them patient and their family members and take them into confidence,” Jaleel said.


