Delhi: MPhil scholar faces slur, spat on over coronavirus paranoia
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: An MPhil student and guest lecturer from Manipur was allegedly spat on outside her home in Vijay Nagar, near Delhi University North Campus, on Sunday.


While an FIR has been filed, the student complained about how people from the Northeast are concerned for their safety as the novel coronavirus paranoia grips the city. Many complained of facing racist slurs and getting harassed by their neighbours.

The student, who wished to remain anonymous, is an MPhil scholar at the department of English. “Last night, I had gone out after 9pm with my senior to buy groceries. As I was walking, a man came on a scooty, slowed down, spat paan on my face and called me corona,” she said.

Her face was saved as she was wearing a mask, but the paan stain spread all over he T-shirt and hair. “I tried to run after the man, but I couldn’t as my eyes were burning. Since we are facing a pandemic, I rushed to my room and washed myself,” said the scholar.

Subsequently, she met the Northeast students’ organisation and filed a police complaint. “The attack was racially motivated, but police filed a case under IPC Section 509 (word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman),” said the student. She has been living in Vijay Nagar since 2013. DCP (Northwest) Vijayanta Arya confirmed that an FIR has been filed against an unknown person.

Bibinaz Thokchim, assistant professor with School of Human Studies at Ambedkar University said more such cases may occur in the coming days if action is not taken to curb them. 

“During our university festival last month, many students from the Northeast told me how they were facing trouble travelling in the city as they were being harassed. The situation is getting graver by the day,” she added.

“Because of their Mongoloid features, people from the Northeast are now being ridiculed as coronavirus,” said Thokchom Singhajit Meitei, general secretary of Manipur Students’ Association.

M Ramanand Singh, professor at Kirori Mal College, said, “There have been incidents of racial remarks on Northeast students in KMC campus, Roop Nagar and Vijay Nagar. Law enforcement agencies must act swiftly. There is a need for social awareness.”

After the incident, deputy secretary NE-II RK Pandey wrote to the chief secretaries of all states and UTs to sensitise law enforcement agencies to take action in cases of such harassment.

(Inputs from Sakshi Chand)


