MSMEs restart operations as lockdown restrictions eased
2020-05-05
Coimbatore: As lockdown restrictions were relaxed, S Sridhar, owner of a micro jobwork unit at Maniyakarampalayam in the city, reopened the unit on Monday, after more than a month.Sridhar spent the day cleaning the unit and attending to machines, the wiring of which had been gnawed by rats, with the help of one of the five employees, who managed to reach the unit.More than 20% of the industries in rural areas of the district resumed operations on Monday. Police and panchayat officials visited MSMEs in rural areas and advised the owners to follow safety measures such as frequent hand washing, use of hand sanitisers and masks, and personal distancing.However, MSMEs face several hurdles. It will take at least a week to clean up and bring machines back to order. With pre-lockdown orders being low, the industrialists are calling up clients who had given them orders, inquiring whether to carry on with the orders. Half of the orders might get cancelled, they said. With workers from other districts stuck at their homes, the units might also have to face a manpower shortage unless workers are allowed to return. Also, unless transport services resume and they get raw materials on time, they would not be able to carry on operations smoothly.Sridhar, whose unit does rod-cutting jobwork for industry and makes areca plates, said he had three-days’-worth raw material for jobwork and a week’s-worth raw material for plate making. “If transport doesn’t get back on wheels and if we don’t get raw material in time, we can’t start functioning smoothly. During the lockdown period, I managed daily affairs with the Rs 10,000 I had saved. Only one of my clients made payment.”K Balasubramanian, who owns a jobwork unit near Neelambur, said police and panchayat officials had visited his unit and had asked him to follow safety measures. “My unit had 13 employees. But as most of them are stuck in their native places, we started operations with only two people. We could only clean the premises. We have to bring in mechanics to check the circuits and to lubricate the machines, which had been stalled for more than 30 days,” he said.Balasubramanian, whose unit caters to the defence sector and big pump industries, said his clients had asked him to carry out only local orders and not export orders.