Mukhiyas execute govt plan to check Covid spread in villages
2020-05-18
PATNA: People’s representatives under the panchayati raj system are busy executing the state government’s plan to help the poor and create social awareness about quarantine, social distancing and other norms to be followed in the fight against Covid-19 pandemic. 

The state government on April 30 made it mandatory for all mukhiyas, sarpanchs and ward members to inform the police if any migrant reaches a village without registration, health check-up and spending 14 days in quarantine. The mukhiyas have also been warned of action for their failure to enforce the lockdown effectively.

Poonam Devi, the mukhiya of Chakanha panchayat in Rohtas district, is back to her social responsibility within a fortnight of her husband Manoj Kumar Singh’s murder on April 25. She can be seen motivating migrant workers returning home to be in 14-day quarantine before going home. She can be spotted distributing ration among the families, who have missed to get it from the PDS shops for some reason.

“This is an emergency-like situation and we are the real backbone of the government machinery to execute its directives pertaining to people’s welfare and their uplift,” said Poonam.

Jayanti Devi, the mukhiya of Rajwara in Muzaffarpur district, herself takes care of the quarantine centres in her panchayat and ensures that the inmates are provided breakfast, meal, sanitizers and other amenities as per the guidelines of the disaster management department.

The panchayat functionaries are also convincing people to wear masks while stepping out for any important work and not to forget to sanitize their hands soon after returning home. “The impact is visible. One can see people using ‘gamchha’ or face masks in rural areas as well,” said Bimal Kumar Jitendra, a former mukhiya of Hasanpur panchayat in Samastipur district.

Meera Devi, the mukhiya of Davaichh panchayat in Vaishali district, said, “We are trying to comply with the government’s order.”

Dayanand Singh of Govindpur Devi Gaura in Vaishali district said, “It is because of the awareness campaign that locals informed Patepur police about the return of some migrant workers to their Musahari Tola homes a couple of days back. Subsequently, they were taken to the hospital for medical check-up,” he added.

A mukhiya on the condition of anonymity said, “Now every household will be provided face masks, sanitizers and soaps on the directive of CM Nitish Kumar. A sum of Rs9 lakh has been sanctioned to every panchayat for the purpose.”

There were 8,406 panchayats across the state. Authoritative sources said police chowkidars, anganwadi sevikas and ASHAs have been entrusted with the task to apprise people of preventive measures to check Covid-19 spread.


