Kochi: Multi-pronged treatment plan mooted to fight virus
2020-04-08
KOCHI: As part of a long-term strategy to fight the novel coronavirus, the state government is planning to introduce multipronged facilities for treating the patients. 

The government has chalked out a detailed plan to set up Corona Care Centres (CCCs) at the grassroots level. First-line treatment centres for Covid-19 will be at panchayat- and taluk-level hospitals, and tertiary care centres at general hospitals and medical colleges. These facilities will also ensure that non-Covid and Covid treatment are not mixed up.

The plan is to be prepared for catering to the needs in different conditions. Keeping this in mind, the authorities have prepared a plan spanning three phases. In the first phase, the patients to be admitted in the treatment facilities like CFLTCs are returnees from the disease-affected areas, positive cases and symptomatic contacts of confirmed cases, etc.

In second phase, the number of symptomatic or positives cases would go up or there will be evidence of local community spread or the bed occupancy reaches 50% of each identified centres. Process of converting other hospitals, including private hospitals and hospitals attached with the private medical colleges, should be initiated at this phase. District collector should coordinate these activities.

In the third phase, there will be evidence of multiple clusters or large community spread. Here, more seriously-ill patients are anticipated, and more ICU beds will be required. Wards in the hospitals should be converted into ICUs with amenities like oxygen.

Health department, in association with local bodies, should identify facilities which can be converted into CCCs where people who came from other states or countries are to be quarantined. These centres will help successful isolation and management of asymptomatic cases. There should be independent single rooms with attached toilets, proper electricity, water and internet connectivity, adequate food and drinking water besides proper security. 

Since there are no inbound flights to Kerala now, the care centres can be used for those who don’t have home isolation facilities. “We have given instructions to local bodies and health officials in each area to set up these facilities,” a top official with health department said. “Other hospitals like primary health centres (PHCs), community health centres (CHCs) and general hospitals in each district should take care of non-Covid patients, while the dedicated hospitals for Covid-19 at different levels will cater to the needs of the patients infected with coronavirus,” the official said. 

Covid first-line treatment centres (CFLTCs) are facilities exclusively for treatment of all mild and moderate symptomatic persons under surveillance as well as treating positive cases. Community centres, auditoria, schools, etc, should be converted into CFLTCs. “Instructions have been given for setting up at least two model CFLTCs in each district immediately. Based on the model, other CFLCs should be rolled out later,” an official with health department said. If the condition of patient under treatment at CFLTC worsens, he or she should immediately be transferred to Covid hospitals. Covid hospitals are are generally tertiary care centres with critical care facilities.


