Mumbai lady doctor booked in Bhuj for hiding Covid
2020-05-12
RAJKOT: A 22-year-old Mumbai-based lady doctor was booked by the Bhuj police on Monday for allegedly concealing that she had tested positive for coronavirus in Mumbai on May 4.


The doctor, who came to Bhuj on May 5, approached the district health officials on May 8 saying that she had received her report done in Mumbai which confirmed that she was infected. The health officials took her to GK General Hospital where doctors got suspicious about her claim that she had tested positive on May 8.

They informed the police which investigated and found her Mumbai medical report which confirmed that she had tested positive on May 4 and not May 8 as claimed by her. “She is a doctor and was well aware about her condition. Despite knowing that she was a Covid patient, she travelled to Bhuj and even went around the town for three days,” Sourabh Tolumbia, superintendent of police, Kutch (west) told TOI. 

Surprisingly, there were contradictions about her Covid status in the versions of the district administration and GK General Hospital.

Prabhav Joshi, district development officer, Kutch said, “She had tested negative on admission on May 8, but as per guidelines for mild symptoms she is required to remain in hospital for 10 days.” 

However, Dr Kashyap Buch, civil surgeon, GK General Hospital told TOI, “On May 8, we had received her report from JJ Hospital that she was Covid positive. We took her sample again but that was discarded because of some technical reasons, so she still remains a Covid positive patient. As per guidelines, we need to treat her for 10 to 14 days and thereafter we will again take her sample.”

Tolumbia added that the woman, who is a trainee doctor at JJ Hospital, had also entered Kutch without valid permission. A pass was issued by Gandhinagar collector in the name of one Rabari Khengarbhai Vashrambhai to transport two persons including from Mumbai to Bhuj. However, there was a condition in the pass that before starting their journey, the travellers must take from the district magistrate of the destination place. The FIR states that she neither had valid documents from Mumbai authorities to travel to other districts or states nor the permission from Kutch district magistrate. 

She has been booked under sections of Disaster Management Act, 2005 in Bhuj B-division police station.

