Mumbai Covid-19 death toll at 508, Wardha loses 'green' status as 1 dies
2020-05-11
Mumbai: Of the 53 deaths recorded by the state on Sunday, 19 were from Mumbai which took the city's toll past the 500-mark, 14 were from Malegaon city, five each from Pune and Jalgaon, three from Dhule and one each from Pimpri Chinchwad, Ahmednagar, Aurangabad, Nandurbar, Solapur and the Vasai-Virar region. The 14 deaths in Malegaon city were from April 27 to May 10. The death of a Madhya Pradesh resident was also added to Mumbai's tally. 

Wardha which was in the green zone so far with no positive cases, recorded its first Covid-19 death on May 8. A 35-year-old woman from Hiwara Tanda village in Arvi Tahsil died at Vinoba Bhave Rural hospital, Sawangi, making her the first positive case of the district. District officials, who have begun an extensive contact tracing operation, said that the woman did not have any travel history. Following the positive case, administration has sealed seven nearby villages.


कोरोना रुग्णांना डिस्चार्ज देण्याबाबत केंद्र शासनाने सुधारीत धोरण जाहिर केलं आहे. नव्या नियमानुसार एखाद्या रुग्णाला… https://t.co/MPGm3eRjwn— Rajesh Tope (@rajeshtope11) 1589130752000

Public health minister Rajesh Tope tweeted that the state has adopted the Centre's revised patient discharge policy after following up the issue with the Indian Council of Medical Research. The health minister, however, received flak on his twitter handle over the sharp rise in new cases.

With the death of a 56-year old woman from Dombivli, the toll within the Kalyan-Dombivli municipal corporation limits reached five. The region also recorded 16 fresh cases on Sunday. And 14 were reported from Mira-Bhayander, taking positive cases to 106. In Vasai-Virar, total cases have reached 208 with six added on Sunday. 

In Mumbai, total number of Covid-19 positive cases in BEST undertaking shot up to 75, with five more staffers found positive.

The civic body said an artificial intelligence backed chest x-ray software was being used in HBT Trauma care, Kasturba Hospital, Podar Hospital and NSCI Dome in Worli. After 3,000 X-ray scans done on a pilot basis, the BMC is planning to use the technique in other hospitals too.

Over 4,199 patients have gone home so far in the state and currently about 2.44 lakh patients have been home quarantined.

