Mumbai's Nair hospital to be designated Covid-only; opposition to plan
2020-04-19
MUMBAI: BYL Nair hospital will be the city’s first hospital with an attached medical college (TN Medical College) to be designated as a Covid-only hospital. While the decision was taken by a specially-appointed taskforce on Saturday, it is yet to be announced, following opposition from senior medical staff.


The 1,600-bed facility will be dedicated to Covid-19 patients after the transition process. Doctors raised concerns over new admissions to undergraduate and postgraduate courses, among other issues.

A senior civic official said a bigger civic-run hospital was needed in the vicinity for emergencies. He said the decision was taken on the advice of Dr Sanjay Oak, chairman of the taskforce formed by state government for patient management. The plan was to turn KEM Covid-only, but it was rejected as it is larger and caters to many non-Covid patients.

The civic chief and senior hospital staff met over an online platform on Saturday. Dr Mohan Joshi from Sion hospital is likely to be dean of the Covid hospital.

A doctor from the hospital said the government should not convert a college into a Covid-19 facility, as no one knows how long this will last. “Teaching will take a hit, no new admissions can be allowed this year. Students will not want to take admissions. Postgraduate exams are to be held in June,” said the doctor. He added that the hospital has 100 beds for Covid-19 patients. “Resident doctors are also being sent to SevenHills and Kasturba. We are also one of the dedicated units for pregnant Covid-19 patients,” said the doctor.

Another doctor said any hospital cannot be converted into a Covid facility overnight. “Infrastructure is inadequate to handle 1,600 beds. The ICU does not have negative pressure facility. What will happen to non-Covid follow-up patients, cancer and dialysis patients? If all doctors work on Covid-19 patients, they will have to provide accommodation. There is no assurance,” said the doctor.

A government official said all concerns will be addressed. Another meeting will be held on Sunday to work out process of transition. With inclusion of Nair, there will be three government-BMC run Covid-19 hospitals in the island city, Kasturba and St George being the others. In suburbs, SevenHills (Andheri) and Hindu Hruday Samrat Balasaheb (Jogeshwari) are dedicated hospitals, apart from small hospitals.


