Mumbai: 15 who escaped quarantine camp brought back, stamped flyers breaking ‘home-quarantine’ warned
2020-03-23
MUMBAI: Fifteen men who ran out of the quarantine facility after landing in the city from Dubai were tracked down and taken back on Sunday. The men, who hail from Punjab, had been stamped for quarantine. They left the quarantine camp, boarded a local train from Andheri and travelled to Khar when they were tracked.


The state ministry has directed concerned agencies to keep a track of all the flyers stamped with self-quarantine, and to check whether they were following instructions.

A team comprising of the Mumbai collector, civic officials and police were kept on alert after learning that 15 people had been reported missing from the quarantine facility on Sunday. Senior inspector Gajanan Kabdule said, “We received information about the suspected runaways in Khar. Our team rushed to the railway station and caught the 15 men around 12.30pm, who were then handed over to civic officials and the collector, who took them back. They were found with the quarantine stamps.”

Five students with home quarantine stamps were found in the Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS) and Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) housing complexes in Palghar. District administration was alerted by locals, who then warned the students. The five had returned from USA, Paris, Philippines, Netherlands and UK, approximately five days ago. Two were TAPS residents, and three BARC residents. They had not reported to the district administration after returning to Mumbai.

Taluka health officer Dr Abhijit Khandare said that when information about the students was received, a team reached their homes and explained to them why they needed to be in self-quarantine for 14 days. No police case has been filed against them, and they were warned to follow the instructions strictly. Their family members were also instructed not to report to work till their quarantine period ended. The buildings in which the five reside will be fumigated and sanitized. Those who interacted with the students were also asked to look out for symptoms. The district administration is drawing up a list of people, including students, who have arrived from outside India.

BJP corporator from Ulhasnagar, Meena Sonde, noticed a few people breaking the ‘Janata curfew’ in her area on Sunday. As a punishment, she made them do sit-ups. Sonde said she was at home when through CCTV cameras installed in her area, she saw people roaming around in the slum area without any reason. She went there and punished them, and told them to stay inside.

Talking to TOI, Sonde said, “As public representatives it is our social responsibility to help the administration.” Sonde’s punishment video went viral on social media, and several people were seen appreciating her actions. Some also criticized her, stating that she should not take the law into her own hands.

The MRA Marg police on Sunday morning checked on 23 people who had arrived from Dubai recently and were staying at a guest house on Modi Street in Fort. The police said they had not been detected with coronavirus, and they were asked to remain in home quarantine for 14 days. A police team will keep a tab on them.

On Saturday, three people with home quarantine stamps were found roaming in Sahar Village. They had returned from Dubai recently. “Locals who noticed them alerted the cops. All of them were asked to complete the two weeks of self-quarantine, and warned that if they did not do so, forced quarantine action would be taken against them,” said an officer from the Sahar police station.

City police spokesperson, deputy police commissioner Pranay Ashok said that the BMC was maintaining a list of all incoming flyers at the Mumbai airport. “We are providing support to the BMC, who has asked us to keep a regular check on incoming flyers. The flyers database is used by police personnel to check whether quarantine instructions are being followed,” said Ashok. Those not following the instructions will be sent to forced quarantine.

On Sunday around 12.40pm, a flight carrying 240 passengers from Europe landed in Mumbai. All the flyers were screened. Another set of 212 passengers from the Gulf were to land at 7.45pm on Sunday.


With inputs from Sandhya Nair and Pradeep Gupta

