Covid-19 scare: Mumbaikars crowd supermarkets to ‘stock up’ as malls empty out
2020-03-15
MUMBAI: On Saturday, state health minister Rajesh Tope notified that malls across the state will be closed until March 31 as a preventive measure against the spread of coronavirus. All establishments inside malls will be shut, barring those that provide essential services such as grocery items or chemist supplies.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The Shopping Centres Association of India representing 110 mall owners said it would comment on the state’s decision after an internal conference on Monday. But Prakash Chaphalkar, secretary of Multiplex Owners’ Association of India, said malls and multiplexes had decided to comply with the order on Saturday night itself. He said all police stations had received a government resolution instructing a complete lockdown of malls, multiplexes, gymnasia, swimming pools and theatres.

On Saturday, a few theatres and gyms functioned in Mumbai as they awaited a “written order”. Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray said establishments which continue to operate will face action. “They shouldn’t wait for written orders. We have now issued orders and from tomorrow if they remain open and draw crowds we will take action,” he said.

Meanwhile, mirroring the rush during Covid-19 lockdowns in China, Italy, South Korea and Iran, Mumbaikars headed out mass shopping as fears of short supplies peaked on social media late on Friday. In an eerie contrast, malls, multiplexes, theatres and public places such as swimming pools and gymnasia wore a forlorn look even before the notification arrived.

In fact, WhatsApp messages spread about an imminent closure of malls on Friday evening causing people to begin hoarding household supplies. Supermarkets and food chains were packed to capacity, with shop shelves emptying out faster than the staff could replenish them.

In D’Mart at Yari Road, Andheri West, shopping carts ran out and customers formed a separate queue at the back exit, waiting for trolleys emptied by people who were leaving. A salesman said, “It is like Diwali, only items are selling out faster than we can restock them.” Shelves of edible oil, food items, sanitation products, detergent, cleaners and toilet paper were half empty. In every aisle, loaders were stacking up cartons refilled from their godown.

“This scene is unprecedented in my working experience since 2005. We are repeatedly announcing we are open from morning till night, still people fear closure,” said the manager. D’Mart is checking staffers’ temperature every day and has ordered testing kits for customers too but stocks are unavailable. 

Interestingly, none of the customers admitted they were hoarding. “But what if manufacturers are unable to despatch stocks later on? Flights have been cancelled so other transportation may also slow down. One has to be cautious,” said Tajunnissa Marker from Versova who bought several packs of cooking oil. Mumtaz from Millat Nagar said she believed this store would not close, “but one cannot be sure of other cities and road transport. It could have a cascading effect on us,” she said.

Large-scale buying unfolded from Churchgate to Mira Road, Navi Mumbai to Thane. Star Bazar in Churchgate saw shelves devoid of essentials like rice, dal and noodles. D’Mart in Manpada, Thane, ran out of ghee and milk. “Still there were long queues at the bill counter. Everyone was buying too much of everything,” said shopper Chitra Mehta. At Raghuleela Mall opposite Vashi station, there were just a dozen people in the food court while the multiplex was shut. Online shoppers of food chains reported shortage too. “Too many items are sold out and I got a delivery slot for Monday,” said Thane’s Yamini Rao. 

Curiously, people did not mind visiting overcrowded supermarkets but stayed away from stations and buses. In Thane, gyms, theatres and two swimming pools at Kalwa were shut.


