Mumbai: No test, only quarantine for asymptomatic contacts
2020-04-15
MUMBAI: The BMC has decided not to test asymptomatic contacts of positive patients, but make them stay in quarantine. While high-risk contacts will be stamped on their hands to help officials spot them if they break quarantine rules, pregnant women who are two weeks away from delivery, patients on dialysis or chemotherapy and healthcare workers will be exempted from this rule.


The BMC has also decided not to test symptomatic young patients to reduce load on labs for faster turnaround time of tests. These decisions were taken in a virtual meeting attended by BMC chief Praveen Pardeshi, Dr Sanjay Oak , chairman of the task force for patient managem-ent protocol for critically ill Covid-19 patients, and additional municipal commissioners.

A civic official said the testing criteria has been changed to align it with the Indian Council of Medical Research guidelines. “Effectively, we will stop testing asymptomatic patients from big clusters. They, however, will continue to remain in quarantine,” said the official.

As per the new norms, testing will only be done if the following criteria are met: Symptomatic high-risk contacts of Covid-positives and people over 60 years and those with underlying diseases.

Additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said, “We have 200 Covid care centres with 12,000 beds. We can shift asymptomatic patients and suspected cases to these centres.” He said asymptomatic persons will be allowed to stay in quarantine in their homes if they have ‘good toilet facility’ and adequate space. The idea, he said, was to give more priority to critical and moderately ill patients as per Centre guidelines. TOI has learned that the decision was taken after experts found that resources were being wasted in mass testing. “Also, for asymptomatic patients, test results have no bearing on treatment protocol,” she said.

An assistant civic chief said many hospital beds were occupied by asymptomatic patients. “Once such patients are shifted to CCDs or home quarantine, more beds will be available for critical patients. This step will thus reduce the death rate.” Another official said they were conducing tests beyond their capacity, which was one of the reasons the reports arrived after two days. “Once we reduce the number of tests, we will get reports on time.”

On Tuesday, state public health minister Rajesh Tope announced the setting up of two committees—one will oversee Mumbai’s developments and the other, the rest of the state. The seven-member panel for Mumbai will be headed by former KEM Hospital dean Dr Avinash Supe and comprise KEM head of medicine department Dr Milind Nadkar, Sion Hospital’s ICU head Dr Nitin Karnik, Dr Chaya Rajguru and Dr Vidya Nagar of JJ Hospital, Dr Sadhana Tayde, director of state health services, and Dr Subhash Salunkhe, former director general of the state health department. The panel will investigate and analyse the coronary morbidity and mortality in Mumbai. It will propose measures to reduce the mortality rate accordingly, and guidelines will be issued to hospitals.

