Mumbai churches prepare to stream Holy Week services due to lockdown
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: For the first time in living memory, the Christian community is unable to attend church over Holy Week owing to the coronavirus lockdown. Not just the archdiocese of Bombay but also individual churches are reaching out to their parishioners by broadcasting masses and rituals through their own YouTube channels, and living streaming on their web sites and apps.

The spiritual cleansing of Lent enters its final week at Palm Sunday today. Easter Sunday falls April 12.

Palm Sunday marks the start of Holy Week, the most significant seven days on the Christian calendar. Maundy Thursday sees the washing of the feet ceremony by priests while special masses and vast processions unfold at Good Friday. In fact even those members of the community who are unable to visit church throughout the year make sure to attend Good Friday and Easter mass.

However, the landscape is virtually altered this season. The archbishop of Bombay, Oswald Cardinal Gracias, will broadcast all services including Palm Sunday, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Easter on the YouTube channel of the archdiocese.

Churches citywide are following his live streaming since the lockdown. "We shall do the same for the Holy Week," said Daniel Lobo, a parishioner of RC Church Colaba.

Fr Frazer Mascarenhas SJ, parish priest of St Peter's Bandra, said, "Not being able to gather is painful, but it is an opportunity for us to keep the balance between religious activities at home and in church. Our parish will live stream the religious ceremonies this week, which will be conducted by only three or four priests in the church at the usual times. We encourage our people to make these into special family events by praying together."

Fr Vincent Vaz of Holy Family Chakala said, "On Maundy Thursday we will stream a special mass for the sick where during the symbolic ritual of washing of the feet we will pray for the coronavirus victims, caregivers and civic authorities. That the Lord may wash away the illness and the pain."

Rev. Bharat Solanki of the Centenary Methodist Gujarati Church, Grant Road, said, "We have recorded the worship service which will be uploaded on Whatsapp on Palm Sunday, Passion Week, Good Friday and Easter."

Activist Joseph Dias whose organisation CSF organises the grand Good Friday procession in Kalina-Vakola, said, "It will be for the first time in over 32 years that it is not possible to enact the Stations of the Cross live on Good Friday. But I have put up a YouTube channel since we are unable to do so. We have uploaded scenes from the earlier years. We are also releasing the regular musical version of this, universally the most popular devotion, before Good Friday."

Roshan D'Souza, an active parishioner of Holy Family, said, "The lockdown has given new meaning to this season. We have had to sacrifice going out on our outreaches, services in church and other activities. But it has also shown us new ways to move closer to God. Spending more time with our families, reaching out to our neighbours in need, learning to live frugally. (Just like) Jesus' resurrection was not possible without the Cross, there is no Easter without Good Friday. This (trial) too shall pass."

