Mumbai's Dharavi cases rise steadily, hunt for quarantine centres
2020-04-15
MUMBAI: Six new cases of Covid-19, including two fatalities, were reported from the congested Dharavi neighbourhood on Tuesday. In 14 days since the first case was reported, the case tally has risen to 55, including seven deaths.


A 52-year-old from Muslim Nagar died at Sion Hospital, and another 52-year-old from Kalyanwadi passed away at Rajawadi hospital. The latter was found Covid-19 positive after his last rites. So, it was learnt that the protocol on such cases could not be followed for the burial.

A 55-year-old woman, who had been kept in quarantine at a civic centre, also passed away at Sion hospital on Monday night. Her swab sample had been collected, but a report is awaited.

On Tuesday, the only bright spot was that none of the cases came from a new pocket of the locality. Two men, 55 and 19, tested positive from Janta colony, and a 43-year-old woman from Rajiv Nagar and a 27-year-old from Muslim Nagar were the other patients.

With the steady rise in the number of cases, the BMC is running out of space in its quarantine centre that was acquired for the purpose. It is now in the process of getting two more quarantine facilities — a 700-bed isolation facility in the Dharavi transit camp municipal school and a building constructed for project affected persons (PAP) — ready.

The BMC is taking all the high-risk contacts of a patient who has tested positive to a quarantine facility if these people live in small homes and find it difficult to isolate themselves. At these centres, orders are to ensure that high- and low-risk persons are separately quarantined.

“We had estimated that the Rajiv Gandhi District Sports Complex would have a capacity of 300 beds, but it seems to have filled up with only 200 persons. So, we will shift the new cases to the transit camp school,” said BMC assistant municipal commissioner of G-North ward Kiran Dighavkar.

In an uncalled for problem at the Rajiv Gandhi District Sports Complex, several persons from two religious communities did not want to be kept together and civic officials had to house them on separate floors of the complex.

