Mumbai: Easy-to-assemble cardboard beds at quarantine hubs
2020-05-18
MUMBAI: The urgency to create multiple quarantine spaces in the city has prompted innovative ideas to furnish these halls.


Recognising the need to make beds that can be easily assembled at quarantine centres, a city-based corrugated boards and boxes manufacturer, Aryan Paper Group, spent a week to develop a prototype for a cardboard bed. The company has since donated over 1,200 beds and sold nearly 10,000 at cost price for use in the state and Gujarat.

A partner at the company, Rhea Shah, figured that quick-assembly beds would be needed. “We had [prepared] a prototype in a week and began manufacturing at our Vapi unit. The beds are easy to assemble and can be used for up to six months, and can be recycled thereafter,” said Param Gandhi, executive director of the company.

In Mumbai, the beds have been used at quarantine or isolation centres at Police Gymkhana, Catholic Gymkhana, Mumbai University’s Kalina Campus, a school and college in Dharavi. “We wanted to help in this crisis, and so we are not making any profit from sale of beds. While a traditional metal bed costs up to Rs 3,800, the cardboard ones cost less than half. The idea has also kept our company working which means we can continue to pay our staffers as well,” said Gandhi.

Another company Nilkamal has been manufacturing plastic chairs for 35 years and recently diversified into metal furniture. Ajay Agarwal, assistant vice president, operations, said, “On March 25, the first day of the lockdown, we decided to manufacture metal beds for use in isolation and quarantine centres. On March 30 we were ready, and donated the first 50 beds to Tamil Nadu. We are now supplying 1,000 beds to the MMRDA facility in BKC. These beds are stackable — 10-12 can be kept atop one another for later use. We are also providing mattresses and storage cabinets that double up as dining surfaces. As infection can spread in large quarantine halls, our isolation beds have foldable plastic covers that envelop all four sides.”

