Mumbai: Covid-19 survivors invited to give pep talk to allay patients' fears
2020-05-31
MUMBAI: It makes a difference when someone who's been through it, talks about it. And that is why civic officials want patients cured of the novel coronavirus infection to "talk" about their experience and help reduce the fear and anxiety spread across society over Covid-19. 

Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) and private hospitals are roping in mental health officials and trying counselling to calm patients and others.

Some hospitals found that patients did not want to leave due to fears their condition would worsen or they would infect their family members, while many housing colonies recorded an increase in arguments between members over 'Covid rules'.

"Around 1% of our patients don't want to leave. Some don't even want to leave hospitals for step-down facility such as Covid care centres," said Suresh Kakani, additional commissioner of BMC.

In order to change this mindset, the BMC wants treated patients to act as 'brand ambassadors' and dispel the notion that Covid is a sure killer. The case fatality rate in Mumbai has been hovering around 3% since mid-April.

The BMC will, Monday onwards, ask housing societies and chawls to felicitate discharged patients and let them share their experience with the disease. "We have been telling people that over 80% of Covid patients will be asymptomatic, but there continues to be the fear that it will be fatal and one will definitely spread it to their family members despite taking precautions,'' said Kakani. The 'brand ambassadors' will hopefully change this mindset.

World Health Organization and Indian Council for Medical Research have maintained that physical distancing, using masks and frequent hand-washing will help check spread of the virus.

Some hospitals such as Hinduja in Mahim have roped in their psychiatrists and counsellors to reduce anxiety levels among patients. "Our doctors counsel patients about every step and, if needed, our psychiatrists also talk to the patients on video chats," said Hinduja Hospital's Joy Chakraborty.

Dr Parul Tank from the BMC-run Rajawadi Hospital, Ghatkopar, had a few weeks back tried a two-week-long intervention to help Covid patients. "We provided supportive counselling and taught basic relaxation exercises through the glass door for 200 patients," she said.

A senior doctor said there is no structure to provide mental health services to patients in hospitals. "Mental health is still at the bottom of the heap as far as Covid is concerned. However, it is much needed," said the doctor. 

Dr Tank said that half of her usual patients have been experiencing heightened anxiety due to Covid. "Of the six patients I counselled on Friday, three had Covid-related anxiety," she added.


