Mumbai: Repair shops gear up for big rush to fix gadgets gone kaput in lockdown
2020-06-08
MUMBAI: Chartered accountant Shailendra Kumar blames his excessive enthusiasm for his iPhone display screen going blank. After his daily evening shopping for groceries, he would scrub all his belongings clean. But his phone did not quite agree with the generous doses of sanitiser that he dabbed. As offices open on Monday, Kumar will be among the many customers expected to queue up at mobile phone and laptop repair shops in the city. 

"We have been inundated with calls from customers during the lockdown but couldn't attend to them as the shop was shut. From Monday, we expect massive footfalls," said Mulund-based mobile repair shopowner Deepak Dama. Customers have complained of softwares slowing down, speakers not working or apps not getting downloaded. But Dama cautioned that not all repair work can be attended to until the spare parts wholesale market in south Mumbai opens up. 

"As of now, we can make do with parts ordered before the lockdown and lying around. Beyond that, we wil have to ask customers to leave their handsets with us indefinitely," said Dama.

Computer technicians are witnessing a huge uptick in demand for webcams, now that school students are likely to attend online classes for a while. "Those with two kids want webcams fitted to desktops so one of the kids can use it and the other can use a laptop for online classes. Then there are families who want laptops on rent. Business has increased three-fold," said Prashant Shetty, owner of Hi-Tech Electronics in Borivli. However, paucity of manpower is leading to xclients being refused. "Most of my staffers have left for their home towns or stay far off. I do not want to take a risk by making them travel to work. I'm running a one-man show right now," said Shetty.

The demand for laptop repairs is such that some service centres have started giving appointments to avoid crowds. "Maintaining social distancing is vital, so we are giving out four appointments a day from Monday. We will not allow anyone without prior appointment," said Rupans Sharma, manager of a laptop service centre in Andheri that specialises in fixing Macbooks. Sharma reiterates that staff strength is an issue.

Some mobile repair shops like Shiv Mobiles in Dahisar East has already witnessed sizeable footfall between Friday and Sunday. Most complaints are about inability to charge phones or screens cracked after a fall. Government guidelines have forbidden opening of shops inside malls. Proprietors of these shops have offered to fix phones at their homes if clients can drop and pick them up. "My customers know me well. I have offered to fix their gadgets at home if spare parts are available," said technician Nirav Shah from Borivli. 

As offices reopen, computer service centres are expecting a surge in business "We've offered to pick up machines, fix them and return them," said Kesavan Nadar of Sanjeevani Computers in Sion.


