Mumbai: Wait for Covid-19 hospital bed now 3 days in some wards
2020-05-06
MUMBAI: As Covid-19 cases continue to rise by leaps and bounds in the city, positive patients are spending anxious hours scouting for beds. The wait for a hospital bed - in civic wards with a heavy load of cases - is now stretching for up to three days from what was previously a couple of hours when the epidemic started. The situation is worse in case of ICU beds or those for positive patients with comorbid conditions. The BMC, however, said a centralised system has been fine-tuned to streamline ICU admissions. Currently, 150 Covid-19 patients are critical in Mumbai, out of 9,945 positive cases. 

ICU beds in tertiary hospitals, like KEM and Nair, were the first to fill up. A doctor said the minimum duration of hospital stay for ICU patients is 12 days, and hence beds stay occupied for long.

A 55-year-old civic official faced a scary situation when he couldn't find an ICU bed or one with oxygen support for five hours on Tuesday. "This, despite my father being breathless and showing an abnormal pulse rate," said his daughter, who spent harrowing hours at Hiranandani Hospital, Powai, and later at SevenHills. While the former told the family there was no ICU bed, the latter arranged for one after the family waited for hours. In between, the daughter and the man's colleagues called half a dozen hospitals, only to be told there were no ICU beds.

Despite the BMC's assurances, several hospitals TOI spoke to said they had no ICU beds. Hospitals such as Nanavati, Lilavati, Breach Candy, and Fortis said all their ICU beds were full. 

A 31-year-old Powai resident, whose wife, infant and mother tested positive on May 2, said he called the police helpline and threatened to take his life if a bed was not arranged for his mother, kept waiting at Rajawadi for eight hours. After reports arrived at noon, he said a BMC team reached his house in no time to seal premises after he informed the helpline about the positive reports. In contrast, an ambulance arrived only at 5.30pm and dropped them at Rajawadi. "The hospital said there were no beds but asked us to wait. We waited till 1.30am. My mother, a diabetic, had hardly eaten anything," said the son, who works as a medical representative. By then, he got a headache and felt tightness in the chest, so much so that Rajawadi doctors had to give him oxygen twice. But admissions were still not done. The mother got frustrated and left for home only to find the building under containment. "She spent the night on the road without a sip of water," the son said. His wife and child were taken to a quarantine centre; the mother was finally given a bed at SevenHills on May 3, nearly 24 hours after her Covid report. 

Additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said over 500 ICU beds were in the city and helpline 1916 has been given the responsibility to guide patients in need of ICU or beds with oxygen support. "There was a problem with coordination which we have sorted out now. However, positive patients need not hurry and rush to hospitals. They should expect a call from ward offices within an hour or two. The ward offices will guide them about the next course," he said.

But a 55-year-old civic engineer from Prabhadevi, one of the worst affected Covid areas, said that soon after his positive reports arrived around 7.30pm on May 3, he was expecting a call from the ward office, but that didn't come. So, he went to GT Hospital, but was told there were no beds. "I couldn't return home as I was told not to board public transport. So I spent the entire night outside the hospital till my friends arranged for a vehicle in the morning," said the man, adding that help arrived on May 4 around 2.30pm after he dialled 1916. An ambulance took him to Worli Sports Complex, he said.

