Mumbai: Covid-19 positive cop and wife celebrate wedding anniversary in hospital
2020-05-24
MUMBAI: Love can bloom anywhere, anytime, despite all odds. Police constable Prasad Ware and his wife Varsha celebrated their third wedding anniversary in their twin room at a hospital in Bandra (east) on Saturday. Prasad and Varsha, Saki Naka residents, have recently tested positive for Covid-19. 


The couple was in high spirits despite the gloom one generally associates with hospitals and illness. For the past two weeks, Varsha had been scouting for the "perfect cake recipe" for the D-day, and Prasad was scheduled to have Saturday off. "With cake shops shut due to the lockdown, I thought I would bake one at home," Varsha told TOI on phone from her hospital room. 

Far from what they had imagined, their wedding anniversary ended up taking place in a hospital, after they tested positive on May 21. They were then moved to a hospital in Bandra (E). 

So there was no cake or the usual merriment they would have had. "We cut fruits instead of cake, and fed one another," a gushing Prasad told TOI. The last two anniversaries were celebrated with their families, he said. "This anniversary will be memorable. It may not have turned out the way we imagined it, but you know, we are together and have all the time in the world for each other," the constable said. 

On Saturday evening, the two got ready and chatted with their family members, who wished them through video calls. The only one they missed terribly is their two-year-old son, who has been entrusted to the care of his ailing grandmother.

Prasad, who was involved in the investigation of a heist, had been staying at a hotel for the last few weeks. Two people arrested in the case tested positive. "I kept away from home to avoid the risk of infecting my family, but my wife fell sick a few days ago," said Prasad. He has been exercising regularly, as he is preparing to give the police sub inspector exams. 

The Ware couple are optimistic about beating the virus. "We are in this together," said Varsha, adding, "We will surely beat it together." The only worry on their mind is for their son and Prasad's mother, who were both tested as well. Their reports are expected on Sunday. "Once their reports are negative, we will be stress-free and recover faster," said Varsha.


