Mumbai: Tata hospital operates on 494 cancer patients in lockdown
2020-06-12
MUMBAI: At a time when cancer treatment has slowed down across the world due to the Covid-19 pandemic, Tata Memorial Hospital in Parel has set a sterling example by successfully operating on 494 cancer patients during the countrywide lockdown, many of them with conditions that made them susceptible to the novel coronavirus, such as advanced age, diabetes or hypertension. 


The 494 surgeries for different cancers were performed during a five-week span starting from the date of the national lockdown.

 

The hospital's effort-perhaps the largest such body of work in cancer surgery in the world during the pandemic-is being printed in the 'Annals of Surgery,' one of the best known medical journals for surgery. 

"No lives were lost. Only six of these patients tested positive for Covid but they didn't need ICU care,'' said Tata Memorial Hospital deputy director Dr Shailesh V Shrikhande, who heads the cancer surgery department. 


With ops pre-booked, hospital went ahead despite lockdown

It wasn’t easy to go ahead with surgeries given that the city is referred to as the country’s Covid-19 capital. But the hospital, which works under the central department of atomic energy, soldiered on because of the huge disease burden.

“There are about one million new cancer cases in India, of whom around 0.2 million require surgery. In the absence of surgery, most patients will experience disease progression with resultant mortality. Given that death due to Covid-19 in India is 0.99 per million of the population with case fatality rate of about 3%, the cancer mortality in the absence of definitive surgery will far exceed the mortality due to infection with Covid-19,’’ said the authors in the research article.

Moreover, most patients had pre-booked for surgery. Many were from outside Mumbai and were already here before the lockdown. “Only 36% of these patients were from Maharashtra,’’ said Dr Shrikhande, lead author of the article.

About 85% of the operations were major or supra-major. While there were 64 patients over 60 years of age with comorbid conditions like uncontrolled hypertension, diabetes and heart problems, the rate of post-surgery complications among them was similar to that in younger patients. “Despite all standard precautions and testing, six patients were found to be Covid-positive in the postoperative period. All underwent major surgeries but encouragingly not one required ICU,’’ said Dr Shrikhande.

Tata Memorial Centre’s director Dr Rajendra Badwe said, “Our experience wherein 40-50% of elective cancer surgeries in a ‘Covid-19 hotspot’ were successfully undertaken should be of interest to the scientific community and general public. The results support the continuation of elective major cancer surgery in regions with Covid-19 trends.”

This is not the first paper from Tata Memorial during the pandemic. On April 30, a hospital team wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine how it has been attending to almost 1,600 indoors and out-department patients every day despite the Covid-19 pandemic. Earlier, it used to attend to 3,000 patients daily.

