Mumbai: Family loses breadwinner, waits 20 days for test at quarantine centre
2020-06-03
MUMBAI: Three members of the Kulkar family from Kanjurmarg who were close contacts of a COVID-19 victim were not tested for the virus until Tuesday-- the 20th day of their quarantining-- despite their repeated pleas. 

ICMR guidelines say that asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case are to be tested once between day five and day 10 of coming into contact. After the family's breadwinner, Manoj Kulkar, passed away on May 12, only his father was tested for the virus. Manoj's father is positive while the others are awaiting their reports.

Manoj, 33, worked in a private insurance company and lived in a joint family with his parents, uncle, brother and his wife at Kanjurmarg. He developed fever in the first week of May. Doctors suggested that he get tested for COVID. Manoj's family approached seven hospitals in Mumbai-- two of them dedicated COVID hospitals-- but were denied a test. 

On May 11, when his condition had aggravated, Manoj was given admission to a private hospital at Thane. A COVID test was done and by the time the positive report came in the next day, Manoj succumbed. "We were grieving when a civic team visited our home and said we would have to be quarantined. They stamped us all," said Prashant, Manoj's brother. With the exception of Manoj's wife, the four other family members were moved to Parivar Allure building, a CCC-1 quarantining centre for high risk suspects at Kanjurmarg. Manoj's wife was home quarantined at Kurla.

"As days passed, we grew concerned that none of us were being tested," said Prashant, who approached doctors at the quarantining centre with his query. Then on May 26, just a day before the Kulkars were to be discharged, Manoj's 68-year-old father was tested. "The doctors said that given his age, he was at risk. I pointed out that my uncle was 74 and my mother was 60 plus but to no avail," said Prashant. As soon as his father was tested positive, the doctors moved him to a Covid Care Centre for positive patients (CCC-2) at Karve Nagar in Kanjurmarg. As Prashant, his mother and uncle were close contacts of his father, their quarantine was extended by another 14 days.

"We had many issues at the quarantine centre, one of them being food, but being refused tests was our biggest concern. We then called up civic corporator Sarika Pawar for help," said Prashant. Pawar said she repeatedly contacted the BMC medical officer's Vilas Mohokar over several days till the Kulkars were finally tested on Tuesday. Mohokar did not respond to TOI's calls and texts for a comment. Assistant municipal commissioner (S Ward) Santosh Dhonde, said doctors at the CCC-1 might have taken a call (of testing just Manoj's father and none of the other kin) on the basis of symptoms shown by him. 


