Mumbai schoolboy creates a coronavirus-themed game
2020-06-09
The COVID-19 pandemic has spread a wave of anxiety and despair across the world, however, there are people who are doing their creative bit to lift the gloom with things like positive messages and uplifting talks and pictures. This also includes video games that not only get people to have fun, but also create awareness. One such video game, Wrath of the Virus, has been created by Mumbai’s 10-year-old Ayush Sankaran. He also topped an all-India game development contest recently, where the theme was ‘Fight Against Covid’. 


‘There is a masked man in the game who stays safe, and I wanted to highlight that’
While talking to BT, Ayush says, “I kept reading about people not following safety precautions and norms like social distancing to keep coronavirus at bay; so I wanted to bring out all these ideas in my game.” He then goes on to share more details and informs, “In this game, there is a blue emoji to represent you. The phone needs to be tilted to help you escape those who are infected. There is a masked guy, too, but nothing happens to him. This gets the message across that if you wear a mask, you are safe.”
The Malad-based student reveals that it took him 10 days to create the game. “I enjoy doing this, so it was fun. I’m glad that all the coding knowledge of the last four years has helped me. My parents have played the game 
and they simply love it. I’m waiting to show it to my friends and schoolmates now.” For now, he has submitted the game to the MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) app of the month — a program where app inventors can submit their creations — under the coronavirus challenge category.


SETTINGS, STORY ARE CRUCIAL IN APOCALYPTIC GAMESMumbai-based gaming expert Rishi Alwani says games based on pandemics are more popular now. “It has a lot to do with how the game worlds are presented. For instance, a game called The Division 2 takes place after a nasty smallpox pandemic sweeps through the US, where the setting is visually arresting with deserted cities and wilderness; it also has an engaging story. Another game called Fallout has players playing a courier in a post-apocalyptic waste. It’s compelling!”


