Mumbai: 89 new Covid-19 cases in Dharavi, three of dead BMC staff kin tested positive
2020-05-03
MUMBAI: Dharavi, in G-North ward, reported 89 Covid-19 cases on Saturday, the highest in a day since the first case was reported there on April 1. It had recorded 38 cases on Friday. The cases in Dharavi stand at 496, including 18 deaths.


The ward includes Dadar-Mahim and Dharavi. Mahim reported 17 cases on Friday-Saturday, but there was no case in Dadar on Friday. Thirteen new cases were reported in Dadar on Saturday.

The cases in G-North ward are 594, of which 84% are from congested slum pockets in Dharavi. Most cases reported in Dharavi are from 31 pockets, mostly in congested slum areas.

Meanwhile, three family members of a 47-year-old civic assessment inspector, who was involved in food distribution in Dharavi and died of Covid-19 on Wednesday, tested positive on Saturday, including his 67-year-old mother. The family lives in Borivali and one daughter tested negative.

Dharavi is one of the worst affected areas in the city and BMC officials stated that maintaining social distancing in congested slums was difficult. Slum-dwellers share common toilets, they explained. BMC decided to check slum-dwellers for fever with thermometer guns since some time. BMC shifted them to a quarantine facility, where civic health staff checked and then tested those with symptoms of Covid-19.

Assistant municipal commissioner (G-North) Kiran Dighavkar said, “We are doing it as part of a strategy to trace maximum positive cases. In a week, we scan around 25,000 people. We are taking the help of local medical practitioners to trace more cases. The graph will be up for few more days due to the aggressive affect of tracing, but soon it will move downward.”

Apart from scanning slumdwellers, BMC is shifting highrisk contacts and neighbours of positive patients to its quarantine centre to ensure they should not pose a risk to others. In one week, they shifted around 1,000. BMC has also convinced around 350 private medical practitioners in Dharavi to report to it regular patients who are symptomatic.

As two civic engineers posted at Nair Hospital tested positive, Sainath Rajadhyaksha, president of Municipal Engineers Union said, “Authorities should take extra precaution, as most people testing positive now are civic employees involved in Covid-19 related work. BMC should make separate treatment arrangements for employees.”

