Mumbai bar dancers lodged at Moradabad quarantine demand beer, create ruckus
2020-05-21
BAREILLY: Caught on camera, bar dancers and their male associates who had recently returned from Mumbai created a ruckus at a quarantine centre in Moradabad after their demand for liquor was not met by health workers. They had demanded beer and danced on the corridors of a private medical college. Recorded on a mobile, the video is being widely shared on social media. Police said the bar dancers and their associates violated standard operating procedures (SOPs) at the quarantine centre.

There are 72 people who had returned from Mumbai five days back, including the bar dancers, in this particular quarantine centre. Of these, five have tested positive for Covid-19.

“They danced on the corridors after being denied alcohol and mocked at us and the police personnel on duty. They also told us to let them go to their respective homes, which is not possible until test reports of all the returnees arrive and the quarantine period is completed,” said the health workers at the MIT quarantine centre.

Additional superintendent of police (ASP) Deepak Bhuker said an FIR under sections 147 (rioting), 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 352 (punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation), 504 (intentional insults), 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) and 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) has been registered against six of them.

Bhuker said that all the 72 people, including 12 kids, 40 women and 20 men, in the quarantine centre had come from Mira Road in Mumbai in a truck. “There are fair chances that they had travelled in the night as the truck was not stopped and checked before reaching Moradabad. We have seized the vehicle and lodged an FIR against the truck owner. Besides, woman constables have been deployed at the facility,” the police officer said.

“They were earlier under home quarantine but after the test reports said five of the returnees are Covid positive, we decided to shift them to institutional quarantine,” ASP Bhuker said.

The incident has come to light after a dance programme by female dancers was reportedly held at a quarantine facility in Bihar’s Samastipur district on Monday night.


