Mumbai: From 50 coronavirus cases a day in May, Dharavi sees just ten on Saturday
2020-06-07
MUMBAI: The Dharavi area, Mumbai’s biggest hotspot, recorded 10 Covid-19 cases on Saturday, the lowest since April 27 when it had recorded 13 cases. In another indication that the situation may have improved in the congested slum pocket from mid-May, when the area was seeing about 50 cases a day, Dharavi has recorded an average of 21 cases a day in the past one week.


Between May 31 and June 6, Dharavi saw 148 cases, its lowest weekly count in six weeks. Between May 10 and 16, when the Covid-19 outbreak in the area was severe, it had recorded 365 cases— an average of 52 cases a day.



Civic officials said the numbers had been controlled because of large-scale screening of slumdwellers, fever clinics in which 350 local doctors were at work and isolation of high-risk contacts in quarantine facilities.

Dharavi comes under GNorth ward, which has the highest number of cases in the city (3,372). Though the ward includes Mahim and Dadar, a majority of the cases—nearly 65%—are from the 2.5 sq km slum pocket. While the ward has seen 95 deaths so far, 71 of them have been in Dharavi. BMC officials said they have surveyed 4.7 lakh people in Dharavi.


‘Reduction in congestion has come to Dharavi’s aid’

BMC has surveyed Dharavi by way of house visits and screened nearly 8,000 senior citizens there. Since public toilets used by many people in the densely-populated pocket have been a major source of spread of the virus, civic staff have been cleaning them several times in a 24-hour period, officials said. Assistant municipal commissioner for G-North ward Kiran Dighavkar said, “Screening of local dwellers helps us to identify symptomatic patients and their high-risk contacts in time. We started isolating symptomatic patients and high-risk contacts in large numbers, and that helped us to control the spread.”

Police have also helped the BMC to implement lockdown in the pocket’s containment areas, officials noted.

According to officials, nearly 75% of the Covid-19 cases in Dharavi in the 21-to-60 agegroup, and many of those affected are workers involved in essential services and healthcare professionals.

Congress corporator Babbu Khan said, “The BMC roped in most of the local doctors, sent health workers to counsel people and encouraged symptomatic people to come forward for tests. Also, over two lakh people (migrants) have left Dharavi area, which has reduced congestion and helped to maintain social distancing. These things have helped to curb cases in the area.”

The first Covid-19 case was found in Dharavi early in April, but after that, the number of cases shot up quickly owing to the dense population there and the difficulty in adhering to social distancing norms due to narrow spaces in the locality.

