Mumbai’s Covid-19 positivity rate jumps six-fold to 18%
2020-05-28
MUMBAI: The city’s Covid-19 positivity rate has seen a six-fold jump since the start of April, which experts say is an indicator of the infection spreading rapidly. Currently, the percentage of people testing positive per 100 tests in Mumbai is 18%, i.e. nearly one of five people are testing positive.


However, the BMC maintains this is a result of more targeted testing, as only those showing symptoms or being hospitalised are being tested.

From 3% in early April, the positivity rate jumped to 6% by mid-month and has been on a steady climb ever since. In the first two weeks of May, the rate was around 12%. As on Tuesday, the seven public and 13 private laboratories had carried out nearly 1.7 lakh tests in the city, of which 32,791 had come positive. The state’s positivity rate is around 14% currently.

If compared with rates across others districts in the state, Mumbai undoubtedly is on top of the chart. Neighbouring Thane, for instance, has a positivity rate of 15%, Raigad has 14%, Aurangabad is 12%, while Akola and Pune have 10% each. The lesser-affected districts, including Gadchiroli, Sindhudurg, Bhandara and Parbhani, have positivity rates of less than 2%. Wardha is the only district, as per the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) data, which has a positivity rate of less than 1%. In Wardha, out of nearly 1,400 tests, only seven samples have come positive.

Epidemiologist Dr Jayaprakash Muliyal said a rise in positivity rate simply means that the cases are spreading. “It’s a natural progression of an epidemic and also shows that it couldn’t be contained,” he said, adding that it indicates the control strategies must be tweaked. “But more importantly, the difference in positivity between civic wards should be looked at. An average could be giving the wrong picture as certain areas accelerate faster than the rest,” said Muliyal, a former principal of Christian Medical College, Vellore.

A senior municipal doctor added that if the average was that high, it would mean the hotspots have a much higher spread. “The positivity rate in hotspots, on certain days, has touched 35%. Transmission in congested areas is the city’s biggest challenge now,” said the doctor.

Additional municipal commissioner Suresh Kakani said: “We are only testing people with symptoms or those who are hospitalised. We can bring down the positivity rate any day simply by testing more asymptomatic people, but that’s not the strategy,” he said. Only high-risk contacts of positive people, even if they are asymptomatic, will be tested once between 5-10 days as per the new ICMR guidelines, he added. Currently nearly 4,000 tests are being carried out in the city, and testing is rather strictly monitored.

Community transmission is a word that’s largely avoided, said Muliyal, but keeping that in mind, the local governments should emphasise on individual participation. “When the infection is so widespread, onus majorly falls on individuals to wear a mask, follow hand hygiene and maintain distance,” he said.

