Munger man dies from Covid-19, CM Nitish Kumar orders lockdown in Bihar
2020-03-23
PATNA: The state government has declared lockdown in urban areas of Bihar with immediate effect till March 31 after the first Covid-19 death and two more positive cases in Patna hospitals on Sunday.


The lockdown decision was taken at a meeting chaired by CM Nitish Kumar. According to a public order issued by principal secretary (health) Sanjay Kumar, the lockdown would remain effective in the headquarters of all 38 districts, 101 sub-divisional towns and 534 blocks and urban and semi-urban areas which have urban local bodies (ULBs) like municipal corporation, nagar parishad and nagar panchayat.

Essential services like medical and telecom sectors, banking and ATM, dairy and dairy-related institutions, foodgrains and general, vegetables and fruit shops, medical and surgical item shops, petrol pumps and CNG stations, LPG gas agencies, post offices and courier services, e-commerce services, electronic and print media have been exempted.

Vehicles being used for the exempted services and those of government would not come under the purview of the lockdown. “The lockdown order was issued keeping in mind the protection of common people in Bihar in the wake of increasing infection of coronavirus,” Nitish said. 

Meanwhile, the man who died of coronavirus at AIIMS-Patna on Saturday night was identified as Saif Ali (38) from Munger. He had come from Qatar recently. He was admitted there on March 20, but his test report came on Sunday. Two more positive cases were reported from AIIMS-Patna and Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH).

Principal secretary (health) said the 25-year-old Patna resident admitted to NMCH isolation ward had recently returned from Scotland while the son of the 45-year-old woman from Aneesabad area in Patna and admitted to the AIIMS-Patna had come from Italy a weeks ago.

State chief secretary Deepak Kumar said RMRI, which comes under Indian Council of Medical Research, confirmed two positive cases.

AIIMS-P director Dr PK Singh said Saif was admitted with chronic kidney problem on March 20 and was put on ventilator. He also had symptoms of coronavirus and his swab sample was sent to RMRI for test. Incidentally, his body was handed over to his relatives on Saturday for burial and they took it on a private ambulance to Munger.

Before being referred to AIIMS-P, Saif was admitted to the PMCH emergency on March 19. Sources said now the entire PMCH emergency ward was being disinfected and all those who had come in his contact will be quarantined.

Munger civil surgeon said Saif was a resident of Charambha under Sadar block and had probably come from Qatar on Mach 13.

Munger district magistrate Rajesh Meena said the deceased was buried on Sunday evening following the government’s guidelines. “We will now trace all those who had come in his contact,” said Meena. He added that Saif had landed in Patna and came to Munger by road.

The chief secretary said the government will prepare a plan as to how to trace all those who had come in contact of the Covid-19 positive people.

The CM made a fervent appeal to all residents in Bihar to extend their full cooperation to the state government’s ongoing drive against the deadly coronavirus. “Whenever a major crisis came, we registered a victory over it with the cooperation of all people. The state government is with its people in this hour of crisis,” he said.

Nitish said the entire human race is under the crisis due to coronavirus. “We are fighting against this epidemic with our all strength. Necessary precautions are also being taken, but it is necessary that all people remain alert in the wake of gravity of this epidemic. Maintaining social distancing is best solution for this disease,” he said and urged people to stay at home and not move unnecessarily. 

Meanwhile, another death has been reported from the isolation ward of NMCH on Saturday night. However, NMCH principal said the lab report of the deceased had not come yet. The deceased had come from Jaipur.


