Nagpur: Muslims join Hindus to celebrate Hanuman jayanti in Covid-19 lockdown
2020-04-09
NAGPUR: Setting an example of social amity, a Muslim youth performed the ‘aarti’ of Lord Hanuman as two Hindu friends and residents of Saraswati Nagar, Takiya, Dhantoli, clapped at the 30-year-old temple to celebrate Hanuman jayanti, on Wednesday.


With the country grappling with novel coronavirus and lockdown in force, the devotees maintained social distance, and ensured the puja remained a low-key affair. But, at the same time, the friends demonstrated that all are united in this hour of crisis.

The programme began with the lighting of a diya, followed by recitation of Ganesh Vandana and Hanuman Chalisa.

The event, in an area where over 100 families reside, was coordinated by youngsters, most of them taxi drivers, mechanics, labour contractors, labourers, and pav bhaji and chat sellers.

The aarti was performed by Israil Abdul Sharif Khan and Lakshman Shahu while senior member of the organizing committee Tarachand Shende chanted the Hanuman Chalisa. Hitesh Sahu rang the temple bell even as other members asked kids to maintain social distance.

“We celebrate all festivals together. Here we have some 100 huts and a few concrete houses, with around 400 residents. Due to lockdown, we restricted the celebrations and just performed aarti twice in the day before all were called to take prasad, which included a sweet for Hanuman jayanti,” said Tarachand Shende.

Israil Abdul Sharif Khan said, “We are not divided by religion or caste. For us, all festivals are equally important. In 2007, we re-constructed the temple with funds collected from all strata of the society.”

“Ours is a united bunch of friends who work in unison and celebrate religious and national festivals. Our Hindu friends join us in all our festivals and distribute sevaiyan during Tajuddin Baba Urs. Today I missed one of our close friends, Sandeep Sahu, actively involved in all these festivals, as he passed away a few years back,” Israil added.

Event coordinator Bablo Thakur said, “For all festivals we pool in money from our savings and also get financial help from politicians and social workers.”

Rupesh Mutalwar said, “We prepared masala rice and kadhi for all residents. We marked an area in the nearby ground where food was distributed, to ensure people do not jostle with each other and norms of social distancing are maintained.”

Amid the Covid-19 fears, these Hindu-Muslim friends — mostly uneducated — gave the message of unity loud and clear.


