Muslims for ‘quieter’ Eid, fear community can be targeted if gatherings lead to spike in Covid cases
2020-05-17
Bareilly: With Covid-19 cases refuse to die down, Muslims in Shahjahanpur have decided to have a “quieter Eid” and limit their exchange of greetings mostly to social media, fearing that large gatherings may increase the risk of infection and the community could be targeted for the Covid spike. 

Divulging details, Shahjahanpur Eidgah Committee secretary Sayed Qasim Raza said the decision was taken by the members at a recent meeting of the committee. “The pandemic is gradually gripping our country. Our mosques are closed and we have been offering prayers at home. Thus, we have decided not to go out for buying clothes or shopping. Eid will be a quieter affair this year.”

Mohammed Aadil, a mobile shop owner, told TOI, “We don’t want news channels to debate that the Covid cases surged due to the Eid gatherings. For us, there is no Eid without ‘Alvida’ (main Eid namaz prayer). We can’t hug each other, can’t invite people, can’t read ‘tarawih’ prayers in groups and will not be able to follow all the guidelines of Ramzan. People are dying of coronavirus and the future is uncertain. So, all my relatives have decided not to buy clothes and rather support the people in need.” 

Mohammed Irfan, a sports teacher, told TOI, “My wife and I have decided not to buy clothes and donate money among needy people. However, I have bought a dress for my five-month-old daughter as it’s her first Eid. I will pray to Allah to finish the disease and save humanity. Every day, I burst into tears after reading about the condition of migrants workers. I wish I had the power to improve their condition.”

Another local who wished not to be named told TOI, “We are very scared. So, we have decided to stay at home to avoid any untoward situation. Often we are ill-treated and people stare at us suspiciously. Communal harmony is dying and Covid-19 is being used as an opportunity to target our community.”


