Muslim bodies seek lockdown extension to avoid Eid crowding
2020-05-13
Ranchi: Several Muslim outfits in the state have written to the government authorities seeking extension of the lockdown till May 31. They said reopening of markets could lead overcrowding ahead of Eid next week and result in a spike in the number of Covid-19 cases.

In a letter to chief minister Hemant Soren, city-based Muslim group All Jharkhand Ekta Manch, said, “There are chances that social distancing norms will be violated if the lockdown is lifted and people come out of their homes for Eid shopping. We demand that the lockdown be extended till May 31.”

The outfit said there should be no relaxations in any area whether they are red, orange or green zones. The outfit’s secretary Abu Bakar Ansari said, “If the government provides relaxations mentioned in the guidelines for Lockdown 3.0, there will be a great risk as movement of trains has also begun.”

Another prominent Muslim outfit, Anjuman Islamia, has also appealed to the people to celebrate Eid in a simple way. Shahid Akhtar, a senior member of group, urged the community to tone down celebrations by staying at home, not crowding markets.

He said, “The pandemic has forced all of us to change our customs. Muslims are observing Ramzan and offering namaz at home. We must celebrate the festival of Eid, too, in a similar manner respecting the lockdown and social-distancing guidelines.”

Socio-religious body, Emarat-e-Sharia, however, said they will soon take a call on issue soon. Md Anwar Qasim of Emarat e Sharia said, “It is too early to say if the lockdown should be extended. We will not make a comment on it right now.”

Eid, the most important Muslim festival, is to be celebrated in the fourth week of May. But owing to the pandemic, mosques are shut during Ramzan, special evening prayers have been cancelled and there are no iftar congregations at local mosques for the poor. People are offering namaz at home.

On Friday, the Bengal Imams’ Association, a body of several imams and muezzins from mosques across the state, asked Bengal CM Mamata Banerjeeto extend the lockdown till the end of May to achieve the “desired result” of containing the virus.


