Covid-19: Mussoorie residents worried about daily commuters from Dehradun
2020-04-25
MUSSOORIE: As Dehradun district has been demarcated in the “red zone” with regards to the number of Covid-19 cases, the residents of Mussoorie have raised concerns regarding the daily commuters from Dehradun who come to Mussoorie in the morning and return to Dehradun in the evening.


Residents of the queen of hills opine that although no Covid-19 case has been reported in Mussoorie so far, the daily influx of a large number of officials from the state’s capital city is likely to spread the deadly virus in the hill town.

“The officials who come to Mussoorie from Dehradun could pose a risk to the local community. The local administration needs to be careful about this,” warns Pushpa Padiyar, a member of Landour Cantonment Board.

According to sources, the administration has prepared a list of around 100 daily commuters from Dehradun. These people are employed in banks, postal services, electricity and water department, and supply of other essential services.

“The staff of banks and post offices are into regular public dealing and they meet a large number of people every day. They pose the greatest risk to the local community,” said PS Patwal, a local resident.

There also have been reports of violation of social distancing norms at some departments and in many cases, the staff was allegedly found without face masks. Residents urge the administration to take adequate steps to ensure that the risk of spread of Covid-19 via these daily commuters is minimised.

“It must be mandatory for all officials of banks, post offices and other essential services to wear face masks and gloves at all times and the local administration needs to strictly ensure this,” suggests Hugh Gantzer, noted travel writer and local resident.

Anuj Gupta, chairman of Mussoorie Municipal Council, said that the thermal screening of commuters must be strictly enforced at Kolhu Khet check post by the police.

Meanwhile, sub-divisional magistrate Varun Choudhary avoided commenting on the matter and asked TOI to contact police and heads of concerned departments.

According to Vidhya Bhushan Negi, station officer, Mussoorie, “These officials were engaged in providing essential services. Therefore, they had been issued passes to commute between Dehradun and Mussoorie. However, we are ensuring that safety procedures — like thermal screening, sanitation of these offices, wearing of masks and gloves — are being followed.”

