“My 10-year-old son gave us strength to fight Covid’
2020-04-08
Rajkot: A 38-year-old citizen, who had tested positive for coronavirus, was discharged from a private hospital, thus taking the total number of recovered patients to four.

Rakesh Hapalia, who is engaged in real estate business, was discharged late on Monday night. However, is not a relieved man still as his wife, who had also tested positive, is still under treatment. He condition, though, is improving and he is praying for her discharge.

Hapalia had contracted the infection from this friend who had tested positive after coming back from the US in mid-March. Hapalia himself went to the doctor informing them that he came in contact with his friend. 

Talking to TOI, Hapalia said, “I was not scared on the first day when I came to know that I tested positive. But I got really scared when my wife’s also tested positive after two days. I was only thinking about the future of our 10-year-old son. However, my son did not test positive and completed his quarantine period.” 

“My son was gave us lot of strength. When I was thinking about my family, my son was constantly giving us courage saying that we both will recover soon,” Hapalia added.

Hapalia has been advised to remain quarantined at home so he may is infected by other viruses as his immune system is weak currently. 

“Don’t panic, but be cautious. Don’t violate government guidelines in combating Covid-19,” Hapalia has requested people.

1ST PATIENT DISCHARGED IN BHAVNAGAR 

In Bhavnagar, which has seen a sudden spike in positive cases, a 70-year-old man recovered fully and was discharged from Sir T hospital. The patient Jashu Jambucha had tested positive two weeks ago. The hospital staff stood in line and clapped as Jambucha walked out on Tuesday morning. According to officials, he leads a lonely life in Bharatnagar area and is mostly seen in the garden of Shivaji circle on Ghogha Road. He got infected through local transmission. 

TESTED POSITIVE, MAN ESCAPES FROM CIVIL HOSPITAL 

Rajkot: A 41-year-old man living in Jangleshwar area of Rajkot tested positive on Tuesday. The source of his infection is still not known because he is not cooperating with the authorities in revealing his travel history. He also escaped from Rajkot Civil Hospital after the doctor on duty suspected him to be positive. 

According to health officials, the man was referred by a private physician after his condition deteriorated on Monday evening. When the doctor in civil hospital asked him to complete some formalities, he escaped from there. The doctor alerted health officials because his mobile number was also switched off. Police and health teams fanned out in Jangleshwar and traced him after nearly one-and-a-half hours.

Hospital sources said they will take help of police if he does not cooperate.

Meanwhile, a 29-year-old woman from Bhavnagar also tested positive. She is a family member of a 65-year-old man who had tested positive and is under treatment at Sir T Hospital. 

COPS’ HELP SOUGHT TO KNOW TRAVEL HISTORY 

Rajkot: Health officials in Morbi had to take police’s help to know the travel history of a 52-year-old man who tested positive on Sunday. He is advocate by profession and did not cooperate with the staff. Police found from his mobile phone data that he had visited Delhi in March. Rajkot district health officer Dr Manish Bhanderi said, “He had visited the doctor on March 27 but not revealed his travel history.” 


