Mysuru dist admin plans quarantine facilities at GP level
2020-05-12
MYSURU: The Mysuru district administration, which has won appreciation at the national level for handling the Covid-19 crisis in a scientific manner, and for providing quality treatment and quarantine facilities, is leaving no stone unturned to face any eventuality with regards to the pandemic.

According to the authorities, even though Covid-19 cases are decreasing by the day in the district, as a precautionary measure, the district administration has started identifying quarantine facilities at the gram panchayat (GP) level. 

Deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar confirmed that panchayat development officers (PDOs) across the district have been asked to keep a list of facilities available in all GPs, which can be converted into quarantine centres, if the need arises. Mysuru taluk panchayat executive officer Krishna Kumar said that the government has asked them to prepare such a list in all GPs in the district. “As of now, in Mysuru taluk, we have listed 7 hostels, including two Morarji Desai Schools, for quarantine facilities. The Morarji Desai School at Varakodu is notified for high-risk patients, while the Morarji Desai School at S Hoskote is notified for low-risk patients. Apart from this, 5 hostels have also been shortlisted for quarantine facilities,” he said.

The biggest concern expressed by parents was that if schools and hostels in the village are used to quarantine people, it may adversely affect the children, once academic activities start. “The main fear is that those who are quarantined may not maintain hygiene in the hostels and schools, leaving them filthy, when the institutions reopen. There is also the concern that institutional facilities can get damaged. The health of the children is an important issue,” said Vasanth Kumar, a parent from Mysuru.

However, the authorities said that this fear is unfounded. “The hostels which have been turned into quarantine facilities are disinfected every day,” said Krishna Kumar.


