Mysuru wildlife warden reaches out to tribals during lockdown
2020-04-24
Mysuru: Ensuring the welfare of members of tribal communities is an integral part of wildlife conservation.

The Covid-19 pandemic and the lockdown imposed to curb its spread have plunged members of tribal communities in the Old Mysore region in distress. The lockdown has further increased the distance between the haadis or tribal hamlets that they dwell in and the towns and villages that provide them with employment, and essential commodities necessary for survival. Taking note of their difficulties during the lockdown, honorary wildlife warden for Mysuru district Kritika Alanahally has been striving to ensure that those dwelling in the haadis near the Nagarahole Tiger Reserve are supplied with essential commodities. 

Krithika roped in wildlife volunteers Bhindiya and Madhu, and was provided financial support by Zeus Biotechnology, headed by Abhilash Nair and Sanvi Technologies chief Yashasvi. With their able assistance, Krithika has been supplying essential supplies and medicines to the tribal communities in Nagarahole range in HD Kote taluk. 

So far, Krithika has distributed essential commodities to residents in Manimoole Haadi, Moole Ooru Haadi and Thimmana Hosahalli Haadi among other hamlets. Each household, she said, was being provided 5kg rice, 1kg dal, refined oil, sugar, biscuits and soap. 

In addition to meeting their basic requirements, Krithika and the other volunteers have been educating the residents of the tribal hamlets about the need to protect themselves from the pandemic. “It is my responsibility as an honorary wildlife warden to help the tribals in these times, when they do not have any source of income to stock up on essential commodities,” Krithika told TOI. 

She has been asking the residents to keep themselves clean, and repeatedly wash their hands so as to keep the Covid-19 infection at bay. Expressing her gratitude to friends who had supported her endeavour, Krithika said, “So far, we have distributed food and other essential supplied to more than 100 tribal families. We are working with the forest department, and compiled a list of all tribal hamlets in Mysuru district. We will continue to supply essential goods to them till the lockdown is lifted.” 


