Mysuru zoo to set up quarantine facility at Koorgalli for rescued wild animals
2020-02-03
MYSURU: With Mysuru zoo becoming the one stop for treatment of wild animals rescued from tiger reserves, sanctuaries and fringe villages near and far, an advance quarantine facility is being set up in Koorgalli to ensure effective treatment of the patients and to prevent infection of the captive animals at the zoo.

Over the last two years alone, the zoo has treated tigers, leopards, a slender loris and a muntjac (barking deer) from the wild. It also received a pair of foxes from the Raipur zoo in Chhattisgarh. One of the tigers received last year was captured after it mauled two farmers near Bandipur tiger reserve; another was a two-year-old caught in a snare in Nagarahole.

Zoo authorities said the quarantine facility and a postmortem centre would be established at the Chamundi Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre in Koorgalli. At present the foresters transport injured, deserted, orphaned and rescued animals to Mysuru Zoo, from as far as 100km or more. The animals are brought from Bandipur TR, Nagarahole TR, Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary, Brahmagiri, Pushpagiri, Talacauvery and Biligiri Ranganatha wildlife sanctuary, besides the fringe villages around these parks.

Veterinarians said the wild animals are accommodated in the inpatient wards in the zoo hospital as there is no separate shelter on the premises. Besides being an inconvenience, this brings with it the risk of transmission of diseases between the captive animals and the wild. "We receive rescued elephant calves, gaur calves, leopard cubs, injured spotted deer, sambar, muntjac, bonnet macaques, bear cubs, tigers, leopards, jackals, freshwater muggers, snakes, starred tortoise, terrapins and many species of terrestrial and aquatic birds. They are treated and shifted to the Koorgalli centre," said a zoo official. "But without an operation theatre and quarantine facility, it had become very difficult to conduct tests and monitor these rescued animals."

Executive director of the zoo Ajit M Kulkarni said increased man-animal conflict was leading to an influx of captured and rescued animals. "We did not have a proper postmortem facility at the centre and carcasses were brought to Mysuru zoo. As there is a clear risk of infection spreading to other animals, a scientific postmortem centre will be set up. The rescued animals will be treated and kept at the quarantine facility for observation after which they will be housed with the stock," he said. Adequate staff and veterinarians have been deputed for the new units in Koorgalli, he added.

