Coronavirus: Mysuru Hospitals told to spare rooms to quarantine people if required
2020-02-01
MYSURU: Health officials here are in contact with their counterparts in Kerala and have taken all precautionary measures to prevent Coronavirus from entering Mysuru. As a precautionary measure, both government and private hospitals have been asked to spare a few rooms to quarantine the suspected persons, if any, said deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar on Friday.

“We request people who had been to China recently with family or on business tour to voluntarily get examined at any hospital. To track those who went to China in recent days, we have told tour operators and hotel associations to help in this regard,” he told reporters. “In two to three days time, we may get those details and our health authorities will go to their doorsteps to examine them,” he said. 

“At major tourist spots, we are creating awareness about Coronavirus by distributing pamphlets both in Kannada and English. We have also set up testing lab at Mysuru Medical College Research and Institute. In case we get any suspected cases, the blood samples will be collected and examined at MMC & RI. Later it will be sent to Nimhans in Bengaluru and from there it will be sent to Pune for analysis. The official declaration of patient suffering from Coronavirus needs to be declared by DHO,” he added.

The DC said that people need not get scared about the virus as it is just one case in Thrissur and nearly 1,000 people are under surveillance. According to health authorities in Kerala, the situation in the neighbouring state is under control and there is no need to panic, the IAS officer said. He also mentioned that due to exams, there will be not much tourists flow till mid of March, which will help in tackling the virus spread.

Dr Venkatesh, district health officer and Dr Shivaprasad briefed about the steps taken and said that they have enhanced the surveillance in the district.

Manjunath, director, Mysuru Airport, said that the health authorities at the airport are keeping a tab on travellers.

C Narayanagowda, president, Hotel Owners Association, said: “In the past few months, there were not much tourists from China. We have instructed all our members that before the tourists check-in, they should know where they are from. If the tourists are from China, they should immediately alert health authorities.”

B S Prashanth, leader of Mysuru Travel Agents Association, said: “There are hardly any people from Mysuru who had been to China. Still we have conveyed a meeting of people associated with tours and travels. During the meeting, we will also discuss how to handle tourists coming from China.”


