N Maha’s first Covid testing lab becomes functional
2020-04-01
NASHIK: The Dhule-based Shri Bhausaheb Hire Government Medical College and Hospital (SBHGMCH) on Tuesday started testing throat swab samples of patients showing coronavirus-like symptoms.

The institute has established a viral research and diagnostic lab on its premises to carry out real-time (RT) PCR tests for Covid-19 on a war-footing. The new facility, the first one in North Maharashtra, would be a boon for the districts in the region as they no longer need to send the samples to the Pune-based National Institute Of Virology.

Hospital superintendent Dr Rajkumar Suryavanshi said several sophisticated pieces of equipment have been installed at the lab to carry out the tests. “We have collected the throat swab samples of the three suspected patients admitted in our hospital. The tests are being carried out,” he said.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the state government had directed the management of the institute to establish the lab to reduce the burden on NIV.

“State medical education minister Amit Deshmukh, medical education secretary Sanjay Mukherjee and director of state directorate of medical education and research (DMER) T P Lahane had been following up with the institute authorities on the issue,” the hospital officials said.

Recently, ICMR, which had provided the funds, had directed SBHGMCH to hasten the process to set up the lab.

SBHGMCH dean Nagsen Ramraje and hospital superintendent Rajkumar Suryavanshi prepared the blueprint for the project. Mrudula Dravid, the HoD of the microbiology department, would be in charge of the lab.

“The lab has the capacity of testing 96 samples in one go. The tests take about four hours,” said Suryavanshi.

NIV and SBHGMCH authorities were in touch online while the facility was being established. NIV has given its nod to start testing the samples. The officials at the institute said that the districts in the region would be informed about sending their samples to the institute rather than the Pune-based NIV.


