Lucknow: N95 masks vanish, fakes being sold at a premium
2020-03-16
LUCKNOW: While the N95 respirator — one of the most advanced anti-pollution and anti-contamination masks available in India — is almost out of stock in the city, thanks to panic buying over the past week, a locally made lookalike has surfaced in the market and is being sold for Rs 400-500 a piece.


This TOI team spotted the inferior quality duplicates at pharmacies in Chowk and Aminabad. Distributors and shop owners admitted that the masks were not N95 and were being manufactured locally. 

“The duplicate masks cannot filter 95% of airborne particles like the N95s. We are selling them because people want to buy them. People feel some protection is better than nothing,” said Yatin Malik, a distributor in Aminabad.

According to experts, the original N95, which can filter particles up to 0.3 micron in diametre, is itself “moderate protection” against the novel coronavirus that has a diametre of 0.12 micron. Nevertheless, it is the best bet under current circumstances. 

Distributors say against an earlier demand of 20-25 masks a day, it was 125-130 a day for the past 10 days. “We are out of stock. Fresh supply has not come since last month (February) after coronavirus cases were reported in the country,” said Amal Sinha, a distributor in Lalbagh.

Wholesale dealers in Chowk, Hazratganj, Kaiserbagh and Aminabad too have exhausted their stock. “We placed fresh order in February with a Delhi-based company, but officials have been non-committal,” said an Aminabad distributor.

Doctors warn that the duplicate are not approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, which tests and authorises medical equipment.

Professor Ved Prakash, head of respiratory and critical care medicine at KGMU, said the lookalike mask has three layers — two synthetic and a foam — but still cannot stop a healthy person from catching the viral infection. 

The professor advised people not to panic and maintain good personal hygiene instead. 

“The N95 too does not guarantee 100% protection against virulent viruses. It comes in handy for those already infected. One must rather wash hands often with soap, use hand sanitisers, avoid crowded places and keep distance of at least a metre from a patient,” he added.


