Nabanna cleans up after office visit by Covid-19 boy’s bureaucrat mother
2020-03-19
KOLKATA: A day after the of a top-level bureaucrat tested Covid-19 positive, Nabanna went into a massive sanitisation drive on all the floors, chambers — including offices of CM Mamata Banerjee and other top bureaucrats — lifts and the entire common area. Some employees who came in direct contact with the bureaucrat were sent to home isolation and have been asked to get tests done. 


The process of sanitization started in the morning with the chief minister’s room on the 14th floor. Four PWD teams worked in tandem through the day. The fifth-floor office of the bureaucrat whose son has tested Covid-19 positive has been sanitized and sealed. Though Nabanna officials termed the sanitization process as a ‘routine work’, top-level sources said the administration didn’t want to take any chance. 

 
 
“On Monday, the patient’s bureaucrat mother came to the office and held several meetings. So there is every possibility that if she has developed any kind infection from his son, it might spread further. So we are not taking any chance,” a senior PWD official said. However, PWD officials feel the process of fumigation can be done only in an empty building but that is not possible now. “We have done this temporarily and we will fumigate the entire building on a holiday,” an official added.

The bureaucrat’s son testing positive has had a ripple effect among the employees of the state secretariat. Even chief minister Mamata Banerjee spoke on the “irresponsible behaviour”. “I do not support this. Why would a person, who has come from London, not go for a test? I cannot ignore anything because I am influential. Those who are coming from outside should maintain the basic protocol laid down by the health department. They should not go to malls or visit any other crowded place,” the chief minister said in a programme on Wednesday.

The incident, however, has raised concerns among the employees of the department. “I went to the library and touched many books. She had also gone the library. I have been asked to go for home isolation. I don’t know what is going to happen,” an employee who works in the same department said.

