Nagaur quarantine model: Only Rs 50 per person a day
2020-05-29
JAIPUR: Quarantine in only Rs 50. Surprised, don’t be. While reams have been written on how the rising expenses on quarantine is creating financial crisis across the globe, the nondescript town of Nagaur has come up with an economic model sorting out the quarantine costs.

The district administration has come out with a model that can quarantine a person for as low as Rs 50 a day. With this cost, they have quarantined 10,096 people in their facilities. The maximum limit of per person expenditure under the quarantine in Rs 2,400 set by the state government.

“I have just followed the principle of ‘optimum utilization of available resources’ and sharing the responsibility with the civil society to achieve the unimaginable cost,” said Deepak Yadav, district collector of Nagaur.

Disclosing his quarantine model, Yadav says that they have turned 1,474 government schools with huge infrastructure and big classrooms into quarantine centres.

Taking government-run community centres along with private trust and foundations volunteered their facilities for free to be used as isolation centres have reduced the overall taxpayers’ money on lodging.

“Another principle followed by us is isolating the suspected ones or those migrating from other states in schools located in their villages or blocks. Here, we have motivated the families to provide them 2-3 meals a day. In case any family is not capable, the gram sabha and gram panchayat has taken up the responsibility of serving food,” said Yadav.

The response has been phenomenal as close to 6,000 persons are getting home-cooked food which also destresses them. In every school, a desk has been formed where the family members can drop the food packet and can take the utensils if any the next day.

The administration has activated its strong network of Bhamashahs (donors) for providing clothes, drinking water, bedding any infrastructural facility like fans and coolers in these isolation centres.

“Around 50 schools are such which has been entirely adopted by the donors and providing everything from food to clothes and even transport facility to district headquarter for Covid-19 test which is compulsorily for the exit from these centres,” said Yadav.

The cost administration is bearing is on disinfectant and cleaning of these facilities. Even in the district headquarter, they have engaged in schools or other facilities.

The only hotel hired by the administration is for health workers in order to give comfort as they work in a long shift of 12-16 hours.

