Nagpurian proud to be part of team behind India’s first Covid-19 test kit
2020-03-25
Nagpur: Finally, India is all set to get the first batch of indigenous testing kits for Covid-19 on March 25. This could be the biggest turning point in the fight against coronavirus outbreak as our testing capacity will increase significantly. Interestingly, one of the brains behind development of this ‘Made in India’ diagnostic kits is Dr Gautam Wankhede, a Nagpurian.

An alumni of Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), Dr Wankhede is trained in the United Kingdom where he specialized in transfusion medicine. He is the son of Dr Ravi Wankhede, who pioneered the preparation and use of blood components in Central India in 1989 and later led the Zonal Transplant Coordination Center (ZTCC), Nagpur, as its secretary for many years.

“Mylabs is planning to supply first batch by Thursday. Currently, we have manufacturing capacity for 15,000 tests per day and we will increase it up to 25,000 soon,” said Dr Wankhede. He is credited with launching some pathbreaking concepts in India such as molecular blood grouping and antenatal red cell antibody screening.

“We already have raw material and been in the molecular diagnostics manufacturing for the last three to four years. So, we can start supplying kits immediately. Majority of components used in our kit are from India,” he said. They import a very few components from other countries, but not from China.

Apart from Mylabs, German company Altona Diagnostics has also applied for an import licence from the Drug Controller General of India. But, this company cannot start supplying kits to labs before next week.

Speaking to TOI, his proud father Dr Ravi said, “Gautam got inspired to take transfusion medicine as he watched our blood bank activities quite closely. After coming back from the UK, he worked with Fortis-Escorts Hospital and later moved over to the industry side,” he said.

Dr Gautam was involved in the development and patenting a transfusion safety system ‘Haemovigil’ that is now being used in leading hospitals across India. Many reputed laboratories in the country are using ID-NAT screening kits for blood banks/hospitals, quantitative HIV, HBV and HCV kits, all developed under his supervision.

Mylab is aiming to manufacture up to 1 lakh tests in a week. Further, the company claims that its test kits can test about 100 patients with one kit. An average lab with automated PCR can test more than 1,000 patients a day.

Matter of pride

Mylab is first Indian company getting commercial Covid-19 PCR kit approved by CDSCO

Mylab Covid-19 test kits costs nearly one-fourth (up to Rs1,500) of currently procured kits

It uses advanced protocols which can reduce testing time by 65% and give results in 2.5 hours

This kit can detect coronavirus with least chances of false positivity

Made in India kits will reduce our dependency on Germany and Switzerland

Nagpurian Dr Gautam Wankhede is medical affairs director of this company


