Nagpur-born doctor dies of Covid-19 in UK
2020-04-19
NAGPUR: Paediatrician Dr Rajesh Kalraiya, a Nagpurian who was working in UK from the past 40 years, died of Covid-19 on April 15. He is the first doctor of Nagpur origin to have died due to Covid-19 while serving patients. 


Dr Kalraiya completed his MBBS from GMCH Nagpur in 1968-69. President of British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (BAPIO) Dr Ramesh Mehta, who too is a Nagpurian, told TOI that Kalraiya, 69, was unmarried. 

“It is very traumatic to share such sad news about a colleague and friend who had graduated from the same medical college — GMCH Nagpur,” said Dr Mehta. “Rajesh was dear to his close colleagues. Medicine was his life. He used to travel a lot in UK and visit various hospitals to treat children,” he said. 

Being unmarried, Dr Kalraiya had no immediate family in England. None of his distant relatives in Nagpur and Jabalpur (MP) could neither visit him during his ailment nor attend his last rites. 

“He was the eldest cousin for us. Service to patients was his passion. Even if he was nearly 70 years old, he chose to serve patients during coronavirus emergency in England. It’s really sad that none of us could attend to him during his last days,” said Yuvaraj Gadhval, cousin of Dr Kalraiya. It is learnt the Kalraiyas have a house in Itwari but it could not be traced. 

Meanwhile, BAPIO has launched a new research forum to analyse the higher death rates due to Covid-19 among Indian-origin and ethnic minority health care professionals.

“It is the right time for us to launch this new research forum to analyse the differentiating factors behind the significantly higher mortality among health care professionals, even though they make up just 20% of the National Health Service (NHS),” said Dr Mehta. 

Dr Mehta further said that at least 300 doctors of Nagpur-origin are working in UK and are active members of BAPIO. “All of them are tirelessly working to save people from coronavirus pandemic,” he said. 



