Naini jail inmate, 3 others test positive for Covid-19
2020-05-31
Prayagraj: An inmate lodged in Naini Central Jail was among the four persons who tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19) on Saturday in Prayagraj district. With the four new cases, the district’s tally reached 86. 

Nodal officer and additional chief medical officer Dr Rishi Sahai said, “Two men from Phulpur, a man currently lodged in Naini Central Jail and 50-year-old man from Kareli were diagnosed with Covid-19 on Saturday.” 

Sahai said the two patients from Phulpur were aged 54 years and 45 years and had returned from Mumbai on May 26. They were advised institutional quarantine. The nodal officer also said that one of them had been suffering from fever since the past two days and was brought to Swaroop Rani Nehru (SRN) Hospital on Friday. Their samples were collected on Saturday itself. 

The third patient was a 50-year-old man from Kareli. Health department officials said the patient had not travelled anywhere in the past one month. “We are trying to find out how he might have been infected. The man had complained of fever and cough and then went to SRN Hospital. His sample was collected and he tested positive for the virus on Saturday. The officials are finding out about the travel history of the man’s domestoc help, who used to visit the latter’s house.”

In addition, a 25-year-old inmate lodged in Naini Central Jail also tested positive for Covid-19 during a random sampling test on Saturday. Officials said that the inmate was brought to the central jail on May 24 and his sample was taken on May 28. The inmate is currently asymptomatic. 

Till now, 86 novel coronavirus cases have been reported in Prayagraj district, of which 24 are active cases. While 59 patients have recovered, three have died of the virus in the district. 

Meanwhile, timely intervention of police averted a major incident when members of two rival communities came to loggerheads near Mehrauda Mosque road on Saturday, while defying lockdown guidelines. Police have arrested 12 persons from both the groups and seized sticks. Inspector (Sarayinayat) said that the accused had violated lockdown guidelines and had been arguing in the open over a petty issue. A case under sections 147, 149, 160 and 188 of the IPC and section 7 of CLA Act was registered against them. 


