Narottam Mishra is ace in Shivraj Singh Chouhan's Covid-cabinet, gets home and health
2020-04-23
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Wednesday allocated portfolios among his five ‘covid cabinet’ colleagues, who were sworn in the previous day.


Narottam Mishra got both home and health, the two most crucial departments in the fight against coronavirus, reinforcing his clout in the new regime and state BJP.

Scindia loyalist Tulsi Silawat -- widely expected to get back his health department, if not more – was given water resources. Govind Singh Rajput, who had the prize portfolios of transport and revenue in the Kamal Nath government before breaking away from Congress along with the Scindia camp, has been allotted food and civil supplies and cooperatives.

BJP long-timer Kamal Patel, who is back in the political mainstream after quite some time, was assigned the key agriculture portfolio and Meena Singh has been given tribal welfare.

CM Chouhan said: “Departments have been allocated, as of now, keeping in mind the task of controlling coronavirus pandemic in the state. Once the cabinet is expanded, we shall have a look at portfolio allocation in its entirety and decide the issue in consultation with other leaders in the party.”


Wishing new ministers to tide over Covid crisis: Scindia

Asked for his reaction on the formation of the cabinet and portfolio allocation, Jyotiraditya Scindia told TOI: “I wish them all the best to resolve the crisis, which MP faces. They should be committed to the cause and do justice to the heavy responsibility that is on their shoulders. I am also available for whatever service I can render through Scindia Foundation, or whatever means.”

The allocation of water resources to Silawat came as a surprise to many. He was health minister in the Nath cabinet and the Congress government’s campaign against adulteration, named ‘Shudh Ke Liye Yudh’, had become synonymous with “Milawat Ke Khilaf Silawat”.

After he broke away from Congress with other Scindia loyalists and joined BJP, it was speculated that he might be made deputy chief minister along with Narottam Mishra. But, while Mishra walked away with the lion’s share in the portfolio allocation, Silawat had to be content with water resources.

On Tuesday, when the mini-cabinet was sworn – nearly a month after Chouhan took over as CM – each minister was given two divisions to monitor the fightback against coronavirus. It seemed that portfolio allocation would take place when the cabinet is expanded after the lockdown ends, but the CM recommended portfolios for the five ministers to Governor Lalji Tandon on Wednesday morning, who approved it.

