Politics infected by coronavirus: Madhya Pradesh CM
2020-03-14
BHOPAL: Chief minister Kamal Nath met Governor Lalji Tandon on Friday morning and demanded that Congress MLAs “imprisoned in Bengaluru” be freed. Accusing BJP of plotting an “unethical and illegal” conspiracy, Nath told reporters later that politics “has been infected by coronavirus”.


At 11am on Friday, the CM’s convoy rolled into the Raj Bhavan compound, with him waving the victory sign to waiting mediapersons. During the hour-long meeting, Nath informed Tandon of the ongoing political upheaval in the state and submitted a memorandum, alleging “horse-trading of MLAs by BJP”.

After leaving Raj Bhavan, CM Nath stepped out of his car to speak to mediapersons. Looking confident, he said: “I have met the Governor and greeted him on Holi. I gave him a letter on how Congress MLAs have been imprisoned, and demanded that all the legislators held captive in Bengaluru be freed and brought back to the state. The entire country has seen how Congress MLAs are being held hostage.” Asked about a possible floor test in the assembly, the CM said, “Floor test can be done after Governor’s address and budget. But that is only possible when MLAs are independent. You hold 22 MLAs captive and then ask for floor test, that is wrong. Let these MLAs come before the media and talk.”


Nath to Guv: The very edifice of democracy is in danger

Replying to a question on spread of Coronavirus, CM Nath said, “Coronavirus is right now in the political situation here. politics “has been infected by Coronavirus.”

In his letter to the Governor, the CM writes, “Our commitment to democratic process is unwavering. As a responsible leader of Indian National Congress, I invite and would welcome a floor test of my government in the forthcoming session of Madhya Pradesh assembly, already notified from 16th March 2020, on a date fixed by the Speaker. This is the minimum a Constitutional authority can offer to address the ongoing turmoil.”

The CM leveled serious allegations at BJP. “I’m constrained to point out the immoral, unethical and illegal acts of BJP in Madhya Pradesh. In the first attempt, on 3rd/4th March 2020, the midnight drama leading to whisking away MLAs to Bangaluru is in public domain. Congress leaders foiled BJP’s attempt to keep in captivity the MLAs by using both allurement and force,” he wrote.

“After the failure of the first attempt, BJP on 8th March 2020 arranged three chartered aircrafts to whisk away 19 MLAs of Congress to Bengaluru. Since then, these 19 MLAs, six of whom are cabinet ministers, are incommunicado in a resort arranged by BJP. Nobody is allowed access and /or any sort of communication with the 19 captive MLAs,” he has alleged.

The CM expressed shock that senior leaders of BJP went to the Speaker’s residence and submitted resignations of the 19 MLAs. “This demonstrates the complicity of BJP leaders in the entire conspiracy and illegal action. It raises questions of Constitutional propriety and legislative procedure and transparency,” Nath points out.

The CM also mentioned Thursday’s incident in Bengaluru when cabinet ministers Jitu Patwari and Lakhan Singh Yadav and Narayan Choudhary, father of an MLA Manoj Choudhary, were “manhandled” and arrested by police. Congress says Manoj wanted to return to Bhopal. “In these disturbing circumstances, the very edifice of democracy is in danger. Trust of a transparent democratic process seems lost. It merits full investigation and inquiry, so that persons responsible for de-railing the democratic institutional process are exposed and punished,” the letter said.

