Nat’l Games hit by virus, postponed to next year
2020-05-29
Panaji: The oft-postponed National Games in Goa will be delayed further after the state government said on Thursday that it cannot host the multi-discipline event in October due to Covid-19 and will be held next year.

“The infrastructure is ready, but we cannot play with the lives of everyone. We cannot host the National Games in October, that’s for sure. It is deferred to next year,” sports minister Manohar Ajgaonkar said after a meeting of the National Games Organising Committee (NGOC). 

“We have to see the situation (later this year) and decide on the next date,” said Ajgaonkar.

Allotted in 2008, the National Games were originally scheduled to be held in 2011 and after several postponements, the 36th edition was scheduled from October 20 to November 4.

“We cannot host in October because of Covid-19. In September, we will have a review meeting and then access the situation. We have to see how Covid plays out. Our decision will depend on that,” said National Games deputy CEO VM Prabhu Desai.

Sources said Goa will not communicate its decision first to the IOA. Instead, the state government will write to the sports ministry and “seek advice”.

Goa’s stand is in sharp contrast to what it had written to IOA last month when National Games CEO J Ashok Kumar said “despite the grim scenario”, Goa and the organising committee is working alongside to attend to all National Games related matters with the commitment it deserves.

The letter prompted a response and advice from IOA. The national body said Goa should go ahead with the preparations and host the Game as scheduled from October 20 this year.

Goa has often been found lagging in its preparedness for the National Games. Even an April deadline was pushed to August 2020 to complete the infrastructure with the Indian Olympic Association (IOA) worried about the fate of at least five sports projects.

There was talk of Plan B for these venues after the swimming pool (Campal), tennis facility (Fatorda), hockey turf-ground (Peddem), squash courts (Chicalim) and lawn bowl facility (Chicalim) all saw inordinate delays.

“From our end, we have been working tirelessly to prepare for the Games, but the coronavirus pandemic has held us back. Our sportspersons cannot prepare, they cannot train. The Games was a good opportunity for our athletes to shine,” said Ajgaonkar.

No National Games has seen as many official postponements as the one scheduled to be held here. The 35th edition was held in January 2015 in Kerala and, should Goa manage to host it next year, it will be more than six years since the last event was held.

In the 100-year history of the National Games—held every two years from its beginning in 1921—the Games have been delayed for over six years just once when there was a seven-year gap between Kerala 1987 and Maharashtra 1994.


