Nature’s fury, lockdown hit fruit and tea growers in Bihar
2020-04-25
PATNA: More than the lockdown, fruit growers in the state have been hit by unseasonal rains and storm, hailstorm as well as the continued easterly winds in the past one week that has affected litchi and mango farming, while the lockdown itself has hit tea and pineapple growers in Kishangaj. Mangoes and litchis will hit the market after May 20.

Due to the lockdown, tea growers had to skip the first plucking season, which happens in March and April after the winter pruning of leaves. This plucking also known as first flush yields the best produce which commands higher price.

“While a tea grower gets Rs 10 to Rs 14 per kg for his produce, for first season he gets around Rs 20 per kg. This is the best quality tea. However, due to lockdown it could not be plucked for almost 15 days,” said Raj Karan Daftari, who owns a tea garden and is also the first to introduce tea business in Kishangaj.

Plucking began from April 5 onwards. With tea gardens spread over 20,000 acres in Kishanganj and adjoining areas, it is estimated that farmers have incurred a loss of around Rs 20 crore. “Forget plucking, we have to now spend extra to prune largely useless grown leaves,” Daftari added.

Even pineapple growers of Kishanganj have suffered a huge loss as they are not able to sell their produce. Dulaljeet Singh, who grows the fruit over 10 acres of land, said, “We used to sell our produce in Patna, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi. Today, there are no buyers of pineapple.” He added that farmers had invested around Rs 1 lakh per acre of land.

In contrast, those growing litchi and mango have been hit by nature’s fury with storm and hailstorm hitting on April 21 and April 23.

“We are completely destroyed. I had invested Rs 44,000 on labour and spraying of litchi to protect from pests and also keep them healthy. But rain, storm and hailstorm have destroyed all my hopes,” said Sunil Kumar Singh Raja Babu of Nawada village in Mushahari block.

Chandan Kumar Singh of Purnia, whose family has mango orchards spread over 24 acres, faced a similar fate. “Due to rains, storm and easterly winds, mangoes, which are still not of big size, have started falling off the trees. The dry westerly wind strengthens the twig and also helps in the maturity and ripening of mango,” he said.

Nonetheless, Sunil also known as Raja Babu has been in touch with traders to take the Shahi and China varieties of litchi to cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Lucknow and those in Punjab, while mango farmers in general, by way of traditional practice, have leased out their orchards to the traders on a three-year lease term.

Litchi is grown in 0.36 lakh hectares of land mainly in north Bihar, while various varieties of mango is cultivated in 1.58 lakh hectares of land in the state. 


