Navy To Join Hands With Cops To Enforce Lockdown
2020-04-01
Visakhapatnam: City police commissioner Rajeev Kumar Meena on Tuesday said that around 1,000 personnel from Navy, forest department and RTC and would join hands with the police to maintain lockdown in the city from Wednesday.

Mostly people less than 45 years would be deployed at various spots in the city and the police department would monitor them. Most of the Navy personnel would be deployed at the harbour, Malkapuram and Sriharipuram, said Meena.

The senior cop said they are yet to identify 70 foreign returnees. The district collector had earlier said that around 470 persons were to be identified as per the list sent by the central government.

Out of 2,507 foreign returnees, 2194 are under home quarantine, said Meena. All the 41 passengers from Delhi, including 14 from the city and three from Visakha rural who attended the religious congregation at Nizamuddin, were admitted in the Chest hospital and their samples sent to Kakinada. The test results are likely to come by Wednesday.

People who have been stranded at various places in the city are given food at five dhabas on NH-16 stretch from Lankelapalem to Anandapuram. Around 1,600 food packets were distributed by CRPF and the police. Meena said they would increase the number of dhabas that will serve food to 21. If anyone willing to distribute food, they can distribute through cops in the city, he said.

He said the situation in the city would be monitored by the higher officials from the command control center through CCTV network. The city has around 2,500 CCTV cameras at more than 600 junctions in the GVMC limits.

“We are using our 3,000-strong force in the city for the duties and deployed those who are above 55 years for administrative work. Around 347 teams were formed and there were deployed at 91 static points and 19 check posts, said the senior cop.

He said cops were assigned in three shifts of eight hours, apart from a reserve force. “There have been no untoward incidents. Our force is sufficient to handle the situation and people should support us,” he said.

“We are only imposing traffic fines to create fear among the public not to venture out. If we apply Section 188 , then they would end up in jail. And we want to avoid it,” he said.


