Nawazuddin Siddiqui put under home quarantine after reaching UP's Muzaffarnagar from Mumbai
2020-05-19
MUZAFFARNAGAR: Bollywood actor Nawazuddin Siddiqui and his three family members have been placed under home quarantine after their 26-hour-long journey from Mumbai to their hometown in Budhana in UP’s Muzaffarnagar, amid the lockdown.


Siddiqui – along with his ailing mother, brother and sister-in-law – reached his ancestral house on May 11, after which their samples were sent to test for Covid-19. Authorities directed him and his family members to remain under quarantine for two weeks till May 25. According to local authorities in Muzaffarnagar, their samples have tested negative.

Speaking about his experience of the 26-hour-long journey back home, the film star said, "We left for Muzaffarnagar after getting permission and a car pass from authorities. We were stopped in Gujarat and Rajasthan but were allowed to move after they checked our documents and medical records."

His brother Faizuddin Siddiqui, who was also travelling with Nawazuddin, said, “Our mother is a heart patient. A few months ago when our sister passed away in Budhana, my mother and brother were not able to take part in her funeral. That is why he decided to visit Budhana.”

According to sources, when the actor and his family reached Budhana on May 11, they first informed the local police before going home. After the police and a medical team were through with the Covid-19 protocol, all four were put under home quarantined.

Additional district magistrate (finance) Alok Kumar said, “Siddiqui and his three family members have tested negative for coronavirus and they are under home quarantine till May 25.”

Sources said that Nawazuddin Siddiqui was in Lucknow for the shooting of his new film ‘Dimple Kidnap Ho Gai’ and only after getting an advisory issued by the film association about coronavirus, he returned to Mumbai on March 17. Siddiqui went on self-quarantine in his house in Mumbai for weeks. Meanwhile, his mother got ill and she insisted that they left for their native home in Budhana in Muzaffarnagar. 


