NCL creates oxygen enrichment unit to help early stage Covid-19 patients
2020-04-10
PUNE: The National Chemical Laboratory (NCL) has developed an indigenous oxygen enrichment unit (OEU) that may be helpful for a Covid-19 patient at an early stage. 

The unit, with oxygen concentration of 27-35%, may also reduce the chances of the patient being put on ventilator. 




The eco-friendly technology uses hollow fibre polymeric membranes packed in a unit. Pressurized atmospheric air is fed to the membrane, which performs physical enrichment of oxygen in the permeate (product) air. The unit also filters out all suspended particles, bacteria and viruses. The equipment is different from the currently available oxygen cylinders as they have ~99% oxygen concentration, which is not required for early-stage patients. The prototype has already been tested and a start-up has agreed to manufacture the unit on large scale for use in hospitals.

Scientist Ulhas Kharul, who heads the Polymer Science and Engineering division at NCL, said, “Covid-19 patients will not develop sudden crisis of ventilator need. At some point in time, the lung’s ability to absorb oxygen will be hampered. Once, doctors diagnose lung disability, the patient can immediately be put on the oxygen enrichment unit. It will help improve the condition of patient and fight back the coronavirus with the additional support given by oxygen.”

Kharul explained that this is known in case of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD), where there are lung disabilities. He claimed it was well-proven that if COPD patients are administered oxygen immediately after the disease is detected, their life expectancy is improved.

Director of NCL Ashwin Kumar Nangia said, “We have already built the prototype and we are trying to build multiple units based on components readily available. We have tied up with those who can manufacture these right now. As soon as it is ready to manufacture by the start-up and interested companies, it will be deployed at hospitals.”


