Coronavirus suspect Irish nationalist, who goes missing from SCB, traced to hotel
2020-03-07
BHUBANESWAR/CUTTACK: The health department officials on Friday traced an Irish national—a novel coronavirus suspect— to a hotel in Bhubaneswar after he went missing from the SCB Medical College and Hospital on Thursday evening giving some frantic moments to the authorities. He was later admitted to the Capital Hospital in Bhubaneswar.


The SCB had lodged a verbal complaint with Mangalabagh police station after the patient went missing moments after he came to the hospital.

Bhubanannada Moharana, emergency officer of SCB, said the Irish national had come to the SCB after being referred from Capital Hospital in Bhubaneswar around 8.30pm. “An attendant was accompanying them. The attendant went to our pulmonary medicine department on the fourth floor with the referral slip while the patient remained on the ground floor. Our doctor advised him to get the patient admitted. He was also asked to remain in the isolation ward,” Moharana said.

He added, “The attendant went down but never returned. After waiting for half an hour, the doctor tried to contact them on the number provided in the referral slip, but there was no response. He informed the hospital authorities and also police as his whereabouts were not known.” 

MR Patnaik, head of the department of pulmonary medicine and treatment committee nodal officer for novel coronavirus, said the information about the Irish national was passed on to the Manglabag police station as a “precautionary measure” as it was a case referred by the Capital Hospital in Bhubaneswar.

Sources said the man was found to have fever while he was screened at Biju Patnaik International Airport on Thursday and was sent to Capital Hospital from where the doctors had referred him to SCB in Cuttack.

The health department officials in Bhubaneswar said the man did not get admitted to SCB because he felt he had no such complications and had returned to his hotel. “He was found in the hotel,” Capital Hospital director Ashok Patnaik said. The man and his attendant were later admitted to the Capital Hospital. They were persuaded to get admitted in the hospital as that would be more convenient for them, a senior health department official said.

