Coronavirus cloud over Kolkata's airport Rs 36 crore tray retrieval project
2020-02-19
KOLKATA: The coronavirus (Covid-19) epidemic in China has cast its shadow over a Rs 36-crore project at the Kolkata airport. An automatic tray retrieval system (ATRS) that was contracted to a Chinese firm has been stalled following travel restrictions on Chinese nationals to stop the spread of the virus that has till date claimed nearly 2,000 lives. 


As deaths continue to be reported, airport authorities said they were not in a position to work on a revised timeline to implement the project that can increase the throughput of cabin baggage screening and reduce congestion at security check portals at the terminal’s domestic wing. 

 
 
The ATRS is meant to automatically send trays, on which passengers place cabin baggage items for screening, back to the preparation area for others to use. This will end the hassle of looking for trays and prevent empty trays from piling up. Automated rollers enable the trays to move into the screening machine, without the need for passengers or staffers to push their trays/bags into the X-ray machines.

ATRS was installed on two cabin baggage X-ray lines in December 2019 as a pilot project. The equipment for 10 more X-ray lines are slated to arrive from China next month along with Chinese technicians and engineers who will install the system. According to the original timeline, the system would have been commissioned in April. But all that has now changed.

“The coronavirus outbreak has put the timeline for installation and roll-out of ATRS in the domestic wing in jeopardy. A committee from the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) has evaluated the two ATRS lines that are in place and we expect the approval in a couple of days. Thereafter, the system was to be installed on the remaining X-ray lines. Though the Chinese company has not communicated about the delay, we are not too keen about Chinese engineers and technicians arriving in Kolkata right now and would prefer to wait till the problem is over,” a Kolkata airport official said.

CISF officers who screen the bags and frisk passengers have been handed out masks to prevent them from contracting the dreaded disease. Sources said three Chinese engineers are still in Kolkata, but they have been asked to remain in quarantine. “The trio came before the outbreak. But one of them had returned to China and came back to India. So we do not wish to take a risk,” the official said. 

The ATRS project is intended to expedite the security-check process that currently takes anywhere between 10-40 minutes. The facility is already in use at Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Mumbai airports. Officials said the system will allow the CISF officers to screen twice the number of bags than they currently do in an hour.

