Covid-19 not in Kolkata, but traders rue low Holi sales amid virus scare
2020-03-08
KOLKATA: Novel coronavirus is yet to strike Kolkata, but traders, who have stocked up on colours, water guns and accessories for Dol and Holi, are reeling from the Covid-19 effect.


Till Saturday evening, shops in major markets had clocked dismal sales as people were caught in a dilemma on whether to go ahead with the celebrations or not, lest they contract the virus. A nationwide alert on the spread of the disease and PM Narendra Modi’s advisory against mass gatherings for the festivities have contributed to the uncertainty. “Till now, we have sold only 20% of our stock. Other years, we would have sold at least 70% by now. Reports of nCoV cases in other parts of the country and the PM’s tweet are influencing people,” said Bapi Pal, a shopkeeper at Gariahat.

 The dip in sales has apparebtly also got to do with people’s wariness to handle anything Chinese, the epicentre of the outbreak being Wuhan in central China. Though shopkeepers are explain to customers that the water guns and other accessories were either from previous year’s stock or of Indian make, customers are sceptical about buying anything other than aabir. Aguntika Ghosh from Ganguly Bagan is unsure whether to buy even herbal gulaal or not. “They might as well be Chinese products being packaged differently and marketed this Holi,” she said. 

Vicky Shaw, a shopkeeper in Jadubabu Bazaar, said, “I don’t know what I will do with the leftover stock.” Sushil Golcha, a wholesale herbal aabir dealer in Burrabazar, said, “People are getting scared for no reason.” 

Ankit Raj Pathak, a student from Behala, has decided not to join the celebrations as he does not want to come in contact with large groups. “We have to safeguard ourselves. Indulging in activities, which would involve so many people, is a big no-no,” he said. Those who will go ahead with the celebrations will tone down the scale. Anwesha Dey, a homemaker from Bhowanipur, will play only with family and close friends. “Better be safe than sorry,” she said. 

