NDA cancels outdoor activities of cadets amid coronavirus scare
2020-03-19
PUNE: The National Defence Academy (NDA) has suspended all outdoor activities, including educational tours of cadets, in view of the spurt in Covid-19 cases. It has also stopped cadets from visiting crowded places.


“All cadets and personnel in NDA are briefed and sensitised about the causes and symptoms of Covind-19 by the Commanding Officer of Military Hospital, Khadakwasla. They are also advised to ensure personal hygiene at individual level. All large public gatherings, celebrations, mass activities, visit to crowded places, guest lectures and movies have been suspended till further orders. All educational tours have been cancelled, " the NDA authorities told TOI on Saturday.

The cadets are being monitored daily for flu-like symptoms by their divisional officers (DOs) and seniors.

“Any person with symptoms of flu, cough and cold are advised to report immediately. They will be screened and treated separately. In case of doubt, they will be shifted to the Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) hospital. Not everybody is required to rush to the hospital for checks. Only those who have symptoms are being checked. This is the advisory of the government,” the authorities added.

“All non-essential mass gatherings have been suspended. All educational hikes, outdoor activities outside NDA have been stopped till further orders,” the authorities added.

Visitors, including parents and others, are also not being permitted inside the campus. “The general public and school students can visit the academy on Sunday, but this has been postponed till further notice. Besides, we have advised parents not to pay visit to the academy. If they want to connect with their wards, there is a proper mechanism which they can follow,” a senior NDA officer, who did not wish to be named, told TOI.

On Sunday, the academy allowed its final-term (sixth term) cadets to leave the campus for some hours. “Currently, the outside environment is not safe. So, we have suspended this activity for the time being. It will be resumed only after the situation becomes normal in the city,” the officer added.

As far as training activities are concerned, the academy authorities said, “There is no deviation or change in routine training activities”.

The academy has also sensitised its teaching and administrative staff about the virus.


