Nearly 1,500 being tested for coronavirus in Gurugram
2020-03-18
NEW DELHI/GHAZIABAD: As many as 1,486 people are being examined in Gurugram for Covid-19. Of them, 1,273 people are in home isolation; three are admitted in Medanta-The Medicity hospital whereas three others are in Fortis.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

 Meanwhile, a 57-year-old businessman, who was the first Ghaziabad resident to be tested positive, returned home on Tuesday after doctors said he had fully recovered. The Raj Nagar Extension resident expressed gratitude to doctors in both Ghaziabad and Delhi for his quick recovery. He was admitted to RML Hospital in Delhi on March 5, and was tested positive for Covid-19 a day later. 

 In Noida, the Sector-100 resident who tested positive had told authorities that she had been screened at the airport during her return from France on March 13 and had tested negative then. She developed symptoms a few days later, following which a doctor advised her to remain in isolation. 

The second Noida patient is a man from Sector-78. Officials said he tested positive after he came in contact with his boss, a Delhi resident who had tested positive earlier and had visited the factory in Sector-80 on March 13.

 "Two persons - a woman with recent travel history to France and a man - have been tested positive for Covid-19. They had been in isolation and are undergoing treatment currently," said Anurag Bhargava, chief medical officer (CMO) of Gautam Budh Nagar. 

 So far, a total of 1,400 cases have been tracked in Noida, with 1,065 of them under surveillance. The authorities have collected 200 samples, of which three have been found positive and 139 negative. The results for 59 are waited. 

District magistrate BN Singh said both patients who tested positive would be monitored closely and at least 3km areas around their houses scanned. "We have started screening everyone in the vicinity in the first stage. By afternoon, teams had started going door-to-door for screening people. It is important for residents to follow all guidelines, without panic," he added.

 Both patients have been admitted to Government Institute of Medical Sciences (GIMS) in Greater Noida, where an anti-viral therapy has been initiated. "Both of them are in their mid-twenties and their health condition is stable. We have started an anti-viral treatment for them and are giving them Lopinavir, Ritonavir (used for treatment of human immunodeficiency virus), Tamiflu (a medication used to treat flu symptoms) and chloroquine. We expect them to recover soon as they are young. There is no need to panic," said Dr RK Gupta, director of GIMS. 

The apartment owners' association of Sector-100, where the woman returned from France, has shut down all common area facilities, such as clubhouses, gyms and swimming pools, for 10 days. Additionally, visitors are being allowed inside only if necessary and after getting their hands sanitised at the gate. "All support staff have been put under watch," said Manali Kanyal, joint secretary of the association.

