Covid-19: Maharashtra advised to be ready with more oxygen supply beds
2020-05-23
PUNE: More beds with oxygen supply will be needed as Covid-19 cases are expected to rise in the coming months, especially in Mumbai and Pune, health experts have said. 

Efforts are on in both cities to ensure that hospital beds are equipped with an oxygen supply system. The state government has already directed reservation of 80% beds in private hospitals for Covid-19 patients.

 

At present, there are 8,000-9,000 such beds in the state at various hospitals. 

Epidemiologist and technical advisor to the state government Subhash Salunkhe said Covid-19 cases will rise in the next two, three months and beds with oxygen supply would be needed. 

“We can’t run around in the last minute looking for oxygen beds. Efforts are being taken by both the Pune Municipal Corporation and BrihanMumbai Municipal Corporation. But care should be taken that the beds with oxygen supply system are ready,” he added.

The new directive of 80% beds in private hospitals will open up more beds in both these cities, chief executive of Mahatma Jotiba Phule Jan Arogya Yojana Sudhakar Shinde said.

He told TOI that over 2,000 beds in Mumbai and over 1,000 beds in Pune will be made available. “These are critical care beds and will be a huge respite,”he added.

According to the state report from the public health department, there are 1,863 beds in the dedicated Covid-19 hospitals, 1,751 isolation beds at health centres and 6,067 beds at the care centres.

Ventilators are in short supply, director of health services Satish Pawar said. Patients requiring ventilator support are 1 to 1.5% of Covid-19 patients in the state, but those requiring oxygen support are more than 20% .

“Hence, we are focussing on oxygen supply for all beds and are using jumbo cylinders. We have got industries and the Centre to help with supply of oxygen for all the hospitals in the state, especially for Pune and Mumbai,” he added.

In Pune, there is 13.8% utilisation of ICU beds in dedicated Covid-19 hospitals and 5.5% utilisation of hospital ICU beds in Covid-19 health centres.

Pune has the maximum utilisation of ventilators in the state in the dedicated hospitals. “We are hoping to get more beds with reservation of more beds in private hospitals,’’ Pune district health officer.

