Need of Covid hour forces Kolkata cop rethink, but no long-term change in cycle rules
2020-06-07
KOLKATA: Lalbazar has asked all traffic guards to allow cyclists to use major arterial roads to a “large extent” for now, purely on “humanitarian grounds”. However, it ruled out any possibility of changing its cycle policy in the long run.

 


Cops said that while no one has been fined till now, those openly flouting signals will be challaned from next week. Their cycles, too, can be seized. However, the usual fine of Rs 100 that is charged for cycling on any of the 120 roads where it is banned, will remain “suspended” in certain pockets for the next few days.

The development comes amidst reports from certain traffic guards, like Howrah bridge and Shyambazar, which have reported thousands cycling to work from Kolkata’s immediate suburbs, especially Howrah and North 24 Parganas. This crowd depended on local trains for commute. With trains not operating and buses numbering only a few, a huge section of these men and women coming to Burrabazar, Posta, BBD Bag and Shyambazar are now depending on cycles.

“We have reported how cycle movement has become a major accident headache for us on Howrah bridge, CR Avenue, MG Road and Sealdah. Lalbazar is aware that several of them are not sticking to their lanes. Public transport is yet to normalize and the average speed — even on stretches like CR Avenue — is on the higher side. Cyclists need to be careful and we need to come up with a temporary solution,” said an officer. 

“We have taken a practical approach. But any vehicle going under 30km/hr and using the main roads can potentially cause chaos on the road,” said an officer, adding that unless dedicated tracks are created, a major policy change “will need to wait”. “All those cycling on the road must wear masks and stick to the extreme left. Any traffic rule violation can become a traffic hazard,” he added.

Ekta Kothari Jaju from NGO switchON that has been advocating for cyclists and their rights for years cited the example of her employee who is now cycling for 1.5 hours each day from his home in South 24 Parganas to her office. “He is relieved not to have to wait for buses. The cycle is the poor man’s best financial option now when social distancing is the norm. The government needs to frame rules in tune with the requirement of the present times,” said Jaju. 

Mahendra Singh from Liluah, who cycles to Burrabazar from home every day, said the cycle has helped him save his job. “I hope that police realize that most of us are cycling to work out of necessity,” said Singh.


