Neeri starts testing Covid-19 samples, throws up city’s 100th +ve
2020-04-25
Nagpur: The laboratory at the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (Neeri) finally started testing Covid-19 samples on Thursday. The Centre has also appointed Neeri, a constituent laboratory of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) as the hub for all the Covid-19 testing centres in the city.

One of the samples on the first day tested positive, which eventually became the 100th confirmed positive case of Nagpur city. State directorate of health services is yet to link samples from any specific district or region for Neeri lab. Being the hub, Neeri will now provide guidance to other testing centres in the city.

The Neeri lab is the fifth Covid-19 testing facility in Nagpur after IGGMCH, AIIMS, GMCH and MAFSU labs. It will be the sixth lab in Vidarbha. A lab is also functional at the GMCH in Akola.

TOI recently reported that CSIR director general Shekhar Mande had recognized the institute headquartered at Nagpur as one of the laboratories to carry out testing for Covid-19 in the region. 

Krishna Khairnar, senior scientist and head of environmental virology cell at Neeri, said that the Centre has recognized 10 hubs in the country. “Neeri will provide solutions on infrastructural development, scaling up of testing capacity, training of manpower, required instruments etc for testing centres in city,” he added.

The Covid-19 testing at Neeri is being under Khairnar who has previously worked on the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). “I am carrying out the testing with support from my students. Three of them help me in the testing while another three help in documentation work,” he said.

Neeri director Rakesh Kumar has also constituted a three-member committee of outside experts to make sure that all the protocols are being followed while testing the samples. “Our lab has been approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and we are following all its protocols,” added Khairnar.

Neeri’s lab became operational from April 19 and has a capacity of testing 50 samples per day. “We are open to testing samples from any part of the country. After testing, we submit the results to ICMR, state health department and some other agencies,” said Khairnar.

Neeri has specially procured personal protective equipment (PPE) for the testing. “Many self-help groups have also come forward to donate us PPEs,” said Khairnar.


