Nellore goes into shutdown to curb coronavirus spread
2020-03-15
Vijayawada: Three persons displaying symptoms of coronavirus have been isolated at the Government General Hospital (GGH) in Nellore, while another six persons with less severe symptoms of the virus have been admitted to the quarantine ward at GGH. The condition of all nine is stable at present and they are receiving treatment as per protocol. 

The condition of the student who tested positive for COVID-19 after returning from Italy is said to be improving.

Authorities at GGH denied that some persons from the isolation ward went missing from the hospital. Symptoms of patients in the isolation ward are more severe than of those kept in quarantine. Authorities added that fake news on the spread of coronavirus is being circulated on social networking sites.

Cinema theatres in Nellore city remained closed on Saturday following instructions by the district administration. Managements of cinema theatres said they would reopen theatres only after orders from the district administration. Degree and private junior colleges and coaching centres in the city are continuing with classes.

Municipal commissioner, PVVS Murthy who deputed special teams in the city for continuous monitoring of sanitation activities, has also started awareness drives to avoid the spread of the virus.

As many as 777 persons from Andhra Pradesh have a travel history to coronavirus-affected countries. At present 512 persons are under observation while 244 persons have crossed the observation period of 28 days.

Twenty-one persons have been admitted to various hospitals in the state while the remaining are under home observation. As many as 70 samples have been tested, of which one sample tested positive and 57 samples tested negative. Test results for 12 samples are pending.

The laboratory at Siddhartha Medical College, Vijayawada has been commissioned for testing samples and started processing samples on March 14.

Meanwhile, the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy announced holidays for students from March 16 to March 31. IIPE director Prof VSRK Prasad said they have taken the decision in view of advisories issued by the ministry of human resources development and other government organisations. 


