Nepalese head home amid uncertainty over lockdown
2020-05-28
Shimla: Amid uncertainty over the extension of lockdown and curfew in Himachal Pradesh, migrant workers from Nepal have started heading back home from Shimla.

On Wednesday, 53 Nepalese packed in two buses left for Rupaidiha, a village in Bahraich district of Uttar Pradesh near the India-Nepal border across from Nepalgunj.

People from the neighbouring country, who had come here in search of livelihood, were finding it difficult to survive without work during the lockdown since March 23.

Return of these workers is a going to raise further problems as it will not only affect construction activities in Shimla but also the coming apple season starting from June 15.

Farmers are worried how to arrange workers during the season.

As per estimates, around 4-5 lakh labourers are engaged during the apple season, out of which 75% are from Nepal. A large number of them are also engaged in construction activities by private contractors.

Dorna Lal, one of the Nepalese residents going home, said due to the lockdown, survival had become difficult. “And worried about our well-being and livelihood, our family members wanted us to return,” he added.

Kalawati, who also decided to return along with her husband, said it was difficult to survive without an earning. Her husband said if the lockdown is lifted later, they will think of returning, provided they get permission for the same.

Tikender Khadga said without work, they could not stay in Shimla for long as arranging for ration was also becoming a tough task. He said 53 people paid Rs 3,000 each for bus journey to reach Rupaidiha border between India and Nepal.

Surender Kumar Thakur, owner of Prabhat Bus Service from Totu in Shimla, whose buses will ferry these migrant workers to Rupaidha, said as these migrants worked as labourers in Ghanahatti and Totu, they knew about his bus service and approached him to drop them till Nepal border. He said total journey is around 900 kms from Shimla and he expects to return by Saturday.


