Nervous neta, bureaucrats ‘compel’ admn to shift 2 quarantine facilities
2020-04-25
Nagpur: Pressure from politicians and senior bureaucrats has prompted the district administration to consider shifting inmates from the two latest quarantine facilities where residents of Satranjipura containment zone are housed. The facilities were opened at the hostels run by social justice department at Wanadongri in Hingna and Civil Lines, on Thursday. On Friday, BJP MLA from Hingna Sameer Meghe reached the district collector’s office and demanded that the hostel at Wanadongri should be cleared of the suspects. Collector Ravindra Thakare told TOI that the MLA’s demand will be considered and alternative arrangements are being made.Even as inmates of the Wanadongri hostel are yet to be shifted, those who were taken to the Civil Lines facility were quietly taken to the MLA Hostel on Friday morning. There were 34 inmates at the girls hostel at Civil Lines, which is over 200 metres from the high court. Offices of top bureaucrats are also close by. It is learnt, some senior bureaucrats had put in a word for shifting the occupants elsewhere.The shifting is done in Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) buses. It involves extensive procedure of disinfecting the vehicle each time the passengers are taken in.Meghe told TOI that presence of the 125 quarantined persons posed a high risk to other residents of the area which has so far not seen a single Covid-19 case.“The hostel has common toilet facilities which increases the chances of spreading the infection. More than that the well from which water supply is catered to the entire area is on the hostel premises. Even if one of the inmates spits by chance it would spread infection to a population of close to 50,000 living in nearby pockets,” said Meghe.Thakare said that the fears though unfounded have been accepted at this point of time. “We are looking to accommodate the inmates in the existing quarantine facilities and even new ones are being explored,” the collector said.Thakare clarified that the venues were being only changed considering the general apprehension among people and because alternatives were available. “Once we run out of space elsewhere, the same facilities may have to be used again,” he said.Meanwhile, the facility at Lonara will be closed with last of its inmates going in a day. “Lonara had different problem. Social distancing could not be maintained there due to the large dormitories housing as much as 40 persons together,” Thakare said.