Netas to common man, all reach out to the lockdown-hit
2020-04-30
MUMBAI: Small acts of kindness from citizens, socio-cultural organizations and political karyakartas have added several feathers to Mumbai’s topi during the ongoing Covid-19 outbreak.

A century-plus temple in Kandivli, for one, dipped into its fixed deposits for the three community kitchens started by Yogesh Sagar, BJP MLA from Charkop. “I told the temple trustees that serving a decent meal to the poor was as good as offering prayers at the temple. They broke their FDs and offered me Rs 4 lakh,” said Sagar. 

The first thing writer Rachana Shah does in the morning is to saddle her driver with a container of chocolates, dry food and water bottles and send him off to cops stationed at the Haji Ali traffic junction, close to her Pedder Road residence. “The city is still going strong because of them,” said Shah.

Rohit Pawar, seated in his office in a faraway Pune village, is busy monitoring distribution of sanitizers to villages. The debutante NCP MLA from Karjat-Mangaon sent 9,000 litres of sanitizers to Mumbai.

When Karan Menon, a young professional from Borivli (East), told his neighbours he wished to start a community kitchen, they all agreed to contribute. “I began with 500 food packets. Today, nearly 2,000 urban poor partake of the meals every day,” said Menon. Civic authorities have waived fees for a nearby open space which Menon and his cooks use to keep the khichdi pots boiling. 

Senior Congress functionary Sanjay Nirupam recently knocked on the gilded doors of the Iskcon temple in Juhu to seek help. 

“I asked them if they would give us over 20,000 food packets every day, and they readily agreed. They run a large kitchen," said Nirupam. 

A young professional who works in a production house visits Nirupam’s Jogeshwari office every day and collects 100 food packets which she distributes among destitutes.

Last week, Jijamata Mahila Kendra, which provides domestic help to Vile Parle residents, gave an extra Rs 1,000 each to its staff.

Tapping the right contact can resolve a stalemate as senior MNS functionary Sandip Deshpande from Dadar realized recently. 

He was in a quandary when locals told him that Shushrusha, a hospital in the neighbourhood, had shut its dialysis unit. Deshpande put a call to NCP president Sharad Pawar who spoke to the municipal commissioner and “within two hours, the unit was back.” 

Rahul Shewale, Shiv Sena MP from Mumbai north-central, was moved when he saw an old woman’s eyes turn misty on being served a plate of khichdi in a Dharavi basti. “Kindness is what makes Mumbai a great, loving city,” said Shewale. 

 Masoom Lakhani called up his schoolmates—the Class of 1995— and launched ‘Helping Hand’, a campaign to provide food packets to the impoverished across the city. 

“It’s moving to see gratitude in the eyes of old citizens and the homeless,” said Lakhani. 

Ajay Chaudhari, Shiv Sena MLA from Sewri, pulls up citizens without masks. Chaudhari’s crusade continues even when he is home. 

“I stand in my balcony with a container of masks. As soon as I see someone walking maskless I call out to him and hurl a box at him. They catch it with Ravindra Jadeja’s finesse,” he said.


