New Jr docs’ team takes command at Covid-19 hosp
2020-04-04
Kanpur: A new team of junior residents, including those who have yet to complete their post-graduation studies, took the charge of Covid–19 hospital of LLR hospital on Friday.

This new team of junion doctors has replaced an old team, comprising 24 junior residents and 26 non-PG junior residents, which was handling the Covid-19 hospital work for last seven days. All these junior residents and non-PG junior residents have been sent on two weeks' rest. But they are not allowed to move in their homes and would be accommodated in hotel rooms which have been taken for the purpose. Prof R K Maurya, head of the team, said that the junior residents had been working for seven days and they, too, needed rest. As some suspected cases have reached the hospital the team members would stay in quarantine.

The nursing staff, who were assisting the junior residents, have also been put in quarantine at the school of nursing, while class four staff members have been asked to stay at JK Cancer Institute. Arrangements have been made to ensure that they would get healthy diet in quarantine.

For quarantine purpose the medical college administration has booked as many as 540 rooms at Vijay Villa, Hotel Regenta and Hotel Bliss. Prof Arti Lal Chandani, principal, GSVM medical college, stated that the expenses for fooding, lodging and maintenance would be borne by the state.

Meanwhile, the police quarantined 13 'jamaatis' of other states after their medical examination. Pheelkhana police got information that 13 'jamaatis' were staying at Mir Mahmood Mosque in Patkapur. The police took all of them to UHM hospital and got them medically examined. When they were found fit and healthy the police quarantined all of them at the mosque.

Satish Chandra Sahu, inspector, Pheelkhana said that all 'jamaatis' had reached the city on February 19 last. They had tried to return to their states on March 25, but could not do so due to the lockdown. Of them, eight belong to Haryana, two to Maharashtra and one each from Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh.


