New virus may have triggered inflammatory syndrome in some children, say paediatricians
2020-05-18
PUNE: A multi-system inflammatory syndrome that resembles Kawasaki disease and reported among children in the United States and Europe could have been triggered by the new coronavirus, said experts in India who have been studying the disease.

Recently, a four-month-old baby in Kolkata was detected with symptoms of the disease. The child had also tested positive for Covid-19.

Kawasaki disease, which often starts with fever, causes skin rashes, inflammation of blood vessels and coronary arteries and mainly impacts children under five.

Reports of a possible link between Covid-19 and the pediatric disease started circulating after nearly 100 children in New York fell ill with symptoms that involved inflammation in the skin, eyes, blood vessels and heart. Three of the children died. At least 50 similar cases have been reported from Europe, including in France, Switzerland, Spain and Britain.

Doctors in those countries have described the illness as a pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome. 

“But any kind of virus or infection can generate an autoimmune response in those who are genetically predisposed. SARS-CoV-2 may have activated the symptoms mimicking Kawasaki disease, but we can't say if it is the causative agent,” said Saji Philip, president of the Indian Society of Kawasaki disease. “It is still not known what causes the disease... even 53 years after the disorder was first described by Japanese pediatrician Tomisaku Kawasaki in 1967,” said Philip, a pediatric cardiologist.

Surjit Singh, professor of pediatrics at the Advanced Pediatric Centre, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, who has studied the disease for over 30 years, said: “There was an emergence of Kawasaki disease during the SARS outbreak too. But we don’t know the reason why it occurs or when it occurs. Often a pre-existing viral infection plays a role in its pathogenesis.”

In India, there is no data on children affected by the disease. “In the past eight weeks, I have come across only two children with Kawasaki disease in Mumbai, which does not represent a change from the usual frequency of cases I see. None of them have reported any symptoms of Covid-19,” said Raju P Khubchandani, founder-convener of the Paediatric Rheumatology Society of India, who has come across 150-160 such cases of Kawasaki disease from Mumbai and elsewhere in the past 14 to 15 years.

“There could be cases we might not know of since Kawasaki disease is very difficult to diagnose. Often, its symptoms are confused with those of measles, hand, foot and mouth disease, scarlet fever, drug reactions etc,” Khubchandani said. 

Initial treatment consists of high doses of aspirin and immunoglobulin.

According to Philip, the disease affects every five to 10 per 1,00,000 children in India. 

“As of now there is no cause for alarm. Not all children in the the US and the UK with multi-system inflammatory syndrome have tested positive for Covid-19. Some have tested negative, while others have tested positive for antibodies. Strangely, no spike in the number of cases has been reported in Japan, which is known as the hotbed of Kawasaki disease. This shows that some environment and genetic factors are also at play,” he said.


