New Rs 1.5cr Covid test machine set to become operational this wk
2020-06-01
Panaji: Two months after setting up a virology laboratory, Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital, Bambolim, is set to add another feather to its cap. A Rs 1.5 crore machine to conduct RT-PCR tests for the novel coronavirus is currently being installed, and is likely to become operational this week.

The laboratory, which currently conducts 60-80 tests a day, will be able to conduct around 500 RT-PCR tests daily after the machine becomes functional. Tests are currently being conducted on a non-automated machine, which was borrowed from the Malaria research centre when the Covid-19 pandemic hit.

GMC dean Dr S M Bandekar said that with the installation of the new machine, it will facilitate the hospital to do all virus tests in the state itself. “The new automated machine is being installed and we expect to make it operational from this week. It will enhance our testing facility,” said Bandekar.

Currently, Goa has TrueNat machines installed in district and subdistrict hospitals, as well as in GMC. Any sample which tests positive on the TrueNat machine is taken to the virology laboratory for a RT-PCR confirmation test.

Bandekar also said that the hospital has worked on a war footing not only to set up the virology laboratory in the microbiology department, but to complete a new laboratory in an area covering 250 sq m. “It was a struggle right from the time of identifying the space to getting various sanctions. Finally, the structure is ready, but some work is delayed due to the lockdown.” 

The new machine is being installed in the microbiology laboratory as bio safety norms are already in place there, thus making it easier for start operation of the machine as soon as possible. 

It will be shifted to the new laboratory once it’s ready and bio safety norms are implemented there. Bandekar also said they have already had discussions and that shifting of the machine to the new laboratory should not be a problem.


