Kolkata gets ready for Covid-normal life
2020-06-01
KOLKATA: Over 3,000 traders of New Market are set to resume business after more than two months. But they will have to tread with caution for if the contagion spreads its tentacles inside, traders run the risk of being shut down again. 



Traders associations at the market warned members against lapse in anti-Covid norms during business hours when the century-and-a-half-old market reopens on Monday. 


Times ViewCitizens must behave responsibly as we go from Lockdown 4.0 to Unlock 1.0. There is a risk of a spike in cases — already seen in areas that have seen a return of migrants from other states — and responsible behaviour may be the only way to slow the virus’s spread.

On Sunday, a section of New Market traders was seen busy with last-minute preparations to take guard against the virus. Both the SS Hogg Market Traders’ Association and SS Hogg Market Shop-owners’ Association acknowledged the challenge, but said they were determined to ensure the market remained safe. 

“We need cooperation of all stakeholders — civic workers, shop-keepers and customers — to ensure everyone is on guard. It will be difficult to monitor all 3,000 traders and their employees unless there is self-regulation. Besides wearing a mask and keeping a 6ft distance from others, every trader has to keep adequate stock of sanitizers for employees and shoppers. Piling goods in common passages will attract penalty,” said Ashok Gupta, president of SS Hogg Market Traders’ Association. 

“That we are able to resume business is a major relief. But we need to handle the situation with care. We have told traders in our association that they must not compromise on anti-Covid measures under any circumstance. We have made them understand that it isn’t just about livelihood but life as well. To protect both, it is important that all norms are followed,” Gupta added.

SS Hogg Market Shop-owners’ Association secretary Zaid Alam made it clear that traders would be penalized if they did not adhere to the rules. “Our members are eager to resume business after incurring a huge loss over the past two months. But we have asked them to abide by all rules set by the civic authorities. We will be compelled to impose penalty on errant traders,” he said. 

Traders from the flower range, bakery range, cosmetics range and readymade garments range are all gearing up for Monday. “It is a great relief. I have been counting the hours ever since I learned that our market will reopen,” said a trader at the bakery section. 

Traders of Simpark will, however, have to wait till June 8 to reopen shops as the central air-conditioning system in the underground market is under repair. The traders also plan to set up a sanitization tunnel for shoppers at the entrance. 

A market department official said the KMC will monitor the functioning of New Market through CCTV and civic officials will conduct surprise checks to verify if rules were being followed. “We have decided to keep open six out of 30 gates to avoid crowding in the market,” the official said. 


