Lucknow: New quarantine rules will put our families at risk, say health workers
2020-05-30
LUCKNOW: After resident doctors of SGPGIMS, employees of KGMU and doctors and medical staff of RMLIMS have also registered strong protest against new rules on ward-service period in Covid-19 wards and quarantine thereafter released by the government. Doctors’ contention is that the change of norms will expose their family members and non-covid patients to infection risk and take toll on their mental and physical health.


While SGPGI Resident Doctors Association (RDA) members will wear black ribbons at work from Saturday, RMLIMS nurses have announced to stay ‘quarantined’ at institute’s hospital, instead of going home. Earlier, health workers had to serve for seven days in Covid-19 wards, during which period they had to stay in isolation at accommodation provided by the administration. After being relieved from duty, even if tested negative for infection, they were kept in 14-days passive-quarantine in the same facility with no contact with the outside world.

Now, medical personnel will have to perform 14-day duty. During this period, she/he will be active-quarantined instead of going home, stay at a facility arranged by administration and work in hospital. After service period is over, she/he will be home-quarantined for two days, if tested negative and resume work in non-Covid wards from Day 17. Only those will be passive-quarantined who are directly exposed to risk like breach in PPE kit.

The frontline workers of three premier institutes cited two reasons for opposing the new rules.

One, working in PPE kits for long hours is physically taxing as it generates heat, hence 14-day duty at a stretch in Covid-19 ward will be exhaustive both mentally and physically, they said.

Two, since incubation period of virus is 5-14 days, scientifically a personnel should be passive-quarantined for two weeks to be sure that she/he has not acquired infection during the service period and does not pose risk to anybody on resuming normal life. However, as per new rules, if a worker is sent home after service period and resumes duty in non-covid wards two days after, it will put both her/his family members including elderly and children as well as non-covid patients at risk, they added.

Directors of SGPGI and RMLIMS sought a day’s time from their respective resident doctors to speak to the government.

SGPGI RDA general secretary Dr Anil Gangwar said “Since we got no communication till late evening, we will wear black bands to work from Saturday.” RML Nursing Association president Amit Sharma said “We will stay in hospital and no go home, if demand is not met.”

KGMU employees’ association president Pradeep Gangwar said they too will protest if rules are imposed.


