New mother tests positive, baby well, but 12 doctors & medical staff quarantined
2020-05-11
Pune: A 27-year-old woman, who delivered through an emergency C-section at DY Patil Medical College, Hospital and Research Centre in Pimpri last week, tested positive for Covid-19 five days after her delivery. 

The baby, a boy, did not catch the virus. However, 12 doctors and staff members of the medical college have been screened and put under home quarantine. 

Hospital authorities said the mother and the baby were moved to Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial Hospital in Chinchwad after the test results. 

“She developed fever on the first post-operation day. By the third day, the symptoms had worsened and she was getting breathless. We conducted a test which came back positive on the fifth day. She had no symptoms before the C-section done in an emergency situation as the baby was in distress,” they added. 

Twelve staff members, including gynaecologists and paediatricians, were screened. “ All three gynaecologists have tested negative while we are awaiting reports for the others. All have been placed under home quarantine for two weeks,” the authorities added. 

Gynaecologist Mahesh Asalkar said the mother was doing well and will undergo treatment 14 days. “We have had several new mothers who have tested positive for the virus. Most delivered at other hospitals and were brought to YCM after testing positive,” he added. 

Child specialist at the hospital Deepali Ambike said the baby tested negative and was sent home with family members and a “maushi” after a short stay in the NICU. The mother could not breastfeed the baby as there were chances of contracting the virus. “We have advised formula to feed the baby till the mother recovers.”

According to Ambike, the youngest COVID-19 patient in the hospital is a nearly two-month old baby, who was delivered at the Terna Medical College.

“The baby started developing fever and tested positive. Later, the mother tested positive followed by other members of the family. They seem to have returned from some other location where they had contracted the virus. The baby now has no signs or symptoms of the virus. We saw that babies have better immunity against the virus. Some studies have been conducted in Wuhan, similar research is needed here,” Ambike said. 


