Goa: New SOP akin to surrendering to Covid-19, worried citizens say
2020-05-26
PANAJI: Citizens are wary of Goa’s revised standard operating procedure (SOP) for travellers that came into effect from Monday. They fear that the state may witness a further rise in cases as most travellers are likely to opt for home quarantine instead of spending on Covid-19 tests.


As per the new SOP, all entrants to the state will have the option of providing a Covid-negative certificate from a laboratory approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). 

“Testing has to be absolutely mandatory. Only those testing negative for Covid-19 ought to have been home quarantined. The tweaking of SOPs is not right. We now run a grave danger of community transmission,” city physician Dr Oscar Rebelo says.

Chief minister Pramod Sawant said the test should be conducted 48 hours before arrival in the state. Those who do not have such a certificate can either pay Rs 2,000 to get a Covid-19 test, or be home-quarantined for 14 days.

Incidentally, of the 67 Covid cases reported in Goa till Sunday, 66 patients had travel history. 

“Everyone has set their sights on business. The central and state governments want to give the economy a push without the slightest thought of how Goa will manage the situation if there is a rise in cases. I am worried,” a senior government doctor says. 

Subhas Salkar, general secretary at the Indian Red Cross Society, Goa, says the state’s new SOP “is nothing but surrendering to the Covid-19 situation”. He is also apprehensive that the options given to travellers may cause community transmission of the virus, which the state has so far been able to contain by testing all visitors till Sunday.

While the relaxation of travel restrictions is likely to help restart the tourism industry — which has been the biggest casualty of the pandemic in the state — stakeholders are concerned. “The government’s decision is hasty and untimely. By opening our borders, we are heading towards a scary situation. The government must rethink and modify the SOP so that all are tested,” John Lobo, a shack operator, says. 

Former president of the Travel and Tourism Association of Goa, Savio Messias, concurs. He says there has been a lack of application of mind in the formulation of the new procedure.

Many have also been questioning the state’s preparedness in dealing with Covid-19 during the fast-approaching monsoon, when flu cases increase.

“Nobody knows how the coronavirus will behaves during rains. I would like to know from the government how it plans to fight the pandemic during the rains. For now, it seems to be in a haste to resume economic activities by allowing easy access to travellers,” Amelia Fernandes, a citizen from South Goa, says.

