New Covid officer for S’kulam dist after positive cases
2020-04-26
Vijayawada: Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy directed officials to post a new officer for Srikakulam district, where coronavirus positive cases were reported this week.

Speaking to the ministers and officials on the medical and health initiatives by the state government to combat Covid-19, at the camp office on Saturday, the chief minister expressed concern over the spread of the virus to Srikakulam district, which hadn’t recorded any cases till now. 

CM Jagan directed officials to find out the reason for the positive cases reported from the district despite a lockdown being in place and the health initiatives taken by the government.

The CM directed the officials to post a special officer to Srikakulam district, who should monitor Covid operations and ensure that the the virus does not spread further. He said that Srikakulam district had not seen positive cases for all these days and wanted to know the reasons for its spread to this district.

The CM also directed officials to convert the district headquarters hospital at Kurnool into a Covid hospital in view of the increasing positive cases in the district. He also directed officials to speed up the process of establishing village clinics across the state. He wanted the officials to open new laboratories to test for Covid cases wherever labs are unavailable. The CM stressed on the need to increase the medical and health infrastructure to meet Covid requirements now and in the future too. 

The officials told the chief minister that they have conducted 6,928 tests in one day and with this, the state had conducted 61,266 tests so far. The state tops the list in the country with 1,147 tests conducted for every million people in the population, the officials told the chief minister.

Chief minister Jaganmohan Reddy reviewed the mobile rythu bazaars and availability of vegetables to the people during the lockdown in the state. He told officials to plan to continue these janata bazaars even after the lockdown.

Ministers Botsa Satyanarayana, Kurasala Kanna Babu, chief secretary Nilam Sawhney, medical and health special chief secretary KS Jawahar Reddy and other officials were present at the review meeting. 


