New schools of thought emerge for education in a post-pandemic era
2020-05-07
NEW DELHI: During an online session Tania Joshi, principal of The Indian School, was asked when classes would resume. Joshi wished she could answer the question. Other school principals too have faced similar questions. They have no concrete responses to these queries, but of one thing they are sure: institutions will not be the same once they reopen after the Covid lockdown. For one, student life is the antithesis of social distancing, so in the post-pandemic era, the schools may have to implement steps like classes on rotation basis, increased online lessons, cancellation of activities like annual functions and daily sanitisation of buildings and transport.

“Until there is a remedy for the coronavirus infection, schools no doubt will have to practise social distancing. The whole idea of a school as a brick-and-mortar structure will change,” confirmed Ameeta Mulla Wattal, principal, Springdales School, Pusa Road. “This will require extensive and exhaustive changes in procedures and protocols.” Wattal surmised that students could be required to come in rotation, one group for three days of a week, another for the remaining days. There will also be a blend of learning from home, classroom and online.

With most city schools having around 3,000 students on the rolls, and 45-50 children per classroom, the staggered attendance seems most viable to most educationists. Ashok Pandey, director, Ahlcon Group of Schools, added, “Children coming to school will mean new protocols in place. The first such protocol will be social distancing. So schools have to work out how to run with X number of students while following social distancing. This can only be possible if fewer students come to school and the rest stay at home. But the protocols have to ensure that children at home learn in tandem with those in the classroom.”

The other mechanism that most school heads are agreed on in the post-pandemic months is the cancellation or scaling down of large gatherings. “We have to be extra cautious. We must avoid huge gatherings like parent-teacher meetings, assemblies, sports day and the annual function. It is going to be tough, but we have to design activities in a manner that minimises crowding,” noted Suman Kumar, principal, Bluebells School International.

Alongside, however, there is concern that distancing will have a negative psychological effect on the students. This might lead to increased hiring of nurses and counsellors in schools. Wattal believes that as the institution transform to cope with the new realities, “we have to be careful about student issues such as rage, bullying, behavioural problems, alienation and irritability among students”.

Looming over such concerns is also the more demanding imperative of completing the syllabus and academic programmes. “We will have to create a balance and ensure that children do not feel pressured,” suggested Joshi. “Meeting the yearly syllabus till Class VIII is not an issue. Online learning will help and we might have to continue with it.” She added, “The institution heads are waiting for a little clarity in the situation before drafting new school policies.”


