New tools to help India Inc battle pandemic
2020-04-22
Chennai: Sensing a business oppurtunity, consultancy firms are readying a range of cost management tools to help companies battle the pandemic. These have gained importance, as corporates shift focus from growth to being solvent.And the industry is calling it the new normal. Top consultancy firms like Bain, EY, Deloitte and Kearney are helping Indian companies to negotiate this new normal with specific products focussed on these needs. “We are helping clients simultaneously pursue “Act Now” or ‘Protect’, which relates to actions for business continuity and “Plan Now” or ‘Recover and Retool for the new normal’. The “Plan Now” model incorporates multiple tools such as scenario planning, consumer behaviour and channel insights, e-commerce acceleration and digital marketing, supply chain reinvention, M&A and partnerships” etc. In the new normal scenario, corporate leadership is interested in “securing the current” even as they think “deeply” about future “possibilities”, said Joydeep Bhattacharya, partner, Bain & Company. The common themes that top OEM and supplier priority list are immediate liquidity, people safety and the supply chain. “The linear nature of traditional supply is bothering everyone in the industry due to the Tier-2 & Tire-3 challenges of survival, whilst on the other side of the spectrum OEMs and Tier-1 suppliers will mostly be resilient,” said Vinay Raghunath, partner and leader, automotive sector, EY India.Already consultants are offering specific help with this. Take Deloitte which is assisting an industrial products company crank out a flexible supply chain model that’s less dependent on mid-sized companies who are under severe strain in the lockdown. The solution, said PS Easwaran , partner and leader supply chain, Deloitte India, is a “focus segmented supply chain model”. EY, will work with organisations to set-up control towers for better visibility of the supply chain, flow of products, inventory status, etc. which will enable companies to “make informed decisions to ensure 