New quarantine rule fills up MLA Hostel, 2 share a room now
2020-03-31
Nagpur: Two quarantined persons are now sharing rooms at the MLA Hostel, which was converted into the city’s first quarantine facility on March 13 in view of the novel coronavirus spread.

So far, building number 2 with 160 rooms was mostly utilized to isolate international passengers landing at Nagpur airport. The flyers were kept for 48 hours, and after screening and negative test results were advised 14-day home quarantine with a stamp on the hand.

State PWD had also kept building number 3 with 60 rooms available for quarantine facility.

The rooms started filling up fast after a couple of policy revisions in the last 10 days. First, a decision was taken to compulsorily hold back flyers from outside Nagpur district, as health officials were not able to monitor them. Last week, it was decided to keep all close contacts of positive Covid-19 patients at MLA Hostel even if they test negative.

As on date, 204 suspects are quarantined at MLA Hostel. As per district information officer, samples of 82 suspects were taken on Monday. The suspects are being kept in different wards of Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) and Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). On Tuesday, those testing negative would be sent to MLA Hostel as per the new decision by city administration. The decision was taken to leave no chance of community spread, and keep situation under control as far as possible.

Hence, MLA Hostel will see around 250 suspects in a day while it has only 220 rooms available.

An official said the beds would be kept at a distance when rooms are shared. “Many of them are here for more than 8 days and are asymptomatic. As per the prevailing rush of suspects, it was decided to accommodate two persons in one room with all the precautions. In some cases, those in good health may be dropped home with the advice of self-isolation,” the official said.

The administration is planning to augment capacity of quarantine facility to around 10,000. Besides MLA Hostel, Vanamati, Nag Bhavan and Ravi Bhavan too have been kept ready.


