Coronavirus in Kolkata: Next 8-10 days critical in fight against disease, says doctors
2020-03-19
KOLKATA: The first confirmed Covid-19 case in Kolkata could be followed by several more over the next 8-10 days as the city enters the critical third phase of the outbreak that has claimed three lives across the country so far, felt virologists and experts. As more and more people reach the city form the affected areas, the task of controlling transmission will turn increasingly challenging. The silver lining is that till Tuesday, the city had managed to maintain a clean slate, so, the number of affected may remain low, doctors said.


According to Belle Vue Clinic internal medicine consultant Rahul Jain, maintaining social distance could be the key to restricting transmission of the coronavirus, which now lurks in Kolkata. “Keeping away from theatres, malls, large gatherings and any other crowd should be the first step. Secondly, take basic safety measures like covering your face while coughing, using tissue papers, sanitizers. Now that the virus has reached the city, exposure to infected people could be the most common mode of transmission. If we manage to segregate the potential carriers from the rest, chances of transmission will be minimized,” Jain said.

 
TimesViewThe response to the first cases will determine how Kolkata copes with this new disease. All government- and experts-recommended precautions must be followed. A single misstep and example of irresponsible behaviour can put the entire community at risk. 
By the end of next week, Kolkata may have 15 confirmed cases, said Fortis Hospital pulmonologist Raja Dhar. “As more people return from the affected zones and the incubation period of the virus comes to an end, more are likely to show symptoms and get diagnosed,” Dhar said.
 
 
 
He added that while the number of cases may now rise, there an ‘explosion’ is unlikely. “While we could be heading for the worst phase, it is unlikely to be a very bad one. So far, Kolkata and the rest of the state had no positive case, which means we go into this phase with an advantage. A lockdown is already in place, which will make it easy to prevent transmission,” added Dhar.

AMRI Hospital consultant Debashish Saha agreed. “The first Kolkata patient contracted the virus abroad, which means we have been able to check local transmission so far. But now we need to step up vigil and conduct tests faster and across more centres so that all suspected patients can be screened and isolated,” he said.

While the lockdown should help to flatten the virus’ rising curve, the fact that the Kolkata teen — who tested positive on Tuesday — had reportedly been out in the open for two days after his arrival has raised the chances of transmission, pointed out an infectious diseases expert. 

The basic guidelines need to be followed more diligently now, according to RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS) consultant Arindam Biswas. “Now that the virus is at our doorstep, we can’t take any more chances. We need to identify all the people who came in contact with the infected individual. All of them have now turned potential carriers and may end up spreading the virus,” said Biswas.

