Next week critical for Bhopal, says state’s Covid-19 team lead
2020-03-22
BHOPAL: “For Bhopal, the next week is critical to break the chain of COVID-19 spread. Everyone should take responsibility and stay at home. No just for a day on Sunday, but for longer duration,” said COVID-19 task force team lead and Gandhi Medical College (GMC) pulmonologist, Dr Parag Sharma, here on Saturday.

Report of 17 samples of suspected COVID-19 patients is awaited.

Experts like Dr Sharma stress that the contagion chain needs to be broken at the beginning stages. The only way to manage and avoid an outbreak is social distancing. “COVID-19 has entered MP. We need to take drastic measures. The more positive cases, the higher the risk,” he added.

As a measure to keep, healthcare workers safe, effective from Sunday, all non-essential elective surgeries stand postponed in tertiary care hospitals from Monday till March 31. The advisory is from the Union government and adopted by state government.

Furthermore, in Bhopal about 250 people who have a foreign travel history to COVID-19 impacted nations, are under observation by health department and tracked by police, said Bhopal collector, Tarun Pithode. “All the measures are proactive to keep the city safe from COVID-19,” he said. A non-functional medical college has been taken over by the district administration as a makeshift ‘quarantine and treatment facility’. Located in Kolar area, it has a 300-bed capacity.

All hospitals have been instructed to carry out a preparedness drill on Sunday. Guidelines for this drill will be made available by the Union health ministry.

Non-essential audits of hospitals by various regulators and accreditation agencies may be postponed. All hospitals must provide treatment free of cost to any medical personnel who pick up infection while treating patients. No suspected COVID 19 patient should be turned away from any hospital and the admission of any such patient should be notified to NCDC or IDSP immediately, it said.

