Next fortnight to contain spread of coronavirus in Karnataka, say experts
2020-03-21
BENGALURU: The weekend and the next couple of weeks will likely decide which way the Covid-19 situation would head in Karnataka, experts and officials say. Social distancing is the key to break the spread of the virus and the statewide lockdown will be put to the test during these days, experts say.


Health department officials fear social interactions by those who should remain in home isolation could undermine efforts of the government. A top bureaucrat said though the upcoming weekend closure is required, the tempo needs to be sustained. “But our concern is after the Sunday shutdown, people should not take to the streets in large numbers the next day,” he added.

Dr V Ravi, professor and head, department of neurovirology, Nimhans, said Karnataka’s preparations kicked in much earlier than during previous viral outbreaks.

“This is the first time we prepared early,” Ravi said. “How effective the measures will be is everybody’s responsibility and not the government's alone. Unless people own responsibility, we cannot be assured that the state would overcome the situation. People must avoid crowding and not go out when not required.”

Health and family welfare department officials are holding confabulations on the way ahead to contain the spread of the virus. “So far, there have not been cases of community spread,” an official said. “But we need to make sure we overcome the problems at the earliest. All those who have come from abroad and primary and secondary contacts of persons who test positive must stay put and behave responsibly.”

A senior official with the department said stamping on hands of those returning from abroad should have been started earlier for better impact. “Now that we have not done it, we should ideally be going in search of all those 42,000 persons who returned to Karnataka in the last 14 days and stamp their hands. That's to make sure they remain in home isolation and do not step out. But this is a mammoth task. It’s virtually impossible to do,” he said.

Health experts reiterate the need of the hour is to remain at home and not to venture outside. “However tempting it may be to travel around, it is more important to help oneself and everyone around by staying at home this weekend. Cook, read, tele chat with friends and tele-consult your doctor if needed, but stay home. We must all do our bit to support the government’s efforts at containment,” Dr Sunita Maheshwari, vision group member, health and medical education, Karnataka, said. 


