NGOs join battle to combat coronavirus in tigerlands
2020-03-25
Nagpur: Even as cities have geared up to tackle novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak, NGOs working in the buffer zone of tiger reserves are also doing their lot to screen villagers for symptoms and to spread awareness about the dreaded infection.

In a major awareness and health check-up camp for tribals, Satpuda Foundation, an NGO working for tiger conservation in Central India, screened 300 residents of six villages in the buffer zone of Pench Tiger Reserve (PTR), Maharashtra.

A unique mobile health service (MHS) of Satpuda Foundation is helping tribal villagers of Pench by educating them about the dos and don’ts to save themselves from acquiring coronavirus infection. The MHS, which was launched to serve locals living around the reserve in January 2014, has come handy during the novel coronavirus outbreak.

“Though Section 144 has been imposed in Nagpur and academic institutions have been closed down, health sector staffers are serving day and night in this critical situation,” said Kishor Rithe, president of Satpuda Foundation. Satpuda’s mobile health service has conducted health camps and offered medical assistance to 300 patients from six villages — Wagholi, Sillari, Khursapar, Sawara, Khapa and Ghoti.

“Those suffering from fever and cough were particularly worried about the possibility of having coronavirus infection. However, it was found that people there suffered from routine fever and cough,” said Dr Manohar Khode, who is serving the tribals for more than 20 years in Melghat, after the health camps.

“The MHS, which is also spreading awareness on dos and don’ts to prevent spread of coronavirus, has treated around 70,000 patients in the last six years and also offered further support for surgeries, eye operations and dental extractions. Medicine is also being distributed for free,” said Rithe.

Satpuda’s conservation officer Mandar Pingle, Bandu Uike and Dilip Lanjewar informed that in the second phase similar screenings will be done from March 23 in six villages in the buffer zone of Pench on Madhya Pradesh side.

Similarly, in the buffer zone of Melghat Tiger Reserve (MTR), Dr Ashish Satav’s MAHAN (Meditation, Addiction, Health, AIDS and Nutrition), an NGO providing preventive and curative medical facilities to tribals, also screened many villagers for coronavirus-like symptoms in the last 20 days.

Dr Satav said, “Our team is spreading awareness among tribals from 35 villages in the tiger reserve buffer. Two villagers having corona-like symptoms were referred to Amravati, but these patients tested negative.”

“We are creating massive awareness on precautions to be taken as many villagers are still unaware about the repercussions of the deadly virus. They have also been told not to leave their homes or go outstation,” said Dr Satav.


