Ngp, 2 Vid districts red zones; lockdown may not end on May 3
2020-04-17
NAGPUR: Nagpur district with 58 Covid-19 positive cases, Buldana (21) and Yavatmal (13) have been identified as red zones — hotspot districts with large outbreaks — by the Union ministry of health and family welfare. 

Amravati (4 cases) has been identified as hotspot district with cluster outbreak while Akola (14), Gondia (1) and Washim (1) are among non-hotspot districts reporting cases.

The classification has been done to focus attention on districts and cities reporting large number of cases or high growth rate. 

However, as compared to total cases in Mumbai (2,073) and Pune (463), the seven Covid-19 affected districts of Vidarbha have collectively reported just 113 cases over one month. As per the ministry notification, districts collectively contributing more than 80% cases are grouped as red zones.

To qualify as green zone, Nagpur and rest of the districts will have to ensure no new cases are reported for 28 days in a row.

After 14 days of no-positive cases, the red zone will turn into orange. This means all non-essential movements in all seven districts may extend beyond May 3.

The next 14 days would be crucial for Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) and civic bodies of Buldhana and Yavatmal, as reporting of new cases has been linked to effectiveness of containment operations.

“Containment operations would be deemed over when there is no case reported in 28 days from an area after last case tests negative. Hotspots (designated red zones) will be assumed to be undertaking effective containment activities, if no case is reported in next 14 days (designated orange zones), and will be deemed successful in containment, if no case is reported for 28 days (designated green zones),” the ministry notification states.

Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar said citizens will play a big role in a hotspot shift from red to orange and subsequently to green zone. “Containment measures are in force. To stop transmission, people must strictly follow guidelines of staying indoors, maintain personal hygiene and social distancing,” he said.

Nagpur IMA president Dr Kush Jhunjhunwala said this is the right way. “Maharashtra is one of the states with the highest number of corona cases in India. Nagpur is among the districts collectively contributing to more than 80% cases of the state. The only way to break chain of transmission is lockdown,” he said.

Resident deputy collector Ravindra Khajanchi said Nagpur district is in red zone because the number of cases is over 50. “We did not send any report to the centre but it did the job itself on the basis of numbers. If there is a gap of 15 days with no new cases, then we will be out of the red zone,” he said.

Buldhana district collector Suman Rawat Chandra too said the district will be declared out of red zone if there are no new positive cases for 28 days in succession.


