NHRC team inspects handling of Covid-19 situation at Lok Nayak Hospital
2020-06-12
NEW DELHI: Following complaints of mismanagement in handling Covid-19 situation in the capital, a team of National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) visited Lok Nayak Hospital on Thursday for an on-spot inspection. It is the biggest dedicated Covid-19 facility under Delhi government.


The team, led by NHRC member Jyoti Kalra, interacted with hospital administration, doctors, staff and attendants of the patients, visited the emergency and the wards having beds for Covid patients.

“The team was informed that no serious patient was denied admission. Only those with serious condition were being admitted, while others with mild symptoms were being advised home quarantine. The hospital administration claimed that they are being referred patients by various doctors without any proper protocol,” NHRC said in the statement on complaints of patients being denied admission and treatment.

“The team also found several beds lying vacant. The hospital administration said that equipment like dialysis machines and ventilators have also been kept ready for any exigencies. About 23% of doctors and para-medical staff has been kept ready for deployment on need basis,” said an NHRC official.

On the complaints of delay in shifting of dead bodies, the hospital administration claimed it could be because of problems in lifts on some occasions.

The NHRC team, however, said that the hospital was required to put up visible notice boards giving directions to patients and their attendants at the entry gate with the telephone number of an official who can guide the families and facilitate them.

Kalra said the idea behind NHRC’s visit was to plug loopholes in the functioning of hospitals and not just find faults. “A detailed report will be prepared and submitted to the commission shortly,” she said.

On complaint of senior Congress leader Ajay Maken, NHRC had earlier sent notices to the Union health and family welfare ministry and Delhi government over the Covid-19 situation and asked them to submit a report within 10 days on arrangements and facilities at hospitals and care centres.

