Covid-19: She tweaks popular logos to promote social distancing
2020-03-24
BENGALURU: An Amul advertisement sans the chubby little girl, the Nirma ad without the girl swirling in a pretty white frock and the Starbucks logo where the twin-tailed mermaid is missing. All these and more, captioned: Everyone around the world has gone home, why are you still here?


A campaign by Ananya Bashyam, 18, a first-year student of National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), on social distancing is gaining popularity. In the campaign, she tweaks popular advertisements/logos to spread the message of social distancing.

 
TimesViewIn a thickly populated country like ours, the concept of social distancing needs extra emphasis. Ananya’s off-beat campaign can help convey the message, especially among the younger crowd, a significant section of which has probably not grasped the severe implications of Covid-19. In the world of millennials, anything that’s quirky is cool and fashionably doable too. This young messenger has devised a novel way to ride on popular logos to draw attention to a way of life that wasn’t a part of our social DNA till yesterday. 

 
 

“I realised Gen Z can’t relate to most of the government advisories. Millennials do not listen if they are just given a list of rules to follow. They need humour to notice things. Even the colour palette and the artwork that the older generation likes need not resonate with youngsters. They should be quirky and relatable to things that we grow with. That’s how I took to these extremely classic Indian logos,” said Ananya.

With the campus shutting and students being asked to leave in the wake of Covid-19 outbreak, Ananya, who is from Hyderabad, is back home. “I am loaded with class work. But when work on the Adobe software gets too much, I shift to other stuff as a stressbuster. I have been working on comics and recently visited the Indian Cartoon Gallery. So, all these were playing on my mind when I had this epiphany of redoing the classic logos. It became popular with my friends,” added Ananya.

Thus far, the youngster has done five logos — Amul, Nirma, Starbucks, Asian Paints and Looney Tunes. “When it comes to animation, the So Sorry series is my favourite and I draw inspiration from that,” she added.

Ananya is displaying her works on Instagram. NIFT Bangalore director Susan Thomas tweeted about her work saying: “My brilliant student @BengaluruNIFT ananya did this visual creative urging all to go home.”

