Niloufer nurse tests positive for coronavirus, family isolated
2020-04-29
HYDERABAD: A 32-year-old nurse working at Niloufer Hospital tested positive after returning home from work on Monday evening. The nurse tested positive in a second round examination. By the time the nurse was conveyed the test results, she had prepared lunch and fed her two children at her village in Rangareddy district. Authorities have placed 12 contacts of her under quarantine and shifted the nurse to Gandhi Hospital. 


After performing duties at the isolation ward in the Niloufer hospital between April 16 to April 26, the nurse returned to her house in Proddutur village of Shankarpally mandal in Rangareddy district on Monday afternoon for a five-day break. After coming home, the nurse had fed her two children and also her husband who is an auto driver. 

In the evening, authorities informed her that her samples tested positive for Covid-19 and shifted her to Gandhi Hospital for treatment. “A two-month-old baby who was undergoing treatment at Niloufer Hospital had tested positive for coronavirus on April 17 and later succumbed while undergoing treatment at Gandhi hospital on April 19. One of the security guards who was working at Niloufer Hospital, tested positive for Covid-19 on April 23. The nurse tested positive in the second sample collected on April 25. Her test for the first sample had come negative,” said an official from the Cyberabad police commissionerate.

Police who are entrusted with tracking contacts of Covid-19 patients, suspect that the nurse contracted the virus from the security guard at the hospital. After the nurse tested positive, authorities placed 12 of her primary contacts from three families, including her husband and two children in Proddutur village, under quarantine. Cops have cordoned off the colony in Proddutur village where the nurse’s family resides.

“About 100 houses comprising 400 people have been cordoned off and placed under containment zone. Health officials will conduct door-to-door checks. Revenue authorities have been providing the residents with food, vegetables and other essential items,” said a Chevella police official. Nampally police said that staff at Niloufer Hospital have already been tested and those who tested positive have been shifted to Gandhi Hospital.


