Nimbahera wins the battle against Covid within a mth
2020-06-01
Udaipur: Nimbahera, a town with a population of about 70,000, which was grappling with the Covid-19 pandemic a few weeks ago, was declared corona-free on Saturday. 

The recovered patients in the cement town also received a heart touching letter from the district magistrate himself. The officer wished each one of them good health with a rose, and advised them to maintain social distance, follow SUMAN-K handwash technique and to share personal experience with others so as to motivate them not to take life for granted.

As Chetan Deora, collector, Chittorgarh declared the town corona-free on Saturday, people rejoiced with a sigh of relief.

The town had lived under great fears as it was under curfew and containment simultaneously after the first positive case was reported on April 26.

“It was a blind case since the trader had been meeting everyone for almost 10 ten days after being infected and within a few hours after he was tested positive, he had to be put on ventilator. His house was in a congested lane and we knew the virus had by then infected many,” Deora told TOI.

The administration and police department worked on the ‘dug out theory’ to find and scan close contacts of the trader and as they feared, almost 90% of the cases turned out from the single source. One by one 162 people were found positive till May 19. Rigorous sampling was adopted as 5,542 samples were tested which constitutes almost 8% of the town’s population.

“We did not hesitate in taking samples despite knowing that more tests would mean more turnout of positive patients,” he said. Initially, the patients were sent to Udaipur govt hospital, but when the latter refused to take in more cases due to overload, the Chittorgarh administration had to find other ways. “We created two Covid care centres (CCC) for infected patients. It was beneficial as the viral load was minimum on CCC which helped in speedy recovery,” Deora said. Every quarantined person in the town was given a special kit consisting of 20ltrs water camper, glass, sanitiser, mask, towel, bucket-mug, soap, tooth paste-brush, hair oil, and dustbin.

Step Down Centre (SDC) was another innovative step that was only implemented in Nimbahera in Rajasthan. “We introduced the concept of SDCs where the Covid patients discharged from CCC, after two consecutive negative test reports were kept. Medically recovered persons were kept in these SDCs for seven days. The purpose was to provide them a stress-free atmosphere, engage them in creative activities and also ensure proper quarantine,” Deora added.

Since May 19, no new positive case has been reported while two consecutive reports have been tested negative for all the infected patients. Of the 162 patients, two died whereas 160 recovered completely.


