Nine new cases take Goa’s Covid-19 count to 22
2020-05-18
PANAJI: The state’s Covid-19 count shot up to 22 on Sunday as nine new cases — all with travel history — were detected. While eight of them arrived in the state by train from Maharashtra, one, a pharma employee from Karnataka, entered Goa by road. “They all are under treatment at the Covid hospital, and their condition is fine,” said health director Jose D’Sa. However, late on Sunday night, four more rail passengers tested positive on the TrueNat test, and their samples are now awaiting confirmation. 

Over the past 48 hours, Goa has received over 500 train passengers, with 368 arriving on Sunday on a Rajdhani Express train. Passengers who alight at Goa are tested using TrueNat. Those passengers who test positive are re-tested for confirmation at the Goa Medical College’s (GMC) virology lab. Sunday’s ninth case, the pharma employee, entered Goa through the Mollem check post on May 14, and was in quarantine till his confirmatory test on Sunday came positive. 

A total of 997 samples were tested on Sunday, 527 of which were negative. Over 450 results were still awaited. “We expect an increase in the number of Covid cases,” said chief minister Pramod Sawant. “The test results of some rail passengers are awaited.” He said that confirmatory tests of some who tested positive on TrueNat are also awaited.

Earlier in the day, Sawant said that around 15 rail travellers have been placed in facility quarantine after their co-passenger tested positive. 

Meanhile, since the spike in cases in Goa is largely thanks to rail passengers, the CM expressed the need to control arrivals. He said the “biggest worry” for the state is people coming from beyond its borders, and called for the state to be alert.

There already seems to have been some success on their front. Sawant said that around 700 passengers were expected to arrive in Goa by rail. However, after the state government issued forms to passengers to collect data, and informed them that they would all be charged Rs 2,000 for the Covid-19 test, many people dropped out. “The number of arrivals reduced by 250,” he said.

Some rail passengers on Saturday were put up at Fatorda stadium, but after facing some problems, they were shifted to a hotel on Sunday. “It is a new protocol,” Sawant said. “Proper care will be taken of them.” 

A state official confirmed that facilities at the stadium were inadequate to handle so many people, and children and senior citizens suffered as a result. The rail passengers were made to stay at the stadium till their test results were known. Only those who tested negative were allowed to leave. Some suspects were transferred to facility quarantine. 


