Nine-day lockdown can be turning point against Covid-19, say experts
2020-03-23
NAGPUR: Citizens have welcomed chief minister Uddhav Thackeray’s move to extend the complete lockdown by another nine days with the exception of essential services. They feel it is much-needed and everybody must cooperate with the government because of the coronavirus crisis. According to medical professionals, the lockdown could be a turning point in the fight against Covid-19. 


Khamla resident Rajesh Sanghani, who owns a garment shop, said he is ready to cooperate with the government for even the next 15 days. “I love filter coffee at a particular South Indian restaurant in Gokulpeth. I am addicted to it and can’t stay without it. But I have no qualms as the lockdown is for a good cause. I’m ready to give up my favourite coffee for another 15 days. Everyone is serious. We have been seeing what happened in other countries. So if we have to do this for some days it shouldn’t be a problem,” he said. 

Medical store owner Yakub Fazal said, “It’s a good decision. It should be extended to the entire country because everyone is going to be affected. The government should come forward and help the poor and daily wagers who have no savings. It is much needed.” 

Laxmi Nagar resident Dhananjay Duragkar said coronavirus is dangerous and research is under way. “CM’s guidelines need to be followed. Safety comes first. Financial markets can be revived, but not human beings. The main threat that we face today is the threat of our existence. So far, our city’s administration has done well to control the situation. It is our duty to care for our own safety as well as the safety of others. The casual approach of other countries is a lesson for us. It is important to remain indoors as mush as possible,” he said. 

Pulmonologist, Dr Sameer Arbat, said, “In view of the events in Italy, it will be prudent for all of us to continue social distancing and isolation for at least a month or so till we get a grip over this pandemic. The decision of imposing section 144 is good and must be implemented very strictly.” 

Dr Sanjay Deshpande, a functionary of state IMA, said that a complete lockdown was necessary to control the spread of coronavirus. “This is the only way to stop this virus. It’s difficult for the mob mentality to accept a lockdown and stay at home for long periods of time. But we must follow this religiously. It’s for the greater good of people,” he said. 

Dr Sushant Meshram, HoD of pulmonary medicine at the Super Speciality Hospital, said that people should use this period to build their immunity. 

“The most important natural immunity booster is quality sleep. Deep and uninterrupted sleep will help a lot. Recent researches have shown that individuals who sleep less than six hours and voluntarily get exposed to the common cold virus are more prone to contracting diseases. Similarly, the population working in shifts has a disturbed circadian rhythm and hence, is also prone to developing diseases,” he said, adding that the lockdown will provide professionals with the opportunity to get good sleep. 

“I appeal to all the young professionals to ensure that they sleep well, eat well and maintain their health during the lockdown,” he added. 

Vice-president of Maharashtra Medical Council and paediatrician, Dr Vinky Rughwani, said the lockdown is a remarkable move and the only way to stop this pandemic. 

“Sunday’s Janata curfew has been a grand success. This proves that people have got the message loud and clear and are fully with the authorities to fight coronavirus with all their might. They will cooperate with the government for the additional lockdown too,” said Dr Rughwani. 


