Pune: Nine more travellers quarantined to rule out Covid-19
2020-03-08
PUNE: Nine more travellers were quarantined at the Pune Municipal Corporation’s Naidu hospital on Saturday after complains of minor illness, while the six individuals, who were isolated at the facility on Friday, have tested negative for the contagion.


“The newly admitted nine travellers had recently returned from novel coronavirus affected countries. They have minor illness in the form of cold, cough, fever and headache. Their throat swab samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology for testing,” Sajeev Wavare, assistant medical officer of health of the PMC, said.

A total of 96,493 passengers returning from China and other affected countries have been screened at the Mumbai airport since January 18. Of them, 516 travellers were put under 14-day surveillance in Maharashtra and 242 of them were quarantined in Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur, among other parts of the state, after they complained of flu-like symptoms.

A total 229 travellers tested negative for the infection and have been discharged. Reports of other quarantined travellers are awaited. 

Health officials have said family, friends, colleagues and other close contacts of the travellers who returned from the affected countries should report themselves to health officials in case of developing flu-like symptoms. 

Isolation ward at YCM hospital 

 The Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation body has started an isolation ward at the civic-run Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial (YCM) hospital in view of the Covind-19 scare, said municipal commissioner Shravan Hardikar.

Hardikar said, “We have given permission to 8 private hospital for creating isolation wards. Work of empanelling them is in progress.”

He said there was no cause for worry and people should not panic. “The Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) is fully prepared to handle the situation. If anyone has had a cold or cough for a prolonged duration or has come in contact with people who have returned from countries affected by coronavirus, they must consult a doctor,” Hardikar said.

He said the civic health facility has sufficient number of N95 masks to meet the needs of civic health department employees.

