Nine in isolation ward after treating COVID-19 patients
2020-03-24
Surat: Three staff members of Mahavir Hospital where COVID-19 claimed its first victim in the city a day ago have been kept in isolation ward of New Civil Hospital on Monday. Health officials of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) said the three staffers- a 26-year-old male, a 35-year-old male and a 36-year-old- of the private hospital have tested negative for coronavirus. They said test reports of the other six suspected patients of coronavirus also kept in the NCH’s isolation ward were awaited. A 38-year-old nurse from SMC’s SMIMER hospital, who resides in Navsari’s Billimora, was also among those shifted to the isolation ward of NCH. The others included a 59-year-old male from Parle Point, who had travelled to Haridwar, a 40-year-old woman from Bhatar with no travel history and a 22-year-old male from Lambe Hanuman Road with no travel history.A day after the janata curfew, people came out in large numbers in some parts of the city to purchase vegetables and groceries amid announcement of extension of lockdown until March 31 to check spread of the deadly virus. Municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani and police commisioner R B Brahmbhatt were out on the streets to ask people to stay indoors for their own benefit.“We appeal to the residents to stay at home. They should get out of their houses to purchase vegetables and groceries between 12pm and 4pm only,” Banchhanidhi Pani said."On Monday, a person who has been home quarantined in Mota Varachha area violated the mandatory rule and hence an FIR has been lodged against him. A total of 44 people were fined for spitting in public and Rs22,000 fine collected from them. Till now, a total of 1,343 people have been penalized for spitting in public places and fine of Rs6.71 lakh collected from the violators. SMC has carried out disinfectant activities at 885 places in the city,'' Pani added.The civic body chief said community monitoring through toll free numbers was proving helpful in the fight against COVID-19. We have given a toll free number through which local residents can inform us about people who have returned from abroad or are suspected patients of COVID-19."On Monday, SMC received information about 64 people via toll free numbers and the total so far was 254,” Pani said.