Surat: Nine suspected patients of COVID-19 admitted in NCH
2020-03-27
SURAT: Two healthcare staffers of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC)-run SMIMER hospital and Mahavir Hospital and seven other people with suspected symptoms of COVID-19 were admitted in the isolation ward of New Civil Hospital (NCH) here on Thursday.


The healthcare staffers were a 24-year-old woman employee of SMIMER hospital and a 58-year-old male staffer of Mahavir Hospital.

A 65-year-old male from Variavi Bazaar in central zone, having travel history to Delhi; a 23-year-old male from Adajan, having travel history to Hyderabad; a 28-year-old male from Pandesara, with no travel history; a 54-year-old woman from Ghod Dod Road, with no travel history; a 60-year-old woman from Adajan, with travel history to Rajkot and Amreli; a 30-year-old woman from Bhatar, with travel history to Vadodara; and a 54-year-old woman from City Light, with travel history to Turkey, were among others to be admitted in the isolation ward of NCH.

Dr Ashish Naik, deputy municipal commissioner (health and hospitals), said, “Now, we are beginning to get suspected cases from people with no travel history to foreign countries too. Samples of all these new patients at NCH have been sent for laboratory tests. Their reports are expected to come soon.”

Meanwhile, SMC has decided to allow some malls and shops selling essential items to remain open for 24 hours in different locations of the city to avert crowding. 

Municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani has chalked out a plan along with civic officials to ensure uninterrupted supplies to people after a meeting with retailers, mall owners and wholesellers on Thursday.

"This will help people to buy their groceries and other essential items with ease. There will be no long queues anywhere. We urge people to maintain social distancing and stay at home to protect themselves from COVID-19,” Pani said.

SMC officials said shops and malls will follow a system which will ensure that people maintain distance from each other. Also, local courier agencies have agreed to deliver vegetables from Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) to residents in the city.

"From Thursday, we have allowed 180 vegetable vendors inside 216 housing societies in the city,” the municipal commissioner said.

