Ninth Covid-19 death in Agra, as tally now 371
2020-04-26
AGRA: A 55-year-old woman of Tajganj died of Covid-19 in Agra on Saturday, taking the city's toll to nine. Also, 25 new cases were reported in the district, taking the tally to 371. In neighbouring Firozabad, eight new cases were reported, with total cases now 83.

According to health department, the 55-year-old woman succumbed due to respiratory failure. She had tested positive for Covid-19 on April 23.

Earlier on Friday, a 35-year-old salesman of Tajganj, who succumbed due to respiratory failure on Tuesday, was also found corona positive. So far, officially, seven patients infected with Covid-19 died in SN Medical College, while two died at NH-2-based private hospital - which has reported over 90 corona cases.

The localities from where the new cases surfaced on Saturday were Mustafa Quarter, Namner, Kazi Para, Balkeshwar, Narayach, Albatiya, Khati Para, Tajganj, Sikandra, Maithan, Nagla Maltona, Nala Badai Saiyad, Aajam Para, Dhuliya Ganj, Shastripuram, Khandari and village Kakua. 

Agra CMO Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified.”

Meanwhile, Agra mayor Naveen Jain sent a letter to CM Yogi Adityanath alleging "the district administration's inefficiency in the containment of Covid-19 and in providing essential services to the citizens during the lockdown". The mayor has requested the CM to take necessary action to check the increasing danger of Covid-19 in Agra and reduce inconvenience being faced by residents. In neighbouring Firozabad, district magistrate Chandra Vijay Singh said, “Six out of the fresh eight cases belong to Nehru Nagar Nai basti – which is mainly inhabited by labourers.”

According to health department, five Covid-19 patients of Nai Basti are from one family, while another one is their neighbour. In Mohalla Chau, a pregnant woman was tested positive, while in Ramgadh a 60-year-old was reported positive.

Amid the reports of rise in infection in Firozabad district, Tundla - which reported at least nine patients with contact links of Agra private hospital, is set to be declared "corona free", as majority of the patients had completed 14-day isolation period, said Firozabad DM.

Also, on the first day of the holy month of Ramzan, Firozabad police maintained a strict vigil and no gatherings were reported from any area.


