Nipah helped prepare better against Covid-19
2020-04-29
KOCHI: The experience of Nipah outbreak, which claimed 17 lives in 2018 and its relapse in June 2019, came handy for Kerala when the state started its fight against Covid-19 by January 2020 end. Training and preparations to prevent Nipah outbreak were the key factors which helped the state health department to face Covid-19 situation in the initial stage.


There was a stock of around 28,000 PPE kits and 50,000 N95 masks which were procured during Nipah outbreak. “This was enough for meeting the requirements in the first phase of Covid-19 in the state during January 25-March 5. Simultaneously, we started inquiries for procurement of equipment, testing kits and consumables required for diagnosis and treatment of Covid-19 patients,” said an official with Kerala Medical Services Corporation Ltd (KMSCL).

When the students from Wuhan returned to Kerala by the end of January 2020, authorities of government medical college, Ernakulam, could handle the situation without much embarrassment. “We could set up a 30-room isolation ward within five days. Devices to set up the isolation facility were kept in various departments of the medical college after use during Nipah period. We installed them in the isolation rooms,” said an official with government medical college, Ernakulam. “Moreover, the training imparted to us by various internationally- and nationally-acclaimed agencies during Nipah was also helpful,” the official added.

Initially, there were only four labs to test suspected Covid-19 cases in the state. Besides, shortage of machines for testing also created problems for the authorities. “More testing labs were installed and now there 14 labs which can conduct RT-PCR tests to diagnose Covid-19 cases. A total of 17 machines were taken from various laboratories in universities and shifted to newly set up labs. Some additional machines were purchased. Now, there are 45 machines at 14 RT-PCR labs across the state. KSMCL used its fleet for transporting the machines and drugs from various south Indian cities,” the KMSCL official said.

To popularize ‘break the chain campaign’, government procured a million 500ml bottles of hand sanitizers and supplied it to hospitals and other government institutions, he added.


