Bihar CM Nitish Kumar wants lockdown extension till May-end
2020-05-12
PATNA: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar on Monday suggested to PM Narendra Modi to extend the lockdown till the end of this month, so that the state government can take make arrangements for large inflow of migrant workers and other stranded persons returning from across the country. A significant number of migrant workers returning home have tested positive for Covid-19 so far. 

“Though we will accept whatever decision is taken by the Centre, but we would suggest extension of lockdown till this month end. This will allow us to identify the infected persons and safeguard others from the infection,” Nitish said in the videoconferencing session of the CMs of all states with the PM. He said relaxations have already been given for certain activities and steps are being taken for employment generation. 

Nitish said 179 special trains are slated to come to Bihar in the next seven days. “Arrangements of buses should also be made to bring migrant workers from nearby places. The process of sending back migrant workers willing to return from Bihar should be completed within next 7-8 days,” he said.

A minister in the Nitish government told TOI on condition of anonymity that the inflow of migrant workers is likely to continue for another 10-12 days and lifting the lockdown may worsen the situation. “While 102 special trains have come to Bihar so far, more such trains are expected in the coming days, including the 19 trains reaching the state on Tuesday. A substantial number of migrant workers, who returned from other states, have tested positive for Covid-19 so far. Thus, lifting the lockdown completely at this stage will not be a wise step,” the minister said.

He added: “We would like to extend the lockdown till all registered migrant workers and other stranded persons return to the state and are put in the quarantine centres.”

Sources in the health department said more than 180 migrant workers have tested positive for Covid-19 virus so far, including 30 out of 85 fresh cases on Sunday and around 40 of 50 cases on Monday. As per the railway records, total 1.2 lakh stranded migrant workers, students and other persons have returned to Bihar since May 2. 

Though Bihar government is for extending the lockdown, it may allow certain relaxations based on colour-coded zones. “We may allow relaxations as per the guidelines of Ministry of Home Affairs to allow some economic activities in the areas where minimal or no cases have been reported,” he said.


