Coronavirus scare: Revoke Section 144 in districts, says Bihar CM to officials
2020-03-17
PATNA: Unhappy with the “panic being spread” over coronavirus, chief Minister Nitish Kumar on Monday directed senior officials to revoke the imposition of Section 144 imposed in a few districts in the state. He also expressed “disappointment” after seeing masks being distributed in the Vidhan Sabha, saying this will create more panic.


A senior official said, “When the CM saw masks being distributed, he was disappointed and called JD (U) MLC Ramchandra Bharti, who had distributed those masks, to discuss the issue.”

He added, “The CM was of the opinion that such activities would lead to more panic among general public.”

Nitish even raised this issue inside the House. “Mask has become an issue now. One mask could be used for six to eight hours only. After using the mask it has to be properly disposed of. It should either be burnt, or buried inside the soil so that others do not get infected,” he said.

Later, talking to media outside the assembly, the CM said, “It is important to be alert, but don’t frighten people. It is important to be cautious, maintain distance and avoid gathering.”

Angry over the imposition of Section 144 in some districts, CM said he had asked officials to get it removed as this was also creating panic. “It is not a law and order situation and I have instructed to get it removed. Instead, awareness should be created among the general public,” said Nitish, adding, officials who had imposed Section 144 keeping in mind coronavirus had misunderstood the situation.

He requested those who had come from outside India to get themselves tested. When asked about the shortage of masks and sanitizers in the market and these products being sold at a costlier price, the CM said, “A few people have the habit of misusing such situations.”

To a media question about role of alcohol in getting rid of coronavirus, CM said, “Nothing is more disgusting than alcohol. World Health Organization did a survey in 2016 and stated various diseases because of alcohol. We should consider that report of WHO and this same organisation has even declared coronavirus as epidemic.”


