NMC turns 5 hosps, bungalow into Covid-19 centres
2020-05-21
Nagpur: After achieving reasonable success in containing Covid-19, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) is all set to treat positive patients. Five hospitals and health centres which were in a shambles are being converted into Dedicated Covid Health Centres (DCHC) with a capacity of 450-465 beds, including 50 in the ICU. 

The Surana Maternity Home in Sadar, which was being used as the official bungalow for over a decade, is set to be used again for patients.

Going by the communication from the central government, the state government had projected 11,114 cases in the city between May 15 and 31 and directed the administration to be ready with as many beds. 

Accordingly, the administration has to prepare Covid Care Centres (CCC) for asymptomatic corona positive patients, DCHCs for moderately severe patients and a Dedicated Covid Hospital (DCH) for severe patients.

To avoid pressure on state government-run hospitals and depend entirely on private ones, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe, chief medical officer Dr Yogendra Savai and additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar planned to develop NMC’s own DCHCs.

After the retirement of the additional municipal commissioner, Surana Maternity Home had become vacant. Work to develop it as a DCHC with 35 beds is nearing completion. The NMC’s Unani Hospital and Physiotherapy Centre is situated in the adjacent building and it will serve the same purpose.

Another major task taken up by the NMC is to convert a health centre at KT Nagar into a 130-bedded DCHC. Here, the ICU facility is also being developed. Residents have opposed the move.

NMC’s three hospitals — Indira Gandhi Rugnalaya (IGR) at LAD Square, Panchpaoli Maternity Home and Isolation Hospital at Rambagh — were in a shambles. Work to convert IGR into a 130 bedded-DCHC, including ICU, is nearing completion. The hospital is set to get a new look.

Similarly, the Panchpaoli Maternity Home will be a 110-bedded DCHC and is likely to be ready soon. The Isolation Hospital will be converted into a 60-bedded DCHC in a short period of time. Here too, the ICU facility is being developed.

The five hospitals, situated in different parts of the city, would come handy in case of a sudden spike in cases.

“The civic body-run Urban Primary Health Centres are in good condition. They were recently developed under the central government’s scheme. The hospitals were in bad shape and lacked proper facilities. After the end of Covid-19 epidemic, these hospitals will become a lifeline for thousands of patients who are now dependent on GMCH and IGGMCH,” NMC officials told TOI.

Another big challenge before the civic body would be to garner the required number of staff.

“We have identified the staff. They have been well trained to treat corona positive patients. All types of safety equipment is also being readied,” added the NMC officials.

The central government’s Rapid Response Team had credited the NMC for fewer casualties and cases in the city. The NMC had launched various innovative measures to contain the spread of Covid-19.


