Nagpur Municipal Corporation begins household drive to check Covid-19 cluster patients
2020-03-23
NAGPUR: To control Covid-19, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has launched a door-to-door containment drive in areas situated within 3km radius of the homes of four positive patients. 


The drive will check whether there are any clusters of Covid-19 patients and also whether people on home quarantine are complying with instructions.

NMC’s additional medical officer, Dr Bhavna Sonkusre, and assistant medical health officer, Dr Praveen Gantawar, said, “The city recorded four positive patients. The central government has directed us to conduct the containment drive within 3km radius of homes of positive patients. Four positive patients are from Laxmi Nagar and Dharampeth Zones. We may extend the survey up to 5-7km radius covering nearly 90,000 houses in these two zones.”

Giving more information regarding the drive, Gantawar said, “Around 260 health staffers have been engaged in the drive. Sixteen teams comprising 26 staffers each have been formed. Two staffers will form a group and visit homes. They have been instructed to keep a one-metre distance from people. The drive is to prevent the spread of Covid-19. We are requesting everybody to cooperate and provide all the necessary information.”

The team will ask for the name, address, age, contact number and whether they have come in contact with positive patients or whether they are suffering from fever or any acute respiratory diseases since the last few days. “Teams will also ask whether anyone from the family has visited any foreign country in the recent past,” added Gantawar.

Sonkusre said, “The team also comprises of doctors. In case of any suspected patients, we will advice them to go for a check up.”

The drive covered 15,000 houses in Bajaj Nagar and Abhyankar Nagar on Sunday. The NMC team is also monitoring the health of over 485 people under home quarantine on a daily basis.

Areas like Laxmi Nagar, Swawlambi Nagar, Shankar Nagar, Sneh Nagar, Daga layout etc will be covered in the coming days.

Initially, there was some discontent among NMC staffers who were called to the Laxmi Nagar Zone office, but were not informed about the drive. Later, they were given a short training and sent on the job. Wearing masks, all were reportedly trained in a hall and were given forms to be filled up by citizens during the drive. Apart from staffers of health centres, NMC also roped in employees of the malaria and filarial department.

On seeing a large gathering of NMC staffers at the Laxmi Nagar Zone office, some residents reportedly alerted the police control room. After checking facts, the cops went back.

NMC assistant commissioner Raju Bhivgade said that no complaint was made and neither did the police come to the zone office.

Since Covid-19, this is for the first time that a door-to-door survey has been started by the NMC. Till now, only flyers were screened and their samples were tested. 


