NMC set to unlock Mominpura, split into 12 smaller c-zones
2020-06-09
Nagpur: The Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has started to unlock Mominpura containment zone by splitting it into 12 small containment zones limiting the restrictions to only those areas which have reported Covid-19 cases in the last 28 days.

Main roads in this zone will also be opened paving way for restarting of non-essential shops after a span of 66 days.

Till date, Mominpura has registered 308 coronavirus cases, including four deaths, despite being a containment zone since April 4.

The area being vast, the already short-staffed police department faced a Herculean task in clamping down the movement of people in the containment zone.

The NMC revised its containment zone policy around 15 days ago and started notifying smaller areas for effective monitoring. Following the policy change, the NMC has taken a decision to revise Mominpura containment zone also.

Also, resistance from the residents was on the rise due to prolonged restrictions. A few politicians and activists also raised demand for freeing areas which did not report any Covid cases.

NMC additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar told TOI, “Cases from Mominpura containment zone are being reported on a daily basis. Now, we will improve monitoring by demarcating smaller zones.”

“Main motive is to break the continuing chain of virus spread by proper contact tracing, quarantining and prohibiting movement of people for non-emergency purposes. The decision has been taken after detailed deliberations and consulting the police department,” he said, adding the details were also shared with the locals in two-three meetings. 

Work to barricade all entry and exit points of smaller zones has started. Areas out of the containment zones will be freed only after completion of this. Buffer zone system will be continued where the NMC will keep a watch, but the area will not will be barricaded, he said.

Mominpura is the biggest among 51 containment zones notified till date in the city. It comprises all areas covered from IGGMCH Chowk to railway line towards kabrasthan to Panchpaoli RoB to Agrasen Chowk to IGGMCH Chowk.

Now, there will be a containment zone covering all areas located between Bhagwaghar Chowk to Mominpura Chowk to Sharda Chowk to Naalsahab Chowk to Bhagwaghar Chowk. This is biggest among all 12 zones. Area wise, this zone was at par with the first one when a cap seller tested positive on April 4. With rise in cases, the area of the containment zone also was expanded.

As per new zone policy, Timki will be the second biggest and remaining 10 will be limited up to only the areas from where Covid cases were reported in last 28 days.

It will be a challenging task for the NMC to barricade 12 new zones as the areas have several entry and exit points. It will also be a Herculean task for the police to deploy personnel on each entry and exit points.

In case of free movement of people from smaller zones, chances of transmission of disease to other areas cannot be ruled out, say some officials.

As per revised policy, main roads like Bhagwaghar Chowk to Mominpura Chowk, Golibar Chowk to RuB going toward Kharbi Chowk etc will be freed. Non-essential shops situated on these roads and some freed areas can open till 9pm. Even, restaurants situated out of the 12 containment zones can start home delivery.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe will issue a notification related to smaller zones after completion of barricading the areas.


