NMC provide mobile Covid-19 clincis in containment zones
2020-05-10
NASHIK: The Nashik Municipal Corporation has started Covid-19 mobile clinics in all the containment zones so that the locals can benefit from it. The civic body has three mobile squads visiting the slums and other areas on a regular basis providing health services to the people as a general practice. 

A medical team led by Nashik Municipal Corporation Commissioner Radhakrushna Game carried out an inspection in one such containment zones of the city. “There is one mobile clinic posted in each of the containment zones – in addition to the regular services which helps the doctors with all the necessary help required while surveying the areas in the city. The NMC commissioner has also visited several of the containment zones and interacted with the people getting the feedback of the people,” a senior an official from health department said. 

These are basically part of the Urban Primary Health Centres (UPHC) which have been deployed in the containment zones on rotation basis providing necessary healthcare services. “When containment zones are announced the people are not allowed to travel outside and hence the clinics are present there. All establishments are closed down except the milk and essential services,” the officer added. 

When containment zones are announced there is a social group of NMC officials and police officials that supply vegetables, groceries, and milk to locals. 

“When people want anything they can ask for help from them. The vendors make it available outside the containment zones from where the things are carried to the customers. However on the health issues, the mobile clinics are the ones who provide the services,” the officer added. 

The medical treatment is free of cost. The clinics further add to the surveillance activities by segregating the persons with symptoms of temperature, cough, headache, and other issues that define the likelihood of Covid-19 infection. 

The mobile clinics are thus helping the system to pick up early signs of the patients with infection and even help the non-covid patients to get medical treatment from other hospitals and specialists as required. 

“With this, we have been able to help the people with even heart ailments get the time treatment as in such cases they are quickly referred to concerned hospitals,” the officer added. 


