NMC plans to shift 1-1.5k people from Mominpura to quarantine
2020-05-01
Nagpur: After quarantining 1,408 persons from Satranjipura, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has now chalked out a plan to quarantine anywhere between 1,000 to 1,500 people from Mominpura, which has emerged as second Covid-19 hotspot.

Meanwhile, two more persons from Satranjipura tested Covid-19 positive on Thursday taking the tally of infected persons from this hotspot to 88 and the number of cases from the district to 138.

The two positive persons have been identified as 23-year-old and 55-year-old males from Badi Masjid area of Satranjipura. The 23-year-old was under institutional quarantine at MLA Hostel and has now been shifted to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). The 55-year-old man was quarantined at Wathoda and has been shifted to Indira Gandhi Government Medical College & Hospital (IGGMCH). The two are neighbours of 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura, city’s first Covid-19 victim.

NMC sources told TOI, “From Satranjipura, 1,408 persons have been quarantined between April 6 and 29. Cases from Mominpura are on the rise. Close contacts of positive persons are not coming forward on their own for testing. Therefore, people from the area will be quarantined to contain the spread of the disease in the area and also in other localities.”

The civic body’s drive in Satranjipura in East Nagpur has yielded result as 88 cases were detected. Test reports of over 500 persons, who were quarantined on April 27 and 29, are yet to come. On April 27, 498 persons were quarantined and 402 on April 29. Reports of all these people are expected in a day or two.

On Wednesday, a 28-year-old pregnant woman from Dobi Nagar near Ansar Nagar had tested positive increasing the Covid tally from Mominpura in Central Nagpur to 27. She also delivered a baby girl at IGGMCH. The woman was third positive case from this locality, but not from the existing chain of virus spread. The NMC team, led by zonal medical officer Dr Khwaja Moinuddin, has quarantined 12 family members of the woman on Thursday.

NMC officials further told TOI that 13 from a family residing in Choodi Gully had tested positive, of which one person died on Wednesday in the isolation ward. “Every one may have come in close contact with others. But people are not giving information,” they said, adding “Close contacts of two new cases (TB patient from Takia Deewanshah and one man from Timki) could not be traced.” 

“Some people are still roaming in containment zone. Therefore, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe has directed us to quarantine people from Takia Deewanshah, Choodi Gully and Dobi Nagar near Ansar Nagar,” said the NMC officials.

“Drive is likely to begin from Friday or Saturday as arrangements at new institutional quarantine centres, including one on Katol Road, are yet to be completed. Announcements to that effect were made in these three areas on Wednesday and Thursday,” the officials added.

Cap seller was the first to test positive from Mominpura on April 4. Since then, the NMC had quarantined 198 people from this area.

Following death of a person at IGGMCH isolation ward, divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar on Thursday held a meeting with officials of NMC, GMCH and IGGMCH. Kumar has reportedly directed the officials of IGGMCH and GMCH to diagnose and take care of all positive persons, symptomatic or asymptomatic.


