NMC begins survey of 27-30L population to trace Covid-19 suspects
2020-03-27
Nagpur: Probably for the first time in the state, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) on Thursday started a door-to-door containment drive across the city. Apart from suspected Covid-19 patients and those with severe acute respiratory illness, the drive will also take detailed information about high-risk patients.

NMC had covered 64,436 houses with population of 2.64 lakh within 3km radius of the houses of the first four positive patients in Laxmi Nagar and Dharampeth zones between March 22 and 24.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe said, “NMC will now cover entire city with houses of around 5.5-6 lakh and population of around 27-30 lakh under the drive. Teams will visit each and every house and take details of health condition of all family members. This will help us know whether there are any more suspected patients of Covid-19. Also, awareness will be spread among people about dos and don’ts in prevailing situation, method of washing hands, hygienic atmosphere, precautions during cough and cold etc. We will also take detailed information of high-risk patients. If needed in case of any situation, we will be able to isolate all these high-risk patients,” he said.

NMC has formed 288 teams, which will also ask whether any family member has returned from abroad in last few days, or if they came in contact with positive patients. They will also monitor home quarantined people.

NMC additional medical officer health Dr Bhavna Sonkusre said, “NMC teams will also collect detailed information of people suffering from diabetes, hyper tension, cancer, cardio vascular diseases etc. Also, details of persons above 60 years will be taken. People should cooperate and give complete and true information to the teams, which will help in controlling Covid-19,” she said.

At the end of the drive, NMC will also be able to get exact data of high-risk patients with disease. It can help NMC plan various types of health related programmes.

NMC assistant medical officer health Dr Praveen Gantawar said, “Drive will again cover 64,436 houses with population of 2.64 lakh within 3km radius of houses of first four positive patients in Laxmi Nagar and Dharampeth zones. This is as per guidelines of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). We will have to ensure no suspected patients have come up for 14 days, as this is the period for symptoms of Covid-19 to arise,” he said.

The NMC teams have complained that a few houses refused to share details.

Gantawar said, “Not a single house will be left out under the drive. We will send team of seniors to houses that refuse to share information. Appropriate measures as per Epidemic Act will be taken to cover each and every house,” he said.

The drive will also cover all houses situated in 3km radius of the fifth positive patient.


