NMC yet of collect samples of 58 first-point contacts of Covid-19 patients
2020-03-15
Nagpur: Even though apprehensions are growing stronger, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has failed to pick up throat swab of several people who were first-point contact of the couple and his colleagues who tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19).The health officials had identified around 58 first-point contacts of which 28 were at high risk, meaning they very in direct touch with the patients.After the IT professional, who returned from the US on March 6, tested positive on Wednesday, his family and close contacts were immediately taken to Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) while he remained admitted at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH). Later, his wife and a colleague too tested positive.On Friday, the health officials prepared a list of 45 persons who came in direct contact with the IT professional and his wife and had to be tested for Covid-19. Similarly, a list of 13 persons was finalized. Initially, the list had only names and contact numbers which were taken from the confirmed patients following their interviews about their whereabouts when they reportedly contracted the virus.The task of calling up these first-point suspects was assigned to NMC’s health department where a control room has been set up to deal with the cases. Officials had to take down their addresses apart from additional details and send ambulance to ferry them to nearby hospitals for taking the swabs. Sources said municipal commissioner Tukaram Munde on Saturday pulled up officials from NMC’s health department for failing to call up these people. Munde didn’t answer to TOI’s call and messages.When TOI called up NMC health officer Bhavana Sonkusale, she said she was in a meeting and will talk later. She too didn’t answer queries till evening.Sources said the officials could take down addresses of only a couple of people from the list. They alleged that the officials were lethargic even at the time of a national diaster-like situation. “This is poor administration by the civic chief and health officials,” they said.A day before, divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar said that 80 persons from six districts of Nagpur division have been notified as suspects till date. Out of them, 31 were admitted to various government facilities in the division during the last two weeks and they have successfully completed 14 days of quarantine period. Altogether 49 patients are under home isolation as well as admitted to hospitals.