NMC asks 13 private hospitals to stand by for Covid-19 patients
2020-04-21
NAGPUR: Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has asked 13 private hospitals in city having 100 or more beds each to be ready for treatment of Covid-19 patients. The civic body will take over these hospitals in a phased manner if capacity and resources at GMCH and IGGMCH are exhausted.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe on Monday met representatives of these hospitals that include most of city’s top ones.

Mundhe, who is competent authority for containing Covid-19 in the city, told TOI, “Number of positive patients is on the rise in the city. Need is to keep 5,000 beds ready. We have identified 42 private hospitals. Thirteen have 100 beds or more and remaining 29 between 50-100 beds. These 13 have facilities of oxygen, ICU and ventilators. As of today, we do not require their services. If the number goes up and capacity at GMCH and IGGMCH is exhausted, we will utilize these then,” he said.

Mundhe said, “All hospitals have been given a proforma and asked to be ready with it. All hospitals in the city can be requisitioned,” he said. On facilities like masks, personal protective equipment (PPE) kits etc, Mundhe said, “All requirements will be fulfilled well before time.” 

Asked whether private hospital can also give services to non-Covid-19 patients, Mundhe said, “We will identify Covid-19 centres as well as other centres. Identified private hospitals will be exclusively for Covid-19 patients.”

As on Monday, city had registered 81 positive cases including one death. Twelve people have been discharged after recovery.

IGGMCH has 120 beds with provision of ventilators and 40 with high-dependency unit. This hospital can increase the number to 600 beds as it has reserved surgical complex for Covid-19 patients. At present, 34 positive and 49 suspected patients are admitted here.

At GMCH has two dedicated Covid-19 wards which have 34 positive and 41 suspected cases, as on Monday. Sixteen beds are reportedly vacant.

Convener of Vidarbha Hospitals Association Dr Anup Marar said, “Private hospitals will be eligible to serve as Covid-19 centres subject to fulfillment of criteria. If government is looking towards us for necessary support to help fight this epidemic, it is natural for us to extend our services.”


