Nashik Municipal Corporation to start quarantine facilities in private hotels, colleges
2020-03-26
NASHIK: The Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) is planning to take over hotels and colleges in the city to increase quarantine facilities in view of the Covid-19 outbreak.


The civic body has already made an arrangement for 220 people in municipal and other private hospitals. 

People, who have recently returned from Covid-19 affected countries/areas are quarantined, while the suspected or positive patients are to be treated in isolation wards.

NMC health officials didn’t disclose many details but conveyed that they are adding facilities as a backup option for newer patients. “We have made arrangements for 220 people right now. But we are also increasing the capacity as part of the preparedness in view of the emergency as we don’t want to take any risk,” said a health official. 

Therefore, the civic officials are planning to take over some city hotels and colleges to provide quarantine facilities, the source said. 

Currently, the quarantine wards are functioning at its own building in Tapovan, Panchavati and Bytco Hospital in the Nashik Road area of the city. Apart from this, some beds have been reserved in some private hospitals for quarantine. 

The district and civic administration has also planned to treat Covid-19 patients in NMC’s Zakir Hussain Hospital. Earlier, the hospital was serving pediatric patients and maternity homes. But the hospital has now been reserved to treat Covid-19 positive patients only. 

The civic body is taking strict sanitary measures across six divisions of the municipal corporation. Even there is a lockdown in the city, the health machinery of the municipal corporation is keeping the city clean. 

All the garbage vans are operational across six divisions of the city to collect the daily waste. Approximately 1,110 tonnes of garbage was collected on Monday and Tuesday. 

During the janata curfew days, the NMC cleared all the black spots collecting a total of 575 tonnes of garbage.

