NMC stickers on houses of arriving travellers to enforce home quarantine
2020-05-28
Nagpur: With domestic flights resuming, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has come up with a new strategy to display stickers on the houses of air passengers, to ensure compulsory home quarantine of 14 days. The same is likely to be implemented soon for those coming by road and railways to the city.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI, “Additional municipal commissioner Sanjay Nipane has been appointed nodal officer for immigrants. A joint special team of NMC and police department has been constituted to paste the stickers as well as monitor air passengers for 14 days. Stringent action will be taken against violators.”

Mundhe added similar strategy will be implemented for people coming from other parts of the state or country by road and railways. “Our team will obtain list of people from the police department. Teams will go to each and every household and check their health status and display stickers of home quarantine,” he said.

Mundhe said much depends upon the support from people. “All have to take care of themselves and their society. In case of any type of symptoms, they should call NMC’s control room or get tested for Covid-19. We are also appealing to the people to inform us in case anyone in their area comes from outside and violates home quarantine norm,” he said.

Mundhe said, “It has been made mandatory for all private doctors and hospitals to test patients of Influenza Like Illness (ILI) and fever for Covid-19, especially those having travel history. Also, private doctors and hospitals have to inform us immediately about such patients.”

Already, NMC has started testing all suspicious home deaths for Covid-19 in containment zones and likely to extend it to non-containment zones in coming days.

Mundhe said all these measures will help identify corona positive patients, trace contacts, end chains and contain spread of Covid-19.

In Nagpur Rural, teams of health and revenue department are taking swab samples of people who came from other states, districts or those who have any symptoms. It helped in detection of some Covid-19 cases in last five days.


