NMC workers accused of throwing bodies of Covid victims into graves
2020-06-01
NAGPUR: In two cases, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) sanitary workers allegedly threw bodies of Covid-19 victims into the graves, instead of laying them to rest in a dignified manner, during burial at Mominpura Qabarstan.

On Sunday, an Akola woman died in the city. Her body was taken for last rites by NMC officials. Relatives of the woman shared a video of the burial with TOI. The video shows an NMC official guiding the workers on the burial procedure, yet they abruptly released the long cloth used to lower the body into the grave as per rituals.

The relatives alleged the officials didn’t allow them to go near the grave (pit) till a portion of it had been filled with soil.

“The body wasn’t laid to rest properly, and it landed inappropriately on being thrown from the top. As she was a Covid victim, the grave too was dug deep, so the impact made a disturbing sound. As per Islamic custom, the body’s face has to be turned towards west (Mecca side). Before and after burial, short prayers have to be offered to God. Ablution is must for persons handling the body,” the relatives said.

On May 25, the body of a woman cancer patient from Mominpura too allegedly met the same fate. TOI has a video of this incident too, where the body is seen being flung into the grave from the long cloth.

Three more bodies of Covid patients have been buried by NMC. In the first two cases, NMC had ensured compliance with religious sentiments while disposing of bodies of positive patients. The civic body had also video recorded the burials.

After the controversy broke out, Jamiat Ulema Hind (JUH) approached NMC top officials and offered to volunteer for burials of Covid victims from their community. Reportedly, NMC allowed them to assist in the burials.

“In the first two deaths, two volunteers from the community had closely assisted NMC workers and therefore there were no issues,” JUH member said.

Additional municipal commissioner Ram Joshi said JUH had NMC complaining that rituals are not being followed while carrying out the funeral. “We have allowed a limited number of volunteers to guide our staff in the last rites. The chances of infection are very high from a positive body. The body can’t be handed over to anyone. A couple of family members are usually there, and two to three volunteers can come. We will also provide PPE kits for them,” he said.

Regarding disrespect to bodies, Joshi said, “The body can’t be touched, so it is lowered with a long cloth.”

JUH member Dr Sarfaraz Ahmad said despite assurance, they were not informed about Sunday's burial. “We will follow all religious as well as WHO guidelines for burial. We are ready to take the body from hospital itself.” 


