NMC admin ignoring elected reps in Covid war: Mayor
2020-05-28
Nagpur: Mayor Sandip Joshi on Wednesday expressed anguish over civic administration allegedly ignoring office-bearers while taking important decisions like issuing notification of containment zones.

Addressing a meeting convened to assess the Covid-19 situation and containment zones, the mayor ordered Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) administration to issue a show-cause notice to additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar for remaining absent from the meeting despite instructions.

Apart from mayor, former mayor Pravin Datke, senior corporators Dayashankar Tiwari, Tanaji Wanve, Divya Dhurde, standing committee chairman Vijay Zalke, health committee chairman Virendra Kukreja, additional municipal commissioner Sanjay Nipane, chief medical officer Dr Yogendra Savai, deputy municipal commissioner Dr Pradip Dasarwar, superintending engineer (public works department) Manoj Talewar were present.

Datke and Tiwari raised the issue of civic administration issuing various notifications related to Covid-19 without intimating or taking the elected representatives into confidence. “Had the administration taken the elected representatives into confidence while announcing any containment zones or quarantining citizens from any residential area, it would not have been a difficult task for the NMC,” said Tiwari.

Citing examples of residents opposing NMC action in Pandhrabodi and Parvati Nagar, which have been declared containment zones, Datke said, “The administration must understand the role of elected representatives before taking such decisions. We are elected by the citizens and serving people. If the administration takes us into confidence, the NMC could serve better even in quarantine centres too.” Congress corporator Wanve expressed similar views.

Senior corporators also raised the issue of appointment of Dr Sawai as NMC’s chief medical officer. Neither the administration informed the elected representatives about the appointment of Dr Sawai nor shared any details about its plan to combat the coronavirus outbreak, they alleged.

Mayor Joshi also expressed concern over substandard food being served in institutional quarantine centres in the city.

Tiwari also complained to the mayor about Dr Sawai not responding to the corporators’ calls. Mayor later directed the administration to arrange a meeting of elected representatives with administration including civic chief Tukaram Mundhe to review Covid-19 situation in the city within three days.


