NMC to continue 14-day quarantine of –ve persons even in case of peak
2020-05-27
Nagpur: Even though asymptomatic corona positive persons are getting discharged without testing on 10th day, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has continued 14-day institutional quarantine of their high-risk contacts who have tested negative, and will continue to do so even if there is a spike in cases. The reason given for the decision is to avoid risk, contain spread of Covid-19, and end existing chains, as some patients tested positive in second samples.A person from Jawahar Nagar tested positive for Covid-19 on May 9. His high-risk contacts were quarantined and tested on May 10. Reports of all were negative. Their samples were taken again on May 23, on completion of 14 days, and the reports of two persons came positive on May 24.A NMC official told TOI, “The chain would have continued and Covid-19 might have spread if they were not kept under institutional quarantine. Therefore, we have taken a decision to continue institutional quarantine of high-risk contacts of positive persons. We have the infrastructure, so there’s no reason to take a risk,” he said.Earlier, some people from Gittikhadan, Kanhan, Mominpura, Satranjipura etc had tested negative in first sample and later positive in second samples in the district.While directing preparation of high capacity beds and hospitals for projected spike in cases, the state government had given an option to NMC to let persons who test negative go home, while keeping asymptomatic positive persons in Covid Care Centres (CCC), moderate severity patients in Dedicated Covid Health Centres (DCHC) and severe patients in Dedicated Covid Hospitals (DCH). The option was also given to convert all institutional quarantine centres into CCC.NMC official said, “It would have been easy for us just to convert institutional quarantine into CCC but we decided to develop new CCC so that high-risk contacts of positive persons remain in quarantine for 14 days.”NMC and district administration had identified 21 institutional quarantine centres with capacity of 15,000, and many are in use like MLA Hostel, Ravi Bhavan, Vanamati, VNIT Hostels, Wathoda, flat scheme of police at Panchpaoli etc.The NMC team led by municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe, chief medical officer Dr Yogendra Savai and additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar had developed a new CCC with 5,000 beds capacity on Kalmeshwar Road. The plan is to develop two more CCCs as per requirement. As per projected peak, the city would require CCC with capacity of 6,668 beds.The development of new CCC also proves NMC’s decision to continue institutional quarantine centres.NMC had opposed implementation of new discharge policy. The DCHs — IGGMCH and GMCH — have implemented it and are discharging asymptomatic corona positive patients without testing on 10th day after taking affidavit of home isolation for seven days. The decision was taken as per new guidelines from the centre and state.Even pandemic specialist Dr Sanjay Zodpey, director of Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI), New Delhi, and member of one committee at Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), in his report had suggested that NMC continue tracing close contacts of positive persons and quarantine them by scaling up infrastructure. He said this should be one of the key measures in post-lockdown period to contain spread of Covid-19.NMC’s model to investigate close contacts, mass quarantine, and institutional quarantine for 14 days had helped keep mortality and cases low.NMC’s officials said the guidelines are to maintain 14-day institutional quarantine and further 14-day home quarantine for persons testing negative.