NMC seals private hospital, quarantines medical staff
2020-04-21
Nashik: A private hospital in Sanjeev Nagar, along the Satpur-Ambad link road, has been sealed by the Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) after a patient admitted here tested positive for Covid-19.

A team of 14 medical staff, including doctors, has also been quarantined. A 63-year-old woman, a resident of Sanjeev Nagar, tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. Following this, the civic body quarantined the entire area and declared it as containment zone.

The civic body also isolated the six family members of the woman and collected their throat swab samples for testing. Later, four of the six family members tested positive for Covid-19. One of the positive patients was admitted to this private hospital.

"We have sealed this hospital where the positive patient was admitted before he was tested positive. Moreover, all the staff has been quarantined as well," a civic official said.

Sanjeev Nagar is the the fifth containment area in the city that has been sealed by the NMC in the last 14 days. The other four being Govind Nagar, Rajlaxmi Lawns on Nashik Road, Anandvalli on Gangapur Road and Nasardi Bridge area on Nashik-Pune road.

The civic health teams continued their door-to-door survey on Monday, but no new suspects were reported from Sanjeev Nagar. The health teams checked a total of 1,642 houses, covering as many as 6,274 people.

Meanwhile, the first patient from Nashik city, who tested positive for Covid-19 on April 6, was from Sumangal housing society in Govind Nagar area of the city. The NMC had sealed the areas on the same day for 14 days.

The restrictions on Govind Nagar was to be lifted on Monday, but the NMC has now extended the containment period for another 14 days.

Municipal commissioner Radhakrishna Game said that as per Centre’s new guidelines, the containment areas where Covid-19 positive patient is reported are now to be sealed for 28 days, instead of earlier time-frame of 14 days. 

Game has also warned of legal action against private hospitals that do not provide information regarding Covid-19 suspects admitted to their hospital to the civic body.


