NMC looks to VNIT hostels for quarantine as Ravi Bhavan, Vanamati fill up in a day
2020-04-03
Nagpur: Rooms having a capacity of 125 persons at Vanamati and Ravi Bhavan filled up in a single day after officials quarantined a large number of people traced from close contacts list of Delhi positive patients provided by the state government.The sudden rise led to Nagpur Municipal Corporation health department, entrusted with tracing the suspects, to start making new arrangements as the numbers are likely to go up further in the next couple of days.MLA hostels, where city’s first qurantine facility was set up on March 13, took around 21 days to fill up its 210 room in Wing II and III. Nagpur NMC health team on Wednesday started readying the old hostels of VNIT at Bajaj Nagar for quarantine facility.VNIT officials said 200 to 300 old hostel rooms were shown to the authorities but they were yet to receive any official letter of acquisition. The campus too was shut 10 days before the nationwide lockdown was announced. VNIT students were asked to leave by March 16. Several institutions including the Nagpur University, too, are having vacant hostels. Including the new hostels, VNIT has space for accommodating over 4000 people. SDO Shekhar Ghadge said Vanamati facility was started on Wednesday but it was full on Thursday. “35 people were brought to Ravi Bhavan on Thursday. Vanamati can take in 84 persons. At both places, two are sharing a room,” he said.Ghadge said administration was looking at options and therefore VNIT campus was inspected. “It is not necessary we will acquire some property. Several factors are considered before we convert a place into quarantine centre. Ultimately, the divisional commissioner and the district collector will decide,” he said.On sudden rise in number of suspected cases, he said NMC was entrused with identifying and bringing them here. The MLA hostels, where around 30 rooms were vacant a day ago, were full on Thursday.Ghadge said several people would be completing their 14-day quarantine at MLA hostel soon so there will be vacant rooms.Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar confirmed the rise in number of suspects was mainly because of the Delhi list and Nizamuddin Tablighi congregation fallout.There were also concerns regarding house keeping and catering services at Vanamati and Ravi Bhavan. Sources said the staff was scared of servicing the suspected Covid-19 cases.Initially, MLA hostels operator too had faced the same issue but somehow managed to retain 80 workers who are deployed now in two shifts there.