NMCH is first dedicated hospital for Covid-19 in Bihar
2020-03-25
PATNA: The state government on Tuesday decided to make Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH) the first dedicated health facility for people with symptoms of Covid-19 in Bihar. There was no fresh case of coronavirus in state after the three positive cases found on Sunday, including that of a man who died at AIIMS-Patna.

“NMCH will now be used as the first reference point for Covid-19 in the state. Now, all the cases will be brought here first for isolation, sampling or treatment. Only after NMCH gets fully occupied, we will use other hospitals for Covid-19 in Bihar,” principal secretary (health) Sanjay Kumar said. 

He said NMCH has around 600 beds and all will be used for Covid-19 suspects and positive cases, if any. Sources said patients undergoing treatment for other ailments at NMCH were being shifted to Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) on Tuesday itself.

In other measures, the state government has roped in Jeevika workers to make masks. State chief secretary Deepak Kumar said Jeevika didis in four districts have already started making masks. “Over 10,000 masks will be ready in the next couple of days. A chemical manufacturing unit in Hajipur has been given permission to manufacture sanitizer and it will start production in the next two days,” Deepak told reporters.

He also claimed that over 1600 people made calls on the toll-free number on Monday for medical assistance. “Over 150 spot visits were done by the medical teams. This facility has been started since OPD services in government hospitals had been closed from Monday,” he said.

As per the press statement issued by health department, total 194 samples have been collected so far in the state and 175 were found negative. Results of 14 samples were awaited and two got destroyed. However, the test reports of close relatives and friends of three positive Covid-19 cases, including the deceased from Munger native, were awaited.

Sanjay said samples were collected from 55 contacts of the deceased by Tuesday and will be sent to Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna, for Covid-19 testing.

Meanwhile, altogether 909 passengers were enrolled for observation as on Tuesday, including 174 from Gopalganj, followed by 100 in Patna. Six symptomatic cases were reported from Gaya airport on Tuesday.

IGIMS allowed to test Covid-19 samples

After getting the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) nod, the Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS) at Patna tested samples of Covid-19 suspects on Tuesday. It is now the third medical college and hospital in Bihar after RMRI and Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital to conduct Covid-19 test. IGIMS microbiology head Dr S Shahi said seven samples were collected and tested on Tuesday and their results were awaited. He said they have got one kit as of now and at least 200 tests can be done from that.


