NMC’s innovative steps led to fewer Covid deaths, +ve cases: Report
2020-05-13
Nagpur: The central government’s Rapid Response Team (RRT) has credited innovative steps of Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) for lesser mortality and less number of severe Covid-19 cases in the city. In its detailed analysis of the situation in the district, the team said the administration is preparing a whopping 24,258 beds in case of a sudden spike in corona positive cases, as projected by the central and state government between May 15 and 31.

In last 63 days, number of positive cases in the district is 304, of which 269 (88.48%) were from Mominpura and Satranjipura. The team appreciated the mass quarantine model of NMC, which is the first-of-its-kind in the country. The district witnessed four deaths, of which reports of two deceased came positive after death, while 102 have been discharged.

Though the city stands at third place in the state for population and area, it is at the 10th place in case of Covid-19 mortality and 7th place as far as positive cases. Mumbai and Pune are far ahead of the district.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe, chief medical officer Dr Yogendra Savai, additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar and zonal medical officer Dr Minakshi Mane have planned mass quarantine model and implemented it in an effective manner. Over 1,900 were quarantined from Satranjipura, of which 117 tested positive. At Mominpura, number of quarantined is over 800, of which 152 came positive.

RRT report stated, “NMC innovated appropriately to mass quarantine in Satranjipura. All residents of containment zone were moved to quarantine, samples were collected and tested. The action effectively broke the chain of transmission in the area. NMC also innovated in early testing. Instead of testing contacts between 5-14th day, NMC tested them on day-1 leading to early detection, prompt treatment and isolation. This might have led to lesser mortality and less number of severe cases in Nagpur,” RRT observed.

As per Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), one positive person can transmit disease to 406 if not isolated. The 290 positive persons traced by NMC are a result of aggressive containment zone system and pro-active measures.

NMC had to face resistance from people, severe criticism from public representatives, communities, and also some petitions in courts. However, Mundhe and his team with the help of divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar and police department have continued the innovations that were appreciated by RRT.

The centre had appointed RRT for all Red Zones to report on the situation at ground-level and give recommendations for containing Covid-19. AIIMS-Nagpur has been given the responsibility of Nagpur and Yavatmal districts.

A two-member RRT of Dr Prashant Joshi and Dr Pradeep Deshmukh visited Mominpura and Satranjipura containment zones, MLA Hostel Institutional Quarantine Centre, IGGMCH, GMCH, NKP Salve Medical College, and Datta Meghe Medical College between May 5 and 7. They also interacted with top officials working to contain Covid-19.

In recommendations for containment zones, RRT said death audit of all cases should be conducted using National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) format, as it can help block chain of transmission at the earliest. “To ensure Covid distancing of recoveries in containment zones, NMC should use cured cases as volunteers. Community needs to be proactively involved in community management. Rogi Kalyan Samiti, Mahila Arogya Samiti may be involved,” RRT recommended.

For centres now being used for institutional quarantine, and that can be converted into Covid Care Centre (CCC) in case of spike in cases, RRT has recommended multipara monitor to measure oxygen saturation, heart rate, blood pressure. Also, RRT advised infrared thermal scanner, blood pressure apparatus, pulse oximeter, glucometer with strips, basic medicines, oxygen cylinder and fully equipped ALS ambulance.

The RRT report has seen sent to office of divisional commissioner, collector, NMC, IGGMCH and GMCH for implementation of recommendations, which are in line with government guidelines.


