No active Covid-19 positive case inBareilly, all six patients discharged
2020-04-18
Bareilly: Bareilly district currently has no active Covid-19 positive case. Four people tested negative on Friday and were discharged from hospital.

A family of six members who resides in Subhash Nagar locality were tested positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly last month. Two of them were discharged on Monday, while the remaining four returned home on Friday.

Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Vineet Shukla said, “After four people were tested negative in two consecutive test reports, Bareilly district is left with no active positive case for now. Though these six people did not infect any individual in the last 20 days when they were under treatment at hospital, they might have spread the virus before admission to hospital. Hence, we will continue our active case surveillance to trace suspected cases and collect samples. The health teams will continue sanitation exercise and strict implementation of lockdown.”

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “These four people were sent home in an ambulance. The discharged patients have to undergo 14-day home quarantine.”

A 34-year-old man who works at a Noida-based firm which has reported several cases of novel coronavirus was the first Covid-19 case to be reported from Bareilly. After he was tested positive following his return to Bareilly, it later came to light that the man infected his parents, wife, brother and sister. He had earlier said, “I reached Bareilly on March 22 and it was only on March 26, I learnt that two of my colleagues tested positive and I went to district hospital to get myself tested. I felt extremely sad when I came to know that I have contracted coronavirus to my parents, wife, brother and sister. I thought for days that if I had not returned home, it would not have happened. However, I was sharing the building with 12 people in Noida and they could have got infected through me if I had stayed back.”

On Friday, 93 health teams conducted door-to-door survey and visited 6,598 houses, but did not find any suspected case there. Officials said 515 teams have surveyed 47,832 houses so far in the six-kilometre radius of the patients’ house. 

Meanwhile, Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) on Friday tested 27 human samples for Covid-19 and all were found negative. RK Singh, director, IVRI, and VK Gupta, joint director and nodal officer of Covid-19 testing here, attended a video conferencing meet with state chief minister Yogi Adityanath and apprised him of progress in testing of samples here. 


