No additional relaxations in Lockdown 4.0, says Goa CM Pramod Sawant
2020-05-19
PANAJI: CM Pramod Sawant said on Monday that there would be no additional relaxation in Lockdown 4.0. However, he said that inter-state public transport, which has been allowed by the Centre, will not be started by the Goa government. 


“There is no major change in guidelines issued by the Union ministry of home affairs (MHA),” Sawant told reporters, adding that the same situation (as it stands) will continue in the state, and that economic activities will continue.

He said that his government’s decision to continue the ban on inter-state public transport was taken with the consent of both Maharashtra and Karnataka. 

“We are not starting inter-state movement,” he said.

On Monday evening, Sawant met BJP MLAs and briefed them about the Covid-19 situation in the state. He told the MLAs that all cases so far are imported, and that there’s nothing to worry about. 

On bringing back Goans, Sawant said that trains have begun to bring Goans stranded in other parts of the country. He added that except a few who wish to go to neighbouring areas, all the other passengers are Goans. He also said that the train from Nizamuddin to Kerala will stop at Margao. The CM said that the Rs 2,000 charged for the Covid test isn’t just for the test, but also for quarantine and food.

Meanwhile, speaking on the migrant issue, Sawant said that trains have been arranged to drop migrants to Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. Around 1.5 lakh migrants have registered with the nodal officer to return to their states. “We are still waiting as Bihar and West Bengal have not yet booked trains to take back their migrant labour,” he said. 

Sawant also reacted sharply to job cuts, saying that the government would seek details and action would be taken against errant industries. “Nobody should retrench workers,” he said.

Also, on the SSC exam, Sawant said that it will be held as scheduled, and that Goa board has made arrangements for students from Maharashtra and Karnataka to answer the exam in those states. He also said that all precautions will be taken during the exams.


