Coronavirus scare in Kerala: No ban on festivals, mass gatherings, says Shailaja
2020-03-07
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The government has made it clear that there was nothing wrong in going ahead with Attukal Pongala though corona cases were being reported across the country. “There is no need to keep away from festivals as a directive to avoid mass gatherings will create panic,” said health minister K K Shailaja. 

The minister’s reaction comes in the wake of Union health ministry asking other states to avoid mass gatherings or give necessary directives to organizers of such events. 

Shailaja said that health department has appealed to all those who had direct links with positive cases and travelled from virus-hit regions not to be a part of Pongala. “People who remained in quarantine at their homes and hospitals should stay away from public gatherings. We have given necessary directive to these people,” she said. 

There are many festivals happening across the state. It is not just the case of Pongala. In Malabar, it is the season of festivals. Hence, we don’t want to create a panic. At present the situation in Kerala is under control and there is no need to panic,” she said. 

Meanwhile, the advisory issued by the Union health ministry to all states said that experts across the world have advised to reduce mass gatherings to avoid the spread of Covid-19. In view of the above, it is advised that mass gatherings may be avoided or possibly postponed till the disease spread is contained. 

The advisory further added that in case such mass gatherings are organized, states may take necessary action to guide the organizers on precautions that need to be taken. 

The 12-member delegation from Telangana, that reached Kerala to study the surveillance and precautions the state took, met the health minister for discussions. More states have evinced interest in visiting Kerala and make use of the state’s expertise and use its model. 

The state governments of Odisha, Delhi and Karnataka have informed that they will be sending teams to Kerala.


