Covid-19 scare in Rajasthan: No biometric attendance, breathalyser test, says government
2020-03-08
JAIPUR: In an effort to check all the possible mode of transmission of coronavirus (Covid-19), the health department has written to the police department not to conduct breathalyser test for checking drunken driving till the state is facing the threat of virus infections. Besides, it has written to all the government departments to suspend marking of attendance through biometric system, which could help in transmission of Covid-19.


Moreover, private hospitals have been asked by the state government to remain prepared by putting in place all possible curative measures to deal with the medical emergency. 

Additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh wrote to all collectors on Saturday to hold meetings with Indian Medical Association (IMA) officer-bearers and representatives of private hospitals asking them to make availability of functional isolation wards, timely redressal of deficiencies pertaining to oxygen supply connector, ventilator connection, humidifier, ECG machines and lift facility. They have been asked to ensure sample collection if only symptomatic patients, avoiding unnecessary samples. Also, private hospitals have been directed to constitute infection control committee and appoint a nodal medical officer for Covid-19.

Preventive steps have been taken in wake of two Italian tourists have tested positive for Covid-19 recently, who are undergoing treatment at the SMS Hospital.

Moreover, directions have been issued to all the government departments of the state to conduct mopping with 1% hypochlorite, which is an effective disinfectant. The directions are not only for cleaning the floor, but also it is for the doors, windows, chairs, handles, staircase railings, almirahs and other such items, which are touched by the visitors and employees frequently, which may enhance the chances of spread of infectious diseases.

“We have issued letters to railways, roadways, transport department and other departments to help in conducting screening of foreign tourists. Letters have been issued to all the departments to stop attendance of employees by biometric machines and to home department to suspend the use of breath analyser for checking drunken driving. It has been done to minimise the chances of spread of Covid-19,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health department.

Health department has sought the help of other department in preventing the spread of Covid-19 in the state. Use of breathalyser is quite common in the state as the traffic police use it for estimating blood alcohol content (BAC) from a breath sample for checking drunken driving. In the state, in 2019, there are 24,207 persons faced action for drunken driving under Motor Vehicle Act.


