No Covid-19 death in Pune, Pimpri Chinchwad in 24 hours
2020-04-20
PUNE: No death of Covid- 19 was reported in Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR) on Sunday after a gap of five days, the district health administration said.

However, the number of cases of positive for the virus is continuous on rise in the region. 




On Sunday, the authorities reported 45 new cases in the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), five in Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC), three in the rural areas of the Pune district and four cases in the Pune cantonment area, the administration said. 

A woman and a male patient from the Sassoon hospital were discharged after they recovered from the contagion. 

District health officer Bhagwan Pawar told TOI, “This is the second time in the last fortnight that the city or the district has not recorded a single death. This is a positive sign for us.” 

The maximum cases in the PMC limits were being reported from the peths where people live in the congested areas. 

“The increasing number of cases in two digit is a major worry for us at this juncture. Although the civic administration has been taking counter measures, the cases are not declining because of multiple reasons. People should come forward and report if they having any Covid morbid symptoms. Besides, adhering to government instructions at this juncture is the need of the hour in the city, Pawar added. 

As far as rural areas are concerned, Pawar said, most of the cases were reported from Haveli tehsil that was considered a semi- urban zone. 

Proactive approach helps woman overcome Covid-19

A proactive approach by a woman, already suffering from diabetes and hypertension, enabled her to successfully recover from the Covid-19 infection, said doctors at the Sassoon General Hospital after she was discharged from the facility on Sunday. 

“The patient was in a positive frame of mind throughout the two weeks of treatment. She was suffering from breathlessness, cough and running nose at the time of admission. But she did hide any of her underlying health condition or symptoms. She herself got admitted to the hospital on April 3. The woman’s family members supported her equally. Today (Sunday), her condition is normal and she returned to her home happily," said a doctor at the hospital. 

“Throughout her treatment, the woman showed no signs of panic and followed our instructions sincerely. This ensured helped her speedy recovery. A patient’s willpower and positive thinking are the key in such cases. It only shows that the diabetics need not fear as they can be cured of Covid-19,” he said. 

“In the woman’s case, we could maintain her sugar level and hence did not face problem during treatment. Many experts and senior doctors have been saying that if diabetes is kept under control, a Covid-19 patient with diabetes can be treated like any other non- diabetic patient.” 

A 40-year-old male patient from Mangalwar Peth was also discharged from the hospital on Sunday.


