Coronavirus scare in Tamil Nadu: No clear instructions from government, say doctors’ bodies
2020-02-06
CHENNAI: Doctors’ bodies, including the Indian Medical Association and other organisations, said they have not received clear instructions from the government on the protocol to be followed if any of the passengers on home quarantine come to them with symptoms of novel coronavirus.


At least five private hospitals in the city said they have no information on how or when they should notify the government. So far, the Indian Medical Association has not received any information from the health department, said IMA state president Dr C N Raja. 

 
 
“Most doctors know how to medically handle such cases since clear protocols are listed out by organisations like World Health Organization. We are planning to meet health officials for more information on state protocol,” he said. The most common questions the association has been facing from doctors are — ‘Do we notify them when we have patients with symptoms or after they test positive? How should we send samples for tests? Can we continue to treat patients if tests confirm the viral infection?’

Senior infectious diseases doctors said treatment for the virus is not clear yet. Morbidity is higher in patients with extremes of age, uncontrolled diabetes or blood sugar and among patients with other co-morbid infection. 

“But the viral infection has been declared as a pandemic. Kerala has declared it as an emergency. If the public health department is using its powers to restrict treatment at government hospitals we cannot violate it,” he said. 

Director of public health K Kolandaisamy said the state did not have any objection on patients getting admitted in private hospitals as long as they have adequate quarantine facilities and are equipped to handle infectious diseases. “We have not sent any instructions because we have not made any restrictions,” he said. The aim now is to prevent the virus within the state, he said. “Adequate precautions are being taken to prevent the spread of the disease within the state. We are keeping passengers in quarantine only to prevent transmission of the virus from one person to another. We expect medical teams to do the same,” he said. The health department said samples should be lifted by microbiologists or physicians in consultation with district surveillance officer Dr P Sampath, public health lab deputy director Dr S Raju and King Institute of Preventive Medicine director (incharge) Dr P Kaveri. 

Earlier, health secretary Beela Rajesh said the state has procured 5,000 additional personal protection equipment for its doctors, nurses and other healthcare workers. “We have also purchased disinfectants for hospitals and public places. Quarantine facilities in the hospitals are fumigated after patients are discharged even if they do not test positive for infection,” she said.

