Bihar: No Covid-19 cases so far, but para forces cautious
2020-05-10
PATNA: Even as a large number of cases are being reported from para-military forces in other states, Bihar is yet to record any Covid-19 case among the personnel posted in the state.

In Bihar, the largest deployment is of the Sashatra Seema Bal (SSB) followed by the CRPF), the CISF and the smallest contingent is that of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP).

These para-military forces are taking utmost precaution at their barracks, battalion headquarters, training centres, state-level headquarters and other installations so that their personnel remain safe.

“As a precautionary measure, we have procured PPE kits for use by our men to handle situation if any suspected case arises here,” a senior SSB officer in Patna, said preferring anonymity.

“Social distancing is being maintained at the barracks and the mess. Ration and vegetables brought from outside are being left idle for 72 hours before using them. All premises are being sanitised periodically where SSB personnel or officers are living,” he added.

The senior officer said that more than 25 quarantine centres have been created across state where personnel returning from leave are being kept in isolation for 14 days.

The SSB’s 14 battalions are deployed on the India-Nepal border in Bihar while three are involved in anti-Maoist operation accounting to almost 17,000 personnel and officers.

A CRPF officer said they don’t have any cases in the state so far. “But we are taking all precautions. We have created vehicle sanitising tunnel at the Bihar sector headquarters for sanitising all vehicles entering our premises,” he said.

“We have also installed hands-free wash basins at entry points of our units and offices which is used by personnel coming from outside,” the officer said, adding, the CRPF in Bihar doesn’t have to interact with citizens on a daily basis.

The CRPF has deployment strength of around 7,000 personnel in Bihar for dealing with the Maoist menace. Six battalions, including one CoBRA, VIP security companies and Rapid Action Force (RAF), are active.

A senior officer of the CISF said they have also procured PPE kits through headquarters and the AAI as their work profile includes close interaction with civilians at airports in Patna and Gaya. “We are also deployed at power stations at Barh and Aurangabad,” he said, adding, all training programmes are currently on hold.

“Only 12-14 people are allowed on a bus. Once used, the vehicle is left idle for 24 hours after sanitisation. Till then another set of vehicle is used which also undergoes same procedure,” he said.

A deputy commandant rank officer of the ITBP said all their personnel in Bihar are completely safe and following all norms and guidelines of the MHA on Covid-19.


