No cluster of Covid-19 patients around patients’ homes
2020-03-25
Nagpur: In a major relief, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has completed door-to-door containment drive in 3km radius of the houses of four positive patients, and confirmed there is no cluster of Covid-19 patients in these areas. NMC has claimed to be the first in the state to launch the drive, which is very important to control Covid-19.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe on Tuesday decided to extend the drive to the entire city as the civic body could complete the drive within three days in 3km radius of houses of four positive patients.

NMC assistant medical officer health Dr Praveen Gantawar told TOI, “No cluster of Covid-19 patients were found in vicinity of houses of four positive patients. We covered 64,000 houses with population of over 2.30 lakh in three days. Around 30,000 houses were covered on first two days and remaining 34,000 on Tuesday. There were some issues in initial stages. We sorted it out so the drive could be completed quickly on Tuesday,” he said.

NMC now has entire data of people residing in these areas, which covers two — Laxmi Nagar and Dharampeth — of the total ten zones. Gantawar said another random survey will be done again in these areas on Wednesday.

NMC sources told TOI a few houses where NMC teams were not allowed to come for survey will be covered on Wednesday. “NMC gave letters to teams so that they can hand over these to houses who did not cooperate. NMC has explained in detail the importance of survey in the letters,” sources said.

NMC will know if any suspected Covid-19 patients or those with severe acute respiratory illness are present in remaining parts of the city with the new drive. NMC is collecting contact numbers if they come across such patients. Also, NMC is spreading awareness among people about precautions as well as steps in case of any doubts about Covid-19.

The drive will also check whether home quarantined people are following guidelines or not.

On Tuesday, NMC also announced door-to-door diagnosis and medical treatment facilities. “If anyone falls ill and is unable to go to nearby hospital, such persons can call NMC’s control room. NMC will send a team of doctors to the home. If a suspect patient of Covid-19 requires admission, NMC will provide ambulance and ensure the concerned persons is admitted in hospital,” NMC said.

NMC has also appealed to retired officials and employees of health department of NMC, state health department, army and other establishments to come forward and join in the drive to control Covid-19.

The civic body has also started meetings with private hospitals to reserve beds for Covid-19 in case of any outbreak like situation.


