‘No community transmission of Covid-19 in India so far’
2020-03-18
NEW DELHI: There is no community transmission of Covid-19 occurring in India as yet, India’s top health research body, ICMR, has claimed.

ICMR said those with no travel history or direct contact with a Covid-19 patient, except healthcare workers, need not get tested as yet even if they exhibit symptoms such as fever, cough and shortness of breath.

The assertion of the health research body, which is developing testing and treatment protocols for Covid-19, was based on preliminary results of a random sampling exercise conducted by it in 51 virus research and diagnostic laboratories between March 1 and 15.



 
 

 


 

The study involved testing 20 samples each of throat and nose swabs taken from patients admitted to government hospitals with influenza like illness and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI), but having no travel history to countries affected by Covid-19 or direct contact with an infected individual.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Dr Balram Bhargava, ICMR director general, said, “The results of 500 samples have arrived. All patients have tested negative for Covid-19. The remaining test results will be available on Wednesday. Based on the final outcome, we will update our protocol for testing for Covid-19. As of today, our stand is that there is no community transmission happening in India. We are still in Stage-II, where the disease is transmitted locally from an infected person with travel history to their direct contacts.”

“Also, two rapid testing machines have been purchased. They can process 1,400 samples daily. We plan to buy three more of these machines to scale up testing,” Bhargava said.

Asked about how the disease transmission was expected to evolve, Bhargava said nothing could be predicted. “We hope to slow down the progression of Covid-19 outbreak in India from Stage-II to Stage-III (community transmission). But we cannot say it won’t happen,” he added.

On Monday, WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus had said that the most effective way to prevent infections and save lives was breaking the chain of transmission. And to do that, countries must test and isolate. “You cannot fight a fire blindfolded. And we cannot stop this pandemic if we don’t know who is infected. We have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test,” he had added.

Bhargava said WHO’s remark could hold true for countries such as Italy and UK, where there are 1,000 new cases daily, but not India. “As and when the situation changes, we will revise our strategy for testing,” said Dr R Gangakhedkar, chief epidemiologist at ICMR.

As per the current strategy, only healthcare workers managing respiratory distress or SARI patients can be tested when they have acute respiratory illness symptoms, even if they don’t have any travel history or directed contact with a Covid-19 patient.

Currently, India has 72 labs that are testing for Covid-19. By the weekend, officials said, 49 more labs of DRDO, CSIR and government medical colleges will start testing.


