No coronavirus fatality in country yet: Union minister Ashwini Kumar Choubey
2020-03-09
PATNA: Union minister of state for health and family welfare Ashwini Kumar Choubey on Sunday said 39 positive coronavirus cases have so far been reported in the country with zero fatallity.

Choubey, who was here to attend the core committee meeting of the BJP to finalize the names for probable candidates for the Rajya Sabha seats falling vacant from Bihar, said 28,529 people were under the surveillance of medical experts in the country.

He said altogether 34 laboratories were operational in the country. “The number of laboratories will be increased to 50 in a day or two. In addition, a team of medical experts has been sent to Iran to ensure that no Indian citizen tested positive could fly back to India,” he said.

“The Indian citizens tested positive in Iran are being provided medical assistance by the team and a laboratory has been set up there for the purpose. However, those tested negative, including the ones from Siwan in Bihar, are being allowed to fly to India from Iran,” the minister said.

Referring to the initiatives taken by the Centre to deal with coronavirus, Choubey said a rapid response team (RRT) has been set up to assist the states from where majority of the cases has been reported. Besides, a group of ministers set up by the central government is taking stock of the situation on a daily basis, he said.

He said people coming to India from Nepal through Bihar are being properly screened. “The states have been asked to develop mechanism to gather reports from panchayat level so that the problem could be tackled properly,” he added.

Isolation facilities identified in state: The state health department has identified isolation facilities in every district to accommodate coronavirus patients and suspects. People with a travel history to countries affected by the virus will be monitored in home isolation. “People with symptoms similar to the virus will be identified and put in isolation. Active door-to-door surveillance will be done by ASHA workers,” state surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra said, adding altogether 6,579 PRI members and 57,245 health workers have been appointed by the state health government for the purpose.

