No check on Covid rule breach by auto drivers
2020-06-12
Nagpur: Three-seater autorickshaws, which are supposed to ferry only two passengers in a trip, are plying with more than six passengers throwing Covid distancing norms to the winds. This was especially witnessed under Lakadganj zone and the traffic police personnel deployed there made no efforts to enforce the Covid distancing rules.TOI went around various parts of the city on Thursday and found some autorickshaw drivers even more brazen in flouting every traffic and Covid safety norm by allowing passengers to sit along with them on the driver’s seat.The blatant violation by auto drivers was noticed between Gomti Chowk to Kapsi flyover. During a 15-minute stay at the spot, TOI found almost all three-wheelers ferrying excess passengers. Senior PI from Kamptee traffic zone Roshan Yadav admitted autos plying in this part of the city are violating the guidelines. He said that traffic constables deployed in this part of the city have been asked to discourage auto drivers from ferrying more than two passengers in one trip. Most commuters were daily-wagers and autorickshaw drivers too hail from poor families and hence the traffic police were a bit lenient, said Yadav. TOI also spoke to a few passengers who alighted at Gomti Chowk and they pointed out that with no Aapli Buses on city roads, they were left with no option but to use autorickshaws to commute.The traffic police are also overlooking the violation of pillion riding on two-wheelers. Traffic police personnel deployed across busy junctions and roads have taken no effort to nab bikers riding double seat.Following the state government directives, Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) had allowed autos and cabs to operate from May 5 with some strict guidelines making it mandatory for drivers to wear mask and use hand sanitizers. It also specified the number of passengers allowed in these vehicles, i.e. driver-plus-two.Deputy commissioner of police (traffic) Vikram Sali said all the 10 traffic zones have been instructed to ensure strict adherence of the Covid-19 guidelines. “Now, I will ask all 10 senior PIs to intensify the drive against violators,” he said.From June 1 to 10, the traffic police have penalized 72 auto drivers. According to city traffic police data, 23 autorickshaw drivers have been penalized for driving without uniform. “If the NMC resumes city bus operations with some riders like limiting passengers, spread of coronavirus could be curbed to a great extent as availability of buses will discourage people from travelling in crowded autos,” said traffic experts.Meanwhile, traffic police on Wednesday detained four motorbikes plying with modified silencers in Civil Lines, said traffic DCP Vikram Sali.