No-contact policy, Mandatory masks, frequent sanitisation: Delhi markets gear up for post-lockdown era
2020-06-07
Earlier this week, Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal announced that all shops in the city's markets will be open, and not on an odd-even basis. Though some of the city’s popular markets, such as Janpath, Khan Market and Sarojini Nagar, have resumed function, they're mostly deserted, a far cry from their usual buzz. With shopkeepers waiting for their regular customers to return, they share how the shopping experience will change. 


No-entry, No-Contact policy at shopsShopkeepers are maintaining a no-contact policy with customers. "We aren't allowing customers inside the shop. They stand outside, tell us what they want, and we show it to them. If they do enter, which is rare, they have to get their temperature checked and wear a mask. We’ve also started home delivery," says Mukesh Goyal, who owns a shop in Khan Market. 


Shopkeepers take safety precautionsThough it may take some time before markets get back to their usual business, shopkeepers are hopeful the situation might improve as Metro services resume. Vinod Sharma, President, Old Mini Janpath Market Association, says, "I don’t think we will have large numbers in CP until the Metro services resume. As far as precautionary measures are concerned,we have sanitisers, are maintaining social distancing and covering our faces all the time."



'Not letting people touch or try things like before'Most shops aren’t allowing customers to touch or try items. Sunny, a shopkeeper in Janpath, says, "We aren't letting people touch anything. We ask them to browse through things from a distance. After selecting a piece and bargaining the price, we give them a new piece from our stock."
Sourav Monga, who has a handicrafts shop in the market, shares, "We sanitise our customers' hands when they enter, and provide them with a mask if they aren't wearing one. We are not letting people touch anything. If they accidentally do touch something, we sanitise the product. Once they’re done shopping and are leaving, we sanitise their hands again."


More wait time At shopsShopkeepers say that while some of them are not letting customers inside shops, others are ensuring there are not more than three-four people inside at a time. Santosh, a shopkeeper from Sarojini Nagar, says, "People will have to wait to enter shops now. And one thing I’ve noticed is that if customers want something, they enter one shop and try to get everything on their shopping list from there."





