No Covid-19 deaths in Goa, state will not hide cases: CM
2020-05-14
Panaji: Denying rumours linking a recent death in a state isolation ward to Covid-19, chief minister Pramod Sawant said people admitted in the isolation wards are tested for the virus multiple times, and there was no basis to call it ‘death of a suspected Covid-19 patient’.

Insisting that there has not been a single coronavius death in the state, Sawant on Wednesday said, “ I want to clarify that the state government will not conceal any confirmed novel coronavirus positive case”.

“No matter who tests positive, there will be no hiding the case, even as an exception, in the interest of the state. A while ago, when we tried to test a former minister, people made an issue out of that too. Noone is immune to Covid-19. We are testing everyone as needed. ,” Sawant told reporters. 

“People wrongly assume that everyone admitted to isolation ward are Covid patients and if one of them passes away, news spreads that he or she has died due to Covid. People should not have this misunderstanding. If a suspect tests positive, then he will not be kept in isolation ward, he will be immediately taken to the Covid hospital facility,” said Sawant.

He said that the death of a youth from South Goa is being wrongly linked to Covid-19.

“He was tested once in Pune and three times in Goa. If he happened to be positive, then there would have been other positive cases linked to him. We also worry about the staff and the safety of the state. We have no suspected Covid death in Goa. Just because a death took place in the isolation ward, it does not mean it is a Covid death. The death becomes a suspected Covid death if the death happens before we can test the patient —then we can say suspected death,” said Sawant.

For a person admitted to isolation ward, the first test is carried out within two hours and this is followed up with a confirmatory test, he said. “When a patient is tested four times and the test comes negative then how it is a suspected Covid case? In the case of the South Goa man’s death, all members of his family were also tested, and are negative for the virus” said the chief minister.


