No case of Covid-19 yet: Ludhiana DC
2020-03-23
LUDHIANA: Deputy commissioner Pradeep Kumar Agrawal on Sunday said there was no positive case of novel coronavirus (Covid-19) in Ludhiana district so far. He said all the samples sent for testing were negative. He also thanked residents of Ludhiana for supporting ‘Janata Curfew’, which was announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.


Agrawal chaired a meeting on Covid-19 in his office in the evening, also attended by commissioner of police Rakesh Kumar Agrawal, ADC (development) Amrit Singh, MC additional commissioner Sanyam Aggarwal, ADC (general) Iqbal Singh Sandhu, ADC (Jagraon) Neeru Katyal Gupta, ADC (Khanna) Jaspal Singh, ADCP Deepak Pareek, all SDMs, civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Kumar Bagga, DFSCs, and several others. The DC said the common man would not suffer in coming days.

The DC said in exercise of powers under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, the Punjab government had already issued the Punjab Epidemic Diseases, Covod-19 Regulations, 2020, for the containment and prevention of the virus. It is imperative to put in place strict measures of isolation and social distancing to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the district, teh DC said. 

Whereas in exercise of the powers conferred under the Rule 12 of the Punjab Epidemic Diseases, Covid-19 Regulations, 2020, a lockdown had been directed in the territorial jurisdiction of the district in public interest with immediate effect upto March 31, 2020 (inclusive), he said.

All shops, commercial establishments, offices and factories, workshops, godowns etc. shall close their operations, no public transport services including operation of taxis/auto rickshaws etc. shall be permitted except transport of all kinds to and from hospitals, airports, railway stations, bus terminals/bus stands. Specific routes to be allowed in the districts shall be decided by the secretary of RTA, Ludhiana, on Monday, strict home quarantine shall be observed by all foreign returnees (who landed in India on or after 06.03.2020) and their contacts/other persons at risk as decided by the district administration, all such foreign returnees (who landed in India on or after 09.03.2020) shall also mandatorily contact the district administration (by calling 104/112/01612444193) and register themselves for home quarantine (they may also register on the COVA Punjab Mobile App) – failing which they shall be liable for legal action, people are required to stay at home; and come out only for essential services and that too one member of a family at a time and strictly following social distancing guidelines issued earlier, any gathering of more than 10 persons in public places shall be prohibited. 

These restrictions will not be applicable on all essential commodities and services as defined under the Order No. JED (1455)-2020/855 of the department of food and civil supplies of 21.03.2020 and their manufacturing, supply chains, required transport and other logistics to ensure their availability, public offices (including officials and employees) tasked with emergency, law and order and essential function such as DC/SDM/tehsil & offices subordinate to them, police, health, urban local bodies, fire, defence establishments and central police/paramilitary organisations including NDRF, rail and air transport – they must comply with all precautions and advisories issued by the government, local transport (as notified by Secretary, RTA Ludhiana). 

All goods vehicles, including those carrying essential items, shall be allowed to ply. 

Companies which have to follow rules will have to apply for permission at the DC office on dc.ldh@punjab.gov.in.

These orders are to be meticulously complied by all concerned and violations shall be dealt with severely under relevant provision of the IPC. Executive Magistrates/ SHOS/ EOs in MCs/ ACA GLADA /Commissioner MC Ludhiana and all the BDPOS shall be personally responsible for the implementation of these orders in their respective jurisdiction.

He further informed that a special awareness drive would also be launched in the district from tomorrow onwards, in which residents would be educated about ways to save themselves from Covid-19.

‘Special suit soon’

The office of commissioner of police on Sunday informed that police officials had bene busy in tracking persons who had returned from abroad. Rakesh Kumar Agrawal said a special suit had also been procured by the police to prevent them from contracting Covid-19.


