Coronavirus: No direct Kolkata-China flight from Monday
2020-02-08
KOLKATA: Direct flights between Kolkata and mainland China will be severed from next Monday following the withdrawal of China Eastern Airlines flights till February 29 because of the novel coronavirus outbreak and dip in passenger load, a senior official of the airline said on Friday. IndiGo had already announced cancellation of its direct flight from Kolkata to China from February 6 and, according to a senior official, flights to Guangzhou are cancelled till the middle of June.

“Considering the current situation, the last flight to Kunming from Kolkata will reach on February 9 and we will fly out with passengers from Kolkata on February 10. For the next few weeks, we will suspend flight movement in this sector and will take stock of the situation after February 29,” said an official.


 

TOI had reported on February 4 how airlines operating between Kolkata and different Chinese cities are either suspending flights or are rationalizing them because of a drop in passenger count over the nCoV outbreak.

Both IndiGo and China Eastern Airlines operate daily direct flights between Kolkata and China. While IndiGo had last week announced the cancellation of the Kolkata-Guanghou services between February 6 and February 15, China Eastern Airlines had brought the number of flights down to four per week. With the Indian government issuing a notification asking its citizens not to fly to China and banning entry of all Chinese nationals to India, the passenger count has come down further this week. Such was the situation that China Eastern Airlines, that was already running a lower number of services, had to cancel Friday’s flight because of low passenger count, an airport official said.

Earlier this week, officials of Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon, which operate flights between Hong Kong and Kolkata, had said they didn’t have any immediate plans to cancel or cut down flights. However, the current scenario has made them rationalize their flight movement and they have decided to fly between Kolkata and Hong Kong five days a week instead of six.

“In view of the novel coronavirus outbreak and significant drop in market demand, we have announced capacity cuts across our network. There has been capacity rationalisation for our services from Kolkata to Hong Kong. From six flights per week, effective from February 9 until March 29, we will be operating five flights every week. Our onwards flights from Hong Kong into China have also been rationalised by 90%,” a statement issued by Cathay Pacific read.


