Coronavirus in Kerala: No fresh cases, Pinarayi Vijayan cautions against slightest lapse
2020-03-18
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan has cautioned against even the slightest of lapse in precautions to check the spreading of Covid-19 in the state. “The virus is spreading the world over. Hence even the slightest of lapse cannot be tolerated. At present, lapses are happening,” the chief minister said after the review meeting.

No fresh case was reported in the state on Tuesday. The total positive cases reported in the state is 27, of which 24 are in the hospitals and three have been cured. However, a 68-year-old Malayali woman, who had returned from Saudi Arabia on March 13, was tested positive in Mahe, which is part of Puducherry on Tuesday. The CM said the three-year-old kid who was under treatment at Ernakulam after testing positive for Covid-19 has been cured.

The state health department has put 18,011 people under observation in the state, of which 268 are admitted at designated isolation facilities. Till date 2,467 samples have been sent for testing, of which 1,807 came as negative. On Tuesday, 65 people were hospitalized and 5,342 people were put under observation. 

More number of people hospitalized are in Thiruvananthapuram (66), followed by Thrissur (38) and Palakkad (27). Seventeen of the 30 primary contacts of the Italian tourist who was in Varkala have tested negative. 

The CM said the government has decided to constitute an expert committee to advise the government on Covid-19 emergency. He said as a prelude to this he had a meeting with the expert doctors and scientists. An interactive web portal is also being planned to disseminate information on Covid-19 to the common man and health workers.

He said the service of medical students and para medical staff will be used to create awareness among the people. The government has decided to give special focus on people above 60 years of age, especially those with respiratory or heart problems. 

He said the situation is under control and no reports of community spread have been reported. He also urged those under quarantine to follow the protocol.

Meanwhile, in Malappuram, 475 primary and secondary contacts of the two Covid-19 patients have been identified and the health authorities have ensured home quarantine of these people. Others have been directed to report to district-level control cell at the earliest. 

 Malappuram district collector has asked all Umrah pilgrims from the district who returned from Jeddah after March 1 to register their names at the control cell via covidtravel@gmail.com.

Meanwhile, Ponnani police have registered a case against Tharbhiyathul Islam Sabha for organizing a prayer meet in Ponnani on Monday night.


