No floor test, Speaker adjourns MP assembly over Covid-19
2020-03-17
Bhopal: The Kamal Nath government on Monday dodged a floor test and hoped to get a 10-day breather in the ongoing political crisis when Speaker N P Prajapati adjourned the assembly till March 26 in view of the Coronavirus threat. The House will now reconvene on the day of Rajya Sabha election.

BJP promptly moved Supreme Court, seeking disqualification of the Congress government for ignoring the Governor’s instruction to conduct a floor test, and paraded its 106 MLAs at Raj Bhawan. Soon after this, Governor Lalji Tandon wrote to CM Nath, asking him to hold the floor test on March 17. “Otherwise, it will be considered that you don’t have majority,” the Governor cautioned.

The countdown to the budget session was full of suspense and drama. In the wee hours of Sunday, Tandon had asked the Speaker to conduct a floor test on Monday. Congress ministers argued that it was a “message and not a directive” from the Governor. CM Nath met the Governor around midnight on Sunday and told reporters that it’s for the Speaker to decide on floor test.

Congress MLAs flew down from Jaipur on Sunday morning and BJP MLAs from Manesar landed in Bhopal at 2.15am on Monday. The stage was set.

The House commenced at 11am. The Coronavirus divide was clear. Most Congress MLAs including chief minister Kamal Nath were seen wearing masks. BJP legislators didn’t.

Soon after the Governor’s address, Tandon gave a message to the House: “I want to give legislators some advice. With the present situation in the state, peacefully and with dedication, ensure that the rules of the Constitution and democratic traditions of Madhya Pradesh are upheld and protected.”

Leader of opposition Gopal Bhargava stood up to speak and attract the attention of the Governor but ruckus ensued immediately. Congress MLAs shouted, “Respect what the Governor said just now.”

With the exit of the Governor from the House, Bhargava said that 22 Congress MLAs had sent their resignations on March 10. “The Kamal Nath government is in minority,” he said, and demanded a floor test. He reminded that the Governor has instructed the government for a floor test.

While Bhargava was speaking, Speaker Prajapati carried on with the business of the House. Ruckus ensued and Bhargava continued to speak on the resignations of the Congress MLAs.

Speaker Prajapati told the LOP, “Please sit down. Whatever letters (including resignations of MLAs) have been exchanged were with the Governor. Not in the assembly and with Speaker.” As Bhargava tried to argue, fresh uproar started and Speaker adjourned the House for 10 minutes.

The House gathered again at 11:35am. Bhargava and former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan again said that the government “is in minority”. Chief minister Kamal Nath was present in the House.

Amid noisy scenes, the Speaker said, “Honourable members, we are aware of the Coronavirus epidemic. There is concern at the international level, including WHO. The government of India has also issued advisories from time to time and almost all state governments — including Madhya Pradesh — have taken steps to fight the epidemic. All of you must be aware that Rajasthan, Kerala, Odisha and Maharashtra have postponed their assembly sessions to check the spread of the epidemic.”

The Prime Minister hs declared it an epidemic during video conferencing with SAARC countries, Prajapati pointed out. “Legislators and people have been advised not to attend public gatherings, which is not possible due to the assembly session and hence, in view of the Government of India advisory and in public interest, the assembly is being adjourned till March 26,” he announced.

After the adjournment, and even after Congress MLAs left, BJP MLAs continued to sit in the House for around 15 minutes. Then, they boarded two buses and 106 of them went to Raj Bhavan to be presented before the Governor. “We are here to submit a list of 106 BJP MLAs to the Governor and tell him that the Congress government is in minority,” Bhargava said.

Former BJP minister Bhupendra Singh said, “We have paraded 106 party MLAs before the Governor. All of us told the Governor that his instructions of a floor test on Monday have not been followed by the Speaker.”

Former CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan argued, “Congress has run away from the battlefield. This government does not have the Constitutional status to be in power. Congress has shrunk to 92 MLAs and BJP had 106 present before the Governor. Majority are with BJP. Today, Congress ran away, so they can get some extra time. But this government cannot save themselves with the Coronavirus excuse. Even Coronavirus cannot save them. We are approaching Supreme Court.” 


