No further easing of lockdown curbs
2020-04-18
Panaji: Goa will adhere to the guidelines and relaxations announced by the Union ministry of home affairs (MHA) and will not indulge in any further easing of the lockdown restrictions, the State Executive Committee(SEC) said after the review meeting.

The meeting, chaired by chief secretary Parimal Rai, noted that the MHA’s order dated April 15 did not provide scope for any further relaxations.

“It was brought to notice that there would be no relaxation beyond the guidelines, and if required, the state could consider to not offer some of the relaxations in view of the local requirements and the situation existing in the bordering districts of the neighbouring states,” said the SEC in a statement.

Principal secretary for science and technology Puneet Goel, secretary for transport SK Bhandari and revenue secretary Sanjay Kumar were present for the meeting, along with other bureaucrats. 

The SEC said that strict vigil has to be ensured at all the entry points of the state in order to rule out the possibility of people entering Goa without permission. 

The SEC asked the department of information and technology, and directorate of municipal administration to prepare a mechanism to monitor the movement of goods vehicles. The SEC also directed district observers and incident commanders to make regular visits to the border checkposts.

Secretary for health Nila Mohanan informed the SEC that Goa does not have any hotspot for coronavirus and thus from April 20, additional economic activities can commence from April 20.

 She also informed the SEC that pharma firm Abbot has developed a rapid screening test for Covid-19 which is under examination by ICMR. The SEC discussed the issue and decided that the feasibility of using such tests could be explored once ICMR approved the screening test. 

The SEC said that as per the new MHA guidelines, all individuals will have to wear a face cover in public places and in work spaces. “We must ensure that there are sufficient quantities of cloth masks available in the market at an affordable rateThe requirement of masks with respect to government departments should be conveyed to GSUDA by all heads of departments. It was also decided that DMA would provide necessary support to secretary, women and child development, for ensuring sufficient availability of reusable cloth masks,” the SEC said.

The SEC also decided to procure 1,000 thermal guns to check the temperature of visitors and workers at all government departments.


