No humidity boost for virus across most of India: Study
2020-05-17
Pune: A recent study by Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, which linked absolute humidity with the spread of Covid-19, has also shown that a majority of states and territories fall outside the 'risky’ absolute humidity range in 2020.Absolute humidity (AH) is the measure of water vapour (moisture) in the air, regardless of temperature. The researchers identified an AH range of 3 to 9 grams of moisture per cubic metre of air (g/m3) as 'risky' and a much narrower AH range of 4 to 6 g/m3 as 'very risky'.Their findings have been published in 'Science of the Total Environment’, an international weekly peer-reviewed science journal. The effect of these humidity ranges on infection spread has been termed as a 'weather-based spread'. “Using existing and projected weather data for January-December, 2020, it was found that a majority of Indian states fall outside the 'risky' absolute humidity range throughout 2020," said Arnab Chanda, lead researcher from the Centre for Biomedical Engineering at IIT-Delhi.“States and territories with some risk of weather-triggered spread are Sikkim, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Chandigarh, and Haryana. Out of these, J&K and Sikkim fall in the 'very risky' absolute humidity range during January, February, March, November and December. One of the worst affected, Maharashtra, is not expected to experience any weather or humidity-triggered Covid spread anytime in 2020 due to its high humidity levels. But social distancing is crucial for states to claim this benefit,” Chanda said.He added that in the monsoon period of June-September, 2020, none of the Indian states are likely to fall within the risky AH ranges. According to this analysis then the upcoming rainy season is not expected to impact the spread of Covid-19 in the country this year. “However, the research showed that as absolute humidity starts to dip in some regions after the monsoon, some Indian states in the north may experience risk in terms of Covid-19 spread," Chanda said. "But most other states, including Maharashtra, are projected to have absolute humidity levels above 9 g/m3 until the end of 2020."The researchers said absolute humidity is just one of the factors that determine rate of spread. While it is always beneficial for a region to have absolute humidity levels in the safe range, this benefit may account to naught if social distancing norms are not followed.“The risky and very risky humidity ranges will help classify areas in different countries. They will help policymakers take steps to prevent weather-based Covid-19 spread in the upcoming months,” Sonal Gupta, another IIT-Delhi researcher involved in the study, said.Some recent studies have shown that the spread of Covid-19 is expected to be stronger during colder and temperate weather, similar to the behavior of seasonal respiratory flu viruses and previous viruses from the Coronaviridae family (SARS-CoV-1 and MERS).The IIT-Delhi researchers also identified risky weather ranges in the United States. “We found that 90% of new cases in US — January to April — were reported when states were in the 'risky' AH range of 3-9 g/m3,” said Gaurav Raghuwanshi, second author of the study.