Meerut: No health worker, kin of Covid-19 dead waits entire night with body at crematorium
2020-05-13
MEERUT: With the entire family in quarantine, next of the kin of a Covid-19 deceased spent an entire night with his body at a Meerut crematorium in the absence of health workers in PPE to lift it. The relative made frantic calls to district administration officials and health department staff on Monday night, but all in vain.


So the kin and policemen had to wait at the crematorium till help arrived on Tuesday morning.

The 67-year-old man, a resident of Sambhal, died at Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial (LLRM) Medical College on Sunday. The information was given to the family on Sunday evening. The family alleged that after at least 12 hours of follow up on Monday, the officials of Sambhal and Meerut administration took a call on the place of cremation.

The 27-year-old son of the deceased, who is quarantined in Moradabad, said, “We were told about the death in the evening despite the fact that my father died in Monday morning. Then the authorities took another 12 hours to finalise where the body will be cremated. And even after that my cousin kept waiting for the health authorities to arrive and carry the body outside the hearse van, until Tuesday morning.”

The cremation was eventually carried out on Tuesday morning at Meerut’s Suraj Kund crematorium.

Meanwhile, a video of the deceased’s nephew, who was at the spot for the cremation, went viral on social media. He said, “I have been waiting for health team to arrive to carry the body to the pyre since Monday. I made calls to the health as well as district authorities, but all in vain. Everybody kept asking me to wait. The entire family in already in quarantine; I am the only one who is not infected. And I could have not taken the risk in the absence of health team.”

Dr RC Gupta, principal, LLRM Medical College, said, “We had provided the body to the family after disinfecting it with sodium hypochlorite, as per the norms. It was packed in a three-layered bag and was safe to be carried. The relatives of the deceased asked for a PPE kit, which was not possible. However, as per the norms, we provided gloves and masks to them. Despite this, they refused to touch the body or carry it outside the hearse van.”

Dr Raj Kumar, Meerut chief medical officer, said, “According to norms, only the driver of the ambulance is sent in a PPE and there is no requirement of any other health team at the spot. However, after assistance was sought, a worker with a PPE kit was sent on Tuesday morning, after which cremation was done. Nobody was available on Monday night.” 


