No info on Covid link to SARI cases
2020-06-02
CHENNAI: The number of people walking into hospitals with cough, heaviness in the chest, breathlessness – symptoms of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) – has increased since March when hundreds of Covid-19 positive cases emerged in TN. But neither the state nor Greater Chennai Corporation has data on the number of these people testing positive for Covid-19 or those who died.

“SARI is a symptomatic surveillance of the trend of respiratory illness among the community over a period of time. It is one of the strongest symptoms of the viral infection. Spike in figures indicates increase in Covid-19 cases,” said National Institute of Epidemiology deputy director Dr Prabhdeep Kaur. While ICMR mandates that all SARI cases in hospitals be tested, TN permits tests even if they are not in hospital.




On March 30, health minister C Vijayabaskar said 956 SARI cases were reported across the state of which 38 were in various hospitals. Surveillance was strengthened and the number increased to 190 admissions including 77 hospitalisations on April 15. On Sunday, the number of cases rose to 5,493 with 365 hospitalised.

Directorate of public health officials said they were still collating the number of people who tested positive among SARI cases. They also do not have data on SARI deaths or total number of deaths. Greater Chennai Corporation, which usually registers birth and death certificates within three weeks, hasn’t issued any for the past few weeks. A senior official said the staff didn’t have the time. “We will be drastically under reporting deaths and cases if we don’t monitor or record SARI cases,” said infectious disease expert Dr Subramainian Swaminathan.

Since at least 60% of deaths in Tamil Nadu are at home and their death certificates are declared by family physicians, many Covid-19 deaths may be falling between the cracks, doctors warned

Meanwhile, with inadequate testing, the positivity rate – the number of people infected over number of people tested – rose by 10% in the last three weeks. On May 7, when 14,102 people were screened, there were 580 fresh Covid-19 cases. But when the state and its capital dropped the number of tests, the positivity rate increased. On Monday, with just 10,964 people screened, there were 1,162 people infected, taking the percentage of people infected to nearly 10% “The infection is rapidly spreading but if all close contacts are tracked and screened, if we screen even the asymptomatic contacts, positivity rate won’t be so high,” said infectious diseases expert Dr V Ramasubramanian.


