No job offer revoked since lockdown: IIT, NIT-Patna
2020-04-09
PATNA: The technical institutions like Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) and National Institute of Technology (NIT), Patna, are heaving a sigh of relief as no recruiter has cancelled the job offers amid the lockdown due to Covid-19.

The premier institutes are still conducting the placement drive through online modes for the final year BTech students.

IIT-Patna has already conducted placement and internship drive with five different companies since the lockdown while five more companies are going to hold online tests, web interviews and group interviews over phone.

“Since the beginning of the lockdown, we have conducted placement and internship activities for 5 different companies through online tests and interviews,” Meghna, professor-in-charge public relations of IIT-Patna said.

“The process is on for five more companies. We have got in touch with all our recruiters about online lectures and revised exam schedules. We have got support from a number of recruiters who reinstated that they will uphold their offers and their relationship with the institute in these testing times,” Meghna said.

She added: “As of now, no company has revoked its employment offers to the IIT-P students.”

Samrat Mukherjee, professor-in-charge of placement cell at NIT-Patna said on Wednesday that one multinational company has completed the recruitment process during the lockdown. “The results are awaited. Once the company releases the list of selected candidates, we would know how many students got the job offers,” he said.

Besides, the NIT-P has sent the database of BTech 4th year electronic engineering students to a Delhi-based core electronic company. According to Mukherjee, the company would conduct telephonic interviews. “Much to our relief, no company has cancelled the job offers due to Covid-19. However, three companies withheld the recruitment process due to the lockdown. But they have assured to do it once the situation gets better,” he said.

Nearly 85% of the IIT-Patna BTech students have received job letters while the NIT-P has recorded 93.9% placement of its BTech students.


