No lockdown for child abuse in Kerala: 97 cases in less than two months
2020-05-15
KOCHI: Childline, during the lockdown period, received 12 complaints on physical abuses in Ernakulam district.


As per statistics released by the agency, a total of 97 cases were attended by Childline between March 22 and May 13. Sources with the agency said children who sustained injuries due to abuse were classified under physical abuse category. Apart from this, there were 11 instances of emotional abuse faced by children in the district during this period.

“Physical abuse is an act of causing harm to a child’s body. Under this category, we have included instances where an abuser inflicted marks or any such injuries on a child during the abuse. If a child is abused without causing a bodily injury, we have included it under emotional abuse category,” said a Childline official.

Childline officials said most physical abuses took place at the house of the child.

“There have been instances of parents, relatives and even neighbours causing injury to children. Mostly, we are alerted about the incident by one among the family members itself. Right now, due to the lockdown, we have limitations in arranging a separate shelter for these children. So, as a primary measure, we have been suggesting the children to be moved to another house which is safe. We would be taking follow-up action, as well and in case of emergencies we would be shifting the children to shelters,” said Resmy Mampilly, Childline coordinator.

Meanwhile, as many as six cases of child sexual abuse (CSA) were verified by the organisation even as there were other reports which were in the process of verification.

“There have been reports of sexual abuse as well. There are cases where the reports are under verification. As of now, we have six confirmed instances of CSA, which were reported during the lockdown,” said a Childline official.

Childline managed to arrange shelter for underage children in eight instances, considering the immediate need for the same. Three instances of parental neglect too were reported from the district during the lockdown period. The agency, meanwhile, also provided assistance to two children who had to be taken to hospitals outside the district.

“One of the main difficulties we faced was that we were unable to personally meet children in need of emotional support and guidance. However, we provided help through phone. Even though restrictions were in place, we still managed to execute so much work. One child was taken to Thrissur for medical treatment during the lockdown. Another child who was stuck at Ernakulam at a relative’s place was transferred to Idukki with the help of other agencies like district legal services authority, justice brigade, IMA et al,” said Fr Jensen Variyath, director, Childline. 

(The victims' identity has not been revealed to protect their privacy as per Supreme court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


