Coronavirus outbreak: No litigant permitted inside Uttarakhand HC, advocates advised to avoid overcrowding
2020-03-17
NAINITAL: A day after Uttarakhand reported its first Coronavirus positive case, the Uttarakhand high court (HC) on Monday said that no litigant will be permitted inside the court premises till March 31st. It also added that no case will be dismissed in the absence of counsel.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The directions were made public through a notice on Monday evening after Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan held a meeting with all the judges of the HC as well as the Advocate General and the representatives of the Bar. Earlier in the day, Chief Justice Ranganathan also informed that he spoke to the Chief Justice of India on the matter as well.

According to the notice issued by the Registrar Judicial, the courts will not take up any final hearing cases and will only deal with urgent matters. The notice also said that “no litigant shall be permitted to enter the HC premises, unless his/her presence is required by the court”. The notice also requested the advocates to “avoid usage of association hall and the canteen to prevent overcrowding”.

Speaking to TOI, Puran Bisht, president of Bar association said he has also requested all the advocates to comply with the directions and to make sure that all the precautions are taken to stop the spread of the virus. “We have requested all the advocates to make sure that they take all the precaution to stop the spread of the disease. The advocates have also been advised to come to court only if they matter listed on the day,” Bisht said.

Meanwhile, Kumaun University vice-chancellor also announced on Monday that the university will remain closed till March 31. “To check the spread of the virus, we have announced that the university will remain closed till March 31 and no classes will be held. We will take stock of the situation soon and further decisions will be taken accordingly,” said VC KS Rana.

The Susheela Tiwari Hospital administration also announced that the government medical college will also be closed till March 31. However, classes for Masters and Final year will continue to be held.

