Kerala: No lockdown misery for Mangalamkunnu elephants
2020-04-28
KOZHIKODE: If getting hold of household essentials during the lockdown has been a challenge for you, hear this. The Mangalamkunnu Angadiyil house near Sreekrishnapuram in Palakkad district has been managing the mammoth task of feeding and tending to the 11 elephants owned by them during the lockdown.


Brothers M A Haridasan and M A Parameswaran, popularly known as Mangalamkunnu brothers, own the largest number of captive elephants in the state, only behind Guruvayur devaswom.

Despite the lockdown, the family has been sourcing around 3,000kg of food materials daily- including grass from Pollachi in Tamil Nadu, rice and rice flakes from mills in Palakkad, palm leaves from Malappuram and medicines from Thrissur - for the 10 elephants which stand tethered at the Mangalamkunnu house after the lockdown washed away the peak festival season mid-way. The remaining elephant is kept at the house of a mahout at Alathur.

The elephants owned by the family include celebrity elephants like Mangalamkunnu Ayyappan and Mangalamkunnu Karnan, among others. “The first three days of the lockdown were tough and we faced difficulties in getting food materials. But with the government giving the nod for transporting food materials for elephants, the supply chain issues have been resolved,” Haridasan said.

He added that an elephant needs around 250-300kg of palm leaves daily. Also, they are fed around 17kg of grains, including rice, rice flakes and 4kg of beer waste, which is also part of the diet. Haridasan said they spend Rs 5,000 for the upkeep of an elephant a day.

“We have a long-term contract with suppliers to provide palm leaves and they mostly source it from Malappuram. There have been some isolated instances of some households raising objections to people entering their compounds to cut the leaves during the lockdown, but even then, we are receiving the supplies,” he said.

To solve issues with the daily travel of mahouts during the lockdown, around eight of the 24 mahouts are staying on the Mangalamkunnu house premises itself. The remaining mahouts and other staff for preparation of food reach the house daily.

The lockdown has crippled the usual January-May annual festive season when it was at its peak.

“From March 10 onwards, the festivals started getting cancelled. The financial loss due to the cancellation of bookings has been huge as normally an elephant gets around 80 bookings in the season and only around 45 of them were over this season when the Covid-19 struck. All the remaining bookings got cancelled and we refunded the advance amounts. There have been around 350 booking cancellations due to the lockdown for our elephants alone,” he added.

However, the family is not ready to cut corners in tending the elephants despite the huge revenue loss.

“Our elephants are like members of the family and we don’t think of profit and loss when it comes to taking care of them,” he said, adding that elephant owners as a whole are worried about the long-term consequence of the pandemic.

The family’s tryst with jumbos began in 1977 when elder brother Parameswaran brought the elephant Ayyappan from Bihar in 1977. Over the years, the brothers added to the numbers. At one point (during 1998-99), the family had as many as 18 elephants.


