Coronavirus scare in Delhi: No link with chicken, but sales see massive dip
2020-03-12
NEW DELHI: While chicken has got nothing to do with the spread of the novel coronavirus, rumours and scaremongering on social media have impacted its sale drastically. Delhi meat merchants’ association has reported a dip of 70% in sale of chicken, while beef and mutton sale has seen a milder impact.



 
   Coronavirus outbreak live updates 
 
 

Mohammad Arshad Qureshi, president, meat association, said the government’s animal husbandry department has clearly said that chicken consumption was safe. “There is no corelation between Covid-19 and the industry. It is just lack of awareness and basic knowledge about the disease that have caused the dip,” Qureshi said.


The association estimated that overall poultry business was running at just 20-30% of what existed before January when information about this new disease started to pour in. “Mutton has seen a decline of just 20%, but it may be a seasonal downturn. Buffalo meat and fish sales have more or less remained the same,” Qureshi added.

The impact of the downturn was visible from the wholesale market and the retail shops across the city. Manoj Rajora, who runs a Kacha Jhatka meat shop in southwest Delhi, said the region has seen 70% dip in meat sales. “People say they are taking precautions, but in reality both are not related. How many people can you convince,” he said.

In central Delhi’s star chicken shop at Mirdard Colony, the sales reportedly dipped by 50%. Md. Salimuddin, the manager of the shop, said their customers were now reluctant to purchase meat despite it being part of their staple diet. “The rates have seen only a minor dip because we also have to pay the workers,” he argued. Chicken here was selling at Rs 140/kg. Rajora explained that since sales were down, people who reared chicken, also stopped bringing them to market. “The entire supply chain is impacted,” he added.

Md Mushtaq, a meat seller in south Delhi’s Munirka, said the area has witnessed a drop in rates by Rs 60-70 in the past two months. “Demand usually goes up around Holi, but sales simply did not pick up this time,” he added. The rates in the high-end market of antibiotic-free meat, however, are still floating around Rs 145/ half kg from the past three months.

Senior public health department official from South Delhi Municipal Corporation clarified that the meat consumption was safe and there has been no reported transmission of Covid-19 from chicken. “People seem to be confused between bird flu and the new virus. They should simply eat hygienically processed well-cooked meat,” he added. Meanwhile, DMMA members were busy forwarding the letter from the animal husbandry commissioner to poultry federation of India to counter the misinformation. 


