Kochi: No lockdown melancholy for the elderly in Ernakulam
2020-05-16
KOCHI: Unlike many other socials groups, Covid-19 lockdown has not been very traumatic for most elderly in Ernakulam. According to a random survey done by researchers at Chinmaya Vishwavidyapeeth covering 600 elderly people who are living alone, elderly have received attention and support from a cross-section of the society including neighbours and relatives.


“We looked at sociological and psychological impact on this population that depends on others for various needs. We interviewed people and also shared questionnaire through Google documents. About 78% of them had received good support from other family members besides help from neighbours or relatives. Many of them depend heavily on other adult family members. Yet, instead of being anxious about their own health and life, they expressed high concern about their relatives and children,” said Vanisree Ramanathan, associate professor and head, School of Ethics, Governance, Culture & Social Systems, who lead the study.

Of the respondents, 67% were male and 33% were female. More than half of the persons surveyed were in the age group of 71 to 80. 

She said that the responses were contrary to the general expectations that elderly were not receiving attention. “Most of them told us that every day they were getting calls from people all over,” Ramanathan said.

The fact that they could not go out socially either to places of worship or make calls was countered by the care and compassion by relatives and neighbours.

The survey forms part of a larger study, ‘Psycho-social impact of the Covid-19 lockdown on elderly in the state of Kerala, India’. “We also did webinars with elderly in other states and found that the Kerala model of social democracy is better,” said Ramanathan.

Internet availability or social network-related concerns were less for the elderly. Many seemed to appreciate helping tendency to connect to the distant family members through technology. Adhering to norms like social distancing, washing of hands and wearing face masks were considered as crucial to curtail the virus by the respondents.

