No more coronavirus suspects in central Tamil Nadu hospitals
2020-02-14
TRICHY: More than a week after panic gripped people over the spread of novel coronavirus (nCoV) from China, central Tamil Nadu no more has patients with its symptoms. Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH), a tertiary care centre in Trichy, was free of nCoV suspect cases as of Thursday. 

While the hospital administration discharged a 27-year-old Singapore returnee of Madurai last week, three others — a 38-year-old man from Pudukottai, a 30-year-old man from Trichy and a 35-year-old man from Ariyalur — were also sent home after either they tested negative or had no symptoms of fever, cough and breathing difficulties. 

Except the Pudukottai man who was working in China, others were workers in Singapore which was one of the four countries including Hong Kong and Thailand where nCoV outbreak was reported. The first passenger diagnosed with the symptom was the 27-year-old man from Madurai on February 2. 

“Though they had fever symptoms while arriving at the airport, their health condition became normal after a few days of treatment at the isolation ward. Though they were discharged, they are being home quarantined,” deputy director of health services (DDHS), Trichy Dr A Subramani told TOI. 

So was the case in the government medical college hospital at Tiruvarur where two men from there and one from Nagappattinam got admitted either with symptoms or out of fear of nCoV infection in the last ten days. 

All of them were China returnees. 

As of Sunday, all of them were discharged as they tested negative, confirmed the dean of the medical college hospital Dr J Muthukumaran, on Thursday. 

Yet, over 600 people from the four countries who returned through the Trichy international airport have been kept in home quarantine, said DDHS Subramanian. 

In Trichy district alone, 95 passengers have been home-quarantined as of Thursday. 

“If the home-quarantined passengers are found to have any of the symptoms in 28 days, they will be shifted to the isolation ward,” said Subramanian. 


