No more 14-day quarantine for health care staff if -ve
2020-06-06
NAGPUR: With a number of corona positive patients emerging from private and state government-run hospitals, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has now ruled that doctors and paramedical staff will not have to undergo 14-day quarantine if they test negative. The high-risk contacts will be quarantined only if any one of them tests positive.

The civic body will also now not shut down hospitals from which patients test positive. Patients admitted in four private hospitals — Dhantoli, Shankar Nagar, Wanjari Nagar and Congress Nagar — had tested positive in the last five days. 

The specific ward was closed for fumigation for a day and then reopened. Doctors and staff were allowed to work after their tests came negative.

At the Dhantoli hospital, only one nurse out of 70 doctors and paramedical staff tested positive. Around 21 nurses who were high-risk contacts of the nurse were quarantined and rest allowed to resume work.

In May last week when there were fewer occurrences of Covid-19 positive patients, the civic body had closed down a private hospital in Jaripatka for three days for fumigation and also two diagnostic laboratories. Around 20 doctors and staff were quarantined for 14 days but all came negative.

Similarly, earlier a cancer hospital was shut by NMC for a couple of days and a team of 59 doctors and staff quarantined for 14 days in a part of the hospital. All tested negative. 

Another hospital at Kamal Chowk also downed its shutters for a day. Its staff of 48 were quarantined for 14 days and all, excluding a liftman residing in Mominpura, tested negative.

When it came to NMC, 10 officials and employees who were not working in Covid-19 or hospitals were quarantined but not the health care staff of Satranjipura Zone.

The NMC’s additional chief medical officer Dr Praveen Gantawar told TOI that these decisions have been taken as per the new government guidelines. “Cases are on the rise and health care staff in government-run and private hospitals are working after taking all precautions,” he said. 

Dr Gantawar said it is because of the care taken by doctors and medical staff that resulted in just a nurse testing positive even though positive patients were admitted in the Dhantoli hospital for between 1-5 days. “In the current situation, we cannot shut down such private hospitals which might even stop treating patients,” he said

With this, the NMC hopes to keep the morale of the doctors and paramedical staff high. 

An employee of a pharmacy located inside the Dhantoli hospital premises had also tested positive. The shop was shut for a few hours, fumigated and reopened after others tested negative.

A private medical practitioner on condition of anonymity said NMC has taken a good decision. “Many private hospitals had built a system to screen patients. There are many hospitals registering more than 100 patients in a day at OPD. But few are testing positive. It only means that private hospitals are taking all precautions while admitting patients,” he said.


