Coronavirus in Delhi: No metro in off-peak hours tomorrow
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: In what could be a sign of things to come, Delhi Metro is going to regulate train services on Monday after these remain closed on Sunday because of the ‘Janata curfew’. Parking, however, at all metro stations will remain closed.


Coronavirus in India live updates

On Monday, Delhi Metro services for general public will be available only from 8 am to 10 am and again from 4 pm to 8 pm. From 6 am to 8 am, only those involved in essential services will be allowed to enter metro stations and there will be no metro services from 10 am to 4 pm and after 8 pm.

“Metro train services will start from 6 am across originating stations of all lines and will be available at a frequency of 20 minutes till 8 am. During this period, only people involved in essential services like hospitals, fire, electricity, police etc. will be allowed to enter metro stations on producing their identification cards before security personnel,” said Anuj Dayal, executive director (corporate communications), Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC).

From 8 am to 10 am, trains will be available at a normal frequency and general public will be able to travel without requiring any identification. Though there will be no metro serviceS between 10 am and 4 pm, all trains which start at 10 am from the originating stations will continue to run till they reach their destination. Similarly, there will be no metro service from 8 pm onwards but the last train starting at 8 pm from the originating station will continue to run till it reaches its destination. 

“The objective of this staggered service plan on Monday is aimed at facilitating all stakeholders with effectiveness and promote ‘social distancing’ which is very much required to contain spread of coronavirus,” said Dayal. 

 “DMRC again appeals to and advises general public not to panic and stay at home and use the metro only when it is essential and unavoidable,” said Dayal. 

“In the prevalent scenario where authorities have shut malls, restaurants and major markets to prevent spread of the virus, it is responsibility of our passengers also to cooperate with DMRC and help fight the coronavirus collectively,” he said.

Dayal said that while the plan for the modified metro services are applicable for Monday, March 23 only, if there was any further requirement to continue it in the larger public interest, people will be informed.


