No more relaxation in Nashik during lockdown 4
2020-05-20
Nashik: Though an order from the district collector is yet to come based on the new guidelines set by the state government for lockdown 4, sources have informed that there will be no further relaxation and the current restrictions are set to continue.

According to sources from district administration, municipal corporation and police, no more relaxation would be granted in the city and rural parts of the district.

“There will be no major changes in the new guidelines. Shops, that do not have permission to open, can open only for repairing and cleaning. Most other things we have already allowed in red zones except containment zones,” an official from the district administration said.

As per the fresh state government guidelines, Nashik, Malegaon, Dhule and Jalgaon municipal corporations in North Maharashtra continue to be in the red zones. Except malls, hospitality industry, rickshaw and saloons, most of the shops have already opened in the city. 

Jewellery and garment shops have already opened in the city for the past few days. Liquor shops also opened in in non-containment zones of the city and district.

The government has also allowed the industries to start their operations, except those in containment areas. Over 5,500 small, medium and large industries have already started operations by maintaining social distancing.

“Apart from buses, we have also issued passes for two-wheelers and four-wheelers for people to reach work places,” an MIDC official said. 

Meanwhile, movement of people was witnessed on city street for buying essentials and other things. “The situation of the city is now completely under control. Of the total 48 Covid-19 positive patients in the city, 37 have been discharged, while two have succumbed to the infection. There are only nine active cases of Covid-19 in the city,” a senior NMC official said.

“More relaxations have already been given and there will be no more relaxation,” he added.


