No more ambulatory bags: PGI to start testing ‘ventilator’
2020-03-26
CHANDIGARH: The Union ministry of health and family welfare, which is facing an acute shortage of ventilators vital for critical care of Covid-19 patients, is interested in a low-cost portable ventilator, weighing just 1.5 kg, designed by a team of experts from Chandigarh’s PGIMER and Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru.


India has only 30,000 ventilators in all the hospitals for its population of over 1.3 billion and it is estimated that at least 5% of Covid-19 patients would need them because of respiratory distress.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday had announced a Rs 15,000-crore package to improve and augment health infrastructure, including ventilators, to manage Covid-19 cases.

“We have recently been approached by the Mahindra Group, which is looking for mass manufacturing of ventilators. We have been working on this for a year and now we feel this will be beneficial for the society during this pandemic,” Dr Rajeev Chauhan, neuro-anaesthesiologist, PGIMER. A patent has already been published for the device, named “Respiration Control (RC),” and it abides by the international guidelines.

The team of experts had started making this ventilator when they felt that manually pumping ambulatory bags was not only tiresome, but also required a patient’s attendant to be immobile for a long period. “Our price will be between Rs 10,000 and Rs 12,000 only. The cost of highend ventilators is around Rs 10 lakhs,” said Eshaan Dhar, an IISC Bengaluru passout and former scientific officer, department of atomic energy.

The device works on battery for 7-8 hours and can then be connected with direct current. The complete unit is noiseless and requires no manual assistance. The apparatus is made of high quality plastic with no sharp edges. The safety of this device is ensured by incorporating volume and pressure microsensors at patient end. Moreover device is incorporated with disconnection alarm. “It is a shortterm alternative to critical care ventilators, which are expensive complex microprocessor driven devices,” said Dr Chauhan, who has spent his own funds to design this device. He said, “We have ethical approval for testing on patients and the same will start soon.”

The designers claim that the device has advantages like sparing human being of tiresome effort, low cost, delivering required volume per breath, easily transportable and easy to assemble. “Although this model is not intended to replace the expensive/ efficient mechanical ventilators, it may be considered for short-term ventilation as required in Covid-19 for which we have a dearth of ventilators,” said Eshaan.

Experts feel that mass production of the device will not take more than 15 days. “We have done field tests and now it has to be seen how it works on patients at the PGI,” said Eshaan.

