No need to panic over Coronavirus outbreak: Kerala health minister KK Shailaja
2020-01-29
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Health minister K K Shailaja, on Tuesday, said people in the state need not panic over Coronavirus outbreak. “The state is safe, however, we are constantly monitoring the situation. We have made all arrangements to prevent any emergency situation,” she said after a review meeting of the health department here. 

The minister said so far 633 people who have come from the virus-hit regions are under the constant observation of medical teams. Blood samples of 10 people were sent for testing at theNational Institute of Virology in Pune, of which seven have been tested negative. The remaining results are expected soon. At present, seven people are admitted to isolation wards in different hospitals in the state. 

Meanwhile, a central team of doctors visited the state to monitor the situation and expressed satisfaction over the preparedness to meet any eventuality. The team visited various hospitals and screening facilities at airports. 

On the students and people stranded in the virus-hit regions of China, the minister said, “The state government has requested the Centre to take effective steps if the people want to come back to their native places. I personally contacted the students and they are safe. They do not have any emergency situation there. Their only issue is that they are unable travel back to Kerala,” she said. However, Shailaja said it was also not advisable to bring back the students from Wuhan if they have been put on isolation by the authorities there. Hence, the Centre will take appropriate decision after having discussion with the embassy authorities. Meanwhile, parents of students who are currently in Wuhan met the chief minister and the health minister on Tuesday.

Shailaja has directed the state health machinery to hold review meetings on a daily basis to assess the situation. It has been decided to set up control rooms in all districts. 

Earlier, the central team met Rajan N Khobragade, principal secretary for health, and expressed satisfaction over the arrangements made to prevent the outbreak. The three-member team led by Union health and family welfare advisor Dr M K Shoukath Ali said so far no Coronavirus case has been reported from the country. “The Centre is closely monitoring the situation and all the people who are travelling from the virus-hit regions are under constant observation. People coming from China and other virus-hit regions should strictly follow the guidelines issued by the health ministry,” he said.

Kozhikode woman in isolation ward

A 40-year-old woman, who arrived from Singapore on Monday, was admitted to Kozhikode beach general hospital’s isolation ward with symptoms of fever and cough on Tuesday. The ward was set up for Coronavirus patients. According to hospital authorities, the patient’s throat swab samples will be sent to Pune-based National Institute of Virology for testing on Wednesday. Till Tuesday, 115 people arrived in Kozhikode from China and all of them have been kept under house quarantine.

