Coronavirus in Mumbai: ‘No need for panic buying, there’s enough supply’
2020-03-21
MUMBAI: Friday saw families rushing to stockpile household items even as shops began to close in the wake of the coronavirus lockdown in the state. Not just vegetables, fruits and grains, but bottled water, cleaning agents, masks, sanitizers, and even cosmetics flew off the shelves in both retail and wholesale markets. But wholesale traders said that there’s no need to panic and there’s adequate stock of vegetables, fruits and grains.


Neither the 10-day state government shutdown nor Sunday’s nationwide lockdown apply to groceries, milk, newspapers and other essential items, yet the fear of non-availability caused panic buying in many areas.

It did not help that cops and civic staff urged shops to roll down shutters before the midnight deadline. Sources said authorities arrived at Andheri Lokhandwala Market and forced shops, even grocery stores, to close.

Social media users narrated a similar situation in Kandivli. Kishore Kulkarni, secretary of the Chembur Merchants Association, said they shut shops after the state directive as “life and health is paramount”. Meanwhile, assistant municipal commissioner Kiran Dighavkar said following the CM’s directive, all shops with non-essential commodities will stay shut for the next 10 days and the alternate day rule for closure of stores is no longer applicable.

In APMC Vashi, the grain market has been virtually emptying out since a week. Wholesaler Deepak Gala said, “This is because retailers are buying up large stocks... Although the PM and CM both have said essential items like fruits, vegetables, grains and milk will continue to be available, people are anticipating a shortage....”

Shankar Pingale, an APMC trader, said: “I fail to understand why families are stockpiling even perishables. A total of 970 truckloads of vegetables arrived on Friday because the market was closed for cleaning on Thursday. We will be shut for Sunday’s weekly holiday and a mathadi strike on Monday, but supply will resume the following day. Supplies are adequate so there is no fear of shortage or price rise, at least at the wholesale end.” Gala said: “After this frenzy, there will be a lull in purchases for the next few weeks as households already have enough. Grain prices are being artificially hiked by retailers...”

