No new Covid-19 cases in central dists for third day
2020-04-29
Trichy: The central region of the state remained free of new Covid-19 cases for the third consecutive day, and Trichy city emerged with zero positive cases on Tuesday after the recovery of the last three patients in the city limits.

For the third straight day, no one tested positive for Covid-19 in the eight districts – Trichy, Karur, Pudukottai, Ariyalur, Perambalur, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and Nagappattinam districts in the central region.

Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) in Trichy has discharged five patients after their complete recovery. Three of them are residents of Trichy city while two others are from Ariyalur district. With this, Trichy city joined the club of Covid-19-free cities. However, the Trichy district has six more patients undergoing treatment at MGMGH. “A couple of patients from Somarasampettai and four patients from Thuvarankurichi are undergoing treatment. They are also likely to be discharged at the earliest,” Trichy collector S Sivarasu told ToI on Tuesday. So far 45 patients have been discharged out of the 51 positive cases in Trichy.

While finishing the task of tracing family and secondary contacts, Trichy district administration has shifted its focus to random sampling in the containment zones. Pregnant women and people with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) and influenza-like infection (ILI) were tracked for taking samples.

Thanjavur also discharged nine patients including four women and five men from the government medical college hospital on Tuesday. The patients included a seven-year-old girl from Ammapettai, four patients from Adhirampattinam and two patients from Vallam. With this, the count of positive cases has dropped to 22 from 51 in Thanjavur.

In Karur, seven Covid-19 patients were discharged from the government medical college hospital on Tuesday. Among them, four are from Dindigul and three from Namakkal district. At present, there are 35 Covid-19 patients undergoing treatment in the hospital which include 11 from Dindigul, eight from Namakkal and one from Karur.


