No non-covid patient left at M R Bangur
2020-04-13
KOLKATA: With 140-odd patients being treated by 41 doctors and an additional seven specialists from different city hospitals on special deputation, MR Bangur Hospital in Tollygunge started functioning as a full-fledged Covid-19 treatment facility from Sunday.


“All of our other patients have been shifted to different hospitals and from now we shall only treat patients with novel coronavirus symptoms. Twelve doctors are on duty in shifts. A team of seven specialists from SSKM Hospital, Medical College and Hospital and Nil Ratan Sarkar Hospital has joined us to look after patients with co-morbidities,” said MR Bangur Hospital superintendent Sisir Naskar.




The Bengal government on April 3 had designated MR Bangur Hospital as the city’s first Covid-19 facility after the state’s initial plan to turn Medical College and Hospital (MCH) into the same was shelved. When the announcement was made, MR Bangur Hospital had 300-odd patients in the old building and a handful of Covid-19 suspects in an isolation ward. Over the past week, around 50 patients were discharged from the old building while 250 others, including the extremely critical 32 patients in the burn ward, were shifted to SSKM and Sambhunath Pandit Hospital.

On Friday evening, a sick newborn and his mother were shifted to SSKM from the Sick Neonatal Care Unit, rendering the entire hospital premises free of all general patients. “We had been disinfecting each department and block as they were vacated. After the entire building was free of patients, fumigation and disinfection was carried out. We are now ready with 1,100 beds to accommodate only Covid-19 patients,” Naskar said.

“We have an adequate number of doctors at present and we are receiving all support, including doctors, paramedics, and personal protective equipments, from the state health department. We have been assured that even in the future we shall get more doctors, depending on the increase in patient count,” said a senior official of the hospital.

