No need to panic, says Gujarat CM after MLA who met him tests positive for Covid-19
2020-04-15
GANDHINAGAR: The political leadership of Gujarat is keeping its fingers crossed on being able to avoid catching the Covid-19 disease after Congress MLA Imran Khedawala tested Covid-positive hours after he met CM Vijay Rupani, deputy CM Nitin Patel and junior home minister Pradipsinh Jadeja in Gandhinagar on Tuesday. Government sources said the meet lasted for 30 minutes during which the CM discussed the proposal of clamping curfew in all hotspots.


Government sources said the meet of three Congress MLAs — Imran Khedawala, Gyasuddin Shaikh and Shailesh Parmar— lasted for 30 minutes during which the CM discussed the proposal of clamping curfew in all hotspots.

Pictures of the meeting in Gandhinagar triggered panic as the CM was seen not wearing a mask and Khedawala’s mask was seen hanging from his chin.


It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign

Rupani, however, insisted there was no need to panic as social distancing norms were followed during the meeting. “Khedawala was sitting about eight metres away from me. We have been taking all precautions. There is also no need [for me] to be quarantined,” said Rupani.

After this meeting, the government announced clamping down of curfew in all coronavirus hotspots from April 15 (6am) to April 21 (6am) in the Walled City of Ahmedabad and Danilimda. Ahmedabad now accounts for 373 or 57% of the total 650 positive cases recorded till Tuesday evening. Of the total 78 new cases, 53 were detected in Ahmedabad. Two more deaths were recorded, taking the death toll to 28. The news of Khedawala testing positive has worried government officials as he has been active in enforcing lockdown in minority-dominated areas.

However, Congress MLA Gyasuddin Shaikh said, “When we met the CM in the afternoon, his report was still awaited. He had given his sample for testing a couple of days ago after running fever. I have no symptoms and hence have not opted to get tested. If required, I will get tested.” Danilimda MLA Shailesh Parmar said, “We strictly maintained social distancing norms in the meeting.”

