No N95 masks for medicos in non-coronavirus blocks in Chennai
2020-03-26
CHENNAI: “Please keep an N95 mask, flowers on my coffin,” read a message posted by a house surgeon from a government hospital in the city in their internal WhatsApp group.


House surgeons and medical students working in wards other than those dedicated to deal with Covid-19 patients have been denied N95 masks and instead provided with only three-layered surgeon masks, which are less effective in filtering viruses and bacteria.

TOI spoke to students from government hospitals in Chennai, Chengalpet, Thanjavur and Theni to confirm the same. Whistle-blowers among students have been allegedly threatened by hospital authorities, though the state health department has denied it.

“These surgical masks are effective only for six hours as pores get blocked, but we wear them for two days,” said a house surgeon in Theni GH. Imagine the plight of old sanitary workers and healthcare assistants with lesser immunity in other wards. All of these people could be potential carriers of the virus if they work unprotected, the student added.

A Ramalingam of Government Doctors Association said hospitals are a source of infection and it was crucial to provide protective equipment to everyone working in healthcare facilities.

The Covid-19 crisis is estimated to extend at least for a month. Many patients with other medical conditions or illnesses haven’t reached out to the GHs fearing infection. These people too will reach hospitals next week. “Who will handle cases from next week if we fall sick?” said a house surgeon in Thanjavur GH.

Meanwhile, the state government said all doctors and health workers in out-patient wards and those dealing with Covid-19 patients will be provided masks and adequate protective gear from Thursday. “We have adequate stock. A seamless supply of 60,000 masks will be released every day by the Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation to all medical colleges and hospitals,” said health minster C Vijayabaskar, who held a meeting with deans and heads of hospitals.


