Uttarakhand's Pauri Garhwal now Covid-19 free district
2020-04-22
DEHRADUN: Samples of 277 Covid-19 suspect cases, including those of the head priest of Badrinath and his aides, tested negative on Tuesday. In another good news, Uttarakhand’s Pauri Garhwal was declared coronavirus free as not a single positive case has been reported from the district in the last 28 days.


An official statement by the health department maintained that no new case was found in Pauri Garhwal and the only positive case of the district was discharged from the hospital in the first week of April after he recovered fully. Notably, a 26-year-old man from Kotdwar, who had come back from Spain in March, was found infected with Covid-19 and was admitted to district’s Base Hospital on March 16 as the first positive case (and so far, the only positive case) of Pauri Garhwal.

“Pauri was also acknowledged by the Government of India as the third district where no fresh case of coronavirus infection was reported in last 28 days. The other two such districts are Mahe in Puducherry and Kodagu in Karnataka,” said additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant.

The official added that another coronavirus patient was discharged from Government Medical College in Haldwani on Tuesday taking total recovered cases in the Himalayan state to 19.

The state has four government facilities for Covid-19 positive cases. Susheela Tiwari Medical College in Haldwani is catering to Covid-19 positive cases from these six districts — Almora, Bageshwar, Pithoragarh, Champawat, Udham Singh Nagar, and Nainital. 

Similarly, Government Doon Medical College and Hospital caters to the postive cases from Dehradun district.

Covid-19 positive cases from Chamoli and Pauri will be treated at Government Medical College (GMC) in Srinagar and at All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS) in Rishikesh. GMC in Srinagar will also treat positive patients of Rudraprayag district. And the positive cases of other three districts — Uttarkashi, Tehri Garhwal, and Haridwar — will be treated at AIIMS Rishikesh.


