Tamil Nadu: No new Covid-19 case in 13 districts, but fingers crossed
2020-04-27
CHENNAI: Thirteen districts in Tamil Nadu have not reported additional Covid-19 positive cases for a maximum of 15 to a minimum of five days – seemingly an indication of declining infection rate amidst a lockdown. But epidemiologists warn that celebrations may be premature as the number of people being tested in these districts may not be significant.

 



The Nilgiris, which had nine cases till April 11, has not reported a new case since then. Kanyakumari, which has 16 cases, hasn’t reported a new case for 13 days now along with Ranipet, which has 39 cases. Among the high prevalence district, in Erode, which has 70 cases, no new case has been reported in the past 12 days. In Theni (43) and Karur (42), the Covid positive numbers have remained the same for the past 10 days.

Krishnagiri has not recorded any case so far, while Pudukottai and Dharampuri have one case each. Many other districts such as Perambalur and Ariyalur have reported cases in single digits.

While health department officials and health minister C Vijayabaskar say it is a sign of declining infection rates, public health experts and scientists say it may be too early to come to such a conclusion. “You may not see numbers if you don’t look for them,” said public health expert and former National Health Systems Resource Centre executive director T Sundararaman. “We need to test more people,” he said.

On an average the state claims to test at least 6,500 people every day. But the directorate of public has not yet released the number of people the state has screened in each of these districts. Chennai, where at least 1,500 people are tested every day, has the maximum number of cases. The city has recorded 523 Covid positive cases, while Coimbatore has 141 and Tirupur 112.

Tuticorin, which has managed to contain the Covid spread to some extent, has not reported a positive case in the past six days. Collector Sandeep Nanduri said contact tracing was being done within two days of a person testing positive.

Erode deputy director of health services Dr S Soundammal said the district had managed to identify 27 Tablighi Jamaat members within two days after they returned to the district and the remaining members were identified within another three to four days. “As the returnees were identified in a short span of time, they did not come into contact with many others,” said Soundammal.

In the Nilgiris, the number of cases of Covid-19 positive cases remains the same from the date of declaration of the seven positive cases in the first week of April. A cluster of 8 people were identified in the Nilgiris by the district health officials, after a list of Tablighi Jamaat members was released by the government.

Public health deputy director Dr P Balusamy said before the test results were announced, all the eight TJ attendees were isolated and kept in Ooty GH. Immediately, the prime contacts were identified and samples were drawn. “All the entry points into the district were sealed and all the 1,417 people from the Nilgiris with travel history were home quarantined with stickers plastered on their house walls,” said Dr Balusamy.

There has been no new Covid-19 positive case in the past nine days in Karur district. Extensive testing of samples was the key, said Karur deputy director of public health Selva Kumar.


(With inputs from V Mayilvaganan, Shantha Thiagrajan, Padmini Sivarajah and Sambath Kumar)

