No. of Covid cases rises by 85 across state in 24 hours
2020-05-06
Kolkata: Bengal has registered a spike in the number of Covid cases on Tuesday. While the figure on Monday was 1,259, it increased by 85 to 1,344 on Tuesday — a rise of 6.8%.

Nearly 52% of all Covid positive patients in Bengal are from Kolkata, according to data released by the state on Tuesday. Kolkata has 700 Covid positive cases. The active positive cases in Kolkata is 472 that is 50.2% of the 940 such cases in Bengal. It marks a slide from the situation four days ago when 80% of Covid cases were reported from Kolkata. The fatality and recovery rates in Kolkata are also higher compared to Bengal. Kolkata has reported 40 deaths which account for 58.8% of total Covid deaths in Bengal, while 136 people have been cured in the city, which is 51.5% of the total persons cured in Bengal. 

State home secretary Alapan Bandyopadhyay said contraction of virus is high in all metropolitan towns and cities having a high density of population and mobility. He informed that there have been seven fresh Covid deaths in the last 24 hours after the state announced 61 deaths on Monday. The tally went up to 68 on Tuesday, he said. The figure doesn’t include 72 deaths due to co-morbidities of Covid patients. 

The Union health ministry has also acknowledged deaths due to co-morbidities in its bulletin in which the death figures till Monday stood at 133 (61 + 72). The state home secretary didn’t indulge in the debate over deaths in Bengal, though joint secretary of Union health ministry pointed out while explaining the sudden spike in death figures in India on Tuesday that two or three states didn’t report corona cases and deaths on time.

 “We persuaded with the states and they gave additional information leading to the surge in total cases and death figures,” the joint secretary said. Bandyopadhyay said: “I can tell you that we are sharing data transparently.” 

Earlier in the day, minister of state for health Chandrima Bhattacharya put it straight. “The state is not hiding facts. It is giving out numbers as and when it comes. The 72 deaths due to co-morbidities were announced after a medical panel of experts examined the cases. I don’t see anything wrong in it.”

The home secretary reported deaths due to Covid on Tuesday without a mention of deaths due to co-morbidities, putting the total death figure at 68. Bandyopadhyay didn’t name the IMCT, but addressed its observation that Bengal has the highest mortality rate in India. “Mortality rate looks high when there has been limited number of tests. It goes down despite a numerical rise in deaths when more tests are done. The high mortality is not because of the state’s failure in Covid management. It is because we didn’t have the logistics and infrastructure to test swab samples till a month ago.” 


