‘No of +ve cases will decide lockdown relaxation in dist’
2020-04-16
Nagpur: District collector Ravindra Thakre has made it clear that relaxation in lockdown ordered by the ministry of home affairs (MHA) and state government will be done depending on the situation in the district on April 19. Clearly, if the number of Covid-19 cases increase too much, then there will be no relaxation.

In the evening, he issued a circular regarding the activities to be permitted from April 20 if the situation does not worsen. This notwithstanding, the state government circular on lockdown relaxation has created confusion in the minds of local industrialists. They said that a clarification was expected on Thursday.

Nitin Lonkar, president of Butibori Manufacturers Association (BMA), said that many activities permitted by MHA were not mentioned in the state government circular. “As per the Wednesday circular, only food processing industries are allowed to function, which were already permitted. On the other hand, MHA has allowed all industries outside municipal limits to run. Industry department officials say that another circular is likely to be issued on Thursday,” he added.

Suresh Rathi of Vidarbha Industries Association (VIA) said that a clarification was needed on Thursday as there was lot of confusion in the state circular.

Meanwhile, Pravin Mahajan, an irrigation contractor, said that while rural irrigation projects have been permitted, not many contractors are in the mood to start work. 

“We will need cement, steel, gravel, etc. Labourers will have to be transported from their camps to worksites. The trucks will be stopped at all village boundaries and they will be checked. Moreover, how do we maintain social distancing at sites?” he said while talking to TOI.

Mahajan appealed to the government to waive off interest on bank loans taken by the contractors for taking costly machinery on rent. “If this is not done, many contractors will be in deep financial trouble,” he said.


