No option but to end life: Kharra man blamed for Covid spread
2020-05-09
Yavatmal: The 26-year-old Covid-19 positive paan kiosk owner, blamed for infecting several others through kharra (tobacco mix), has said because of the stigma there is no option left but to commit suicide.

According to sources, the man had made his intention clear to a senior bureaucrat who visited him recently. “How can I go back to the area where I have been projected as a culprit who spread coronavirus. It is a blot on my character. I run a paan kiosk for my daily bread,” the man is reported to have told the bureaucrat.

“Health department says one person has been infected because of me. But it was projected as if my kharra is the root cause of Covid spread in Pawarpura and adjoining Indira Nagar, which is incorrect,” he said.

When contacted by TOI, the positive person purported to have been infected by the kharra man denied having met him earlier. “We met in the institutional quarantine for the first time and later brought here (isolation ward),” said the 57-year-old man, whom the survey by preventive medicine unit of health department projected as the kharra man’s close contact.

When contacted, head of department of preventive medicine unit Dr Prabhakar Hiwarkar stood by the survey claim that the paan kiosk operator had infected 21 others through kharra.

Contrary to the unit’s claims, a chart prepared by the GMCH shows the paanwallah had 24 close contacts of whom one tested positive, 22 negative and one inconclusive. The chart also reveals that a 57-year-old man and his 45-year-old wife, who used to sell rotis, had 73 close contacts of whom 30 tested positive, 27 negative and 16 inconclusive. 

The survey also claimed that another source of infection in Pawarpura were two community handpumps. There were seven positive cases in the vicinity of one handpump and six from the vicinity of the second.

According to Dr Hiwarkar, “The unit presumed these cases are because of handpumps where a positive woman had gone to fetch water. This woman might have used one handpump, what about cases near the other handpump.” There are 10 other handpumps in containment localities of Pawarpura and Indira Nagar and no positive case was reported in the vicinity of those pumps, he said. 

Speaking to TOI, former state president of IMA Dr TC Rathod said there is no evidence to suggest chewing kharra spreads Covid. “Of course, chewing tobacco is injurious to health and one should discourage it. Not following social distancing, spitting and use of plastic pouches are some of the grounds that may spread Covid if it is done by an infected person,” he said.

Another senior IMA functionary Dr Deepak Sawalakhe said chewing kharra is detrimental to human health as it contains tobacco, but it cannot be said it spreads Covid. There is no evidence to sugggest that.”


