Patna: No PPE and N95 mask, doctors fear infection
2020-03-26
PATNA: On a day the state reported its fourth Covid-19 positive case, resident doctors on duty in isolation wards at government hospitals, especially NMCH, have alleged that they are not being provided with Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) and N95 masks.

“We are still on duty without PPE kit. I know many of us will be infected because we are totally exposed to this virus. But who cares?” said NMCH Junior Doctor's Association (JDA) president Dr Ravi Ranjan Kumar Raman, adding, “One Covid-19 positive patient was seen roaming around in the hospital premises, increasing the chances of passing on the virus to others.”

The NMCH JDA on Wednesday sent a letter to the principal secretary of health department claiming that the health department had ignored the instructions of the World Health Organization (WHO) and Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and was compelling doctors, paramedical staff and others on duty in the hospital to serve without protective gears. 

The junior doctors had earlier on March 23 written a letter to their superintendent, seeking permission to be quarantined for 15 days as many of them had come in contact with a patient and “many have started showing symptoms of fever, cough and sore throat”.

Doctors at NMCH, which was declared a dedicated Covid-19 facility on Tuesday, further alleged that they have been provided with gowns used during surgery or protective gear used while treating HIV+ patients. Two of the four cases reported so far are in isolation here.

TOI had on Monday reported that junior doctors wanted to be quarantined for 15 days after treating with Covid-19 positive person without wearing PPE kit. 

Another resident doctor said on March 17 they had demanded PPE kits and other necessary items but are yet to receive them. He also alleged they were being threatened with administrative action.

“We have been left to serve and die, while our principal is handling everything through video conference," said a post graduate student. They were also against naming NMCH as a covid-19 dedicated hospital saying it lacked infrastructure. "Everyone knows that NMCH gets submerged in water during rainy season. Most of the equipment are not functional here," said Dr Raman.

When TOI tried to contact NMCH principal he did not receive the call. Earlier he had claimed of having 1000 PPE kit.

A junior doctor of PMCH shared similar grievance on her social media account. Posting a photo with her colleagues wearing normal gown and without sanitizer, she wrote, "Suicide squad working on emergency @ patna medical college and hospital, bihar...We are given HIV kit instead of PPE. This is how we are supposed to fight against corona and this is how we are going to treat patient." The doctor had tagged Prime Minister Narendra Modi and WHO in her post.

"Covid-19 is not a new thing. Its cases started reporting three months back and government was seeing that doctors across the globe were putting PPE kits which has provision for covering eyes, shoes, everything. Still they are waiting for it to be procured," said a senior doctor at PMCH.

His colleague added,"Its is said that doctors are next to God, but we are human being and will be infected with this virus. Like others, we too have a family. Just five minutes applause and its over. now. What will happen to health system when doctors get infected."

However, health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar said they had provided 475 PPE kits to NMCH and 200 to PMCH on Wednesday.


