No private hospital planned for a pandemic: Dr Anup Marar
2020-05-04
Nagpur: The administration in Nagpur wants to use private hospitals to combat Covid-19 by treating positive patients there. This has upset those who run the private hospitals. On behalf of Vidarbha Hospitals Association, its convener Dr Anup Marar, who is also the managing director of the Orange City Hospitals and Research Institute, speaks to TOI on why it is a faulty move and likely to cause more problems.Excerpts:Can you explain what exactly is the problem?We have an excellent relationship with the administration and have even loaned equipment to government hospitals treating Covid-19 patients. Suddenly, The administration came out with a list of 12 hospitals which were asked to be in a state of readiness to treat positive patients. All this had to be done under specified norms inside two days. We are already working under strain, so how can we create infrastructural facilities like rest rooms, isolation wards etc? We just don’t have the wherewithal.Are private hospitals equipped to treat Covid-19 patients?Some newer hospitals do have isolation blocks. Not the older ones. Whenever we would get contagious disease cases we would refer them to isolation hospitals. It is not technically possible to convert private hospitals with all norms. Who would be accountable for the shortcomings? The accountability should lie with the government if at all it intends to process the order.Has the administration been receptive to your problems?The VHA has written to the administration pointing out the shortcomings under 4-5 heads. I don’t blame the authorities who are trying to be very proactive. But who is going to bear the recurring financial expenses? We had earlier suggested that all government hospitals with buffer land should be converted into Covid hospitals.Can all hospitals be blocked for Covid treatment?No, where will the accident and delivery cases go? Private hospitals can treat all non-Covid cases under government schemes. Hospitals in residential areas should be kept for non-Covid patients.The administration has been saying it has all powers to take over private hospitals.No, not taking over which would mean handing over our buildings to it. We have only been asked to be in a state of readiness and create facilities. This is the problem.Is treating non-Covid patients the only way private hospitals can contribute during this pandemic?The situation is very dynamic. What the future holds nobody knows. Considering the beds available in secondary and tertiary care, segregation of Covid-19 patients is the best thing to do now. Asymptomatic patients should not be hospitalized. They should be home quarantined or based in institutional facilities so that the available resources can be used beneficially. Every bed has to be for serious patients only. The VHA has also suggested that portable bedside oxygen concentrators be made available. This is easier than having piped oxygen or ventilators.What would happen after all government hospitals are full?The projected numbers are scary. If it increases, the solution could be to place patients in big halls with separate entries. If the projection goes into lakhs, patients will have to be at their homes with oxygen. It is a new thing for everybody.Would private hospitals be willing to treat Covid patients for a cost?Many in Delhi and Mumbai already have isolation blocks. They can surely consider this. Nagpur has always been a city of nursing homes with 50-100 beds scattered all over. In bigger cities, the private hospitals have 500-800 bed capacity. In Nagpur there is not enough land.Private hospitals seem to be worried of the damage to their reputation.We know our goodwill will go up if we are part of the Covid treatment. But, right now, it is a scary situation. If the virus spreads to other parts, will we be held responsible? Some patients have charged hospitals and even doctors have got infected from patients. In such cases, the entire hospital gets blocked and the team quarantined for 14 days. No private hospital has planned for a pandemic.Have you approached higher authorities?All are worried about the future and how we can be part of the process. Private hospitals cannot shirk away from our responsibilities. We have play within the limitations and overcome the shortcomings. Meetings are on for a mutually agreeable decision. (Watch the interview on facebook.com/toinagpur & twitter.com/TOI_Nagpur)