Covid-19 lockdown: No private vehicles to ply in Rajasthan
2020-03-24
JAIPUR/NEW DELHI: The Rajasthan government on Monday decided to ban all private vehicles on road from 6 am on Tuesday barring vehicles related to essential services including medical, paramedical, vegetables, fruits and grocery till March 31. The decision was taken after people were seen flouting ‘janata curfew’ risking their lives in the time of Covid-19 infection. The state highway tolls would also be closed for operations of private vehicles except those used in transportation of essential commodities. Chief minister Ashok Gehlot warned that if public does not cooperate in maintaining the lockdown, government will have to impose a curfew from Wednesday.


Gehlot also announced a Rs 2,000 crore relief package for 1.41 crore families to meet their daily needs in the wake of the lockdown. Those not covered under any social security pension scheme will be given an ex gratia of Rs 1,000. The CM instructed to release two month’s pension to 78 lakh beneficiaries.

Apart from this, Rs 1,000 ex gratia will be given to the each of the 36.51 lakh BPL families, 25 lakh construction workers and registered street vendors who are not covered under the social security pension scheme. Gehlot said in a statement that the decision will benefit 1.41 crore families in the state.

He said the state government will not allow any shortage of funds and resources in this hour of crisis.

During the lockdown, no needy will face any trouble and no person will sleep hungry, he said, adding that food will be delivered to the needy with the help of voluntary organisations and donors.

The state government will also distribute ration packets to the needy, who are not included in the National Food Security Act list. This will include items of need such as flour, pulses, rice, oil etc. These packets will be made available at every government building, police station, tehsil and panchayat building in urban and rural areas, he added.

Gehlot at a high-level meeting directed the authorities to ensure full compliance of the order.

Gehlot, upset with people for making a mockery of the ‘janata curfew’ said, “I appeal that people should not come out of their houses and observe self-imposed curfew for their as well as others’ safety. If people will not cooperate, the government would be left with no option other than imposing curfew from Wednesday onwards,” he said.

