No private labs for Covid-19 testing in Marathwada
2020-04-10
AURANGABAD: Even though tests for Covid-19 carried out by private laboratories account for one-third of the total screening across the state, this facility is still not available at any private hospital or laboratory in Marathwada.


Out of the 20,877 tests carried out in the state till Wednesday 7,893 were carried out by the private labs. The government has already capped the price of Covid-19 testing at private facilities at Rs 4,500, while the Supreme Court has advocated free testing amid impending danger of mass transmission of the pandemic.

Avinash Bhondwe, president of Indian Medical Association (Maharashtra), on Thursday said that early detection is the key in the fight against Covid-19 and private testing can play an important role in this.

“A section of the society can afford private testing for possible symptoms of novel coronavirus. Thus, the government should authorise private laboratories in adequate number for carrying out necessary tests. The screening at private labs can be made more reliable by laying down standard operating procedure,” he added.

Bhondwe, however, said that rapid antibody tests carried out using blood samples of patients would not be of much help.

“Rapid tests tend to show negative result in positive cases during the first week and therefore it can be misleading. The laboratories offering testing based on secretion samples of throat and nose can be useful,” he said.

Senior pathologist Sachin Kale, who runs one of the few NABL-accredited labs in Marathwada, said that outbreak of Covid-19 is an unprecedented situation.

“The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test carried out using throat swab samples can confirm the presence of Covid-19 during early days and rapid tests can be useful after one week or so. While it is challenging to establish a set up for PCR test during the period of current lockdown, there is no clarity on the part of government on carrying out rapid tests,” he said.

Unmesh Talkalkar, director of CIIGMA hospital, offered a different view. “Hygiene etiquettes and social distancing could be effective weapons against Covid-19 instead of mass screening. The phobia associated with Covid-19 calls for the need of mass screening. The disease can be cured and mortality rate is not that high as compared to other pandemics witnessed in the history of mankind,” he said.

Currently, swab samples from Latur and Osmanabad are sent to Solapur while that of other six districts from Marathwada are tested at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) in Aurangabad.

The government had announced a testing lab in Latur, but it is yet to be materialised.


