Covid-19 scare: No pharmacy in Visakhapatnam airport for travellers looking to buy mask
2020-03-14
VISAKHAPATNAM: Even as health authorities take emergency measures to contain the spread of novel coronavirus, the lack of a pharmacy in Visakhapatnam International Airport has become a matter of concern for travellers.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Although prescribed norms for international passengers are being followed at the airport, members of the airport advisory committee of Visakhapatnam airport suggested that precautionary measures be taken for domestic passengers as well.

At Visakhapatnam airport, a frequent flyer, Kumar, said, “Since I needed to carry a sanitizer along with me while I was travelling, I went to search for one on the airport premises. I was disappointed after I learnt that there are no sanitizers available in the airport and later I found out that there is no pharmacy to cater to the medical needs of passengers.” 

The advisory committee has submitted a representation to the ministry of civil aviation on the need for preventive measures at Visakhapatnam airport.

In the representation, committee members O Naresh Kumar and DS Varma said sanitizers should be provided at points where hand contact is unavoidable, such as the check-in process, and sanitizers and masks should be sold at MRP in the airport.

The letter also recommends that passengers pass through a thermal scanner, ensure that no passenger COVID-19 symptoms is allowed to travel and have a doctor and supporting staff round-the-clock in the airport.

All airport staff, the letter states, should be screened daily and given masks and gloves and buses, trolleys and washrooms be cleaned and fumigated more frequently.

Speaking to TOI, Visakhapatnam airport director, M Raja Kishore said, “We are following all guidelines issued by the ministry of health and family welfare. Until now, we have not got any notification regarding screening of domestic passengers. Due to scarcity of availability of masks, we are providing mask for a passenger only if the need arises. However, it is not available for everyone.”

Adding that cleaning of surfaces is being done with diluted solutions, Kishore said, “We have provided seriline hand rubbing liquid for the passengers.”

Kishore added, “Although tenders for setting up a pharmacy were initiated several times, there was no response. We will initiate a fresh tender again. The matter will also be escalated to higher officials.”

