No proof yet that tuberculosis vaccine can fight Covid-19: WHO
2020-04-18
NEW DELHI: World Health Organisation is studying if Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), a decades old tuberculosis vaccine, can protect people against infection with Covid-19 virus. According to the UN health body, two clinical trials addressing this question are under way, and WHO will evaluate the evidence when it is available.


“In the absence of evidence, WHO does not recommend BCG vaccination for the prevention of Covid-19. WHO continues to recommend neonatal BCG vaccination in countries or settings with a high incidence of tuberculosis,” WHO said.

On Friday, Raman Gangakhedkar, chief epidemiologist, ICMR said, they were also conducting a trial to assess whether BCG vaccine could be given for prophylaxis even among the healthcare workers. 

“We will be able to say something definite only when the results are out,” he said.

According to WHO, there is an experimental evidence from both animal and human studies that the BCG vaccine has non-specific effects on the immune system. These effects have not been well characterised and their clinical relevance is unknown. On April 11, the UN health body updated its ongoing evidence review of the major scientific databases and clinical trial repositories, using English, French and Chinese search terms for Covid-19, coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 and BCG. The review yielded three preprints (manuscripts posted online before peer-review), in which the authors compared the incidence of Covid-19 cases in countries where the BCG vaccine was used with those where it wasn’t and observed that countries that routinely used the vaccine in neonates had less reported cases of Covid-19 so far.

Such ecological studies are prone to significant bias from many confounders, including differences in national demographics and disease burden, testing rates for Covid-19, and the stage of the pandemic in each country, WHO stated. It added that the review also yielded two registered protocols for clinical trials, both of which aim to study the effects of the BCG vaccination given to healthcare workers directly involved in the care of patients.


