No pay cut for staff on lockdown days, govt tells pvt firms
2020-03-31
Jaipur: With March coming to an end and lakhs of employees and labourers engaged in companies, shops, and commercial establishments wondering about how to get their salary, the state government has announced to issue movement passes to employers so that they can go to their offices and pay their staff.

The order issued by industries department on Monday said that salaries or wages of the employees or workers will not be deducted for the duration of the lockdown and all the payments will be made through online transfers such as Direct Benefit Transfer, NEFT, RTGS, etc.

“In one hand the employers are willing to pay the wages and salaries and on the other, the workers or employees need the money urgently but because of lockdown that was not possible. The movement passes will now allow them to go their offices and make the payment through online modes,” said Subodh Agarwal, additional chief secretary, Department of Industries.

The order also says that in case the online payment modes are not possible with some laborers or employees, movement passes will be allowed to the company person dealing with the payment of salaries so that he can go and make the payment. But the duration of such passes will be for limited period. “For such exceptional cases, time duration and place have to be specified in the passes. This is done to not deprive anybody his or her monthly salary in these difficult times. But we expect the employers to adhere to the objective of the lockdown,” added Agarwal.

Just before the closure of the commercial units, some companies have already paid partial salaries to their laborers or employees but many were left out. Most of the companies did not find time to process the payments as the lockdown was abrupt.

But the payment for the period under the lockdown was not factored in even though the few workers who had been paid by the companies. This will require all the employers to avail the movement passes for the payment.

But some employers said even though they are willing to pay for the lockdown period, it will not be possible for them to do the same for April. “We have now no income and it will be out of question to pay for the month of April, which will be another month of shutdown,” said the employer.


