No relaxation of lockdown in city for next 8 days: Ajit
2020-04-19
Pune: Deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar on Saturday directed more stringent implementation of the lockdown measures in Pune city and Pimpri Chinchwad for the next eight days beginning Monday.In a meeting held in the presence of all the local authorities and police officers from Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad, the Pune guardian minister said the stern steps were needed in the wake of the increase in Covid-19 cases in the limits of both the municipal corporations.“The shutdown will be stricter and efforts would be made to reduce the number of cases. Citizens will have to extend support to the measures initiated in this direction. Necessary directives would also be issued,” he said in the meeting.The deputy CM expressed concern over the rising number of deaths in Pune city because of Covid. He assured that the state government would extend complete support to any requirements put forth by the authorities.Pune municipal commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad said, “Of the 15 civic wards in Pune, as many as 13 are in the red zone and the remaining two in the orange zone. It was, therefore, unanimously decided to continue with the lockdown measures across the city for the next eight days. The civic administration will conduct extensive drive in the sealed areas in the next eight-day period to identify and screen symptomatic patients of Covid-19.”Pune divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said following the recent order of the state government on some relaxation in rural and non-hotspot areas, industries in rural Pune would be allowed to function but movement of people from the city, especially from the containment zones, would not be allowed.He said there were 37 Covid-19 hotspots in the city. The Pune collector would issue the necessary orders for strict implementation of the lockdown in Pune city and Pimpri Chinchwad, as directed by the deputy chief minister.Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram said the status quo of the present lockdown would continue for the next eight days. He clarified that the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation authorities would have to enforce lockdown in Hinjewadi. The situation of Chakan would be reviewed, he added.Pimpri Chinchwad municipal commissioner Shravan Hardikar said, “I shall have to take this decision jointly with the Pune Municipal Corporation and the Pune Metropolitan Region Development Authority. It will depend on how the cases reduce and we have to give priority to the reduction of cases.”Deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar called for speedy completion of the 11-storeyed building at Sassoon hospital in the meeting. He assured that 25% of its expenses would be borne by the District Planning Committee Fund. 