No relaxations for common man as lockdown continues, says Bihar DGP
2020-04-21
PATNA: Common people in towns and cities remained indoors on Monday whereas rural areas witnessed marginal increase in movement on the first day of relaxation in nationwide lockdown, which has been extended up to May 3.

State DGP Gupteshwar Pandey, however, made it clear that there was no relaxation for common people and they should stay at home and not pay heed to any rumours. “A lot of rumours are doing the rounds. I am reiterating it that there is no relaxation of any kind from today. The lockdown will go on for common citizens till May 3,” he told reporters after the assessment of the first day of relaxation on Monday.

He, however, hastened to add that the Centre has allowed the resumption of some activities. “So, if people engaged in those activities come out, common people should not think that they can also step out of their homes now,” he added.

The police intensified patrolling soon after reports started pouring in from different parts of the state that people came out on the streets and shops other than grocery and vegetables were open. More vehicles were seen plying on the roads. Attendance in government offices, banks and other establishments was better than earlier. Officials and grade III and IV employees, however, maintained social distancing. Some people also visited the government offices to inquire about their applications.

“I was taken aback when an elderly man visited the grievance redressal cell in Muzaffarpur to know the status of his complaint he had submitted before the lockdown,” said an employee at the Tirhut divisional commissioner’s office.

In West Champaran, a large number of residents came out on streets as if the lockdown had come to an end. The police asked them to return home. In Madhubani, the scene was no different. A few shops opened and services resumed in Sitamarhi, which is in the green zone. The district administration closed the business establishments which were not on the relief chart. 

In Gaya, people were disappointed as restrictions continued. “Lockdown in the rural areas has been eased to facilitate agricultural and some construction activities with certain conditions,” Gaya DM Abhishek Singh said. Government offices started functioning but the civil court remained closed.

The footfall in banks and on the roads at Bhagalpur marginally increased. Shops and major establishments, however, remained closed. People in Darbhanga found the mohallas grocery shops opened since morning. Government offices functioned with one third attendance. Vehicles mostly remained off the road. There was increase in the number of patients at OPDs in hospitals.

Lack of transportation and fear of contracting Covid limited the impact of partial relaxation in Ara town. Though the wholesale rice and wheat market was open, there were few porters to carry the goods. “No buses or autos were on the road,” Anil Kumar, a trader, said.

Khagaria DM Alok Ranjan Ghosh and SP Meenu Kumari told reporters that relaxations have been given only for health services, agricultural activities, cross border transport of essential goods, sale of essential items, commercial and private establishments, financial institutions and construction activities.

In Nawada, some more government offices like that of the DTO opened. But crowds thronged the banks for withdrawing Rs500 credited in their Jan Dhan account. 

(With inputs from Ramashankar, S K Singh, Abdul Qadir, Kumar Rajesh, B K Jha, Praveen, N P Thakur and S B Sinha)


