No relief for Indore in lockdown 3.0
2020-05-05
Indore: On first day of nationwide lockdown 3.0, Indore district administration issued ‘guidelines’ giving no relaxation to the common man.

According to the district collector Manish Singh, there is no change in provisions of existing lockdown rules and the same will continue in days to come to check spread of the disease. No liquor, bhang and other shops accept the already exempted chemist shops, will open till next order.

“We are keeping a close watch on the situation and any decision, including giving relaxation in lockdown rules, will be taken on the basis of any change,” said collector appealing people to support administration’s instructions as the same are required to defeat the disease.

He added to have started giving permission to persons, who are stuck here and want to return to their hometown in different states. “The process will be completed in next 4-5 days,” said Singh, adding that the process of giving permission for interstate movement to the people will be provided thereafter.

The collector added that private clinics will remain shut while specific and separate orders will be issued on giving relaxation, if any, to any service or industry in days to come.

He warned the people, commercial, private establishments of facing appropriate actions if found violating lockdown rules.

Kolhapur district administration of Maharashtra approached its counterpart in Indore and coordinated to help 34 students, who had come here on a study tour but got stuck in the lockdown, to return home. According to senior administrative officials, the students had come with their teacher here in March on training.

To help them returning to their home, Kolhapur collector has sought help from Indore collector on e-mail and has said that all the required arrangements of their transportation will be made by Maharashtra government. In the case, Indore administration has granted required permission.

A huge crowd of outsiders, who want to return to their hometown, turned up at the collectorate to get permission. Most of the people were however stopped at the gate and they couldn’t meet officials to file application.

The senior administrative officials claimed to give permission to 52 private vehicles and two buses to take the outsiders to their hometown.


