No coronavirus screening facility at railway stations, bus stands in Patna
2020-03-14
PATNA: Despite global outbreak of Covid-19, people reaching the state capital from other parts of the country are not being screened at railway stations and bus stands here.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Though several trains ply between the city and other states, thermal screening facility is yet to come up at railway stations here. Passengers too said they were not checked at Patna Junction for possible exposure to the virus. Sheetal Jain, who returned from New Delhi on Friday, said, “New Delhi is one of the affected cities with several positive cases of Covid-19. I was expecting a proper screening on my arrival at Patna Junction. However, nothing was done.”

Danapur station director Nilesh Kumar said since lakhs of people arrive at the station from different parts of the country on a daily basis, it is not easy to check each and every passenger. “We have set up isolation wards and medical teams. Medical attendants were keeping a watch on passengers a fortnight ago. However, they stopped the exercise after finding no Covid-19 suspect,” he said.

Kumar said the health department’s advisory was being displayed on two big screens at the railway station in order to make people aware about the virus.

Even at Bankipore and Mithapur bus stands, screening facility was nowhere to be seen.

Transport secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal, however, said all passengers travelling from New Delhi, districts bordering Nepal and other states would be screened from Saturday. “Screening facilities and help desks will come up at all bus stands in the city. Passengers reaching the city will be checked thoroughly by medical attendants. Special vigil will be kept on interstate buses and buses coming from districts bordering Nepal,” he said.

Meanwhile, the state health department has installed a thermal screening camera at Jayaprakash Narayan International Airport here to check body temperature of passengers at the immigration point. Medical teams and help desks have been asked to check every passenger arriving at the airport.

An airport official said more than 20,000 passengers have so far been screened at Patna and Gaya airports.

However, Aniz Bakumstak, who returned to city from Kolkata on Friday, said screening was done at Kolkata airport, but not in Patna.

