‘No scientific evidence to suggest non-vegetarian food causes Covid-19’
2020-03-11
Are bats responsible for this infection? Why do all viruses originate from China? Is it true that the virus will subside once summer sets in? – Parimala G Tadas
There is no firm evidence to suggest that origin of Covid-19 is from bats. It is not easy to explain why the three originated from China. It may be just a chance, especially as there are more number of people in China or their food habits that can bring zoonotic bugs in context of human. Virus cannot survive outside the host for long. They stay alive on surfaces like tables, chairs, etc. for a while. In warm weather this survival reduces considerably, so it is expected that in summer the spread will be much lower. However, there is no scientific evidence yet to support this.


Since experts say the virus survives on surfaces for days, is it important that our phones are cleaned thoroughly and often? – Ramakant Jaju
Phone cleaning may not be of much use, simply keeping in pocket will be enough. Best is not to touch mouth/face/nose/eyes without washing the hands with soap, keep distance from people with symptoms and avoid gatherings/crowded places.


When a mosquito bites a coronavirus-infected person, is it possible that it carries the same virus and infects other people with it? – Jayalatha V Swamy
No, it is not likely, but always better to avoid mosquitoes for other reasons.


In India, corona broke out first in Kerala. It was combatted by the health department effectively. But in Telangana the situation is different. Gandhi Hospital staff is up in arms to shift the isolation ward to some other place. Do you think that measures taken so far are adequate? — B Ajayakumar
I understand, Gandhi Hospital in Hyderabad is one of the Government of India centres for Covid-19 test. There may be small hitches but so far system has responded well, and prevention of spread is the best strategy.


I am six months pregnant and must frequently visit hospitals for scans. I am worried because I am told private hospitals too are now accepting Covid-19 cases. Should I look out for hospitals that do not cater to these patients? – Meenakshi Nair

No need to worry if you take precautions that are generally recommended. Hospital that is accepting Covid-19 patients is not more dangerous than any other hospital or crowded place, as such patients are kept in isolated wards/rooms and additional precautions are in place (that way they may be relatively safer!).


I
t’s become scary to be near anyone who coughs or sneezes. How paranoid should we be in these circumstances? There is no cure or vaccine; how does this work? — Rakesh Kannoth

There is no need to worry about this, as there are ways to avoid/prevent catching infection by taking general precautions. There is no drug or vaccine, but the infection is generally defeated by our immune system. Only older people or people with other health conditions are at risk, they need to take additional precaution or medical attention. More than 80% of incidents are asymptomatic and people recover without needing any medical help.


Should we stay away from non-vegetarian food? Especially, the ready-to-eat products available in the freezers in super markets and any imported stuff? – Narayanan Srirangam

There is no scientific evidence to suggest that non-vegetarian food or ready-to-eat frozen imported items are means of Covid-19 spread. It is safer to eat healthy and freshly heated food items to ensure neutralising any accidental presence of infectious agents.


How effective is the mask? What type of mask one should use? – Sam Singhal
N95 respirator face mask (costs around Rs 250) is advised for a person who is infected, to prevent the spread when person coughs/sneezes.


Is the novel coronavirus going to stay in India, surfacing season after season like the human influenza virus? – Srinivas KV

It is difficult to rule out this. Increased hygienic practices and community action will be needed to control or see this off.


Are there chances of co-infection of novel coronavirus and human influenza virus? – Suresh Rao 
In principle, yes, but there are no such reports yet as far as we know.


Various kinds of information are being spread through social media causing a lot of distress. What are the exact symptoms that we should look out for? What preventive measures should we take? — Sanghamitra Malik

Covid-19 symptoms that may appear two to 14 days after exposure include,runny nose, fever, frequent sneezing and coughing, shortness of breath (all symptoms may not show in each case).


How to respond if a family member has these symptoms:
1. Avoid going out, stay at home and maintain 3-4 feet distance from other people in your home as much as possible; stay in a separate room and use a separate bathroom, if available.

2. Limit contact with your pets.

3. Wear a face mask if you must be around other people.

4. When you cough/sneeze, cover your mouth and nose with a tissue; immediately throw tissues in garbage; wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds; if that’s not available, clean with hand sanitizer that has at least 60% alcohol.

5. Avoid sharing household items, including drinking cups, eating utensils, towels or even bedding. Wash these items thoroughly after using.

6. Clean high-touch surfaces daily using a household cleaner or wipe. These include counters, table tops, doorknobs, bathroom fixtures, toilets, etc.

Stay healthy, use vitamin supplements like vitamin C. Don’t panic or take stress. Relax by watching your favourite TV show, surfing internet, talking to friends on mobile. Most people recover and by self-quarantine prevent spread of infection. Continue monitoring your symptoms. If they worsen, such as you if you begin to have difficulty breathing, seek medical help. 


Can you tell us about the origin, spread and mode of infection? Is there any vector or alternate host? When it is not airborne, do we need masks? Is there any information about its response to temperature? – Dr KB Reddy
Covid-19 is reported to have emerged from the Chinese city of Wuhan and there are unconfirmed suggestions that it has zoonotic origin. There is no strong scientific evidence of any alternate host so far. There are indications that this virus is sensitive to higher temperatures, but it is not certain how much of help will the summer season be. Remember, lot of places are air-conditioned where temperature does not change with season.

Here is what is known about Covid-19 and knowing this will help in taking precaution to prevent its spread:

Person-to-person spread: The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person, between people who are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet) through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs. People are thought to be most contagious when they are most symptomatic. However, some spread might be possible before people show symptoms; there have been reports of this occurring with this new coronavirus, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.

Spread from contact with contaminated surfaces or objects: It may be possible that a person can get Covid-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it (from an infected person who coughed/sneezed on the object) and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads. The virus that causes Covid-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community, known as community spread, in some affected locations.


I have a corporate meeting overseas and must travel to the US via Dubai. What precautions should I take? Is wearing a N95 mask enough while travelling? – SK Sinha

Take general precautions such as avoiding touching things. Don’t touch your face before washing your hands with soap or wiping with alcohol-based disinfectant (carry one in your hand bag). Mask is not of much use, it may be counter-productive as one tends to adjust it frequently by hand. Maintain 3-4 feet distance from people, if possible, and avoid venturing into crowded places.

