No testing lab should remain underutilized: HC
2020-04-25
NAGPUR: Concerned over under-utilization of Virus Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL), the Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court directed the divisional commissioner here to remove this discrepancy and balance the samples better. He was also told to take steps to expedite starting of VRDLs at NEERI and Nagpur University where Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) Machines are available.


Quoting example of VRDL at Maharashtra Animal and Fisheries Sciences University (MAFSU) that started on April 16 and was testing only 40 samples per day, Justice Nitin Sambre noted it was underutilized and samples pending at various other centres should be transferred here.

“It will be appropriate to direct the commissioner to take every day stock of number of pending samples in each VRDL and pass all consequential orders of their diversion where the capacity is underutilized or the pendency is comparatively less,” the judge said.

Before adjourning the hearing till April 30, the bench directed the commissioner to inform on steps taken in this regard by that date. “The commissioner will be competent to take appropriate decision regarding RT-PCR machines utilization in consultation with AIIMS medical superintendent in case there’s rise in patients’ number in any of the districts or failure of any centre due to technical snag in machines,” Justice Sambre said.

The directives came while hearing a case filed by CH Sharma through amicus curiae Anup Gilda which is clubbed with a PIL by Subhash Zanwar through counsel Ram Heda.

Earlier, the IGGMC dean in an affidavit informed that the VRDLs at Yavatmal, Chandrapur, and Gondia would be made operational by May 20 due to lack of infrastructure.

“It’s informed that necessary machinery required for VRDL is made available by Haffkine Institute by procuring the same from Singapore and shipment is consuming certain time. Once the labs are installed, their operation shall not be withheld for want of testing kits,” the judge said.

He added it shall be the duty of competent authority, including the government, to make available sufficient number of testing kits for making them operational. “The fact remains that VRDLs are required to be made operational at the earliest and the government appears to have taken steps for establishing those,” Justice Sambre said.


