No time to grieve: Kin in quarantine as family patriarch, 72, gets lonely funeral
2020-04-07
Meerut: A 72-year-old, whose son-in-law was the first Covid-19 patient in Meerut and who passed away on April 1 after suffering from novel coronavirus, had a lonely funeral last week. His family of 18, including his sons, daughters, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law, are all quarantined. All they could do was helplessly watch and wail from a ‘distance’ as health workers took his body away for a quiet burial with Covid-19 safety protocol in place.

According to sources, four of his distant relatives lowered his body into the grave during his last rites. Nobody cried nor hugged one another. They stood at a distance and watched solemnly. A police team was also present at a distance to monitor the law and order situation.

The deceased’s 50-year-old son-in-law who travelled from Amravati to Meerut last month, stayed in three localities, attended a wedding and prayed in two mosques ended up infecting 17 others.

“Not even a single family member could attend his funeral. He has a wife, four sons, four daughters-in-law, seven daughters and six sons-in-law. But not even a single person could see his body one last time. Even those admitted to the same hospital saw his remains from at least 10 feet away. We couldn’t even grieve for him properly,” the 37-year-old daughter of the deceased said.

“We do not even know who attended the funeral of my father-in-law. We pleaded with the government authorities many times to at least allow our family members, who are not infected and not in Meerut, to attend the funeral. But the permission was denied. Nobody could see him on his last day and this will haunt us forever,” she said.

According to the Meerut CMO Dr. Raj Kumar, the man had travelled from Amravati to Meerut in two trains, namely, Amravati Jabalpur Superfast Express and Chhattisgarh Express, had reached the city on March 19. He stayed at three locations in the city -- Shastrinagar, Humayun Nagar and Sohrab Gate area -- for two days each. No foreign travel history or contact could be traced until now.”

Three kilometre radius of these areas was sealed and disinfected.

The health department officials said that the best way to break the chain of his contacts is to stay home and inform about any symptoms related withcoronavirus on the district’s helpline number.


