No universal lockdown withdrawal: Task force
2020-04-13
Jaipur: The state government’s 13-member Covid-19 task force recommended the Centre to lift the lockdown in a phased manner across geographical areas, sectors, age-groups and other vulnerable population. The report made it clear that there “cannot be a universal lockdown withdrawal order on a pan-India basis”.

The task force, headed by additional chief secretary (home), Rajeeva Swarup, submitted the report to the state government on April 10. It has already been sent to the Centre for consideration. The task force was formed to give suggestions to the government on the withdrawal of lockdown.

“In the initial period, the positive cases were few and sources identifiable. However, the position changed dramatically on account of the Tablighi Jamaat incident. This has contributed to a spurt in the number of positive cases in recent times,” the report observed.

It said that “the lockdown should ideally continue till a consistent decreasing trend in a defined geographic area and population is achieved”.

The panel was of the view that under the current circumstances and varying geographic spread of Covid-19, decision and the modalities of withdrawing the lockdown should be entrusted to state governments. “It may not be appropriate that the conditions of the phased withdrawal are determined by the government of India for the entire country as has been done for the three-week period,” it said.

The state government was of the opinion that the Centre might regulate certain issues pertaining to testing and medical treatment of Covid-19 cases, international and inter-state movement of people, supplies of medicines, medical equipment and essential items, goods and transport services, movement of migrant labourers and opening of central government offices.

“The state governments may be authorized to take all further decisions in respect to the manner in which they propose to lift the restrictions in a phased manner within the boundaries of their respective states, keeping in view the hotspots and conditions prevailing in different districts,” it said.

The committee recommended a phased relaxation of lockdown based on local district-level situation. Districts may be classified as high-risk, medium-risk and low-risk. “In high-risk areas, lockdown shall continue without any further relaxations and ruthless containment measures shall be undertaken in hotspot areas and areas under curfew orders,” it suggested.

“In medium-risk areas, movement of private vehicles shall be allowed with restriction of one person in one vehicle and ruthless containment measures shall be undertaken only in curfew-affected areas; in low-risk areas, government offices shall resume with 50% roster-based attendance and industries shall be allowed to operate with 50% strength; and in no-case districts, government offices, industries and construction activities shall resume with 100% attendance and public transport services may resume with permission of maximum 50% passenger capacity in each vehicle,” it recommended.


