No waiver, schools only asked to defer fee demand till after lockdown
2020-04-01
Nagpur: A state education department circular requesting schools not to demand fee payment till the lockdown period ends, was misrepresented by fake news peddlers on WhatsApp causing a lot of confusion. Many parents and schools were led to believe that a complete waiver of fee has been announced even though it was at best a ‘deferred payment’ suggestion.

The circular clearly mentions that all schools are being requested not to force parents to pay either pending or next academic session’s fee till the lockdown is in force. The circular probably assumed not only financial difficulty but also the fact that many parents still prefer to pay fee by depositing cash or cheque at banks or at school fee counters. With the traditional format of fee payment not a possibility in the current situation, the state education department rightly told schools to suspend fee demands till the lockdown ends.

Some messages on WhatsApp are twisting its meaning and causing a lot of confusion. Some schools too approached TOI after incorrect interpretation of the circular reached them. As per the circular, it is clear that once the lockdown is over schools can again start collecting their pending dues.

Rajendra Dayma, president of Independent English Schools Association (IESA), said they appreciate the government’s stance. “We will comply with the state education department’s guidelines on fee collection, as we too understand the restrictions on movement,” said Dayma.

However, the Pan-Maharashtra Trustee’s Association also reminded the government that school owners are also reeling under financial stress not only because of coronavirus effect but also because of non-payment of RTE bills. Dayma said, “We have so many schools that have not been reimbursed even a single rupee for the free RTE admissions. In some cases, the reimbursement amount is already with the district education department but they are not giving it to our schools on some or the other pretext.” IESA says it stands firm on boycotting all RTE admissions till every bill has been cleared.

The RTE lottery has already been conducted in the state with parents being informed about the school their ward has got admission in. However, due to the lockdown the entire admission process has been put on hold till the government removes restriction on movement of people.


