Quarantine civic body chairman who went to hotspot area: Nodal officer to Bijnor SDM
2020-05-17
BIJNOR: Alleging lockdown violation, nodal officer of communicable diseases has written to the Bijnor sub-divisional magistrate (SDM), claiming that Najibabad civic body chairman Maujjam Khan and his supporters have been loitering around in hotspot areas.

In his letter, nodal officer Dr Sarvesh Nirala also requested SDM Sangeeta to quarantine Khan and his supporters.

According to officials two days ago, a man from Najibabad's Rampura mohalla tested positive for Covid-19. Administration declared Rampura a hotspot area and banned the entry of all persons.

According to Nirala, “Najibabad's Nagar Palika chairman, Mauzzam Khan, and his supporters were found roaming in hotspot area without any permission. He was publicizing himself among the residents. There were some supporters accompanying him. They were talking and meeting the people, trespassing lockdown restrictions.”

In his defence, Khan clarified that he went to Rampura hotspot area to allay the fears from the mind of people and take stock of the situation and arrangements.

“I am a public representative. It is my duty to know their wellbeing. Rampura was declared hotspot. People were afraid and panicked after a Covid-19 patient was found in the area. Therefore, I went there to take the stock of the situation and allay their apprehensions. I have not violated lockdown orders.”

Notably, 43 persons were tested positive for novel coronavirus in Bijnor district. Out of them, 30 patients have recovered. 

As of now, samples of 2,650 people were collected and sent to laboratories. Out of which, 2,300 testing reports have been received by health department.

Meanwhile, the local administration is focusing on influx of migrant labourers. Over 14,000 labourers returning from Haryana, Punjab, Uttrakhand, Himachal, Delhi and Maharashtra were quarantined in their houses.

Separate monitoring committees headed by village heads were formed to keep a close vigil on migrant labourers.

Moreover, 916 migrant labourers of Bihar and east UP have been quarantined in different centres in the district. The administration is planning to drop them on the bordering areas.


