Nodal Covid-19 hospitals stop admitting asymptomatic patients in Telangana
2020-06-10
HYDERABAD: While the state government slowly shifts the burden of existing Covid-19 patients to individuals and private sector, nodal Covid-19 hospitals of the government have stopped taking in asymptomatic patients.

Hospitals like Gandhi Hospital, Chest Hospital and Fever Hospital are only admitting symptomatic Covid-19 positive patients now. With the selective admissions, the total number of new admissions have reduced drastically in government hospitals.

The state health authorities had already announced that patients with mild to moderate symptoms will be kept in home quarantine only and a chunk of patients admitted in Gandhi Hospital were discharged on Monday. Continuing the discharges, 23 more patients were discharged on Tuesday, bringing down the total of Covid-19 positive patients at the facility to around 300.

Meanwhile, due to the selective admission process at the state-run Gandhi Hospital, less than 10 patients were admitted on Tuesday. At the remaining designated Covid-19 hospitals too, new admissions were low. “On Tuesday, less than 25 patients were admitted across the designated hospitals treating Covid-19 patients. Suspected patients are being sent back after taking their samples. Also, since most of the positive patients are either asymptomatic or have mild symptoms, the patients who are less than 50 years of age are not being admitted,” said an official from the state health department.

With the new admissions as well as already admitted patients both decreasing drastically, the previous plan to house Covid-19 patients in the Gachibowli hospital, which was previously planned to be used as an exclusive Covid-19 hospital and later renamed Telangana Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (TIMS) is not likely to be pressed into Covid-19 service. 

A formal order was issued designating the 1,500 bedded hospital as a medical and research institute last month.


