Noida border passes only for Covid-19 doctors
2020-04-27
NOIDA: Doctors, nurses and paramedics who are not associated with treatment of Covid patients will not be allowed to move between Noida and Delhi from Monday. The Noida administration has decided to stop issuing passes to doctors not involved with Covid duty and management.

The move — latest among Noida’s measures to cut down travel between the two cities — evoked mixed response from medical professionals. Some backed the administration’s decisions, saying it would arrest the rate of positive cases in Noida. Others, however, insisted that it would hit emergency treatment in private hospitals in the two cities.

Noida’s chief medical officer Deepak Ohri said the health department had already issued passes to most doctors involved with Covid duty. “Only those required for Covid-19 work will be allowed to cross over to the other side. Others will not be allowed to go. We have already issued passes to such medical professionals and doctors. There is no scope for confusion anymore,” Ohri said.

Noida imposed stringent measures to cut down movement through its borders after it was found that at least 30 Covid patients had travelled to Delhi just days before they tested positive. A day after the Noida district magistrate issued clampdown orders on April 21, doctors and health workers started queuing up at the office of chief medical officer in Sector 39 for passes. According to officials, there are more than 2,000 MBBS doctors in the city, of whom 760 are registered with the Indian Medical Association.

The responsibility of issuing passes initially lay with the police. However, the job was later transferred to the CMO’s office when the applications started increasing.

A format was circulated among doctors to fill in details. They were required to mention the nature of their service, expertise, place of work, whether their hospital has been treating Covid patients or testing them, etc. “Those who were able to establish that they are involved with Covid-19 duty were issued passes. Others were denied. We need to take such bold decisions to keep the outbreak in check,” said NK Sharma, president of the Indian Medical Association (Noida).

Doctors said the move not to allow non-Covid medical professionals to travel across the border would hit emergency care in both cities. “Already, most of the hospitals are working with half the manpower due to lockdown. This order will crumble the health infrastructure further. The number of doctors required for dealing with emergency cases is bound to go down,” said a doctor associated with a private hospital in east Delhi.

Dr Nitin P Ghonghe, who works with Apollo Hospitals in Indraprastha, could get a pass on Friday. “The first day, policemen deployed at the border asked me to stay in Delhi instead of coming back home to Noida. Patients suffering from heart diseases, respiratory infections, cancer, Alzheimer’s, tuberculosis and other such diseases require constant care and counselling. Apart from emergency needs, their treatment is equally important,” said Ghonghe. His hospital is treating Covid patients.

Told about the apprehension that emergency services were likely to get hit at private hospitals, Noida DM Suhas LY said, “Adequate health facilities and hospitals are available in Noida. People with medical emergency can get treatment within the city. Also, ambulances, be it private or a medical van, are being allowed to cross the border without any questions. The objective is to bring down movement of people and positive cases.”


