Noida officer on the frontlines of fight against Covid-19 can’t hold his newborn
2020-04-07
NOIDA: It’s a girl! With the message came overpowering emotion. Rajeev Rai was ecstatic, but also relieved after quarantining himself in the guest room of his house for nearly three weeks so as to not endanger his pregnant wife and their eight-year-old daughter. He also had to give up on that special fatherhood moment of cradling the newborn in his arms. That’s how it will be for a while.


Rai is the field officer leading the massive containment exercise to check the spread of the novel coronavirus infection in Noida, which has UP’s most Covid-19 cases so far (58). Each time a person tests positive, the containment protocol demands extensive sanitisation of the neighbourhood and sealing it for a period of time. Rai oversees this and, with cases in Noida surging in the last two weeks, his field visits have only gone up.

So at home, he has distanced himself — staying confined to a guest room and the living area to avoid any contact with his family.

Moments after he saw his newborn daughter — from near the door of his wife’s hospital room — on Monday afternoon, Rai had to go back to work. He returned to the hospital late evening, standing three metres away from his wife and daughter, on the doctor’s advice. Rai told TOI he will not go near his wife and child till his current task is completed.

Picture
Rajeev Rai saw his newborn daughter from near the door of his wife’s hospital room, standing 3 metres away on the doctor’s advice


Noida officer home only for quick meals
It’s one of the greatest days of my life. Both of them need to be in hospital for a few more days. They are already susceptible to infections and I don’t want to increase the risk any further. It would have been great to hold my girl and be by their side. But duty calls and we all have work to do,” said Rai, who otherwise holds the post of subdivisional magistrate (Dadri).

Till Sunday, Rai was part of the administration team that worked at a stretch for 72 hours to set up the advanced integrated control room to deal with the Covid-19 outbreak in Noida as well as prepare contact-tracing software and run checks on those ordered home quarantine.

Life had been different till just a month ago. Rai and his wife Swati had been planning to put office work in order so that he could take a few days’ leave and be with the family during the delivery.

“We had planned that he would take a two-day trip to Allahabad and settle the official high court cases before the delivery,” Swati told TOI. “That way, he would be able to take a week’s leave from work and be with us. Then they all got busy, especially after the first case in Noida in the first week of March. Since then, he has only been home for a quick meal and a bath. On some days, he comes at 2am.”

With Rai forced to confine himself, it also meant more household chores for Swati. “He is usually very helpful at home. But he has had to entirely restrict himself to just one part of the house so tshat he is never too close to us. He is scared because be visits all the places where positive cases have been reported. He has a different room now towards the outside, so that he can change and take a bath before he even enters any other part of the house,” said Swati, adding the family had stayed positive throughout the past few weeks as they prepared to welcome their newest member.

