Noida and Ghaziabad pulled up over coronavirus fight
2020-04-20
NOIDA: The performance of the Noida and Ghaziabad administrations in enforcing the lockdown has been found “unsatisfactory” in a review by the UP government. The two districts are among 45 in the state whose authorities have been pulled up by the government over their performance.

Apart from Noida and Ghaziabad, the list — prepared by additional chief secretary (home) Awanish Awasthi — includes Lucknow, Meerut, Baghpat, Shamli, Hapur and Bulandshahr in the “unsatisfactory” category. They have been asked to enforce health department’s guidelines and improve law and order situation.

The observations made about Noida in the report include the alleged suicide of a man at a quarantine centre and reported lack of coordination between police and the district administration. The report also mentions the rising number of Covid cases in Noida — 97 on Sunday.

Ghaziabad’s performance and the observations made about it in the report were not too different from Noida’s. For Ghaziabad, too, the report mentioned lack of coordination and failure to arrest the number of Covid cases.

Sources said the report was being viewed as a major reason for the recent transfer of Noida’s chief medical officer, Dr RK Chaturvedi. “The government took a grim view of the situation, especially the suicide at a quarantine centre. The transfer is being seen as a fallout of that,” a senior official said. 

The report has also asked the districts to improve their law and order situation. “Taking note of the situation of the respective districts, law and order situation be strengthened and steps be taken for curbing spread of Covid-19 epidemic,” read a letter sent to all district police chiefs and district magistrates.

Told about the report, Noida DM Suhas LY said the fight against the novel coronavirus was a coordinated effort. “We are trying to work with utmost sincerity. We would like to urge the people to be a part of this team and think that we are fighting this battle together,” he said.

Ghaziabad DM Ajay Shankar Pandey said the police were doing a “good job” and he had not come across any case where there was lack of coordination between the authorities. “I will send my reply to the government if that is required,” Pandey said.


