Noida: Dialysis patient told to get Covid-19 test first, dies
2020-04-18
NOIDA: A 50-year-old woman died waiting for her dialysis to begin after the private hospital she visited advised her to get a Covid-19 test done first because she showed symptoms. Authorities at Yatharth Hospital in Sector 110 cited a health department advisory that said anyone showing symptoms should be directed to a government facility first.


Ratnamma, a resident of Grand Omaxe in Sector 93 and mother of an official in the Union ministry of health and family welfare, died in the early hours of Thursday. She was diagnosed with renal failure in January this year and had been undergoing regular dialysis at Yatharth since then.

Ratnamma had undergone her last dialysis at Yatharth this Monday. Her son Raju Gilgitta, an assistant section officer with the ministry, said she was doing fine when she was discharged from the hospital on Monday evening but started having breathing problems later that night.

“We called an ambulance on Wednesday evening and took her to Yatharth. Her temperature was checked at the gate and she was admitted at the dialysis unit. Later, a doctor at the emergency ward said my mother was running a temperature of 103.2°F and had breathing problems. She needed to get a Covid test done first,” Raju told TOI.

Raju had a tough time arranging for an ambulance all by himself. “The hospital did not arrange for an ambulance. I dialled the emergency numbers — 102 and 108 — but the drivers did not know whether to send a general ambulance or one kept for Covid patients. As the clock ticked, I decided to take my mother home. A private car was sent by my society’s AoA and we got her home late that night,” he said.

Raju sought suggestions from doctors in his housing society, and it was eventually decided that Ratnamma would be taken for a Covid test. She died around 5am on Thursday.

Authorities at Yatharth Hospital said they had received guidelines from the health department that they should not admit any person showing symptoms of the virus. “The patient had undergone dialysis here earlier as well. She was diagnosed with fever and had breathing problems, which is why they were asked to get a test done. A Covid test can only happen at a government facility. Even if the patient required dialysis, the procedure can be done at a government facility. Since she was prescribed a Covid test, it was clear she had to be taken to a government hospital,” said Dr Kapil Tyagi, director of Yatharth Hospital.

The health department’s guidelines lack clarity in terms of admission of such patients. An advisory issued to private hospitals by the chief medical officer on April 8 referred to three patients who had undergone surgeries at different health facilities in Noida and tested positive later. “Hence, you are being requested that before carrying out any procedure, you should get a Covid-19 test done and also get the premises sanitised as per protocol,” the advisory reads..

“I am not aware of this specific case. However, we have already issued instructions to the three Covid hospitals regarding handling of suspected patients. We’ll be doing the same for non-Covid hospitals also soon,” said Narendra Bhooshan, nodal officer for handling Covid-19 response in the district. Health department officials were unavailable for comment.


