Noida, Ghaziabad, 13 other UP districts go into coronavirus lockdown till March 25
2020-03-23
NOIDA/GHAZIABAD: From midnight on Sunday, Noida and Ghaziabad went into a three-day lockdown to contain the spread of Covid-19. They are among 15 districts in the state that have closed borders, shut public transport, banned public gatherings and suspended non-essential services till March 25.


Coronavirus in India live updates

“There is a complete ban on public transport. Barring emergencies, people will stay put in their houses. All commercial establishments, shops, educational institutions, private establishments, restaurants and hotels will be closed,” said Ghaziabad SSP Kalanidhi Naithani. “During the lockdown, residents will follow social distancing guidelines and step out only for emergencies or essential services,” Naithani added.


 
Essential services — which include power and water, fire services, police, medical services, e-commerce, animal feed, food (fruits and vegetables, groceries), telecom, insurance, banks and ATMs, post offices and refuelling stations — will not be disrupted. 

Sugar mills will continue functioning, as will rice shellers and fodder-making units. Shops selling groceries and daily essentials will also be open. “If anyone forces shop owners to shut their establishment, they can lodge a complaint on Ghaziabad Police helpline, 94544-03434. They can also WhatsApp or call,” Naithani said.

The decision was taken after a late-night videoconference between state government and district officials. Besides Gautam Budh Nagar and Ghaziabad, the lockdown has been enforced in Lucknow, Agra, Meerut, Bareilly, Allahabad, Varanasi, Kanpur, Aligarh, Moradabad, Lakhimpur Kheri, Azamgarh, Gorakhpur and Saharanpur. The state government added nine districts after the Centre’s advisory on 75 districts across the country that should be locked down to contain Covid-19.

The order has banned the assembly of more than five persons in a place, Ghaziabad district magistrate Ajay Shankar Pandey said. The administration has been empowered to ensure compliance. District magistrates will take a call on whether a service or establishment is essential. To enforce the lockdown, the DGP headquarters in Noida has cancelled leave for all police officers till April 5.

“Taxis and autos will not be allowed,” Naithani said. Earlier in the day, NMRC had said metro and bus services in Noida will not operate during the lockdown. However, those going to hospitals, airports, railway stations, bus stands and vehicles carrying groceries and essential goods will be allowed in Ghaziabad.

On Sunday, Noida police sealed its borders with Delhi and neighbouring districts of Ghaziabad, Hapur, Bulandshahr and Faridabad. All expressways — Yamuna Expressway, Noida-Greater Noida Expressway and Eastern Peripheral Expressway — will be closed for public transport, ACP Akhilesh Singh said.

A late-night notification by principal secretary Amit Mohan Prasad said that while public transport will be restricted, some exceptions will be made. 

“For those headed home from airports and railway stations, a limited number of public transport vehicles authorised by the district administration will be available,” the notification said. In addition, “in case of medical emergency, personal vehicle can be used for transportation to hospitals,” it added.

Cab driver associations in Noida said they will provide services for those in essential services or those with a written permission from their organisation. Private cab drivers said they would not take bookings for drops or pickups in Noida but would make exceptions for those going to hospitals or the airport. “We get bookings for really far-off places but will not do so right now. If the government allows, we will take people who need to go to hospitals or airports,” said Bablu, president of the Nodia unit of Sarvodaya Drivers’ Welfare Association, which has about 300 drivers associated with Uber and Ola. Yogesh Verma, president of the Noida Cab Association, which has 200 Ola and Uber drivers, said the same: “We will provide services to those in the media, telecom industry, IT sector or banking. The passenger should carry an ID and show a permission that says they work for an essential service.”


