Noida Covid-19 cases linked to UK auditor rise to 13, firm faces FIR
2020-03-29
NOIDA: One of the longest chains of the novel coronavirus infection to be detected so far in India is emerging in Noida, which on Saturday recorded its highest single-day spike as nine persons tested positive, among them a an 11-year-old girl. She is the youngest Covid-19 patient in the city.

Five of those who tested positive are employees of Cease Fire, a fire safety company in Noida that a British man, who is believed to be the source of the infection, visited earlier this month. He had fever and was coughing at work, people he met have said. It takes the total number of Covid-19 infections linked to him to 13, which is 50% of the total number (26) that the city has recorded so far. The health department has asked police to lodge an FIR against the company for not informing the administration about the visitor from abroad.

 
 

The new cases include the company’s managing director, who lives in Sector 44, and his colleague, one in Sector 37, one in Sector 128, and two at Accheja village in Greater Noida. The residential premises of all four are being sanitised and have been sealed for the next two days.

The four other patients who tested positive for Covid-19 are family members of a woman and her son, residents of Sector 2 in Greater Noida, who had tested positive on March 22. A health department official said the woman’s younger son had travelled to Denmark and there were 10 people at home when he returned, including his 11-year-old niece, who also tested positive on Saturday. She is the youngest Covid-19 patient in the district so far. The three other patients from the family include two men and a woman.

“All patients have been moved to isolation wards at GIMS in Greater Noida and the child PGI in Sector 30. We now have 13 cases from Cease Fire and three cases from the same family in Greater Noida. In the district, the source of transmission of all patients so far can be tracked,” said Dr Anurag Bhargava, chief medical officer.

“The MD of Cease Fire had returned from the UK on March 1 and another employee had returned on March 7, which was declared. However, they had an auditor from the UK who was in Noida from March 15 to 19 about which we were not informed, despite clear directives by that time. This is highly irresponsible as we can source 13 infected patients so far to this person, all employees of Cease Fire and their family members,” added Bhargava. “It also highlights the urgency and importance of social distancing in Noida and proper sanitisation, which could have prevented the spread of the disease. We hope people follow these and report anyone who has come from outside India.”

Officials said families and direct contacts of all Cease Fire employees were being traced. Officials said 707 employees from a company related to Cease Fire have also been checked, but no one has shown symptoms so far. “There are some employees living in other places like Delhi and Ghaziabad. We have informed authorities there,” said Bhargava.

