Nomadic Van Gujjar tribe caught in lockdown with nowhere to go
2020-04-03
Dehradun/Saharanpur: Around 500 members of the nomadic Van Gujjar community living in almost 100 deras (houses) on the border areas of UP and Uttarakhand -- in the stretch between Dehradun’s Daat Kali temple and Mohund area of Saharanpur district of Uttar Pradesh — say that they are in desperate need of food and medical aid for themselves and their animals. Locked down in their homes since the past 12 days, members of the community — that mainly subsists on rearing animals for milk — say they have received no help from the government. Driven by despair, a couple of families claimed to be eating leaves of a creeper locally known as Maljhan. The others are surviving by consuming milk of their animals which they used to sell earlier in the markets of Dehradun and Saharanpur.

“After our stock of wheat flour ran out and there was no vegetable or dal left, we cooked Maljhan leaves. But how long we can survive like this?” Mohammed Alam, a Van Gujjjar, told a TOI team that visited the area on Thursday. 

The community has been getting sporadic help from some individuals who came to know of their plight after a few videos regarding the community’s condition started circulating on social media some days ago.

Zain Qazi, an IT firm owner from Dehradun, who after hearing the problems of the Van Gujjars, reached their settlement (referred to as ‘dera’), said he was shocked to see the state they were living in — inside the jungles, on the dried river bed.

“It is difficult to imagine that there are so many people living in these deep jungles. I am not surprised that help has not reached them as they are living in such places where no one would come,” Qazi said, adding that he and his family members have decided to make a visit to the community’s deras on alternate days to distribute cooked food and raw material.

The community members say that none of them have been able to go to the cities to sell milk since March 22 as no transportation is available.

Some of them who used to work as labourers in Dehradun and Saharanpur have had no work in hand since two weeks, and are now running short of both money and food. What has added to their woes is the soaring temperatures that is making their animals sick.

“We should have moved to hills by this time of the year as our animals are more used to the cold weather. With less availability of water and green leaves, our buffaloes are falling sick. Also, there are no phone networks available for almost 7-8 km in this stretch and if we want to make a call for help, we have to walk 5 km towards Saharanpur to find a mobile network,” said Irshad, head of a dera situated near the Mohund police post. Another community member Aish Ali added in a bitter vein, “Coronavirus may or may not kill us, but hunger definitely will”.

Meanwhile, Naresh Saini, MLA of Behat in Saharanpur district, when queried about the matter, said, “The Van Gujjars are staying around 70 to 80 km from the district headquarters and they don’t have any ration cards. We have been raising this issue with the administration that these people need assistance. We will now help them with our own funds if officials don’t act.”



