Non-Covid death rate falls amid lockdown in Bihar
2020-05-01
PATNA: Bihar has seen a sharp fall in the number of deaths due to accidents, homicide, non-covid ailments and suicide following the nationwide lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic. The number of deaths related to respiratory diseases has also fallen drastically owing to improvement in air quality, according to city hospitals.


According to figures shared by the state police ADG (headquarters), Jitendra Kumar, the number of deaths in road accidents between April 1 to April 15 plummeted by 66%. “Compared to last year’s data, the number of deaths related to road accidents has drastically gone down this year in the first two weeks of April. Similarly, the number of murder cases during these 15 days dropped by 26%,” Kumar said.

Senior traffic police officials in Patna conceded that fatalities due to road accidents have drastically come down in the last one month because of the strict lockdown being enforced in the city. City traffic superintendent Amarkesh D said road accidents after the lockdown have reduced by at least 80%-85%. “As the lockdown has put a break on unnecessary movement of vehicles, the number of people dying due to road accidents has significantly decreased,” he said.

Doctors and health officials at various hospitals attributed better air quality as one of the main reasons behind fewer deaths in the city. Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) superintendent Dr Sachidanand Kumar said air and water pollution lead to large number of deaths.

“Most people suffer from respiratory problems because of the city’s bad air quality index (AQI). Now that the AQI level has improved and people are staying indoors, their health conditions have also improved following which the number of deaths has decreased,” he said.

He added: “Road accidents and murder cases too have been coming in fewer numbers.”

A strong indicator of the low death rate amid the lockdown is the low number of cremations taking place in the city. Officials at crematoriums said they are receiving fewer dead bodies after the lockdown. Arti Devi, in-charge at the Gulbigha crematorium, who stays on duty for around 10 hours, used to see at least 10-11 dead bodies on a daily basis. “It is something unbelievable for me as I have never seen such a drop in number of cremations. For the last few weeks, hardly two or three dead bodies are arriving at the Ghat for the last rites,” she said.

