Patna: Non-Covid patients face lockdown hassles
2020-04-10
PATNA: While government hospitals in Patna are busy tackling the Covid-19 pandemic, which saw a surge on Thursday, non-coronavirus emergency cases and those with chronic illnesses requiring regular hospital visits are facing hurdles in accessing proper care.


Even though most government healthcare establishments in Patna, including the PMCH and the IGIMS are open for emergency patients, elderly patients and those with critical ailments such as kidney problems and cancer are finding it a daunting task even to reach the hospitals.

Arvind Kumar Sharma, a 56-year-old Jaganpura resident in the city, fell from the stairs at his house a few days ago. He was taken to a prominent government hospitals in the city, but he said he could not get treatment as doctors were said to be busy with Covid-19 patients. “After finding it difficult to be admitted there, I visited Mahavir Arogya Sansthan. My injury was so severe that an MRI had to be done,” he said.

Krishna Verma (name changed), who is a stage two cancer patient, said lack of transportation and unavailability of doctors, has added to his woes. “Prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, I was getting treatment in Mumbai, but after the lockdown I am not able to go there for chemotherapy. Whenever I am in Patna, I seek help from local doctors but due to the lockdown, I am not able to reach them,” he said.

The IGIMS medical superintendent, Manish Mandal, said, “Operation theatre and emergency wards are available for emergency cases. Since, patients with underlying diseases are more prone to contacting Covid-19 virus, we make sure they don’t come in contact with positive patients. Hence, we are only giving treatment to very serious patients.”

The Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH), which has been declared as a Covid-19 hospital, has completely stopped treatment of all other diseases. NMCH superintendent Nirmal Kumar Sinha said the hospital is closed for other patients as there’s a chance of them getting infected. “Our services are open for old patients, who can call us in case they need any medical help or advice,” he added.

However, several hospitals have started giving medical aid to non-Covid patients with the help of digital technology as most of them have OPD services.

Dr Mandal of IGIMS said, “We have completely shut the OPD due to growing cases of Covid-19. But, at the same time, we know that other non-covid patients need our help too, hence we have started the telehealth facility for all non-emergency patients. We have allotted an hour’s time of doctors of every department. During this period, patients can show their prescription and get medical help.”

Private healthcare centres, on the other hand, are providing all services except OPD. 

“We are referring patients with symptoms similar to that of Covid-19 to hospitals like IGIMS and NMCH. Besides, we are not giving OPD services in order to maintain social distancing. We are operating every day and doing surgeries, kidney transplants, deliveries and all other emergency cases,” Dr Satyajit Kumar Singh, MD of a private hospital in Pataliputra, said. 

Sharing similar views, Talat Halim, regional director (east) of a private hospital said, “We have not closed any services. As all government hospitals are lockeddown with Covid-19 patients and small clinics are open for a few hours, patients with trauma, heart attacks and kidney failure have nowhere to go.”

He added, “We are making every patient except those who are in very critical condition, fill a self-declaration form, where they write about their travel history and whether they have coronavirus-like symptoms or not as precautionary measure. ”

Asked about emergency services for patients who do not have their own vehicle, Halim said: “We have tied up with private ambulances for bringing patients from other districts without any additional charges.”

He informed that the number of patients have increased after the lockdown. “We are receiving at least 70-80 patients per day. Besides, we are getting 15-20 consultations on our online application,” Halim said.

