Non-virus patients in Odisha wait for crisis to end
2020-03-26
BHUBANESWAR: For those afflicted with some disease other than coronavirus, getting to a doctor is proving to be difficult during this lockdown. 

Those patients who were recently discharged following treatment are facing a harrowing time with follow-up health check-ups and diagnosis as some hospitals have stopped OPD services.

“I have undergone kidney transplant. I need to visit the doctor and get medicines every month. Now I can’t come to Bhubaneswar after the trains and buses have been cancelled. I have a relative in Bhubaneswar but he can’t send over the medicines with the transport services under lockdown. It is getting very difficult for me,” said Bidyadhar Palai, a resident of Palur in Ganjam district. 

One of the major hospitals of the state, AIIMS Bhubaneswar, has closed OPDs for outpatients in order to reduce gathering in the hospital during the lockdown period to contain the spread of Covid-19. 

This hospital normally gets between 4,000 and 4,500 outpatients everyday. Other hospitals in the city have also controlled their OPDs to reduce the visitors. Some private clinics have also downed their shutters during this lockdown period. 

A patient from Bargarh district, who was diagnosed with cancer, reached Bhubaneswar for treatment. He was advised some tests but with most diagnostics centres not open, he is finding it difficult to get those tests done. 

But amid such takes of desperation, some doctors are providing a ray of hope. They have started providing consultations on WhatsApp, voice calling and video calls. 

“I request people to use digital platforms like WhatsApp to consult me for any gastro-related problems between 2pm to 10pm everyday. If anybody has an emergency, they can meet me at the hospital between 9 am and 2pm. I will send a scanned copy of the prescription through WhatsApp message so that people can get medicines from the nearby stores,” said gastroenterologist Premananda Pattanaik of SUM Hospital. 

Ashutosh Mohapatra, a gastroenterologist from AMRI Hospital, also appealed to the public to contact him if they want information on coronavirus and consultation on gastro-related problems.


