Kolkata: Non-coronavirus outbreak adds to medical concerns
2020-03-11
KOLKATA: Even as the Covid-19 scare looms large over Kolkata, other non-novel coronaviruses have been stalking the city and has led to a cough-and-cold outbreak. Along with the spread of the nCoV across the world, thousands have been infected with the other common viruses that have symptoms, which are worryingly similar to the one that has taken more than 3,500 lives over the last one month. But doctors maintained that these viruses are far more innocuous since they are not easily transmitted like nCoV, though they recommend caution and immediate medical action.


Adeno virus, rhinovirus, influenza virus and non-novel coronaviruses are on the prowl in Kolkata, warned experts. These viruses routinely strike at this time of the year when temperatures fluctuate, leading to the onset of summer, they added. “They trigger a bout of cough and cold, body ache and, sometimes, fever. But the difference this time is the fear of nCoV, which has led to a big concern among people. So far, however, no one from Kolkata has been diagnosed with Covid-19. But it is better to stay at home in case your symptoms are severe,” pulmonologist at Fortis Hospital Raja Dhar said.

 
 
Most patients have contracted dry cough this time. The cough has worsened in many patients, leading to body ache and fever, said internal medicine specialist Rahul Jain. “We are being forced to seek every such patient’s travel history to rule out the possibility nCoV. So far, I haven’t come across a suspect, but it’s now mandatory since every patient can’t possibly be tested for nCoV. We are also advising patients to make sure that they don’t get close to people who have travelled from the affected countries, at least for some time,” Jain said.

 
 
The common viruses will now thrive and spread as the weather is ideal for their survival, pointed out RTIICS consultant Arindam Biswas. It’s getting warm but the maximum temperature has continued to hover around 30°C, which isn’t enough to kill the viruses, he pointed out. “But what makes these viruses less harmful is that they don’t get transmitted as easily or as fast as the nCoV,” Biswas said. He added that nothing has changed about the seasonal viruses other than the fact that they are leading to a scare. “Even though many are insisting on an nCoV test or hospitalization, it is the elderly who are at some risk. Due to their low immunity and comorbidities — like diabetes, renal failure, asthma and cardiac ailments — they are more susceptible to infections,” Biswas added.

There is little to distinguish between nCoV and the rest, though, said experts. “Symptoms are identical and the incubation periods are long. Most nCoV as well as non-nCoV patients remain symptomless for several days. The only difference could be a runny nose and more pronounced upper respiratory tract infection,” said Jain.

Once the mercury climbs, the viruses could die out, said Jain. “While there is no specific temperature, at which circulating viruses die, respiratory viruses generally die when the mercury climbs. So, we can expect the viral outbreak to end once it gets a little warmer,” he said.


