NDMC adds four crematoria to Covid-19 list
2020-06-11
NEW DELHI: With the rise in the number of Covid-19 hospitals and virus-related deaths, the city is feeling the need for more cremation grounds designated to handle bodies of infected patients. This has prompted North Delhi Municipal Corporation, the nodal agency for Covid-designated funeral facilities, to add four crematoria to cater to hospitals in North, West, Central and New Delhi districts. 

These facilities are located in Mangolpuri, Netaji Subhash Place, Inderpuri and Wazirpur, and will cater to two pools of hospitals. The three municipal corporations are currently running 16 Covid-designated funeral sites.

However, the staff at the Inderpuri crematorium, the only directly corporation-run facility, aren’t ready to comply with the order yet. “We have four people in the wood section, two officers, one safai karamchari and one chowkidar. But there is no protective arrangement for Covid-19 funerals. We will not take part in it unless proper arrangement is made,” said one of them. 

Another staff member echoed the concern. “Even the area hasn’t been disinfected. We can’t take the risk of infecting our families,” he said.

The north and south corporations recently issued show-cause notices to two NGO-run cremation facilities for objecting to wood cremations on safety grounds.

Jai Prakash, the chairperson of the north corporation standing committee, said all necessary arrangements would be made to divert pressure and address concerns of all stakeholders. The south coropration’s standing committee chairperson, Bhupender Gupta, said the civic body had been receiving 60-65 Covid bodies every day and the move would reduce the burden on the Punjabi Bagh facility, which has already been made corona-exclusive. “People are calling us to intervene in getting a timely slot of cremation,” he added.

The Covid bodies from the first pool comprising MD City Hospital, Deep Chand Bandhu Hospital and isolation centres located in Central and New Delhi districts will be taken to the Inderpuri facility and the Wazirpur cremation ground near Kanhaiya Nagar metro station. 

The second pool will include Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital, Action Balaji Hospital, and Fortis and Max hospitals at Shalimar Bagh in North and West districts. “The bodies from this pool will be taken to either the Mangolpuri facility near Avantika Sector 1 Rohini or the Beriwala Bagh crematorium near Netaji Subhash Place,” said a senior civic official.

The East Delhi Municipal Corporaion recently allowed the Ghazipur and Seemapuri facilities to handle Covid bodies to lessen the load on the Nigambodh Ghat crematorium. 

