Covid-19 scare in Gujarat: Not what doctor ordered for exam calendars
2020-03-16
AHMEDABAD: Following neighbouring states’ decision to suspend academic activities to prevent spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Gujarat announced a two-week shutdown of academic institutions ranging from anganwadis to colleges and private coaching classes from March 16 to 29. The move would affect the overall academic calendar and would result in delay for exams and new academic sessions, opined educationists.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Dr Himanshu Pandya, vice-chancellor of Gujarat University (GU), said that teaching, examination and other meetings are suspended up to March 31 till further orders by the state government. GU officials said that the examination for repeat students was concluded recently. “From March 23, the exam for undergraduate and postgradute courses was to commence. With the notification, it will be deferred to April. Administrative work will however continue at the head office,” said an official.

 
 

Sources in education department said that senior officials had fought hard against the decision to close academic institutes. “Till Saturday, senior state officials maintained that there was no need to panic and close the schools and colleges. The officials cited examples of China and European nations to support the argument. In less than 24 hours, the stance however got changed,” said an official.

Jayvantsinh Sarvaiya, senior official of an association of college administrators, said that if the state can conduct exams for Class X and XII, why not college students? “Delay in exams will affect an academic year for the students. We are yet to go through finer details of the notification,” he said.

City-based universities and schools sent out messages to the parents, informing them about at least two weeks’ suspension of academic work. Non-teaching staff will continue to attend the schools and colleges.

For the schools, the annual exams were to commence from March 27. With the notification in place, now the exam is likely to be conducted in the first week of April. Several CBSE schools have completed their exams. A few of the schools might conduct the last exam on Monday.

Bhaskar Patel, president of All Gujarat School Administrators’ Association, said that the move will definitely affect the academic calendar. “About 10% of the course is still to be taught. The schools will have to devise ways to cover it. Moreover, this is the first year of the state’s ambitious plan to start the next academic year’s session. It will take a hit due to loss of the fortnight,” he said.

