‘Not just lung tract, Covid hits other organs too’
2020-05-13
Bhopal: It is not just respiratory damage, Covid-19 infection also leads to skin inflammation, clots, renal damage, strokes and multi-organ failures. Kids going into toxic shock with inflammation of coronary arteries and blood vessels is a new challenge for the medical community. Medical experts in Bhopal since 1984 gas leak have learnt to look for uncommon symptoms in gas victims; they may be leading the way in having a better understanding of Covid patients across the country.

Progression in +ve patients

Professor, department of medicine, Gandhi Medical College, Dr JL Wadhwani, said that coronavirus needs a ‘receptor’ to enter a human host. That receptor — ‘angiotensin-converting enzyme II’ or ACE 2 — is found in lung tissue, in oral and nasal mucus, kidneys, testes and gastrointestinal tracts. “We have been finding abnormal clotting, known as thrombosis, in our Covid patients and seeing clots everywhere including arteries. It is impacting multiple organs and not mere respiratory failure,” said pulmonologist and Covid-19 team lead, Chirayu Medical college, Dr Krishna Singh. Director, Dr Ajay Goenka, has been advocating that Covid patients respond best with high flow oxygen. Interventionist cardiologist, J K hospital, Dr GC Gautam, said that Bhopal’s medical fraternity is highly skilled to deal with crisis. “But we need to ensure safety of these corona warriors by providing them with proper protective gear (PPE suits) and other facilities,” he said.

Skin rashes & ‘Covid’ toes

Skin legions and inflammation of skin is witnessed in Covid patients. “When the area gets less of oxygen,” said assistant prof, dept of dermatology, GMC, Dr Nitin Pandya, “Covid patients show rashes, which seem to be consistent with what’s called a viral exanthema, which is a term for a general rash. In extreme cases the red, to blue skin vasculitis can lead to ulcer and can be very painful.” 

Findings in children 

Instances of rashes are reported in positive children. We are not sure if it is due to vasculitis or something else,” said HoD paedrictics, GMC, Jyotsana Shrivastava. Paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome is being observed in Covid-positive children, said director in-charge paediatrics ICU, Miracles hospital, Dr Rakesh Mishra. “These kids have blue toes and fingers, without apparent reason. This happens because the small blood vessels get blocked,” he added. 

Long-term impact

As per data, about 3 to 9% patients face renal failure; 30% had proteinuria, wherein protein leaks through urine. It is the kidney manifestation of Covid-19,” said nephrologist and kidney transplant specialist, Bansal hospital, Dr Vidyanand Tripathi. Doctors in Bhopal are grappling with one open question — what would be the long-term effects for the survivors? Will we see decrease in heart, lung and kidney function that is long-lasting and permanent. “This makes situation worst for gas victims,” said Dr Wadhwani. Director, AIIMS Bhopal, Dr Sarnam Singh indicated that chronic effects of Covid would be known after June. 


