Not used to isolation, people socialise and spread the virus
2020-04-29
Vijayawada: Brazen defiance of the lockdown has emerged as a major problem in Vijayawada and the rest of Krishna district. It is being attributed as one of the reasons for rising number of corona cases in the district.

Contrary to several leaders at the national level blaming the Tablighi Jamaat congregation at Nizamuddin Markaz as a prime reason for the exponential rise in the Covid cases, but Krishna seems to be among the least affected by it. Overall, only 18 cases linked with the Tablighi Jamaat have been reported in Krishna district.

Meanwhile, a look at the police data will show the extent at which people continue to flout lockdown norms. Vijayawada police alone has booked 1,874 people in the past month. In the rest of Krishna district, over 2,300 cases have been booked under Section 188 of the IPC.

On the other hand, two truck drivers managed to transmit the disease to almost 40 people as they violated the lockdown. In the first instance, the truck driver played a game of cards with a group of his friends while a set of women sitting adjacent to him were playing a game of tambola. 

“We have booked a case against the driver for violating lockdown and admitted him to the Government General Hospital. It has been found out that the driver had hidden his travel history. He had visited other countries prior to the lockdown,” a senior police official told TOI. 

In the second incident, another truck driver from Karmika Nagar transmitted the disease to 15 people after he decided to socialise during the lockdown. Apart from them, cops admit that there are at least 14 other truck drivers who live in their neighbourhood and have tested positive for Covid. Police have identified six ‘super carriers’ of the virus in the district. But the primary source of the contagion is yet to be found. Currently, Vijayawada is the third major hotspot of Covid-19 cases after Kurnool and Guntur. 

But the question arises as to why are people continuing to leave home despite police restrictions? A police personnel pointed out to TOI that areas such as Krishna Lanka, which has the highest number of cases, and Karmika Nagar are crowded. Here a family of five lives in one room. “Its like Mumbai’s Dharavi. People live in crowded homes and keeping them at home is difficult. They spend a considerable time outside socialising with neighbours. It is how they keep themselves entertained and the lockdown has suddenly taken their means of 
entertainment away,” he said.


