Andhra Pradesh: ‘Not enough food at quarantine centre’
2020-05-24
VISAKHAPATNAM: Migrant labourers put up at a quarantine centre at AP Residential School in Gummakota alleged on Saturday that the administration is not providing them adequate food and that the menu issued by the government is not being followed here. Around 252 people, including six pregnant women and 22 children have been housed at this quarantine centre since May 13.

The people at the quarantine centre, who have threatened to stage a protest, said that till date they haven’t been provided soap, sufficient rice or dal. These workers are tribals from interior villages in Ananthagiri mandal, near Araku, who had gone to Kolluru in Guntur district to work in brick kilns.

The lockdown put them in trouble as the brick kiln supervisors refused to make payments and they faced a lot of trouble attempting to make their way home. The workers in quarantine at the Gummakota quarantine centre are still 22kms away from their home mandal.

Jammi Polayya, one of the people putting up at the quarantine centre said, “The authorities are providing only 2kg dal and 500 grams of tamarind for 252 people. Is this sufficient? No officer has taken care of us.” He further alleged that while authorities are supposed to provide cooked food at quarantine centres, here the people have to cook their own food with scarce supplies.

“We have 22 children at the centre aged between two years to five years. How do we take care of them? We don’t even have buckets or mugs to take a bath with. After one week, the gas got over and we had to bring firewood from Kondapalli area ourselves to cook,” said Kiran, another worker staying at the centre.

Former MPTC of Ananthagiri mandal, D Ganga Raju has requested the tehsildar to provide food and other necessary facilities to workers put up at Gummakota, Piramid Dyana Kendra and Chilakalagedda Sivalingapuram. 

Joint collector, M Venugopal Reddy, upon being contacted, said that he has given instructions to all tehsildars to provide cooked food. “I will verify this with the sub-collector of Paderu and arrange facilities. We will definitely take up the issue and resolve it by Sunday afternoon.”


