Nagpur: ‘Not coronavirus, but bhukhmarivirus’
2020-03-20
NAGPUR: Its been only a day that they were made to shut down their outlets and made to stay home. Most are already restless and worried about their future. While some have monthly instalments to pay, others are worried about their survival as they have to earn every day to keep the family going.

TOI spoke to a few food vendors and owners of some well-known joints about how they will survive this forced holiday till March 31.

“This is not coronavirus it is a bhukhmarivirus. How will we manage during this lock down? We have 25-30 employees and all are on fixed salaries. If we are not earning a penny, we will have to pay their monthly salaries from our own pockets,” said Ramji Pandey, owner of the popular Raamji Shyamji Pohewale which operates at Chhatrapati Nagar Square.

Ramji added that not are they a big family of four brothers, “we also have a big family of employees to manage”. “Our day starts at 2.30am when we start preparations to make poha. Our shop opens at 5am. Today was our first day of the forced holiday and it is difficult to even swallow a glass of water at home,” he said.

“Our business was already down as people were panicking unnecessarily due to the virus threat. Now this total shut down means everyone will soon be on the road,” said Ramji.

Chunni Singh, who owns a pav bhaji shop in Dharampeth, is taking a break from business to spend some time with his family in Udaipur. He has told his employees — all daily wagers — to come for work after March 31.

Pawan Kumar of New Famous Chat Centre in Laxmi Nagar is worried if he would be able to pay his monthly loan instalment. “I have a two-wheeler loan with a monthly instalment of Rs5000. Every day I earn and feed my family of six and also save some amount to pay the instalment. If I won’t work for 15 days, what will I earn and how will I survive,” asked Pawan.

Rajkumar Patel has a stall of Chinese food and ice gola near Shankar Nagar. When asked about his plans, Patel said, “Since the government has brought in this rule, we have no option but to manage any how. I have five workers and if we need to retain them I will have to pay. I will be at home and spend some time with family. Since everything is closed, we have nothing to do but I will plan some short trip.”

Manoj Choubey, a resident of Kachipura and owner of Shreenath pav bhaji and pulao, added, “If this lock down is not relaxed, there’s a serious doubt about my survival. I have some savings and for some days things can be managed. My workers are paid on a daily basis and that’s a worry. With no work they won’t be paid and I have a serious doubt about their survival as two of them have purchased new mobile phones on instalment.”


