Not just elderly, young too are losing Covid-19 battle
2020-05-08
Jaipur: While a majority of Covid-19 deaths reported from SMS Hospital had comorbidities, the disturbing fact is that six of those did not have any underlying condition. Besides, contrary to the belief that the virus may prove to be fatal only for the elderly, at least 19% of patients who died are below 30 years of age. But, 89% of them had comorbidities.

SMS Hospital has reported 55 deaths till May 6. Out of these, 36 patients tested positive after their death. Twelve were brought dead to hospitals attached to SMS Medical College. When the doctors took their samples, they were found positive for coronavirus. “An audit done to analyse the reasons for death of patients found that many patients had comorbid conditions such as diabetes, kidney and heart diseases. The underlying conditions have been analysed in depth for each fatality,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

It came as a shock for SMS doctors when a 20-year-old girl, who had allegedly committed suicide by hanging in Jalupura area on May 4, was found infected with Covid-19.

However, out of all the deaths, 26 are above 60 years, 11 in the range of 50-60 years, eight were 30 and above but below 50, and 10 were below 30 years of age. The hospital said the young who died too had comorbidities.

“We found that out of all the deaths in Jaipur, 11 of them had diabetes, 14 had hypertension, four heart disorders, two kidney issues, one liver, two stroke, two pulmonary tuberculosis and four perforation and septicemia,” said Dr Sudhir Bhandari, principal and controller, SMS Medical College.

Six of the deceased did not have any comorbidity. However, the hospital said that they were elderly. “We conduct tests on all those who are brought dead to our hospital. Twelve such persons tested positive for coronavirus,” said Dr Ajit Singh, member of the core group of treatment for Covid-19 at SMS Hospital. The other members are Dr Prakash Keswani, Dr Raman Sharma, Dr S Banerjee and Dr Bhandari, who heads the group.


