Not enough screening for virus at airports, finds study
2020-02-18
Chennai: Passengers from China, Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore are being screened at major airports including Chennai for symptoms of novel coronavirus (COVID-19), but people who took a survey and also posted comments on an online platform have mentioned that the screening arrangements are inadequate and porous. 

Passengers are being screened at special counters using thermal scanners but many travellers say posting two to three staff to screen 300 passengers who arrive by a flight is inadequate. This raised a concern at Chennai airport too, where immigration officials often face passengers who do not meet the screening parameters, say the ones arriving from destinations without infection risk, requesting to be screened. 

Sources say the number of passengers who arrive from these destinations is too high for staff of the Airport Health Office (APHO) under the ministry of health to handle. Often, they have to go by the self declaration given by the passengers on a card before they disembark. 

A survey by LocalCircles conducted among 40,000 people across the country, and also by going through the posts put up by people on their platform, show that people are not happy with the kind of screening done at airports. Around 2,000 people from Chennai took part in the survey. 

A spokesperson of LocalCircles said “multiple LocalCircles members outlined how screening at airports were minimum and one counter with two individuals to take temperature of 300-plus passengers and note their details is just not enough. A few of them reported how people were getting away from the screening. Infection experts on the platform said airport screening only catches about 25% of the patients, highlighting the need for a three, seven, ten and 15-day follow-ups with each patient by the respective state governments. This follow up is not being done in most states.”

In Tamil Nadu, 47,645 passengers have been screened so far at Chennai, Trichy, Madurai and Coimbatore airports and 2,256 passengers are in home quarantine for 28 days. In Chennai, 650 passengers are in home quarantine for 28 days. 

And this has had an impact on foreign travel this summer. At least seven of 10 Indians are staying alert and taking precautions against coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and at least 40% of them are cautious while making travel plans for summer, shows the survey.


