Coronavirus outbreak: Not all can work from home or afford to take cab
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: As the Gurugram-bound train stopped at the Yellow Line platform of Kashmere Gate interchange station, Sanjay Kumar (33) stepped forward to board it, a face mask firmly in place. For 10.15am, the train was empty, but as commuters ahead of him entered, the compartment got a little crowded. After hesitating for a few seconds, Kumar let it go.


“This is nothing compared to the usual morning rush, but I don’t want to take a chance. Despite the mask, I’m scared of getting infected by novel coronavirus,” he said. 

But why isn’t he staying at home? “I work for a construction company and have to work at the site. Staying at home means going without pay and I can’t afford that,” Kumar explained.

Delhi Metro has been witnessing a gradual decline in the daily footfall over the last two weeks and a dip on Friday, a day after it announced strong measures to control crowding. But there are still lakhs who don’t have an alternative. 

Sameer Kushwaha is one of them. “I work for a small firm and work from home is not possible for us, particularly around the March closing. And I can’t afford a cab ride to Gurugram,” he said.

Shivam Singh, who works in Noida, was unaware of the new restrictions. “I have been taking the metro as a cab from Lajpat Nagar is not cheap. But now I may have to look at other options.” 

Another commuter, who was travelling to Kashmere Gate on the Violet Line, said he had largely been using the metro as he could not afford cabs every day. “We are going to office on alternate days. Buses from my area are erratic and with less crowd, this is my best option.” 

Most people were sporting masks, while others wrapped a handkerchief around the face, hoping to stay safe. Rajesh Muni said he would like to work from home but it was not practical for his small company. 

“I am using a mask and gloves. Buses are more dangerous and cabs are not affordable. They will have to close down the metro to enforce the rules.” Bahadur Singh, a salesman, agreed. He was sitting atop a basket full of goods as no seat was available. 

Hauz Khas, another interchange station, is also seeing enough crowd. A credit card salesman said they were using masks and hand sanitisers.

 “It is as crowded as yesterday. Our job involves public interaction. If the metro closes, what will happen to our job?” he asked.


