Bhopal: Notices for quarantine misconstrued as +ve cases
2020-03-27
BHOPAL: A large number of Covid-19 notices – pasted outside the house of the people quarantined in different localities of Bhopal – are being misconstrued as positive cases of the coronavirus infection. Images of such notices are also being circulated on social media with posts like, “Dekho mere ghar ke paas corona positive case hai.”

Senior lawyer Vineet Godha, has written a letter to the chief minister to take cognizance of the issue, which is adding to the woes of quarantined people. “There are over 2000 such notices. The language used in such notices should be changed as it is creating confusion,” he said. The lawyer said that his son and wife had returned from England on March 16. 

“Though my son had a little fever after his return, he is fully fit now. I had informed the administration about it and immediately quarantined both my wife and son. Instead of medically examining my son, I was asked by the administration to SMS my address. Ten days after his return and informing the administration, two persons approached me on March 24 and asked about their passport details. On March 25 night a notice of COVID-19 was pasted outside my home,” wrote Godha in his letter.

The notice also mention that quarantine period will be from March 25 to March 15. In fact, almost all the notices pasted in Bhopal mention the same quarantine period, irrespective of people’s travel history .

Godha said that there is nothing wrong in pasting notice, but it should not be misleading. “ When we contacted the administration on March 16, we wanted to tell them about the people who had visited him but it did not happen and defeated the very concern raised by the PM,” he said. 

Such notices can be seen in Arera colony, BHEL, Ayodhya bypass and Saket Nagar. 

The office of the district collector told TOI, “Yes all these are not COVID-19 cases, but we consider them as suspects. What if they turn out to be positive after a few days?” So far there are only two positive cases in Bhopal, the office of collector said.

