Novel Coronavirus: Health camps to come up at 26 Pilibhit villages near Indo-Nepal border
2020-02-02
BAREILLY: The health department will organize health camps at 26 villages in Pilibhit near the Nepal border to rule out the spread of Novel Coronavirus (nCov-2019).


The doctors will conduct health check-up at these villages to see if any person has symptoms related to the virus. Besides, ASHA workers have started conducting awareness drive to visit the hospital if anyone has a fever. 

As Nepal reported one confirmed case of Novel Coronavirus, officials are taking precautionary measures so that the virus does not spread in Pilibhit, which shares the border with Nepal. In India, one confirmed case was reported in Kerala. 

Additional director (health), Bareilly division, Dr Rakesh Dubey, said, “We have set up two mobile medical units at check-posts in Pilibhit to screen people entering India through the Indo-Nepal border for novel coronavirus. Apart from that, health camps will be conducted in villagers bordering Nepal. In the health camps, screening of fever and other symptoms will be done to rule out the spread of novel coronavirus.” 

Chief medical officer (CMO), Pilibhit, Dr Seema Agarwal, said, “A team comprising a doctor, pharmacist and lab technician will hold health camps in 26 villages. ASHA workers will conduct cluster meetings with residents of these villages to educate them about the disease. We will distribute pamphlets and put up flexes to create awareness.” 

Meanwhile, the health department in Bareilly has issued advisory to the public. CMO, Bareilly, Dr Vineet Shukla, said, “The risk is in the districts having airport or those sharing the border with Nepal, but we are also on alert. We have issued an advisory to the public and set up an isolation ward at the district hospital. Besides, we have sent the guidelines on novel coronavirus to all community health centres, IMA, private pathologies, and private medical colleges to notify us if they find any suspected case.” 

Health officials said the nCov virus spreads when a person sneezes and the infected droplets fall on nearby objects like tables or mobile phones. When healthy people touch these objects, they get infected. 

Experts said people can reduce the risk of coronavirus by cleaning hands with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub. Besides, one should cover his nose and mouth with a tissue when coughing and sneezing, and should not reuse the handkerchiefs or tissues. People should avoid close contact with anyone with cold or flu-like symptoms.

There should be no unprotected contact with live wild or farm animals, and people should eat thoroughly cooked meat and egg. 

Officials said nCov symptoms include fever, difficulty in breathing, chest pain, pneumonia and rapid heartbeat. 


