Coronavirus in Uttar Pradesh: Labourers, street vendors, daily wagers hit as work shrinks
2020-03-21
AGRA: With coronavirus cases steadily rising every day, businesses have been severely affected, leading to a cascading effect on those dependent on them. The worst–affected are daily wagers and street vendors. 


Every day, groups of labours from rural areas can be seen waiting at the major crossings of the city from morning to late afternoon in the hope of getting some work. The condition of the street vendors is no different. Their business has dipped by over 60% over the past one week. 

With demand shrinking, hundreds of daily wagers working at dhabas, cafes, restaurants, showrooms and factories have been sent on unpaid leave.

A group of five construction workers from Bichpuri block at Bodla crossing here told TOI that they have not been able to get any work for the last three days. They said if they did not get any work for another week, they would have to borrow money from loan sharks to sustain their families. 

Shahganj-based shoe factory worker Imran, who got married in January, said, “I am a daily wager. I spent my entre savings of Rs 25,000 for my marriage. Since March 15, I have been on unpaid leave. I don’t know when I will get back to work. I have asked my wife to try and take work as a domestic help. Coronavirus has made the situation very difficult for us. I hope that this bad phase ends soon.” 

Idgha resident Virendra Singh, a waiter in a restaurant at Bhagwan Talkies was asked not to come to work from Tuesday. “I used to be paid Rs 200 a day as wages and Rs 100 as tip from costumers. Due to a significant fall in the number of costumers since March 10, the restaurant owner asked me to come after two weeks. I tried but could not find any alternative work. I have decided to work without pay so that I can at least get a tip from the customers,” he said. 

A kachori and samosa seller near Kheria crossing said, “In February, I was making a net profit of at least Rs 700 a day. Now, my earnings have fallen by 60%. I have three school-going children, a wife and mother to look after. I don’t know how I will be able to manage the family expenses if the current situation continues for a few more days.” 

Talking with TOI, district president of Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bhupendra Rana said, “The labours and people working in the unorganized sector are facing a financial crisis. The outbreak of coronavirus has rendered them jobless. If the coronavirus epidemic does not subside soon, a majority of these people who have a hand to mouth existence may have to go hungry. The government must take cognizance of their situation and declare a relief package for them.” 

