Novel coronavirus may get efficient at infecting humans during early phase: NIV
2020-03-29
Pune: The novel coronavirus — SARS-CoV-2 — can adapt to survive and may become “more efficient” at infecting humans during the “initial phase of its outbreak”, especially when immunity within a population is absent or at its weakest. But this efficiency and adaptability will only be fully understood once the outbreak ceases and a strong clinico-epidemiological database is made available for researchers and experts to analyse, said scientist-professor Priya Abraham, director of the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, during an exclusive interview with TOI. “Analysis of the viral genome data, along with the clinico-epidemiologic profiles of cases from whom isolates of the virus were obtained will be able to provide answers to these questions. We are working on it,” Abraham said.When asked if the epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 — referring to its spread over time, which can occur slowly or rapidly — and if its behaviour in India is different from what has been seen in China or Italy, Abraham said a detailed epidemiology was still under “active study”.“Generally speaking, there are many factors that can contribute to the epidemiology of a virus infection in a country: population density, average age of the population, social behavior, hygiene levels, travel patterns, rate of case reporting, preparedness and containment efforts by a government,” she said.Abraham added that the rate of virus spread, effectiveness of infection-control practices, weather conditions and human immunity will all also determine how this pandemic plays out in the country. “The rate of spread depends on quarantine and isolation efforts; effective laboratory screening; and adherence to strict infection-control practices, including stringent hand hygiene, cough etiquette, proper doffing (removal or disposal) of medical masks and other personal protective gear,” she said.“Also, unnecessary travel and use of public transport should be avoided. Avoiding mass gatherings can further reduce community transmissions. Immunity of the individual also plays an important role on the outcome of this infection.”Her message to the general public was simple: “Follow good hand hygiene and comply with the guidelines that have been issued by our authorities. There is no need to panic.”She added that people will also need to keep an eye out for symptoms. “Be alert. Seek immediate medical assistance if one feels unwell. Also, ensuring prioritised medical care for persons with underlying conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, heart disease is also of paramount importance.”