Now virus woes in Covid-free zones of Hyderabad
2020-06-01
HYDERABAD: Fresh Covid-19 cases have been detected in areas of Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), which did not have any case for the past month, after relaxation of lockdown norms.

Eight cases were reported in Seriligampally circle which was Covid-19 free for more than 35 days. A techie living in a PG accomodation as well as a senior citizen in Lumbini Avenue both in Gachibowli have tested positive. Two people in Lingampally were diagnosed on Thursday. Another four people from Kondapur, including a software employee, tested positive this week. 

“Both the techies admitted that they moved in the city and visited multiple places post lockdown relaxation. One of them also met a friend who came from Mumbai. In Lingampally, two people who tested positive crossed state border and reached their home post lockdown relaxation,” said an official deployed on Covid-19 duty. 

New cases were also detected in Begumpet, Malkagjiri and Secunderabad post lockdown relaxation. “Bhoiguda , Neredmet and Seethaphalmandi are the three new places which have been added to Covid-19 list. These places were free form coronavirus for a month. The people who tested positive visited wine shops, vegetable markets and other places. They also admitted that their activity increased post lockdown relaxation. Socialising is the reason for increased cases in these three locations,” said a GHMC official. 

Several residents from these newly formed hot spots said that their apartment associations are framing stricter rules. “While the government relaxed the lockdown rules, our apartment association has decided to implement stringent regulation following four positive cases in our locality. They said that they will not allow any outsiders, including relatives of residents, to enter the premises,” said Chellanki Ramana, resident of Raghavendra Colony in Kondapur. 

Several residents from newly formed hot spots said that their apartment associations are framing stricter rules and even relatives of the residents are not allowed to visit


