Now, Burhanpur records its first coronavirus case
2020-04-29
Indore: Burhanrpur district on Tuesday reported its first case of Covid-19 sending administrative officials and locals on toes.

Panic gripped Dauadpura area of the main Burhanpur city, when a 63-years-old former corporator was found positive. “The patient had visited Saudi Arabia around a month ago for Haj. On return, he was quarantined for a month but thereafter, he developed some symptoms and thus, his samples were sent for laboratory test,” CMHO Dr Vikram Singh Verma told TOI.

He added that patient’s report came positive late on Monday night. “We have taken samples of 40 people of his contact and all of them have been quarantined. The area around the patient’s resident has been declared as containment zone while required steps are being taken to check spread of the disease,” he said.

Earlier, a woman of Maharashtra, who was undergoing treatment in a local sospital, was tested positive. “Second report of the woman has also tested positive. As she belongs to Buldhana district of Maharashtra, we are not counting her as a local patient. The patient was however being provided treatment in a hospital meant for Covid-19 patients,” CMHO said.

This apart, Dhar district reported another Covid-19 patient taking the tally to 40. “As per the division’s report of the day, 165 new patients including three deaths have been reported in Indore late on Monday night. In the district, number of deaths have increased to 63 while total 1372 patients have found positive here” the joint director (health) Dr JS Awasya told TOI.

A bulletin of the day released by Ujjain division office revealed that four positive cases including three deaths reported in Ujjain while one death reported in Dewas district on Tuesday.

As per the report, Ujjain has so far reported total 23 deaths and total 124 positive cases while Dewas district have reported seven deaths and total 25 positive cases. Both the districts under Ujjain division are adjacent to the state’s worst-affected Indore district.

No new death or positive cases were reporting remaining five districts including Agar-Malwa, Ratlam, Shajapur, Neemuch and Mandsaur district of the division.


