Now, insurance cos offer Covid-19 cover
2020-03-18
Visakhapatnam: Following the outbreak of novel coronavirus (Covid-19), companies selling health insurance are floating advertisements recommending policies targeted for the treatment of this viral infection.

Sources say that while the policies remain the regular ones, they are being marketed highlighting coverage of Covid-19. One particular company however, has even floated a benefit policy exclusively for patients infected with Covid-19.

Speaking to TOI, DS Raju, a senior official of a leading insurance company said, “What is happening right now is that insurance companies are selling existing health insurance highlighting entitlements for Covid 19-affected patients. This is a sheer marketing policy of selling old wine in a new bottle.” 

Marketing experts say owing to virus outbreaks such as Ebola, Zika and Nipah, insurance companies have begun designing policies to cover such infections. As Covid-19 is an infection, like other infections, coverage for it will be available with insurance products that cover hospitalisation costs.

Coverage for in-patient treatment, pre-hospitalisation, post-hospitalisation, OPD and ambulance that a certain health insurance policy offers will be available for Covid-19 as well. 

TK Sarathi, a senior official of a nationalised health insurance company said, “Recently, the IRDA issued strict instructions to health insurance companies warning against rejecting claims related to coronavirus. The regulatory authority has stated that all claims reported under Covid-19 shall be thoroughly reviewed by the claims review committee before repudiation.”

“Following this, insurance companies have decided to go for this all-out campaign for highlighting coverage for Covid-19 affected patients,” Sarathi added. 

Meanwhile, a private company has introduced an exclusive Covid-19 exclusive benefit plan, but “people above 60 years of age are not entitled to this policy,” said Kamal Thelagathoti, a senior official of an insurance brokerage agency.

Experts are unsure of how successful these marketing strategies will be. There has not been an increase in people buying policies after insurance companies started marketing policies highlighting coverage for patients suffering from Covid-19. 


