Now, a capsule for transporting Covid-19 patients sans risk
2020-04-04
Nagpur: Transferring a Covid-19 positive patient from one ward to another or from one hospital to another is a challenging task in many ways. Even though doctors treating them wear protection kits, infection can still spread through droplets of patient during transportation on a general stretcher. Entire hospital galleries and corridors must be sanitized once a Covid-19 patient visits.Moreover, other patients in ward or support staff without proper PPE kits may get infected. So, moving a patient from isolation ward becomes very risky.Doctors from Nagpur’s Aureus Institute of Medical Sciences and K innovation labs have developed a unique capsule for transport of Covid-19 patients in a safe manner without contamination of outside atmosphere.Dr Anant Singh Rajput, critical care consultant of this hospital, said that ward-to-ward transfer of Covid-19 patients has become risk-free with this enclosure made of toughened glass, acrylic plates, and aluminium frames.“Covid-19 patients in isolation rooms may need to be transported on stretchers for ventilator support or for advanced care in ICU. Moving them through hospitals can spread infections. So, this concept of designing an enclosure for such patients struck my mind,” said Dr Rajput.Dr Amol Kadu, his ophthalmologist friend who has developed eight such innovative medical instruments so far, took the responsibility to design this capsule. Together, they named it as Covi-safe.“The concept of such capsule is not new to medical field. But, Covi-safe is arguably the first to support ventilators,” said Dr Kadu.“We can shift the patient on ventilator in this box without disconnecting oxygen support. For those who are not on ventilator, we have kept an oxygen inlet and CO2 outlet. The outlet has a filter that restricts virus inside it. This filter is disposable,” said Dr Kadu.Developing this device in the middle of lockdown had been a challenge for the doctors. They had to take special permission from city police to open their vendors’ shops, workshops and designed the prototype in 2 days under police protection.“As this was exclusively for Covid-19 patients, we decided to donate it to IGGMCH, where 9 positive patients are presently admitted. Union minister Nitin Gadkari was present when we donated this on Thursday,” said Dr Rajput.The duo claimed that they can produce these enclosures in large numbers and it may cost less than Rs20,000. “In its next version, we want to make it compatible for CT Scan. It’s an important diagnostic tool for Covid-19 patients, but in India, entire CT Scan center needs to be disinfected if one such patient visits. The next version of Covi-safe will have such features that CT Scan can be done without infection,” said Dr Rajput.About Covi-safe The enclosure is made of aluminium angles, toughened glass, acrylic plates and fixed on a GI stretcherWith gaskets support, it can be fixed on stretcher in such a way that it becomes air-tightEven patient on ventilator can also be shifted in this box as it supports ventilators and has arrangement of oxygen cylinderPatient can be shifted from one ward to another, or one hospital to another easily without the risk of contaminationIn the next version of this tool, doctors are planning to make it suitable for CT Scan which is important diagnostic tool for Covid-19 patients