Now, ‘Nightingale of Kannur’ to the aid of Covid hospital
2020-04-21
KANNUR: Machines rush more confidently than humans who tend to be cautious. Such was the case at the Covid hospital at Anjarakkandy in the district on Monday, when a robot fearlessly entered the hospital to assist the medical and healthcare teams in treating Covid-19 patients.

Health minister K K Shailaja inaugurated the service of the robot, named ‘Nightingale-19’, via video call, and also interacted with a few children undergoing treatment.

The robot has been developed by the robotics centre of Vimal Jyothi Engineering College at Chemperi in the district, and the service was offered free of cost.

Nightingale-19 is a lot more advanced than the one at the hospital in Wuhan, China, where Covid-19 was first reported, said the team that developed it with the assistance of health department officials.

Apart from providing food and medicines to the patients, it would help interact with the patients via video, without wearing a PPE kit, said Dr Ajith Kumar, who is the nodal officer coordinating the Covid treatment in Anjarakkandy. The one in Wuhan was used only to provide food and medicine and no communication was possible.

“With this facility, we could avoid going to the patients wearing the PPE kits, even for minor requirements, but we would continue the routine personal visits as part of the medical examination,” said Dr Kumar.

This robot can be managed using a remote control up to a distance of 1km and after every single use it would be disinfected. It is also a relaxing presence for the patients, including children, he said.

The robot can carry a payload of up to 25kg, which means it can take medicines, food and water for at least six patients at a time, said the team comprising associate professor C R Sarin, research dean T D John, research team member Sunil Paul, which developed it.

Along with this, the college has also developed leg-operated sanitizer dispenser, which was presented to the Covid hospital. Using this system, the sanitizer can be used without touching the bottle by hand. When a pedal is pressed with the foot, the sanitizer would come out through a tube.

Now the engineering college is in the process of developing a movable kiosk, which would enable the health personnel to reach the patient without wearing a PPE kit, they said.

DMO K Narayana Nayak, surveillance officer M K Shaj and DPM K V Latheesh also interacted with the patients with the help of the robot.


