Now, Covid-19 spike in Pathankot, Gurdaspur
2020-06-11
Gurdaspur: A spike in Covid-19 cases was recorded in Pathankot and Gurdaspur districts on Wednesday.

A pregnant woman and an SHO were among the 19 people who tested positive for the virus in Pathankot. In Gurdaspur, the number of cases rose by 13.

While the pregnant woman is from Bhudoria, a Pathankot district official refused to divulge details of the SHO. Gurdaspur deputy commissioner Gurpreet Singh Khaira said the infected persons included three migrant labourers, four contacts of patients and 10 persons who were tested as they were symptomatic.

Gurdaspur deputy commissioner Mohammad Ishfaq said six persons in Shukarpura and three in Sundar Nagar localities of Batala were found infected and they had now declared the two localities as containment zones and imposed curfew there to restrict movement of people.

This is the highest number of coronavirus positive cases reported in a day in Pathankot and Gurdaspur, which have 44 and 26 active cases, respectively. Gurdaspur district administration has also appointed sub-divisional magistrate Balwinder Singh as nodal officer of the containment zone. 

Pathankot’s Dr Krishan Chand said the health department had also appointed nodal officers for conducting medical tests of contacts of patients. 

He expressed concern over a few people not being ready to undergo home quarantine, describing it as a threat to public safety. “Such people will be dealt with under Section 188 of IPC,” he said. 

Punjab medical education and research minister O P Soni said 126 patients were under treatment in Amritsar and that a few congested areas of Amritsar — including Phulla Wala Chowk, Katra Charat Singh, Lohgarh, Shaktinagar, Katra Sant Singh, Bombay Wala Khu, Katra Moti Ram, Gali Kaddan — had been declared as containment zones.

Twelve persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Amritsar on Wednesday. They included six new cases (one each from Bombay Wala Khu, Maan Singh Gate, Katra Khajana, Katra Charat Singh, Lawrence Road and Chucak village), five contacts of patients from Garden Enclave and Mohini Park, and a man who returned from Mumbai


