Now, two new containment zones demarcated to stem virus spread
2020-04-04
Bhopal: After four jammatis — staying in mosques at Shyamala Hills and Aishbagh — were tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday, the one-km area radius around the two places of worship has been barricaded and declared “containment area”. 

The spokesperson for district administration, Arun Rathore told TOI that the “containment area” was sanitized by the Bhopal Municipal Corporation (BMC) on Friday. Residents of 50 houses on all on either sides of the “epicentre” were screened, he added. 

A rapid action team of health officials, BMC officials and revenue officials has been formed to monitor the area and make provision of essential for the residents — who have been quarantined for 14 days, and will not be allowed to leave the area under any circumstances. “It there is some emergency, then the rapid action team headed by the SDM will take a call,” said Rathore. 

Residents of the area have been advised to practice social distancing, wear masks and wash their hands frequently during the quarantine period. 

“A doctor would be monitoring the health of the residents and if someone develops coughing of fever, they should inform the team or the doctor immediately,” said Rathore. 

Talking about the provision of essential goods during isolation, he said, “The necessary items will be provided by the district administration. We have provided a phone number to all residents of the area to contact, if they need anything.” To ensure that no one enters or exits the areas, police have barricaded the area and are on constant vigil around their perimeters. 

Even the road leading to the chief minister’s house in Shyamla Hills has been closed and checkpoints set up in front of Bharat Bhavan. Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan is currently living in 74 Bungalows — which is not part of the containment zone. 

SHO Shyamla Hills, BP Singh Bains said, Ahata Rustam Khan area was already barricaded after the a woman and her father were tested Covid-19 positive. He said, now another 1km around the area has been locked down. 

He further said, police have put up checkpoints at Depot Square, Doordarshan office, Shyamla Hills police station, Kilol Park, Ravindra Bhawan, Governor House, and Banganga Square. The movement to and from these areas is completely restricted. 

He further said that entry is only allowed to milk supply from Sanchi, newspaper vendors, BMC vehicles which are supplying vegetables & grocery and the emergency teams conducting the medical screening. A force of around 100 police personnel has been deployed in the area to enforce lockdown. They have been supplied masks and sanitisers from the control room. 

Similarly, the area around Rehmani Mosque in Aishbagh has been locked up and police have barricaded all streets leading to it. 

ASP Zone I, Rajat Saklecha, said that the mosque was completely barricaded and entry in or out has been stopped. Checkpoints have been set up at every cut point to restrict movement of people especially in and around 200-300 metres from the epicentre.

 A force of three policemen at each checkpoint has been deployed. Saklecha said that police force has been deployed at all 32 mosques in the city, where foreign jamaatis had been living. 


