Now, domestic passengers to be screened for Covid-19 too
2020-03-22
Nagpur: After alarming rise in the number of coronavirus cases across India, the district administration has decided to tighten screening norms by now including even domestic passengers coming from cities like Mumbai, Pune and Chennai among others.

“So far, only those arriving from international flights were screened and moved to isolation centre at MLA hostel. Now, even those arriving from domestic flights would be screened as many of them arrive from abroad and then take domestic flights to the city. The virus is spreading from the passengers coming from other countries,” guardian minister Nitin Raut said.

He was speaking after a joint meeting convened by divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar and collector Ravindra Thakare, which was attended by public representatives, including MPs and MLAs, along with municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and police commissioner Bhushan Kumar Upadhyay.

Later, while addressing the media, the minister talked about various measures taken by the district administration to contain the spread of the virus. “The citizens should understand that this is an unprecedented medical emergency and they should cooperate with the administration. We request all to close their establishments, else we would be forced to take strict action,” Raut, who was accompanied by animal husbandry minister Sunil Kedar, said.

Acknowledging that poor and daily wagers would be suffering the most in the lockdown, Raut said the state cabinet had discussed the issue and would come out with a solution to help them out after March 31. “We’ve directed the NMC to restore all water connections of citizens which were snapped for defaulting on bills. We’re also taking help of NGOs and public representatives to spread awareness about the disease. We’ve advised flat schemes and townships to screen the visitors and keep sanitizers at the gates.”

On the alleged leak of list of quarantined persons, Kumar said, “There was nothing secret in that list, which contained information of those who travelled abroad in this period and were advised home quarantine.”

Munde said that they found two suspects who weren’t cooperating and one of them was later forced to go into quarantine at MLA hostel. “The citizens should report presence of foreign nationals in their localities if found,” he said.

On screening at railway station, Raut said they had advised railway officials to monitor passengers and on Saturday, they detained a couple of them who were suspects. “Those coming from outside in their private vehicles had to give a certificate that they hadn’t travelled abroad in the last 14 days,” he added.


