Now, 1-year-old tests +ve for Covid-19 in Kalaburagi
2020-04-16
Shreyas.HS

Kalaburagi: Days after a two-year-old child tested positive for novel coronavirus in Kalaburagi, a one-year-old kid was confirmed infected in the district on Wednesday, much to the dismay of the parents. The authorities are at a loss to understand how the children contracted the infection despite not having come in contact with individuals who tested positive. 

The two-year-old boy who tested positive for the virus a few days ago had been brought to the Kalaburagi District Hospital with fractured leg. The boy’s father, a bookseller at the Wadi Railway Station, had been admitted to the same hospital a few days before his son with severe acute respiratory infection. His son, meanwhile, was confirmed infected on Sunday. 

The one-year-old kid, again with no confirmed history of contact with an infected patient, was rushed to the hospital after developing influenza-like illness. Considering that most children are, even under normal circumstances, not exposed to the external environment to the same degree as others, these two cases have left doctors in Kalaburagi understandably baffled. 

A source in the Kalaburagi district administration said that they had still not been able to trace the source of the kids’ infection. “The one-year-old child was brought to the hospital by an ambulance, and the personnel attending to the kid were from Yadgir, where they had been in isolation along with 18 others. We have sent their swabs for medical examination and awaiting the results,” the source said. 

Director of Indian Council of Medical Research-National Institute of Traditional Medicine Debprasad Chattopadhyay, a noted virologist, said that transmission to children was more likely to occur within the walls of a house. 

“A member of the family or a guest who may have come in contact with an infected patient could have transmitted the disease to the children,” said Dr Chattopadhyay. 

The detection of the infection in two children with no travel history, and with no clear record of contact with a positive patient has sparked off fears of the Covid-19 pandemic having touched the ‘Community Outbreak’ level in the country. “This had been predicted earlier too – instances of people with no discernible contact history testing positive for the infection. But I would like to point out that the two-year-old child who was confirmed with the infection Sunday may have contracted the disease at the hospital,” said Mangaluru-based physician Dr Srinivas Kakkilaya. 

However, Dr Maqsood Chanda of Bidar, was not as sanguine in his observations. An advisor to the Bidar district administration for handling the Covid-19 crisis, Dr Chanda fears that this had now become a community outbreak. “The parents may have stepped out to purchase essential commodities, or they may have had visitors. Such scenarios point to the likelihood of a community outbreak,” he said.


