Now, Aurangabad central prison opts for full lockdown
2020-04-20
AURANGABAD: The Aurangabad central prison has joined the league of jails opting for a complete lockdown to shield the inmates from getting infected with Covid-19. 


About 10 days back, the state prison department unanimously imposed lockdown in major prisons of Yerwada in Pune, Arthur Road and Byculla in Mumbai, apart from those situated in Thane and Kalyan.

As per the latest move, the inmates and the prison authorities would compulsorily camp at the prison premises till lockdown rules are relaxed.

DIG (prison) Dilip Zalke said that so far none of the prisons in the state have reported any Covid-19 positive cases. “To ensure that the infection does not penetrate our prisons, the decision has been taken.”

Highly placed authorities said that the central prisons in Nashik and Aurangabad were on the watch list as both the districts housing these prisons have been marked in the red zone due to high number of Covid-19 positive cases.

Starting from Sunday, a team of prison staff led by superintendent Hiralal Jadhav along with seven jailers, one senior jailer, one doctor, one compounder, four clerical staff, 45 constables and six women constables would camp within the prison premises till the relaxation of lockdown.

Prison administration has stocked considerable amount of essentials including milk, vegetables, cereals and grains to sustain a fortnight.

“We have even sealed the entry and exit gate so that no one enters or exits from the prisons,” said Hiralal Jadhav.

Home minister Anil Deshmukh, who was in the city on Sunday, said that lockdown is being imposed all the overcrowded prisons in the state.

Sources in the prison department said that of the total staff of 300, only 67 have been camped within the prison. For the remaining staff, staying at home has been made mandatory and their attendance would be recorded at least thrice a day. However, a handful prison staff will get duty at the barrack outside the main prison. This barrack has been reserved for housing those are being sentenced to judicial custody.


