Now, Meerut RS MP writes to Yogi Adityanath, points at loopholes in dist admin’s Covid-19 preparedness
2020-05-12
MEERUT: Nearly a fortnight after Agra mayor Naveen Jain wrote a letter to UP CM Yogi Adityanath, urging him to save the city “which is on the verge of becoming the next Wuhan”, Meerut Rajya MP Kanta Kardam has now in a letter to CM Yogi apprised him of the loopholes in the district administration’s tackling of the Covid situation.

In her letter dated May 9, MP Kardam pointed out “rampant violation” of the lockdown in hotspot areas, “irregularities and mismanagement” at Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial (LLRM) Medical College, death of a local party worker due to Covid-19 and “flouting of social distancing norms” at liquor shops in the district.

“LLRM College is a victim of mismanagement. Patients are wary of being treated here, and their family members have consistently been raising concerns about poor treatment, substandard meals and unhygienic conditions,” the MP wrote.

She also spoke about death of a party worker due to Covid-19. “With a heavy heart, I want to bring this to your attention that our dedicated party worker died due to Covid-19 on May 8. In his case also, negligence of medical and health officials had surfaced,” Kardam said in her letter. 

Several videos of patients narrating their ordeal from isolation and quarantine centres over substandard meals, lack of medical aide and unhygienic conditions in the wards have surfaced on social media drawing severe criticism from netizens.

In a recently shared video, a quarantined man writhing in pain was left unattended in the facility and later succumbed to his ailments. In another video, a city trader under isolation had raised concern over lack of medical aid and prevailing irregularities in the ward. 

Earlier, Meerut Lok Sabha MP Rajendra Agarwal, too, had raised concerns with the state government over the prevailing mismanagement at LLRM.

“Spoke to medical education minister Suresh Khanna and apprised him of the irregularities at Meerut Medical college. He told me Dr Suryakant Triapthi is being sent to Meerut...,” Agarwal had tweeted. 

Dr Tripathi is professor and head of department of respiratory medicine at King's George Medical University in Lucknow. Upon arrival in the city on Monday, he held a meeting with a delegation led by MP Kardam at the circuit house and heard about the grievances from local representatives and party functionaries.

The state government finally woke up to the piling complaints and a four-member team of nodal officers led by T Venkatesh, principal secretary, irrigation, was sent to Meerut to take stock of the situation on ground which was been consistently deteriorating with 14 deaths due to Covid-19 in the district.

The team held meeting with senior administrative and health officials in the district, including district magistrate Anil Dhingra and chief medical officer Rajkumar. 

As of now, 254 patients have tested positive of the virus in Meerut while 14 succumbed to it. Out of the total, nine fatalities were reported in the last 10 days while three had tested positive after their death. 


