Now, it is a total lockdown at Bengaluru’s apartment complexes
2020-03-18
For many Bengalureans, living in a big apartment society also translates to easy access to lifestyle amenities, such as multi-sport facilities, swimming pools, childrens’ parks and more. A day off from work or school offered plenty of options to stay engaged and active without having to step out of the complex. This week, however, in their effort to follow the government order on partial shutdown of day-to-day activities, there has been a clamp on most of these privileges. Several housing societies in the city are working round-the-clock to ensure that the health and safety of residents is paramount and are taking extra measures to maintain status quo.

When early news of the Coronavirus in Karnataka began doing the rounds, the first thing that the residents association at SNN Raj Serenity in Yelenahalli did was to close access to the swimming pool — a move that was later part of the government directive as well. Crucial safety measures taken at most of the apartment complexes too, have been on similar lines. 

“There is no access to the gym or the sports courts, or even the clubhouse. We have stopped entry for personal trainers and sports coaching staff as well,” Pretheesh Unni, a member of the managing committee at the complex. 

Apart from sanitation measures, apartment complexes are looking at screening residents and visitors for potential symptoms of the virus at the entrance of the building. Complex management has also invested in infrared thermometers that are being used to check the temperatures of everyone entering the building.

“Our apartment management sent us all declaration forms that we had to enter and sign up — anyone with a recent foreign travel history had to declare the same and also observe self-quarantine for 28 days — irrespective of whether they show symptoms of carrying the virus or not,” says a resident of a complex located in south Bengaluru. 

Yet another resident of Elita Promenade, in JP Nagar, says, “All the elevators in all the 17 blocks in the complex are being sanitised twice every day. Access to any of the ‘social’ areas that is otherwise open to all residents have been shut. Frequent sanitising and social distancing the norm.”
At Bhartiya City, on Thanisandra Main Road, visitors, vendors, delivery agents, maids and cooks are being allowed into the premises only after being debriefed about their health status. “Disinfectants are sprayed frequently in common areas, with major focus on places like doorknobs, stairs banisters, lift buttons, common washrooms, etc., to mitigate spread of COVID-19. Staff has been sensitised, briefed and instructed to avoid shaking hands, hugs, high-fives or any physical contact with others, especially those who are sick,” reads a statement issued by the agency handling affairs at the Bhartiya City.

With restrictions in place for a mandatory period of at least 10 days, which began over the weekend, this sense of panic that is currently prevalent among most Bengalureans, is more than evident.

(With inputs by Sunayana.Suresh@timesgroup.com)



