Now, three-tier Covid-19 healthcare system in Ahmedabad
2020-04-12
AHMEDABAD: For the first time after Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) scaled up Covid-19 testing across the city, a three-tier Covid-19 health care system is being put in place by the municipal health authorities. It includes a Covid care centre, a Covid health care centre and the Covid intensive care. 


The strategy is being planned in order to avoid overcrowding the hospitals that provide critical treatment to patients. 



AMC commissioner Vijay Nehra said that the newly set up Covid care centre at Samras hostel in Navrangpura would principally cater to asymptomatic Covid-19 patients, who are stable, have no co-morbid conditions and are aged between 18 and 60 years. At present, the Samras hostel has a capacity to cater to 1,000 individuals at a time. 

Another tier of health facility that the AMC is aiming at is the Covid health centre. This will specifically cater to patients who require oxygen. In this, the existing health facilities like VS Hospital, LG Hospital and Shardaben Hospitals have been roped in along with major urban health centres which will double up as a facility. 

“We have also consulted medical associations that if need be private hospitals too can be roped in to aid the medical facility,” said Nehra. 

And lastly, the third tier of Covid-19 care is the intensive care which will be handled by the two major civil hospitals of Sola and Asarwa, and the third being the SVP Hospital in Ellisbridge. “I am confident that our existing infrastructure will be capable of handling Covid-19 cases and providing adequate care,” stated Nehra. 

Senior AMC officials said that from Sunday onwards random Covid-19 tests would be performed on clustered populations in chawls and slums. 

A senior AMC official told TOI: “Already, disinfection drive has covered a large portion of the city and it will be repeated for several areas as well. However, a critical issue will be to conduct Covid-19 tests in slums and cluttered areas of the city to know the prevalence of the disease in the local population.” 


