Now, bureaucrat comes out with handy guide on management of coronavirus
2020-04-06
Medical professional-turned-bureaucrat Sanjay Mukherjee has come out with a comprehensive 360-page operational module for management of Covid-19. The blueprint drawn up by Mukherjee, secretary, medical education department, will serve as an important resource for bureaucrats entrusted with the task of handling the health crisis as well as doctors associated with the state public health department and medical colleges across the state. 


The compendium provides information on setting up isolation and quarantine wards, transportation of doubtful and confirmed cases of Covid-19, effective and rational utilization of personal protection equipment, management of clinics and handling the deceased. 

For the first time, an SOP has been prescribed for reallocation of resident doctors and post-graduate and nursing students as part of hospital administration. The disease management protocol also has guidelines for specimen collection, packaging and transportation, handling, treatment and disposal of waste generated during treatment, diagnosis and quarantine of Covid-19 patients and the discharge policy once a patient is declared coronavirus-free. 

In addition, specific responsibility and accountability has been fixed on the dean/medical superintendent of hospitals. The role of every person involved in the treatment of coronavirus patients has been defined so that there is no confusion and dereliction of duty. A former medical school dean said Mukherjee's compendium would go a long way in effective treatment of cases.

 Three ministers give up security, vehicles 

Three senior cabinet members - Sandipanrao Bhumre (horticulture and EGS), Shankarrao Gadakh (soil and water conservation) and Abdul Nabi Sattar (rural development)-- have given up their escort vehicles and security personnel so that they can be used to tackle the health crisis in the State. 

Ironically, the trio's gesture comes at a time their colleagues and senior politicians are asking for additional escort vehicles and security staff.

