Coronavirus scare in Bijnor: Now, forest department bans human entry into forest areas
2020-03-18
BIJNOR: Bijnor forest division has banned entry of human beings into forest area to “mitigate the possibility of infection among animals from humans as novel coronavirus is a zoonotic (spreading from non-humans to humans) disease”.


The state government has already declared Covid-19 a pandemic and all departments have been put on high alert and awareness programmes are going on. Forest authorities have sealed forest areas, including tiger and elephant reserve areas, and banned the entry of public to reserved forests.

According to Bijnor divisional forest officer (DFO) M Semmaran, “Higher authorities have sounded alert in UP and directed us to stop public entry into forest area. Novel coronavirus is zoonotic. Notably, similar directions have already been put into force by the Jim Corbett National Park. Amangarh Tiger Reserve is the buffer zone of this part that falls within UP jurisdiction in Bijnor.”

According to officials, Amangarh is home to 22 tigers, a hundred jumbos, leopards, and a large number of herbivores. There is no boundary between Amangarh and Corbett tiger reserve areas. Animals can frequent both areas without any barrier. Entry to Corbett park has been barred and ATR admin has taken cognizance of the situation. 

There are 25 villages located on the border areas of Amangarh tiger reserve. Villagers frequent the forest areas to pick up woods, fodder, leaves and some forest fruits.

Forest authorities have launched a campaign in these villages urging the population not to enter the forest area. Besides, the forest staff has been put on alert to look after activities and movements of the villagers living in the neighbouring areas.

On the other side, CTR has been closed for the tourists. Deputy director of Corbett National Park Chandra Shekhar Joshi confirmed that tourist activities have been prohibited in the park from March 17 to March 31. All bookings have been cancelled. 

