Kerala: Now, police team to trace contacts of Covid-19 patients
2020-05-17
KOZHIKODE: It has been found that several Covid-19 patients in Wayanad had traveled extensively and it is going to be a daunting task for health authorities to trace their contacts.

Against this backdrop, district police have stepped in with an ‘ABCD model’ by putting to use the department’s technical and investigative capabilities to effectively implement contact tracing.

Police will prepare a separate contact list for each of the Covid-19 patient and will hand it over to the district administration for cross checking it with the list prepared by the health authorities.

According to district police chief R Ilango, four separate teams have been constituted for implementing the ‘ABCD model’. The A team will compare separate contact lists prepared by the district administration and the police and look for discrepancies.

The B team will provide backend support in preparing the contact lists. The C team will be made up of a separate contact tracing team, which will prepare distinct list for each patient, deploying technological and technical expertise. The D team, headed by the district police chief, will be the district-level interrogation team comprising two DSPs who will interrogate persons who go into hiding or withhold information or mislead authorities during contact tracing.

“The objective of the ABCD model is to enable quick and accurate contact tracing. The team will help district and health authorities in the contact tracing exercise and the separate contact list prepared by the police will be submitted to the district administration,” Ilango added.

The route maps of three policemen who tested positive for Covid-19, along with two patients belonging to the Koyambedu cluster, released during the last two days have shown extensive travel, covering several days.

For instance, the brother- in-law of the truck driver who has been running a shop at Panavalli has 64 primary contacts, including many tribespeople.

Also, the route maps of the two policemen shows extensive travel, with one policeman’s travel extending from April 28 to May 13, covering over 70 points, including Mananthavady police station, locations where he was posted, visit to a petitioner’s house, shops, etc.

The route map of the policeman from Kannur also shows wide travel from April 26 to May 13. He has been to various places, including Arakkal Palace, the residence of deceased NRK expatriate Arakkal Joy on his funeral day, along with visits to his house at Kelakam in Kannur, police station mess and multiple shops.


