Now, five coronavirus cases confirmed in Maharashtra, Kerala put under lockdown
2020-03-11
PUNE/THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: India’s count of coronavirus cases rose by 18 to 62 with eight testing positive in Kerala, five in Maharashtra, four in Karnataka and one in J&K on Tuesday. 

A Pune couple, their daughter, one of their co-travellers from a group of 40 on a Dubai trip, and the cab driver who drove the family from Mumbai to Pune on March 1 on their return were the five confirmed cases in Pune.

Meanwhile, the Kerala government went on high alert after eight new cases were reported. Government sources said the number of cases is expected to rise and have imposed a host of regulations, including shutting down all educational institutions and cinema halls till March 31. All government functions too have been suspended till the month-end. The CM urged all religious heads and institutions to organise events without mass gatherings. 

The Pune couple, who live on Sinhagad Road, were the first two travellers who tested positive for the contagion a day after they were quarantined at Naidu Hospital on Monday.

“We have quarantined the couple’s daughter, their 18-year-old son who did not travel to Dubai, and two co-travellers who are residents of Pune,” a civic health official told TOI.

A health official said they have fever, sore throats and headaches, but their health is stable. 

Of the two co-travellers, the Sinhagad Road resident tested positive for the infection. He is originally from Yavatmal, he added. The second co-traveller is a 24-year-old man from Hadapsar. He, and the couple’s son, have tested negative for the infection.

Another civic health official said, “After returning from Dubai, the couple’s daughter was travelling around in her father's car. He already had symptoms like fever, cough and a sore throat. The daughter is an IT professional and works in a software company in Pune.”

Health officials on Tuesday traced the 36 other co-travellers who were part of the group that visited Dubai and returned to Mumbai by flight on March 1. “None of them have any symptoms,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate told TOI. 

Three of the 36 co-travellers are from Belagavi in Karnataka. The rest are residents of Mumbai, Pune, Pimpri Chinchwad, Thane, Ahmednagar, Beed, Nagpur, Raigad and Yavatmal. 

“We have advised them home isolation for 14 days. Health officials in their districts will monitor them. Those who develop symptoms will be isolated at the designated hospital in their districts and tested for the coronavirus infection at Pune-based National Institute of Virology,” Awate added.

He said they have informed Karnataka health officials about the three travellers from Belagavi.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said a five-member team of revenue, health and police departments and authorities from Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad municipal corporations will monitor the people who have interacted with the Covid-19 infected persons. “Any person from their office or their neighbourhood showing any symptoms will be tested,” he added. 

The divisional commissioner has told Indian Medical Association members to keep records of foreign travel history of their patients and report to the district administration if they come across such persons

At present 1,495 people are under the observation in the state of whom 259 are in isolation wards of various hospitals.

