Now, 8 areas in district have 10 or more Covid-19 cases
2020-06-13
Nagpur: The number of containment zones with 10 or more Covid-19 positive cases in district has increased to eight with rise in cases. Latest ones are Lashkaribagh slum in North Nagpur and Narayanpeth in Prem Nagar near Shanti Nagar in East Nagpur.

Lashkaribagh has registered 14 cases as of now. The latest cases are family members and contacts of a 63-year-old woman who was admitted at IGGMCH on June 6 and her samples tested positive on June 7. She had no travel history.

NMC official told TOI, “Son of the woman works in a private company engaged in drinking water supply. He was among 13 who tested positive a day ago. We had quarantined 46 persons of whom 13 came positive. Another 40 persons have been quarantined a day ago. It will be a next hotspot if more people from this area test positive,” he said.

Similarly, ten persons from Narayanpeth tested positive on Thursday and Friday. They were close contacts of a person who was admitted at IGGMCH and tested positive on June 3.

As per norms of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), in case 10 or more contacts of a positive person test positive, s/he is termed a superspreader .

Initially, Satranjipura in East Nagpur was the only containment zone to witness high number of cases after a 68-year-old man died at IGGMCH and his samples tested positive on April 6. The tally of this zone is 137 as on date. It was followed by Mominpura containment zone in Central Nagpur which is having highest number of cases at 333.

Gaddigodam containment zone in West Nagpur was city’s third hotspot and registered 23 cases. Naik Talao-Bangladesh emerged as another major hotspot with cases at 218. The team of NMC Satranjipura zone on Friday quarantined 223 more persons from here on Thursday. Their reports are likely to come on Saturday.

Two areas in Nagpur Rural—14 Mile Area at Gondkhairi and Digdoh at Hingna— had registered 12 and 10 cases respectively.

Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) on Thursday reportedly closed down its slaughterhouse at Mominpura containment zone. BJP corporator Dayashankar Tiwari had questioned continuation of slaughterhouse despite the area being a containment zone since April 4.

Tiwari said, “NMC claimed selling of meat and other essential products are permissible in containment zone. But slaughterhouse is not allowed. At was closed in Gaddigodam. NMC realized its mistake and closed this one too,” he said.


