Now, district administration stresses on room quarantine
2020-03-31
Thiruvananthapuram: The district administration is mulling stressing on room quarantine instead of home quarantine with the latest instance of home quarantine norms being compromised in the district. 

The seven-year-old daughter of a person who has been tested positive has been hospitalized after she developed symptoms. The person arrived from Dubai and was advised to go on home quarantine. He stayed at home for five days and according to authorities the norms were compromised which may have exposed his family members. 

This is the second case in the district when home quarantine was reported to be compromised. The person who came from Britain to the city and was tested positive had compromised on home quarantine which made district collector K Gopalakrishnan to repeatedly insist on the need to stick with the norms. 

The district administration is also making the families choose a single member to take care of the person under home quarantine rather than random family members interacting with the person. The ministry of health and family welfare has recently brought out guidelines on home quarantine in which instructions for the family members of persons being home quarantined are clearly laid out. It says that only an assigned family member should be tasked with taking care of the person under quarantine. 

Even within the room, strict guidelines have been issued. The quarantined person has to stay away from elderly people, pregnant women, children and persons with co-morbidities within the household.

Besides the movement has to be restricted and under no circumstances shall the person attend any social/religious gathering like wedding, condolence meet, etc.

The patient who is under treatment at Medical College isolation ward is learnt not to have complied with restrictions in movement within the house which may have resulted in his daughter developing symptoms. 

In the first case, although the person didn't come out of house, he got in close proximity with family members like his wife, his wife's sister, brother in law, father in law. They shared same phone, ate together and shared common areas which was unadvisable, the collector had said. 

He had said that those from all foreign countries should go to home quarantine for 28 days and it should be real home quarantine, They shall not come out during this period, use single toilet, single room and door shall not be kept open.This is very important, the authorities had pointed out.

As per the Union ministry guidelines, the assigned member of the family should avoid shaking the soiled linen or direct contact with skin. Disposable gloves have to be used when cleaning the surfaces or handling soiled linen.

In case the person being quarantined becomes symptomatic, all the close contacts will be home quarantined (for 14 days) and followed up for an additional 14 days or till the report of such case turns out negative on lab testing.


