Kerala: NRKs outdo domestic returnees in Covid cases
2020-05-20
KOCHI: One in every hundred evacuated NRKs is testing positive for Covid-19. Under the Vande Bharat and Samudra Setu missions from May 7, 5,619 persons travelled to Kerala mostly from Gulf countries and Maldives. By contrast, the rate of infection among Malayalis returning from other states after lockdown restrictions were relaxed on May 4 is much less. Of the 59,945 who returned by road and train only 41 have tested positive.

In the last 10 days, 67 persons from abroad have tested positive, with the majority of them making their way from the Middle East. Most of the domestic travellers testing positive for the coronavirus infection are from the two biggest hotspots in the country — Mumbai and Chennai. 

“Many have only mild symptoms and are being treated in Covid care centres. They don’t need ICU or ventilator support,” said Dr Amar Fettle, state nodal officer (public emergency) and currently in-charge of anti-Covid-19 efforts in the state.

Health officials said the current situation was anticipated and there is nothing to be concerned about. With carriers from abroad accounting for a large number of the most recent wave of patients, a mere 20 cases were detected among their local contacts. With those coming from outside being placed in 14 days’ quarantine, either at home or in an institution, officials said that it is easy to identify and control the spread of infection. “Our entire effort is towards ensuring that there is no spread of infection amongst locals. At the moment, we are doing well,” said an official. “Moreover, awareness is being created among those who return, who are being told that they are welcome to the home state but now it’s their responsibility to ensure their own safety and safety of their family and people in the state,” the official said.

However, compared to phase two of the infection when the state saw 100 new cases in 16 days, the current phase three has seen the same numbers in just 10 days. “But this was expected. Right up to March 25, when the lockdown was first implemented, other states didn’t have much cases. This held true for other countries as well. In the latest phase, most of those returning to the state are coming from hotspots. Therefore, we expect more positive cases and are more vigilant. Our strategy is to pick up cases early, treat them, trace their contacts and quarantine them, besides ensuring reverse quarantine,” said Dr B Ekbal, chairman, Kerala government’s medical advisory panel on Covid management.

“We need to be doubly vigilant. Unavailability of antibody testing kits remains a concern,” said Dr Rakhal Gaitonde, professor, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, who is also a member of the advisory panel on Covid management.


