NSS volunteers join fight against pandemic
2020-04-23
Kannur: The volunteers of the National Service Scheme (NSS), especially of its higher secondary wing, has taken up a challenge to produce five lakh reusable masks.

The NSS expressed hope that sufficient number of masks would help in ‘breaking the chain’—the foremost strategy to fight Covid-19. “Hence the mask challenge was thrown at the volunteers,” said Jacob John, state-level programme coordinator of NSS’s higher secondary wing.

Volunteers, staying at home as part of the lockdown, were provided the knowhow to make masks through online modules.

“Even if a volunteer makes five pieces, the NSS can make at least five lakh masks, and if needed be, it can be scaled up to 10 lakh,” John said.

The higher secondary and vocational higher secondary section of the NSS has around 1.6 lakh volunteers.

“Their services can be efficiently utilized in the present situation,” said Ajith Sen C R, coordinator, IHRD NSS cell.

The masks could be distributed among students and common people based on the requirement, he added.

Apart from making masks, the NSS volunteers have been active in various awareness programmes and contact-tracing activities in association with the district administrations, said G P Sajith Babu, regional director, NSS regional directorate, Thiruvananthapuram.

“Our volunteers are helping in the community kitchen and the Janamaithri police to procure provisions and vegetables. They are producing sanitizers, many of our members are part of ‘Sannadham’, the voluntary force set up by the state government,” he said. Almost 50,000 NSS volunteers had joined ‘Sannadham.’

Apart from helping students overcome the mental tension in the wake of Covid, especially because their examinations are yet to be over, the initiative could also be utilized to provide masks to the students appearing for the remaining examinations, said Haridas V, district convenor, higher secondary, NSS, in Kasaragod. They are targeting to produce at least 50,000 masks with the help of 5,000 volunteers.

The students are highly enthusiastic about the projects and it gives them a sense of involvement, NSS programme officers, who coordinate the activities, opined.


