NSS volunteers of MUHS get training in handling Covid cases
2020-04-14
Nashik: Nearly 8,800 National Service Scheme (NSS) volunteers of Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (MUHS) across the state are getting professional training from experts to help the district administration in the Covid-19 crisis.Experts from Ministry of AYUSH are training the master trainers prepared by the MUHS, who instead train 113 programme officer across the state. The programme officer then will impart their training to the volunteers.Deelip Mhaisekar, the vice-chancellor of MUHS said “After my video conference with the governor, we decided that the NSS volunteers should be ready to go out in the field so that they can be helpful to the district administration when required. It would be useful for the students to get hands on training via online methods directly from the experts.” The volunteers had to register through a Google form to compile their details in one place. The details comprised their current phone number and interests in various fields.Sandip Kulkarni, the director of the Social Welfare Department, MUHS, said “All our students registered on the Google form and we had their compiled data with us within a week. Now, the training process has started which will enable the students to be deployed in various fields of their interest.”“The students are being prepared for community service programmes. The volunteers are mainly being trained for public health services as the current emergency situation rose due to the outbreak of Covid-19,” he added. The online training is being coordinated by 133 programme officers across the state in various colleges affiliated with MUHS. The programme officers have undertaken the two and a half hours training from the master trainers. Now are imparting it to the NSS volunteers. They conduct the basic training via Zoom application. Aishwarya Ranade, a programme officer of MUHS said “We are training our students about how to carry out surveillance, conduct counselling of Covid-19 positive patients etc. We are also teaching them about the difference between quarantine and isolation, how social distancing works and why hand hygiene is a must.”