Number of people under quarantine goes up in Ernakulam district
2020-06-04
KOCHI: With domestic and international flights resuming operations, Ernakulam is once again becoming topper in the list of those under quarantine. This necessitates the need for more preventive as well as treatment facilities.


 

On May 1, just a week before the first repatriation flight from abroad arrived in Kochi on May 7, there was no Covid-19 patient in the district. On May 7, the total number of those under quarantine in Ernakulam was 489 and the district was in the 12th position among the districts in terms of quarantine cases. “The increasing number of flights, both repatriation and domestic flights, led to the proportionate increase in the number of quarantined persons. This is a big challenge to the district administration, health department, police and other agencies,” said an official, who spearheads Covid-19 control measures in Ernakulam. 

Authorities in the district anticipate a spike in the number of persons who require quarantine in the coming days as well. “More and more flights and trains will be arriving in Kochi in the coming days. So, the number of those require quarantine will go up significantly. After a fortnight it will peak and then there may be a downward trend,” health department officials said. “However, the total number of Covid-19 patients who are under treatment in various hospitals in the district is 39 as on Wednesday,” he said.

The district administration has decided to set up more Covid-19 treatment centres. The district administration has already decided to convert a convention centre at Angamaly into Covid care facility. Those who are asymptomatic or with mild symptoms will be treated at this centre. Similarly, a private medical college in the district also will be roped in for offering Covid-19 treatment if the number of patients goes up all of a sudden. 

Authorities have also decided to beef up the surveillance system as more and more persons are placed under home quarantine every day. The service of Accredited Social Health Activists, police and volunteers will also be asked for increasing the surveillance. Moreover, local bodies will be asked to arrange more facilities for those under quarantine.


