Number of coronavirus tests to be increased in Bihar
2020-03-22
PATNA: Bihar is likely to increase the number of tests for Covid-19 in adherence to fresh guidelines issued by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). Only 79 samples have so far been collected in the state and sent to laboratories for test against 520 travellers enrolled for observation.


Coronavirus in India live updates

State nodal officer Dr Ragini Mishra said they were following the guidelines of ICMR. Till Friday, only those coming from affected countries were being tested in the state.

“According to the fresh ICMR guidelines, those having severe acute respiratory illness will also be tested henceforth,” she said.

The ICMR has made some changes in the guidelines for conducting tests for Covid-19 in the country after World Health Organisation (WHO) asked all countries to increase the number of tests.

After changes in the guidelines, even asymptomatic direct contact with positive case and high risk contacts of confirmed case will be tested. Besides, those hospitalized with symptoms of coronavirus, like respiratory illness, shortness of breath, cough and fever will be tested.

Bihar has so far received 1,500 kits from National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune for conducting tests for Covid-19. While 1,000 kits are in Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, the remaining 500 kits are with Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital (DMCH).

Asked whether 1,500 kits were enough for a populous state like Bihar, Dr Sunil Singh, a member of Bihar Medical Council, said the state was following the protocol of the Centre for tests and these kits were sufficient for the time being.

No protective gears for doctors at isolation wards: Health workers at isolation wards of Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH), including doctors, nurses and other staff, were on Saturday seen working without wearing protective gears like eye shield, shoe cover, gown and gloves.

World Health Organisation (WHO) has asked all the medical institutes to ensure that health service providers, who are at high risk, work with personal protective equipment (PPE). But at PMCH, this was not the case. The health service providers were only wearing N95 mask. 

PMCH superintendent Dr Bimal Karak, however, said the hospital has sufficient quantity of PPE. Health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar also said that 31,000 PPE are in stock but there was some scarcity of N95 masks. 


