Nurse who had beaten Covid turns +ve again
2020-05-19
Malappuram: A pregnant 34-year-old who had returned from Kuwait after recovering from Covid-19, tested positive for the viral infection once again at the government medical college hospital (GMCH) Manjeri on Monday.

According to the medical authorities in Malappuram, the woman from Alappuzha district was working as a nurse in Kuwait. She landed at Karipur in a special repatriation flight on May 13.

Earlier, she had tested positive in Kuwait and had travelled to Kerala after recovering. Upon arrival, she had informed her history of infection to health authorities and they shifted her to GMCH where the infection has yet again been confirmed. The relapse, reportedly the first in the state, has caused concern for the authorities. 

District medical officer of Malappuram K Sakeena said that the woman had returned after testing negative and she was instructed to report again for testing after 14 days. "As she got a chance to return to India in between, and she came here and reported it here,” Sakeena said, adding that the woman was in an isolation centre. Such cases have been reported elsewhere in the country. In April, a member of Tablighi Jamaat, had a relapse within a week of testing negative. Three Chithradurga, Karnataka tested positive three weeks after recovering from the infection.

There have also been reports of patients dying after recovering as in Keezhattur in the district mid-April when an 85-year-old man died within days of recovering.

Medical experts say that if the immune system of the cured patient is weak, there are chances for a relapse. Those infected develop a protective antibody, though it is not clear how long the protection lasts.

A Malappuram native also tested positive on Monday. The man, aged 37, from Kolakkatuchalil near Chelembra, had returned home from Chennai on May 7, with the permission of government authorities. After developing symptoms of viral infection he was shifted to GMCH Manjeri on May 16.

A total of 45 cases have been reported in the district to date and 23 of those, including the pregnant woman from Alappuzha, are active. Another 416 were brought under observation in the district on Monday taking the tally to 4501 persons. An Air India Express repatriation flight from Doha arrived at Karipur International airport on Monday night with 183 NRKs. Of them, 105 were women. The passengers belong to the districts of Malappuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam, Kannur, Kasaragod, Kozhikode, Palakkad, Thrissur and Wayanad.


