Jaipur: Nurses play mothers for newborns born to Covid-19 positive women
2020-05-09
JAIPUR: Subhita (33) is taking care of infants born to coronavirus-infected women at Mahila Chikitsalaya since March 14. She herself is mother of a six-year-old daughter and the last time they met was on March 14 itself. Subhita has no idea when she will be able to meet her again. 

Subhita is a nurse and deployed at the nursery where newborns born to Covid-19 positive women are kept. “Around two months have passed since I met my daughter. I am missing her badly. She is staying with her grandparents. I hope I will be able to meet her again, once the situation improves,” said Subhita, who lives in Jhunjhunu. Her husband is a teacher posted in Alwar. 

“I see my daughter when I look at these beautiful newborns in the nursery. I know it is a difficult time and these infants need care when their own mother is infected with coronavirus,” she said. 

Mahila Chikitsalaya is a dedicated Covid-19 care hospital for pregnant women in Jaipur. Not only Subhita, her colleagues Meena, Manisha and other nurses are also there to take care of newborns. 

They perform their duties wearing personel protection equipment (PPE) for eight hours so that infants will remain protected from any sort of infection. In the hospital, three nurses have already tested positive.

Mahila Chikitsalaya superintendent Dr Asha Varma has made arrangements for care of these newborns in the hospital. “There is a facility for mothers’ milk bank. Infants born to Covid-19 positive women, who are weak, are given milk donated by mothers at the milk bank. We are taking care of nutrition of these children,” said Dr Shalini Rathore, nodal officer Covid-19 at the Mahila Chikitsalaya in Jaipur. 

The nurses arrange milk from the milk bank for infants who are preterm and weak. “We are feeding these newborns from mothers’ milk bank who are preterm. However, children who are healthy are being provided formula milk. However, there is limited availability of mothers’ milk bank as no more donations are being done due to Covid-19,” said Dr Rathore. 

Till date, 41 women who have tested positive for Covid-19 have delivered babies in the hospital. 


