Nursing staff at AIIMS-Rishikesh, parents of day-old baby in Dehradun found Covid-19-positive
2020-04-27
DEHRADUN: The administration of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Rishikesh has quarantined the entire staff of its urology in-patient department (IPD) after a nursing staff member of the department was found Covid-19-positive on Sunday. This comes even as AIIMS has neither tested nor treated a single Covid-19-positive case till now and the staffer had no travel history as well. The hospital is now suspecting that one of the patients in the IPD was asymptomatic who had spread the infection to the staff.


Besides, the entire staff of Doon Hospital’s women’s wing as well as 12 other pregnant women were quarantined on Sunday after the mother of a one-day-old baby (who was from the sealed locality of Azad Colony) tested Covid-19-positive. Later in the evening, reports of the baby’s father also came out positive, taking the tally of infected patients in the state to 51. With two patients from Haridwar getting discharged on April 26, total cured cases in the state have now reached 28.

Doon Hospital staff is now testing all the other new mothers and newborns as well as the doctor who conducted the woman’s delivery on Saturday. Dr NS Khatri, nodal officer for Covid-19 at Government Doon Medical College (GDMC) said that the woman’s family members and other staff members were also being tested.

UB Mishra, dean of hospital administration, AIIMS Rishikesh, meanwhile told TOI that the 28-year-old nursing staffer who was found Covid-19-positive on Sunday is being queried in order to trace how he had got infected.

“We are asking him about the people he has come in contact with in the past 10 days. We are expecting that there is an asymptomatic patient admitted in the urology ward who has infected the staffer."

According to the daily bulletin issued by the health department, the rate of doubling of positive patients in the state has been 28 days for the past week, that is April 19 to 25. Of the total tested people, only 1% have tested positive which is less than the national average of 3.26%.


