Jaipur: Nurses, doctors face threats from landlords for treating coronavirus patients
2020-03-26
JAIPUR: Four days ago, people clapped and clanged their utensils from their balconies to appreciate the role of doctors and nurses for their untiring efforts to treat Covid-19 patients and suspects.


But these bravehearts are now receiving threats from their landlords for the same reason for which they were appreciated. The state government was however quick to react to the problem and sternly warned houseowners from victimising such people.

The health department has been flooded with such complaints from doctors and nurses who informed higher authorities about the threats they have been receiving from their landlords. 

“I have been deployed for the treatment of suspected Covid-19 patients at SMS Hospital. My landlord is aware about it. Since it is a highly contagious disease, my landlord is apprehensive that they might get infected with it because of me, which is not true at all. They have asked me to vacate the house,” said a nursing staff on condition of anonymity. 

Not only her, but there are others such healthcare staff facing the same problem. Such cases have been reported in Bhilwara, Jhunjhunu and Jaipur where large number of health department's teams have been deployed in survey, treatment and care of the Covid-19 suspected patients and positive cases.

In Bhilwara and Jhunjhunu, they are working hard in areas where curfew has already been imposed as these areas reported Covid-19 cases in clusters. 

Taking it as a serious issue, health department has decided to take action against such landlords. “Some complaints have been received about landlords threatening nurses and doctors, who are tirelessly working for Covid-19 related cases. The state government has taken serious note of it and issued a notification in this connection,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health department. 

The notification says, “Landlords and house owners are forcing them to vacate their rented residences. The behaviuor amounts to obstructing public servants in discharging their duties. The state government has issued Rajasthan Epidemic Diseases Covid-19 Regulations 202 under Epidemic Diseases Act 1897 and Rajasthan Epidemic Diseases Act 1957 for prevention and containment of Covid-19.”

It further directed district collectors, SPs and zonal deputy commissioners of municipal corporations to take strict penal action against such landlords and house owners under relevant provisions of law and submit action taken report on a daily basis to the health department.

