Odisha prepares battle plan to take on Covid-19
2020-03-14
BHUBANESWAR: In a pre-emptive move sparked by the global outbreak of novel coronavirus (Covid-19), the Odisha government on Friday declared it a “disaster for the state”, declared closure of schools, colleges and film theatres and approved a Rs 200 crore package to deal with the likely public health challenge that could arise out of the virus attack. 


Further, the government has notified a new ‘Odisha Covid-19 Regulations 2020’ under which anyone not going into isolation or failing to get admitted to a hospital over a suspected case of coronavirus may be prosecuted under IPC Section 188, which has a maximum jail term of six months.

Though Odisha has not reported a positive case so far, the precautionary move was taken a day after India reported its first coronavirus death in Karnataka and two days after the World Health Organization termed the disease — that has spread to at least 114 countries — a pandemic.

Announcing the government decision in the state assembly after chairing a cabinet meeting, chief minister Naveen Patnaik said, “The last 45 days has seen human beings as a race facing one of the biggest challenges of the century. We are faced with a threat that does not discriminate between developed countries and under-developed countries, between democratic or non-democratic countries. Rich and poor societies all are equally vulnerable.”

By terming it a ‘disaster’ under the provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, the government has delegated additional powers to certain officials to take steps like putting curbs on public activities and a free hand in purchase of required medicines, equipment and machines in case the situation so demands.

The health and family welfare department and its directorates, district collectors and municipal commissioners can make emergency procurement of drugs and consumables, equipment and other required services necessary to contain Covid-19. The officers have been authorised to impose restrictions on congregations to ensure ‘social distancing’ to contain the spread of the disease. The Rs 200 crore will augment the public health response fund to combat the threat of the pandemic and for making required expenditure.

Under the Odisha Covid-19 Regulations, anyone who has travelled to any corona affected country in the last 14 days has to voluntarily report it to the state control room and follow the authorities’ advice. If a Covid-19 case is reported in a locality, the district collectors can bar entry or exit of people to the area, designate any government building as a quarantine facility and initiate surveillance of positive cases.

The chief minister also announced the closure of schools and colleges, film theatres and gymnasiums and asked people to cancel seminars and conferences till March 31. Educational institutions, however, will go ahead and conduct scheduled exams. For wedding receptions, one has to take permission from local authorities. 

The coronavirus scare was also felt in the assembly, with speaker S N Patro adjourning proceedings of the budget session till March 29. Stating that “This extra ordinary circumstance calls for an extra ordinary response,” Naveen said, “This response cannot be only at the individual, government or sectoral level. Each one of us in Odisha has to rise to the occasion, and be responsible. In the absence of any vaccine or treatment, our collective responsibility is the only hope we have to fight this epidemic.”

He added, “We must remain calm but not complacent. We must remain prepared, but not panic.” Pointing out that social distancing is the only effective measure to prevent its spread, Naveen said, “All of us should ruthlessly practice social distancing. Just keep interactions to the most essential levels and even in that take all precautions. Being at home, reducing social interactions and avoiding gatherings will cut down the vulnerability to a great extent.”

The chief minister also warned of stringent action against rumour-mongering, misinformation and irresponsible conduct. The government has also formed an empowered group of ministers and a committee of secretaries under the chairmanship of the chief secretary to evaluate the emerging situation and take all necessary steps to prevent and contain the possible spread of Covid-19 in the state.


