Odisha: Govt bid to revive tourism through roadshows after lockdown
2020-05-08
BHUBANESWAR: The state government is gearing up to revive the Covid-hit tourism sector and has planned to hold roadshows across the country after the lockdown is lifted to woo domestic travellers. Senior officials, including chief secretary Asit Tripathy and tourism secretary Vishal Dev, on Thursday discussed strategies to bring the tourism sector back on track.

The sector, which was already reeling from the onslaught of Cyclone Fani in May last year, has received a body blow in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. The government is yet to estimate the financial loss incurred by this sector in the state. Keeping in mind the alarming Covid-19 situation across the world, Tripathy laid stress on the revival of domestic tourism in the first phase. The chief secretary directed the tourism department to float packages for promoting intra-state tourism and woo private investments in the hospitality and tourism sector.

“Once the situation improves and the lockdown is lifted, we expect to organise roadshows after July in major cities of the neighbouring states and in tier-II cities across the country to attract domestic tourists. Itineraries for the road trips from destinations like Kolkata, Ranchi, Visakhapatnam, Raipur, Bilaspur, Durg-Bhilai, Jamshedpur and Bokaro are being developed. We will focus on resurrecting international tourism after assessing the Covid-19 situation later,” Dev said.

The tourism secretary said a special campaign will be taken up to promote state tourism through Odia cuisine and organizing Odia food festivals across six metros along with roadshows. In the meeting, the officials decided to improve infrastructure at the Rambha and Satpada clusters in Chilika Lake, the Bhitarkanika National Park, ensure the Chandrabhaga beachfront and Talsari beachfront developments.

“We will form a taskforce to assess the impact of Covid-19 on Odisha tourism involving key stakeholders from hotels, restaurants, resorts, tour operators, adventure sports, home-stays and boat operators. After the lockdown is lifted, we plan to liaison with financial institutions for all possible support to the affected industry players,” Dev said.


