Odisha begins 'hunt' for Tablighi Jamaat returnees
2020-04-05
BHUBANESWAR: The Odisha government on Saturday launched a massive operation to track down those who had attended the religious congregation at Nizamuddin Markaz a day after three Tablighi Jamaat returnees tested positive for novel coronavirus in the state. 


The three - from Cuttack, Puri and Jajpur - were among the 28 returnees who were tested. The remaining 25 people tested negative for Covid-19. The man from Pipili area of Puri district works as a postman in BJB Nagar area of Bhubaneswar. He has delivered many letters/parcels in past some days.

The samples of 70 others, including family members and close contacts of the 28 Jamaat returnees, have been sent for test. The results are awaited. The government is also looking for more people the 28 returnees may have come in contact with.

Chief minister Naveen Patnaik made a public appeal to those who returned from Nizamuddin to come forward and get themselves tested. "I request all who attended the Nizamuddin meet to call up the helpline number 104 and obey the doctor's advice. Come for test within 24 hours. If you delay, this may cause problem for you and your families," Naveen said in a pre-recorded statement. "I request the mothers to cooperate for the welfare of your family and children. My government and I stand firmly behind you," the chief minister added.

The government has also roped in minority community leaders to appeal to members of their fraternity to report anyone who travelled to the Jamaat event. This comes in the wake of Odisha witnessing the single biggest jump in Covid-19 cases with 15 positive results on Friday, taking the total number of infected to 20. Out of them, two have been discharged.

The state government has asked the health, civil and police administrations to work in a focused way to identify the returnees and convince them to go for medical assistance. Government teams moved from door-to-door in several localities to track possible Nizamuddin returnees.

The government has also expanded the areas under complete shutdown to several parts of Jajpur district as well as Danagohir village in Pipli block of Puri district in view of Covid-19 cases reported from those places. In Cuttack, Bhubaneswar and Bhadrak, the shutdown started on Friday evening while in the rest of the areas, it commenced from Saturday evening.

