Coronavirus scare: ODIs in Lucknow, Kolkata to be played sans spectators
2020-03-13
LUCKNOW: As a precautionary measure in view of the coronavirus spread, the remaining two one-day international matches between India and South Africa slated to be held in Lucknow and Kolkata on March 15 and 18 respectively, would be played without spectators. 


The UP government on Thursday announced that the public entry into Atal Bihari Vajpayee Ekana Stadium stadium, where the second ODI was to be played on Saturday, would be barred due to coronavirus spread.

The move disheartened the 55,000 spectators waiting eagerly for only the second ODI to be held at this stadium, but officials said that they had no better precautionary measure. 

It is probably for the first time ever that an international cricket match will take place without an audience.

“The match will be played as usual but only the crew, health officials and stadium staff would be allowed to enter. Everyone who enters the premises, will have to pass though thermal scanners. Anyone with flu-like symptoms will be screened and isolated. All directions related to safety of the players and crew will also be complied with,” Uttar Pradesh Cricket Association (UPCA) secretary Yudhveer Singh said.

UPCA director SK Agarwal added: “The association will return all the gate money it has so far collected through online ticket sale besides cancelling all the complimentary passes issued.” Chairman and managing director, Atal Ekana Stadium, Uday Sinha, stated: “Public interest naturally supersedes everything else and we will support the local administration in implementing the order.”

Meanwhile, the Union ministry of youth affairs and sports also issued an official order on coronavirus outbreak. Directing state-level officials and president and secretary of BCCI, the order said: "You are advised to adhere to the advisories issued by the ministry of health and family welfare and ensure that no public gathering takes place in any sporting event. In the event the sporting event cannot be avoided, the same could be done without allowing gathering of the people including spectators.” 

Government sources told TOI that both the state and the stadium management would lose heavily on account of the cancellation. “The move will cost Ekana nothing less than Rs 15 crore generated through sale of tickets and advertisements while the state would lose out on the GST,” said an officer.

Sources also said that the decision was based on a technical assessment undertaken by a team comprising Lucknow DM Abhishek Prakash and chief medical officer Dr Narendra Agarwal besides a panel of experts in microbiology, communicable diseases and public health. 


