Odisha Mining Corporation contributes Rs 500 crore to the CMRF to fight Covid-19
2020-03-26
BHUBANESWAR: The Odisha Mining Corporation (OMC) on Wednesday donated Rs 500 crore to the Chief Minister’s Relief Fund (CMRF) to support the state government’s efforts to control the Covid-19 situation in the state.

“Covid-19 has created an extraordinary situation across the world. The state government has taken very pro-active measures to contain the spread of the virus. The OMC, being a responsible public-sector company, contributes its share to the state government,” said an official statement issued by the PSU.

The board of directors of the OMC also declared Rs 250 crore as the interim dividend of the PSU for the 2019-20 financial year. The amount will be transferred to the state exchequer soon. 

The fully state government-owned profit making PSU had contributed Rs 100 crore to the CMRF in February. With more than 30 mining blocks, the PSU mines major minerals like chrome, iron ore and manganese to cater to the raw material requirement of the Odisha-based companies. 

Meanwhile, chief minister Naveen Patnaik on Wednesday sanctioned his MLA local area development (MLALAD) fund worth Rs 1 crore for Covid-19 preparedness and prevention in his Hinjili constituency in Ganjam. Naveen earlier donated his three months salary to the CMRF. 

Ganjam collector Vijay Amruta Kulange said the amount will be spent for functioning of the temporary health camps and isolation Centre in his constituency. 

The MLALAD funds can be spent for purposes like hiring manpower for different activities to counter Covid-19, procurement of materials,

development of infrastructure, including toilets for the temporary health camps, hiring of ambulances and other vehicles for transportation of patients, provision of food, drinking water, clinic, watch and ward for temporary health camps and quarantine facilities. The state planning and convergence department has made necessary changes in this regard. 

 BJD Rajya Sabha MP Amar Patnaik also sanctioned Rs 1 crore from his MPLAD fund for Sundargarh for procurement of ventilators and other equipment for the temporary healthcare facilities in the district to fight Covid-19. 

Similarly, senior BJD MLA Pranab Prakash Das sanctioned Rs 3 crore from his MLALAD fund for functioning of temporary healthcare facilities and isolation centres in his Jajpur assembly constituency. BJD Rajya Sabha MP Sasmit Patra has donated his three months salary (Rs 3 lakh) to the CMRF. He also sanctioned Rs 1 crore from his MPLAD fund for Mayurbhanj district for the temporary healthcare facilities. 

Most of the MLAs and MPs in the state are planning to sanction their local area development fund to help the state government to overcome the emerging situation, said an official source. 

 (end)


