Odisha government ropes in additional chief secretary at the helm of health department amid Covid-19 fight
2020-04-27
BHUBANESWAR: The state government on Sunday appointed Pradipta Kumar Mohapatra, an additional chief secretary (ACS) rank officer at the helm of the health department and roped in 22 other senior IAS officers as observers of various districts in its fight against Covid-19 pandemic.

Nikunja Dhal will continue to be the principal secretary of the health and family welfare department.

“Appointment of an ACS rank officer was necessary in view of the massive coordination works required in the next a few days as lakhs of Odia migrant workers, students, professionals, stranded pilgrims and patients would travel back to Odisha from affected states,” said a senior government officer.

In the evolving and escalating scenario, Mohapatra has been assigned to coordinate with the Centre, with various states, with departments of the state government and Covid-19 observers as well.

Mohapatra, who has been currently serving as agriculture production commissioner and revenue secretary, had earlier served as health secretary for several years. He would additionally handle the revenue department now.

In its fight against the pandemic, the state government had focused on the foreign returnees in the first phase while the Nizamuddin returnees were on the focus in the second phase. After nearly 40 percent positive cases mostly form Bhadrak, Balasore and Jajpur were found with recent travel history to West Bengal, the state government has steeped up efforts to identify West Bengal returnees and to isolate them. In the fourth phase, the state government plans to screen nearly 7.5 lakh Odia people, who are expected to travel back to the state after lifting of lockdown restrictions, said official sources.

IAS officers appointed as observers have been assigned to review the preparedness at the district level and to coordinate various other Covid-19 related activities. The appointment was made after a review by chief minister Naveen Patnaik on the Covid-19 situation in the state.
