Goa: Asymptomatic Covid patients to be treated at Shiroda PHC
2020-06-08
PANAJI: The state government said on Sunday that over 90% of the state’s active Covid-19 cases are asymptomatic, and that only 20 patients require specialised treatment. As the number of positives is set to rise, the department of health has now decided to set up Covid care centres for asymptomatic patients, said health secretary Nila Mohanan. 

The state’s active Covid-19 count shot up by 33 on Sunday, 30 of which were linked to the Mangor Hill containment zone. The remaining three are travellers who arrived from Delhi and Maharashtra. With these 33, the Mangor Hill tally crossed the double-century mark, with 201 of the state’s 235 cases.

This is already well past the capacity of the ESI hospital at Margao, which has served as the state’s dedicated facility for Covid-19 cases. “Out of the 235, 215 are asymptomatic,” said Mohanan. “Asymptomatic persons are not expected to require critical care.” Thus, based on guidelines issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare, the state set up the first Covid care centre at the Shiroda Public Health Centre. 

South Goa collector Ajit Roy also issued an order under the Disaster Management Act requisitioning the services of the entire premises of the Gomantak Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Shiroda, and notified it as a Covid care centre.

These care centres will cater to individuals infected by the novel coronavirus but do not exhibit symptoms. These individuals, said Dr Jose D’Sa, director of health services, do not require any critical care and get cured with basic medical treatment. He said that of the 300 cases Goa has seen in total, only 5% had visible symptoms. “The rest of the 95% had no symptoms,” he said. “Despite the rising number of cases, patients presenting symptoms remains negligible, and at the same time, we have a mortality rate of zero. Everyone has been cured in Goa.” 

Mohanan said that the move to have care centres as designated hospitals for asymptomatic Covid-19 positive persons and the ESI hospital in Margao for serious cases is in line with projections for future cases. “Patients were coming in small lots earlier, and because we thought it was manageable, we were taking care of all cases at the ESI hospital in Margao,” she said. “However, now, we feel we must keep enough beds for symptomatic patients.”

Meanwhile, with the Shiroda PHC being used as a Covid care centre, the directorate of health services has shifted the out-patient department (OPD) and medical services for Shiroda to the Kamakshi Arogyadham. 

Mohanan said that the government would be adopting a targeted approach for testing at Mangor Hill, with a focus on at-risk persons. She said that testing resumed on Sunday “after a pause”, with 80 persons screened at the Mangor Sports Club on Sunday. “We have to evolve our strategy as the situation emerges,” she said. “We cannot get stuck on a particular position and say that this will be our only strategy.” She said that around 1,000 samples have been tested at Mangor Hill. 

TOI had reported in its edition dated June 7 that testing at Mangor Hill had stopped for two consecutive days. On Sunday, Mohanan said that the testing was temporarily paused testing because two members of the swab collection team tested positive. “A total of eight healthcare workers who were working at Mangor Hill have tested positive for the virus,” she said. “We then had to test their contacts and our frontline workers. After checking, we have re-formed the teams, for which we needed one day to train them on how to wear PPE and how to go about collecting swabs.”

The health department conducts regular screening for all frontline health workers, and they’re tested every 14 days or as and when they develop symptoms associated with Covid-19. Mohanan also said that the elderly woman from Calangute who tested positive for the novel coronavirus is stable, with “no cause for concern”.


