Officials in bind as netas call to demand quarantined sailors be freed
2020-05-03
Panaji: The issue of quarantine of seafarers has added an unexpected dimension in the state’s fight against Covid-19. Ever since seafarers from the Marella Discovery and others who entered Goa were placed in facility quarantine, authorities have been receiving interventions from politicians questioning the need to keep the sailors isolated. 

And this is just one of several problems authorities are facing. A few days ago, a seafarer quarantined in a city hotel escaped in the middle of the night by evading security. He was later apprehended at Old Goa and taken back to the hotel. 

Officials say they are in it for the long haul. “Our problems will increase as the number of people in quarantine increase,” said an official who declined to be named. “Politicians interfering and asking us to release seafarers only adds to our woes.” 

At present 62 sailors who arrived in Goa on Wednesay are in facility quarantine, and 200 more are expected to reach next week. The official said that keeping a tab on a large number of sailors or other persons will be a huge challenge. 

“It will be an issue, given their anxiety to return home early.” 

Now, to fend off requests from politicians, the official said that any neta coming with such a request will be asked to submit an undertaking that they would take full responsibility for sailors released without completing their 14-day period. “Who shall take responsibility if a sailor is released without completing 14 days in facility quarantine? What if he shows symptoms of Covid-19 after he’s sent home?

Another issue authorities are facing is that some sailors, after accepting to stay in paid quarantine, are refusing to pay. “Two sailors who came to Goa after staying in Mumbai for 15 days claimed they were penniless, and refused to pay after staying in the facility for two days,” he said.

A person opting for paid quarantine has to pay Rs 2,000 as room tariff. The paid quarantine, the official said, has become a bone of contention even as shipping companies have agreed to bear the expense of their respective employees.

With this being a big problem, the official said that the government could at least send sailors who have tested negative for Covid-19 home, with a direction to stay in home quarantine. For that to happen, the health department would have to give its nod, he said.

“They are responsible people. Most sailors were in quarantine while they remained on the ship,” he said.

Meanwhile, the directorate of health services has strengthened its monitoring of persons placed in home quarantine. Persons in home quarantine are stamped, and stickers are put outside their houses, he said.


