Officials prepare vocation-wise data for lockdown fin aid
2020-04-03
Varanasi: The national population register (NPR) exercise was put on hold following the announcement of nationwide lockdown, but the announcement of financial aid and free ration to daily wagers hit by the lockdown to prevent coronavirus outbreak has forced officials to start a count of workers as per their occupation. The exercise is being conducted to ensure proper implementation of relief measures to the intended beneficiaries.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal told TOI on Thursday, “The exercise to create a comprehensive database of every resident in the country with their details, including occupation, had to be undertaken between April and September. As per government directives, the training had also started. The last training session had been conducted on March 20, but the exercise was postponed due to lockdown.”

“However, since the government announced financial assistance for daily wagers and labourers anticipating that their earnings would take a hit during the lockdown to prevent coronavirus outbreak we had to ask officials to start counting labourers and service providers of unorganised sectors,” said Agarwal. 

While the number of people without shelter in the city is almost clear, records of rural labourers, porters in different wholesale markets, unregistered labourers, autorickshaw and e-rickshaw drivers, rickshaw pullers and others are being collected.

Officials said transfer of financial assistance money announced by government in this time of crisis to the beneficiaries, including registered construction labourers, of various schemes was not a difficult task. But, preparing data of the beneficiaries became obligatory, they added.

DM Kaushal Raj Sharma assigned the task of finding out the figures to district urban development authority and executive officers of Gangapur and Ramnagar Palika Parishads. DUDA compiled a list of 3,272 people while other two agencies also gave figures of intended beneficiaries in the areas of their jurisdiction. Now, process is being initiated to ensure direct bank transfer of Rs 1,000 into their bank accounts.

The DM asked the CDO to carry out similar survey in villages to find out people in these categories .


