Oil price slide, virus spread pull sensex down 1,011 pts
2020-04-22
Mumbai: The troubles in the global crude oil market and the rising number of Covid-19 cases in India unnerved Dalal Street investors on Tuesday and the consequent selling pulled down the sensex by 1,011 points, or 3.2%, to 31,637. Banking and financial stocks led the slide with ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank and HDFC among the top contributors to the slide. On the NSE, the Nifty closed 280 points lower at 8,981 points.

According to Vinod Nair, head of research, Geojit Financial Services, as the US crude oil prices crashed, “Indian markets, in sync with global markets, traded negatively, as the extent of the impact of lockdowns and the global slowdown is becoming evident”. On Monday night, the WTI crude oil futures closed at -$37.6/barrel, its first ever negative close with sellers paying the buyers to lift their produce as storage capacities were running low.

In addition to the slide in oil prices, the impact of the shutdown due to the coronavirus pandemic is also showing in corporate earnings. “Post-earnings management guidance has also not given any clear indication about the recovery path,” Nair said. Going forward, earnings of leading companies will to some extent decide the market’s direction, among other factors.

The day’s four-digit loss in the sensex came on the back of a net foreign fund outflow of nearly Rs 2,100 crore with domestic institutions also net sellers at Rs 68 crore, BSE data showed. The day’s losses also left investors poorer by Rs 3.3 lakh crore with BSE’s market capitalisation now at Rs 119.6 lakh crore. According to chartists, technically the Nifty has closed below the psychologically important 9,000 mark. Its next crucial support level is 8,800 and if this is breached, the index could see a sharp slide. On the upside, 9,100 could prove to be a good resistance, they said. Sebi extends IPO nod to 1-yearMeanwhile, the markets regulator Sebi on Tuesday said all the public offers including IPOs that got its nod to open between March 1 and September 30 this year can launch the offer within one year of the nod, up from six months now.


