Old hobbies become survival mantra for many during lockdown
2020-03-30
Surat: The nationwide 21-day lockdown to contain spread of COVID-19 has made some people feel as if they are under house arrest. However, it has also provided an opportunity to many others to revisit old hobbies and undertake health pursuits which were not possible earlier for them due to their busy schedules. Spending quality time with familyFor diamond baron, Hitesh Patel, the lockdown has come as a blessing in disguise. His busy schedule at the diamond company and frequent travelling kept him away from enjoying family life, which he is trying to live during the lockdown. “I was yearning to stay home with my family. The lockdown has given me a golden opportunity to fulfil my dreams. I keep myself engaged reading Bhagavad Gita, playing board games with my kids and doing a bit of gardening in our bungalow,” Patel said. “Every evening, all the family members gather in our garden and sing bhajans and do aarti after offering special prayers to the almighty for the well-being of people in our nation,” he added. Back to reading and cookingBandana Bhattacharya, renowned fashion designer, was not getting time from her busy schedule to read books and cook food for her children at home. Though she is very much concerned about the spread of COVID-19, lockdown has given her an opportunity to be at home with her children and husband. “Our cook is on leave, so I am preparing delicious dishes for my children, including traditional Bengali dishes,” Bandana said. “I was not getting time to even read books, which I am doing now staying at home,” she added.Bonding with children over games and danceSanat Relia, hotelier, was missing an emotional connect with his grandchildren due to his busy schedule managing his three hotels in the city. But, lockdown has come as a blessing in disguise for him.“My grandchildren were not much attached to me as I was unable to spend time at home. As I remain at home during lockdown, they now have an emotional bonding with me. Now they play indoor games and dance with me. They have found a new friend in me. In the evening, all the family members gather at the dinner table, which we missed since long, and enjoy the delicious meals,” he said.Keeping healthy and cooking for the needyPramod Choudhary, textile entrepreneur, sees an opportunity in lockdown to keep himself healthy with exercise and Yoga. “We all are passing from the toughest phase of our lives where we don’t know what is going to happen in next few days. So, I am practising Yoga, meditation and doing gardening to keep myself fit. In the evening, we cook food for about 60 poor people living on the footpath near my residence,” he said. 