On Day 1 of lockdown 3.0, people flout rules brazenly in Jaipur
2020-05-05
JAIPUR: Residents were seen loitering around the city on Monday, without any regard for the necessary precautions required in the wake of the pandemic. Many were seen flouting the lockdown norms and social distancing went for a toss. 


Traffic was back to near normal on many city roads as people thronged the liquor shops. Despite Jaipur being under the red zone, there was traffic rush, crowds at the grocery stores, markets and too many people out on streets in the city. 

Barring barber shops and sweet shops, a majority of the shops and stores remained open, which included medical stores, grocery stores, vegetable stores. In the evening, senior police officers of Rajasthan police headquarters said that strict action would be taken against those who are found roaming around in the city without a valid pass or reason. 

Heavy rush and long queues were seen at the liquor shops in some parts of the city. At some places, police had to intervene to maintain order. The liquor shop owners too had made white circles at a distance to ensure social distancing is maintained but many were seen flouting the rule. “I will have a beer crate,” said a 30-year-old man who wished not to be named, while purchasing beer at Jagatpura in city. 

BL Soni, additional director general (crime) urged public to maintain social distancing and wear a proper mask. “We are also not allowing entry of five people at a place. Also, for those who are roaming around without any reason, action is being taken against them,” he added. 

Jaipur district as a whole, including the city and rural parts, is under red zone, but excessive traffic in the city revealed the lack of rule enforcement by the police and the district administration. 

Though curfew remained intact in the Walled City areas and other identified areas including Sodala and Sushilpura, yet by and large, people in the city were seen roaming around casually. “Also, we found the workers of various factories on the road,” said a police officer posted at Amrapali Circle, Vaishali Nagar. 

Senior police officer said that at many places, police have caught youths and couples who were roaming around in the city with a doctor’s prescription. “One of the couples we caught hold of told us that they were going to see a doctor and when we checked their prescription, it was from October 2019,” he said.

