On first day, cops arrest 1,003 for violating lockdown rules
2020-03-25
Kolkata: Kolkata Police arrested 1,003 people on the first day of the lockdown for not adhering to restrictions imposed to contain novel coronavirus and sent home the message that they meant business while implementing the shutdown order. 

The police adopted a carrot-and-stick policy from early Tuesday morning as they went about implementing the complete safety restriction. Among those booked was a man driving a luxury car at Esplanade and another drinking in the open at Convent Road in Entally. But it was the south division that had the maximum arrests — 271 — followed by the south suburban division.

Lalbazar received clippings from markets like Gariahat and Garden Reach where people not only defied the lockdown but also challenged the cops over ‘right to free movement’. Several shops were kept open, prompting cops to forcibly shut them across several pockets of north and south Kolkata. A middle-aged man on Rashbehari Avenue even questioned why he could not enjoy a walk in a desolate street when he had no recent travel history of visiting a coronavirus-affected country. 

In the densely populated north Kolkata, police entered a locality at a time and challenged anyone who was found outside his home. “This is not an easy place to enforce a lockdown. Hence, we have to do it with a firm hand,” said an officer.

A majority of the arrested comprised youths aged 20 to 27, who had ventured out for a chat with friends or had taken their bike out for a spin. In several pockets of the city like Tiljala, Topsia, Park Circus, Rajabazar and Maniktala, police had a tough time enforcing the lockdown as bike-borne youths sped past the checkposts that had been set up. Youths were also found gossiping by the roadside or crowding around teastalls. Cops, armed with batons, went on an overdrive in some localities, chasing violators and arresting those who refused to disperse.

“We have deployed all our officers on the road who have been pleading and at times forcing people to get back to their homes. But there are instances when the men were back on the road the moment our team left the area. They need to understand that we are trying to implement the lockdown for their safety,” said a senior officer of Topsia police station.

The scene was similar at Rajabazar and Park Circus where residents called up police stations, urging cops to take action against shops selling non-essential items that had opened and about men loitering in the road. On VIP Road, too, men were spotted moving in herds atop mini-trucks and in ambulances. When the violation was pointed out, the cops gave a chase but didn’t arrest anyone. 

In Salt Lake, youths were seen riding bikes and driving cars around PNB crossing. When police stopped them to ask what they were doing on the road, they cited flimsy reasons. Councillor Anindya Chattopadhayay joined the cops to explain the urgency for them to return home and follow the lockdown rules. 

At checkposts in Kolkata, police did let people through if they cited valid reasons for being out during the lockdown. In Santoshpur, cops asked those who were outside to stop making excuses and go in. “We don’t want to use force. Please abide by the law,” a policemen told a group.

But there were odd allegations about police excesses too. A youth in Baguiati claimed he had been beaten by cops when he had stepped out to buy medicines. In the morning, the Vidyasagar traffic guard stopped six vehicles — coming from as far as Delhi, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar — on the second Hooghly bridge. Coming to know that they were migrant labourers, the cops shifted them to a quarantine centre.

In Howrah, police had to canvass on the lockdown with loudspeakers. “Don’t treat this like a bandh. The consequences of staying out can be serious and can affect your entire family,” a policeman said over a louspeaker. 

Back in Kolkata, police commissioner Anuj Sharma tweeted: “I appeal to all citizens to #StayHome and cooperate with the administration. @KolkataPolice will continue the drive against violators. #CoronavirusPandemic.”

(With inputs from Dwaipayan Ghosh, Tamaghna Banerjee, Jhimli Mukherjee Pandey, Suman Chakraborty & Priyanka Dasgupta)


