On guard, despite lull in Covid-19 cases
2020-05-26
COIMBATORE: Much to the relief of residents and health workers, the district and neighbouring Tirupur haven’t reported any Covid-19 cases in the past 22 days and 23 days, respectively. Had there been zoning system as earlier, this would have qualified both the districts to be re-designated as green zones. The district administrations, however, have warned people against lowering their guard, thinking they are in safe zones.

It was on May 3 that the district last recorded a positive case. “We have completed 22 days without a Covid-19 case,” confirms Coimbatore collector K Rajamani.

Renuka Nair, a senior beautician at a local salon, says it is a relief to know there is no community spread in the district. “Most of us have been asked report for work, which involves physical proximity to customers. We can also send our children to write board exams on June 10 without any fear.” 

While the district recorded its first case on March 22 when a student from Spain tested positive, Tirupur recorded its first case the very next day when a 48-year-old businessman tested positive. Both were returnees from abroad. The districts saw a spike after March 30 and April 1, when attendees of Tablighi Jamaat conference in New Delhi tested positive in large numbers. The next wave came when their relatives tested positive and that was followed by another wave in April third week when a few people in containment zones contracted the virus.

According to officials, they managed to control community spread by strictly restricting people’s movement in containment zones and ensuring their adherence to lockdown norms.

Tirupur collector K Vijayakarthikeyan says, “We were quick to trace contacts of positive cases and quarantine them. We also monitored their neighbourhoods, where disinfection drives were taken out on large scale.”

Health department officials say they haven’t compromised on screening people for Covid-19 in both the districts. “We continue to test everyone entering the districts and patients who are approaching hospitals with flu like symptoms or breathing problems. We were testing around 250 samples a day. Now that flights are operational, we expect the numbers to increase to 500 samples a day,” says a health department official.

Officials say they have no plans to ease more restrictions. Coimbatore collector says, “It’s the period to remain more cautious, as people are coming from northern districts and other states, where the infection rate is high. While our focus is on monitoring the district’s entry points via road, rail and air, there is always a chance of someone slipping through. We want the public to follow safety norms like washing their hands, sanitizing surfaces, wearing masks and practising social distancing voluntarily, while allowing us to resume our normal duties.”

