Coronavirus in Bhopal: On ground zero, anxious locals & questions for administration
2020-03-23
BHOPAL: The state capital’s first Coronavirus case sparked anxiety in the city on Sunday, especially in the colony where the patient lives. 

The locality was abuzz with rumours since the afternoon of March 21 when neighbours spotted an ambulance at her house. When they inquired with the ambulance staff, they were apparently told it was a swab sample collection. 

As the residents knew that she had returned from London, they were worried. Soon messages started appearing on social media groups of the colony about a “positive case” in the colony though the test report was yet to come. Some residents even called the local police station. A team of cops had accompanied the medical staff while the swab samples were taken, but police denied any information.

“Aisa kuch nahi hai”, ( there is no such thing),” they told residents over phone when asked about the “corona case”.

Till Sunday afternoon, police continued to deny. After the media broke the story, local residents called up Bhopal municipal corporation and demanded fumigation around the house of the patient. Around 3pm, two BMC personnel arrived and fumigated the area around the house. 

In a video message in the evening, district collector Tarun Pithode said, “There is no need to panic as the protocol required to check the further spread of the disease is followed and safety measures taken. The colony where it has happened is being sanitized and cleaned”. 

Barely 10 minutes before the confirmation of the positive case by the media, four cops were posted near house of the family. 

A local resident Vinay Sharma said,” I talked to the cops but they said it was a negative case.”

Dhrupad maestro and the family’s neighbor, Umakant Gundecha said “ I learnt about the positive case through media reports in the afternoon and not through the district administration. I expected the administration to be around in the colony to handle the anxiety of the local residents.”

Mahesh Sahu, an advocate and resident of the colony said , “ I expect that the administration must be knowing about status of the case much before the media broke the news of positive case. But no one from the administration was seen in the colony. A fumigation unit of BMC arrived after local residents made the calls.”

Many residents also rushed to the medical stores for “ preventive medicine”. Owner of a pharmacy in New Market, Suresh Agrawal, said, “People were buying Hydrochlroquine or Chloroquine along with Azithromycin to combat Covid 19.” This was due to a WhatsApp forward that claimed this was a magic cure for Covid-19 though there is no official confirmation of this.


