Kolkata: On the ground, police gear up for extended lockdown
2020-04-12
KOLKATA: Cops on Saturday intensified lockdown enforcement in pockets of the city and on its fringes and increased personnel in lanes and bylanes.

Police scanned the stretch between Canning Street and Burrabazar-MG Road crossing with drones as a large team patrolled the area and urged people to stay indoors. Cops chased away groups of people talking on the pavement along Colootola Street.

New Alipore residents said that they had been asked by cops to stock up essentials as the lockdown would be more strictly enforced, making multiple trips to the market difficult. Residents of Alipore, Panditiya Road and Behala received a similar appeal.

Checkpoints have been set up at entrances and exits in Parnasree, where confirmed cases were reported within a family. Checking has also been intensified on roads leading to DH Road and Taratala Road.

In Salt Lake, barricades were installed in AD Block, but were removed in the evening. Bidhannagar cops though continued using drones in the area.

Shibpur, Salkia and Uluberia in Howrah were barricaded and people entering and leaving the area were asked to show identity cards and reason for venturing out. On the northern fringes, parts of Baranagar, Birati, Belghoria, Bhatpara Madhyamgram, Dum Dum, Nagerbazar and Satgachia were also cordoned off.

North Dum Dum Municipality chairman Subodh Chakraborty told TOI: “Due to stricter enforcement in the area, our civic and medical staff have started distributing tokens with emergency phone numbers among the locals. Residents can call the numbers and our supervisors will arrange to send all essential items.”

Barrackpore police commissioner Manoj Kumar Verma said, “Stricter enforcement has been imposed in localities of Birati, Bhatpara and Baranagar. But we shall also extend help to locals for procurement of essentials.”


(With inputs from Tamaghna Banerjee, Dwaipayan Ghosh, Sanjib Chakraborty, Zeeshan Jawed and Rupak Banerjee)

