On World Malaria Day, experts fear focus on Covid-19 weakens fight against malaria in Bareilly
2020-04-25
BAREILLY: Experts feel that with the Bareilly health department focusing all its efforts on the novel coronavirus pandemic threat, the fight against malaria outbreak has been weakened. In April this year, only 24 malaria cases were detected after screening 1,413 patients, compared to 252 malaria cases reported in April 2019, after screening 6,046 patients. Experts told TOI the number of malaria cases has reduced due to screening of fewer suspects.


Health department data shows 612 people were found positive for malaria between January and March this year, after the health department examined blood samples of 30,893 people in the district. This is in comparison to 308 malaria cases detected in the same period in 2019, after screening 12,097 people.

Sources told TOI that ASHA workers, who were conducting tests for malaria using rapid diagnostic tests kits, are busy this year surveying Covid-19. Similarly, most lab technicians and lab assistants, who prepare blood slides for malaria tests, are occupied with novel coronavirus work. Though the number of patients examined for malaria rose from January to March this year, in comparison to same period in 2019, the groundwork to screen patients reduced drastically since April.

A senior official who did not wish to be named, said, “If people carrying malaria parasite remain undetected due to reduced screening, the number of cases will go up drastically later. If it rains, the situation may worsen. The aim of health department has been to detect all hidden patients and treat them to contain the spread of the malaria parasite. However, our past efforts will be wasted if we neglect malaria in highly-sensitive Bareilly.”

The official added, “Active case finding — in which a health staff team holds a camp in a village to test all fever patients for malaria — has been stopped from March 11. Besides, as out-patient department (OPD) at primary health centres (PHCs) and community health centres (CHCs) has been suspended, suspected malaria patients are not visiting hospitals for treatment.” 

Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “As Bareilly is endemic zone for malaria, on Friday, I directed all medical officers in-charge of PHCs and CHCs to focus on malaria. I have asked them to test migrant labourers for malaria and conduct blood tests of patients coming to CHCs and PHCs. We will rope in ASHA workers to create awareness on malaria too.”

In 2018, Bareilly district reported 37,482 malaria cases, which increased to 46,717 in 2019.

