Bihar: One test must before discharging any Covid-19 patient from hospitals
2020-05-23
PATNA: Even though the Centre has relaxed the norms for discharging Covid-19 patients and has allowed asymptomatic and mild symptomatic cases to leave without any test, the Bihar government is not discharging any coronavirus infected person without at least one test.

However, the state government has tweaked the norms and is now doing one RT-PCR test before discharging a Covid-19 positive person. Earlier, a coronavirus patient had to undergo two RT-PCR tests and one chest X-Ray before being discharged. Only if the result of the two consecutive tests came negative was a person allowed to be under home quarantine.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) had on May 9 relaxed the discharge criteria and asked the states to discharge those with no symptoms, or with mild symptoms after 10 days of onset, or no fever for three days. This new guideline stated that no RT-PCR test was required for discharging these people.

States like Maharashtra with large number of Covid-19 cases have adopted this guideline. However, Bihar has modified it after consulting clinicians and experts and decided to conduct at least one RT-PCR test before discharging a patient. A letter to this effect was issued by the state health department on May 14.

A senior health department officer said, “For states where the number of coronavirus cases is very high, discharging an asymptomatic person without test can be a viable option. But in Bihar, the situation is not like Maharashtra or Delhi.”

Bihar has around 50,000 testing kits available and is doing pool testing at Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, where 20 samples are tested together in one go.

A doctor at a dedicated Covid-19 hospital said, “In states like Maharashtra, they did not have the option to keep all positive persons in hospital or isolation facility and test them all because the number was high. One has to prioritise and work.”

He added, “Even if Maharashtra is discharging asymptomatic people, or those with mild symptoms, they are advising them to be home quarantined. Their figure is so high that they are not in a position to test them all and keep them at a health facility. In Bihar, the figure is still less, so we can continue with keeping positive people in healthcare centres and discharge them with at least one test as of now.”


