One death, 42 +ve cases: Worst Covid day for Vidarbha
2020-04-26
Nagpur: The number of Covid-19 cases in Vidarbha crossed the 200-mark on Saturday as 42 new cases were reported from three districts in the region. Yavatmal recorded 20 new cases in a day, which is a record for any city in Vidarbha. With this, 19 new cases came from Nagpur and 3 in Amravati, taking Vidarbha’s total number of confirmed positive Covid-19 cases to 225. Out of three patients reported today in Amravati, a 52-year-old who was admitted in Covid-19 hospital died just 2 hours before his reports arrived. Due to this, total number of Covid-19 deaths in Vidarbha reached 10, six of them being in Amravati itself. Other four include one each in Akola, Buldhana and Nagpur while one patient had committed suicide in Akola. Meanwhile, 3 patients recovered and discharged from Buldhana and one from Washim on Saturday. With this, total number of patients who recovered from Vidarbha region reached 59. A good news is that this number is likely to increase on Sunday as more patients are likely to get discharged. Deceased tests positive in AmravatiA 52-year-old patient, who died at Covid hospital in Amravati on Saturday, is among the three new Covid-19 cases that were detected positive. This has taken the number of positive cases to 19 in Amravati. These include six deaths and four discharged. Nine are in Covid hospital now.The 52-year-old Yusuf Nagar resident was admitted to Covid hospital on April 23. He died there at 4pm on Saturday. His swab report came positive late in the evening along with two others. Total 13 reports were received this evening. Ten tested negative.The second male who tested positive is a 53-year-old man from Badnera. He has been admitted to Covid ward while his contacts are being identified and quarantined.The third positive is a 35-year-old man from Tarkheda locality who had come in contact with April 23 Covid-19 positive deceased woman and was already institutionally quarantined. He has now been shifted to Covid positive ward for treatment.20 positive in Yavatmal A total of 34 active positive patients are in the isolation wards of GMC Yavatmal, of whom 20 were tested positive on Saturday. Total 38 test reports were received on Saturday. Out of them, 14 were negative. Remaining 4 reports will be referred to the lab for a fresh test. As soon as test reports confirming 20 positive reached here, the health workers accompanied by the police forces launched a manhunt from the hotspot areas in the containment areas of Yavatmal. There are 100 persons in the institutional quarantine while 829 are in home quarantine. The district administration has already started the survey in the containment areas. Swab samples would be collected during survey and they would be sent to the lab for the test. The people who have come in contact with the positive patients should come forward for the test, urged the district collector MD Singh. He has also urged the people to strictly adhere to the set norms and rules and cautioned the people in the hotspot areas of stringent action if they try to violate the curfew rules. 