Coronavirus suspect admitted to AIIMS Rishikesh, Kenya-return man also referred to facility
2020-03-20
DEHRADUN: A 37-year-old man from Rishikesh who complained of throat pain and dry non-productive cough was brought to AIIMS Rishikesh on Wednesday. He has been kept in the isolation ward. Another foreign return from Uttarkashi, with coronavirus-like symptoms, was referred to AIIMS from Chinyalisaur’s community health centre (CHC). He didn’t reach AIIMS till the time of filing this report.


Harish Thapliyal, public relations officer of AIIMS Rishikesh, told TOI that the 37-year-old patient is suffering from cough, fever, myalgia, and headache for a week now. He has also complained of changes in the consistency of stools and difficulty in swallowing food.

“These symptoms were developed in the man after coming in contact with a visitor from Gurugram (where positive cases of Covid-19 have been found). The man’s examination has revealed that posterior pharyngeal (throat) wall congestion were within limits. At present, he is being managed conservatively with antihistamines, IV fluids, and cough suppressant. His throat sample is being sent for Covid-19 test,” said Thapliyal.

Another man from Chinyalisaur block of Uttarkashi district who recently returned from Kenya was referred to AIIMS Rishikesh after he showed flu-like symptoms. According to sources, the man works at a hotel in Kenya.

He reached Delhi airport on March 16 and came to Chinyalisaur on March 17, where he stayed alone in a rented accommodation. On Wednesday, he went to a private clinic for treatment of cough and cold. However, after getting to know about his recent international visit, the doctor there sent him to Chinyalisaur’s CHC. And from there, he was referred to AIIMS Rishikesh.

Authorities at AIIMS Rishikesh confirmed that the case was referred to them but the man didn’t reach the hospital till the time of filing this report.

Meanwhile, according to the health department, as many as 78 samples of suspected Covid-19 cases have been sent for testing. Among these, 28 have come out negative, one have come out positive, and reports of others are still awaited.

“As many as 794 people were quarantined in Uttarakhand. Among them, 390 patients have completed 28 days of observation and 356 people are still under observation. The rest 34 patients have migrated from the state. We have 200 ICU beds in various government hospitals and we are identifying some properties in the outskirts of cities to convert them into isolation centres,” said DG health Dr Amita Upreti.

She added that the hill state has 220 companies involved in drug and medicines manufacturing. An analysis of these units done by health department revealed that they can produce 110 crore tablets and 44 lakh bottles of syrup in one eight-hour shift. 


