One more Covid-19 positive case in U’khand, total now six
2020-03-29
Dehradun: The total number of Covid-19-positive cases in Uttarakhand rose to six on Saturday with a 21-year-old Doon-based man, who had returned from Dubai on March 18, testing positive for the infection.

The private hospital, where the man went for initial check-up, had placed him under home quarantine for almost a week after which his family was also quarantined at the hospital.

Director-General (Health) Dr Amita Upreti confirmed that the 21-year-old Dubai returnee, who was initially taken to the private hospital, had tested Covid-19-positive on March 28. “The man’s medical samples were sent for testing on March 26. We received his reports on Saturday which confirmed that he was Covid-19-positive,” she said.

The health department also quarantined 10 staffers of the private hospital who came in contact with the 21-year-old man. While the doctor of the hospital was wearing the personal protection kit, the technician, staff nurses, ward boy and some other staffers at the reception who came in contact with the patient were placed under 14 days of isolation.

The patient along with four other family members was brought to Government Doon Medical College on Saturday where he was kept in the Covid-19 quarantine facility. His family members, parents and two siblings were kept in general isolation ward.

“This is a major lapse on the part of the authorities of the private hospital who sent the man back home, even after knowing the fact that he had returned from Dubai, where there have been a lot of Covid-19 cases. The man has lived with his family of four for almost a week who must have also visited market places, met friends and relatives. It would be a tough task to identify all their contacts now,” said a doctor from the health department, who added that the man took a flight from Dubai to Delhi on March 18 and from there, took another flight to Dehradun the same day.

Meanwhile, the district administration is tracking the people who met the US national – the hill state’s fourth Covid-19-positive case admitted at GDMC - after they received information that he visited two other four-star hotels during his stay in Dehradun.

District Magistrate Ashish Srivastava confirmed that the US national visited some hotels, but added that so far, no symptomatic individual from those places has approached the health department.


