One more tests positive for Covid-19, Kanpur tally now 313
2020-05-17
KANPUR: One more person, tested positive for coronavirus on Saturday, taking the total number of cases to 313 in Kanpur. The patient is a resident of Ajitganj colony of the city, and has been admitted to the isolation ward of the Lala Lajpat Rai Hospital for further treatment, said Chief Medical Officer Dr Ashok Shukla. 


The reports of patients swab samples, which were sent to the COVID -19 laboratory in Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Memorial medical college for testing, arrived on Saturday, confirming that the person was suffering from COVID-19, he added. A team of doctors is attending on the person at the hospital. 

Those who came in contact with the patient were identified, CMO said, adding that they were being quarantined. He said the infected person’s house and locality are being sanitised. With this, the number of coronavirus cases in Kanpur has climbed to 313. The first coronavirus case was reported on March 23, when a 70-year-old man with a travel history to US tested positive for the disease.

He also added that on Saturday nearly 20 persons, who were being treated for COVID 19, were discharged after their second report tested them negative. “A total of 13 patients were discharged from Kanshiram Trauma Centre while seven from Lala Lajpat Rai hospital,” said CMO. Total number of active cases in the City are 93. While eight City people died after contracting deadly virus. 

Meanwhile, the worries of the district administration officials are not ending as four new hotspots surfaced in the city on Saturday. The district officials, who had converted 13 hotspots into green zones in the last few days, have now added four new hotspots taking their tally to 16.

The district administration and police officials at a review meeting held here on Friday discussed the issue and released a fresh list of hotspots. According to the new list, as many as 89,3,30 people of the city, residing in around 15,517 houses, are in the ambit of 16 hotspots. According to police, around 96 barriers have been raised to close those hotspots.

Amit Mohan Prasad, principal secretary in UP government, has directed the city officials that areas which have not reported any positive case in the last 21 days could be converted into green zones. If everything is found under control, then Kotwali, Meerpur, Prem Nagar in Chamanganj, Jajmau police outpost and Juhi Parampurwa would be included in the list of green zones.

 Quli Bazar has reported maximum 96 Covid 19 cases among hotspots of the city. Around 22,000 residents of this locality are locked in their houses since the last 66 days.


