One more dies before reaching hospital in city, test positive for Covid-19 after death
2020-05-28
JAIPUR: Sudden death of a 35-year-old woman who was brought dead to Sawai Man Singh hospital suspected to have died of hypoxia.

The woman was brought to SMS hospital on Tuesday but before she could reach the hospital she died. She was resident of Jagannath Shah Ka Rasta in Kishanpole Bazaar, one of the worst affected areas of the Walled City. 

She was declared Covid-19 positive after her samples were found infected with the virus on Wednesday. Her samples were taken after her death. “The cause of sudden death could be many and one of those is hypoxia in Covid-19 patients. The woman brought to the hospital was a case of sudden death,” said a SMS hospital administration official, while reacting on the death of the woman. 

However, since no diagnostic test was done, the cause of death is still inconclusive. However, the SMS hospital doctors are not ruling out the possibility of hypoxia, which is one of the major complication in Covid-19 patients.

It is not the first time such an incident has happened. A 25-year-old youth, who was brought dead to Bangur hospital in Pali on May 10 had died suddenly without getting any medical attention. Dr HM Chaudhary of district hospital, Pali had suspected it as a case of happy hypoxia saying that in such a condition, a patient does not realize that he is sick and he dies due to low level of oxygen in blood causing hypoxia. 

In such a case of sudden death, a 24-year-old man, resident of Bhatta Basti was brought dead to Kanwatia hospital, which is hardly 10minutes away from his residence. He too, was tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. A 17-year-old girl was brought dead at JLN hospital from a hotel at Delhi Gate, which is hardly 10 minutes away from her hotel, where she was residing recently. 

BOX:

Happy hypoxia is a state where body’s oxygen concentration gets lower (to about 60%) in a patient infected with Covid-19 virus but not so low that patients feel uncomfortable. They can behave normally till they deteriorate rapidly and collapse. The rapid deterioration and collapse has been one of the reasons Covid-19 has emerged as a major killer.

What government is doing to check happy hypoxia:

The health department teams are visiting Covid-19 hotspots and checking blood oxygen levels with oximeters to detect the cases early to prevent mortalities


