One dead, pvt hosp doctor, SRPF staffer among 6 new Covid +ves
2020-05-26
Nagpur: A 54-year-old woman from Mominpura died at IGGMCH five minutes after her test result for Covid-19 came positive on Monday, taking the district’s death toll to eight. Five more persons, all new cases — a State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) personnel, a private doctor, two Mumbai returnees and a pregnant woman from Mominpura — also tested positive, taking the day’s total to six and total number of cases from the district to 429.IGGMCH deputy medical superintendent Dr Sagar Pande told TOI, “The woman was a cancer patient and admitted at 4.24pm on May 24 in a serious condition. Her samples came positive for Covid-19 and she died at 6.15am,” he said.Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) arranged for cremation of the woman. The number of deaths in Mominpura, city’s second hotspot, increased to three. No other area has more than one death.All eight deceased until now had comorbidities. The latest case is seventh direct patient and not from existing chains. Among the deaths, only one was secondary corona positive case as his son tested positive, following which the deceased was quarantined and then died while undergoing treatment in IGGMCH Isolation ward.A 26-year-old pregnant woman, also from Mominpura, went for check-up at NMC’s Urban Primary Health Centre (UPHC) on May 24 and her reports came positive on Monday. She is also a new case and not from existing chains.On May 24, two new cases had come from Mominpura containment zone. It is an alarming situation at Mominpura containment zone as new cases are on the rise despite the locality being a containment zone since April 4. The civic body has also conducted mass quarantine, special health check-up camps and door-to-door surveys here.Number of cases from Mominpura containment zone have now increased to 224.A 45-year-old private doctor practising at Ramdaspeth and a resident of Seva Sadan Chowk, Central Avenue, in Central Nagpur was having fever and cough so got tested and came positive from Dhruv Lab.A 40-year-old SRPF personnel also tested positive. He was deployed at Satranjipura containment zone, city’s first hotspot, and went for check-up on May 24 as he had some problems in throat. Strangely, there has been no case from this zone for last 10 days. The latest case indicates presence of virus in the zone. Cases from this zone increased to 122.With latest case, number of SRPF personnel who have contracted the virus increased to seven. Earlier, two policemen had also tested positive from Mominpura containment zone in Central Nagpur. Thus, number of SRPF and policemen who have tested positive while serving in containment zones is nine.A 24-year-old woman from Hiwri Nagar near Wardhaman Nagar in East Nagpur also tested positive in Dhruv Lab. She had returned from Mumbai on May 23 and visited a private doctor and gave swab samples on May 24. This is the first case from NMC Lakadganj zone. Now, all ten zones have registered cases. This area is close to Satranjipura containment zone and likely to be a new one.A 50-year-old woman from Siraspeth in NMC Gandhibagh zone also tested positive from Dhruv Lab. As per NMC officials, she had a paralytic attack in Mumbai and was undergoing treatment. She was brought here and taken to a private hospital at Sitabuldi where swab samples were taken. Her reports came positive. She was at her home and shifted to IGGMCH.Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe notified part of Siraspeth as containment zone.New cases from 10 non-containment zones were registered in last three days. With latest two, number of persons returning from Mumbai and testing positive in the district increased to five.Mundhe also notified Taj Nagar under NMC Hanuman Nagar zone as containment zone.A person from Jawahar Nagar had tested positive on May 9. He had visited a private hospital in the same area before getting admitted at GMCH. His close contacts and staff from the hospital were quarantined and tested. His two family members had tested positive and remaining came negative.In second samples, two — the person’s son and a 50-year-old woman — tested positive on May 24. The woman is a nurse at the private hospital and a resident of Taj Nagar. She becomes second nurse from the district to contract Covid-19, with the earlier one being with NMC’s primary health centre.IGGMCH discharged 15 corona positive patients including two children of Mominpura as per new guidelines. Number of discharged persons increased to 352. With eight deaths, 69 are active Covid-19 positive patients and undergoing treatment at IGGMCH, GMCH and AIIMS.