One in seven virus-infected senior citizens dying in Karnataka
2020-06-03
Bengaluru: While Karnataka’s fatality rate of 1.3% is among the lowest of states in the country, it may have to change its strategy and focus on elders, especially with the influx of people under relaxed lockdown norms. 

Data up to Tuesday shows the number of people above the age of 60 account for only 6% of the cases — 228 of the total 3,796 — but account for 60% of the total number of deaths. Of the 52 deaths so far, 31 were people aged above 60. Of these, 13 were aged above 70 years and 18 were between 60 and 70 years.

Dr MK Sudharshan, chairman, Karnataka Technical Advisory Committee on Covid 19, said: “Senior citizens are more vulnerable to Covid-19. The government has realised this and has already conducted a survey to identify such people across the state, especially those with comorbidities. The focus now will be on protecting them. But people will also need to be proactive and responsible.”

Experts say that the way forward would be to conduct random tests on seniors, especially those with comorbidities, and track them. “This must be done to ensure they have access to healthcare. In many cases, death has occurred because there was a delay in hospitalisation,” a senior official said.

As on June 1, around 54.5 lakh households in Karnataka had seniors, data from a government door-to-door survey of 1.3 crore households shows. And, of these households, 14.7 lakh seniors have comorbidities such as high BP, diabetes and cardiac problems.

A government doctor said conditions like BP and diabetes are not something to be concerned about if they are under control. “For most people above the age of 50, these are milestone conditions, so there’s no need to be too worried. But they must be very careful,” the doctor said.

Sudharshan added that conducting random tests may not be viable. “At present the testing capacity is about 12,000 per day and the priority is for those with symptoms and those returning from high-risk states. I don’t think random testing of seniors can be done.” Instead, he advised families to keep tabs on seniors in the house.


