One more with Tablighi links +ve, state Covid count at 33
2020-04-19
Ranchi: A 33-year-old man from Trinidad & Tobago islands, who was a part of the 17-member foreigners’ group of the Tablighi Jamaat, tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, taking the total number of cases in the state to 33.

The man tested positive in the third test conducted on him in 20 days after he tested negative in the first two — on March 31 and April 7. Soon after he tested positive on Saturday, the man was shifted from the Khelgaon quarantine centre to the Covid-19 block at Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims). Meanwhile, the result of the third test on the Malaysian women, the state’s first case, who tested positive on March 31, is still awaited.

Talking to TOI, Dr Santosh, who looks after the records at the Khelgaon quarantine centre, said, “The foreign national was shifted to Rims on Saturday afternoon after he tested positive.”

Meanwhile, medical staff and others deployed at the quarantine centre are apprehensive about the 92 people released from the centre. “If one of the foreigners can test positive twenty days after being quarantined, we do not know what might happen to those who have been sent home after completing their 14-day quarantine here,” said a staff at the Khelgaon quarantine centre on condition of anonymity.

Allaying fears, district administration officials said those released have no risk as they were accommodated in separate blocks from the ones who had Tablighi links. Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said, “The foreign nationals with links to Tablighi Jammat were housed in a separate block from others who were tracked during contact tracing exercises. Thus, there is very little chance that they had come in contact with the 33-year-old foreign national who tested positive on Saturday.”

\Meanwhile a retired Jharkhand administrative officer aged 73 years passed away in a Gurgaon based hospital after being tested positive for Covid-19 there. 

The 73 year old had suffered a brain stroke on April 2 at his flat in Madhumati Apartment in Joda Talaab area, Bariatu after which he was admitted at Lake View Hospital in the same area. He was airlifted to Medanta hospital in Gurgaon on April 16 after his condition deteriorated .

Soon after the patient was tested positive for COVID-19 on Saturday, back here in Ranchi, the district administration was asked to take necessary precautionary measures and to screen and get samples of people who have had shared contact with the deceased.

Acting on the information a district administration team along with health workers reached Madhumati apartment in Joda Talaab area and started a screening and contact tracing exercise. Apart from that they also locked down Lake view hospital which was used by the retired official for his treatment before moving to Gurgaon. 

“We have started contact tracing for all those who might have come in contact with the 72 year old who passed away on Saturday during treatment. Lake view hospital will be closed from immediate effect and we have started screening and sample collection exercise at his residential society and at the hospital,” said Ranchi DC Rai Mahimapat Ray.

Meanwhile district administration official also urged people to come forward and contact the Ranchi district helpline number -1950 if they feel they had come in contact with the deceased.


