One dead, 17 Covid-positive in Moradabad, eight new cases in Sambhal
2020-04-15
Bareilly: In Moradabad on Monday, a 49-year-old man died of Covid-19 at a private medical college, while 17 others, including a 39-year-old doctor who was treating corona patients, tested positive for the virus. Chief medical officer M C Garg said of the fresh cases, two are residents of Sambhal and one of Amroha. In Sambhal, eight more suspects tested Covid-19 positive on Tuesday. 

With the 17 fresh cases, Moradabad’s tally shot up from one to 18 in a single day, leaving local administration and health department distressed. District magistrate R K Singh and SSP Amit Pathak asked locals to strictly follow lockdown rules to stay safe.

According to officials, among the 17 fresh cases, 15 are Tablighi Jamaatis who had either attended the event in Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz or came in contact with those who had. 

The deceased person has been identified as Sartaj Ali, resident of Nawabpura in Moradabad, who got infected after coming in contact with Jamaatis.

All 17 people were quarantined at a private medical college in Moradabad. The CMO said Sartaj had approached the facility on his own on April 8, after his condition deteriorated. His sample was sent for testing, and the report, which arrived only on Monday, showed he was Covid-19 positive. But few minutes after the report arrived, he passed away.

Among 15 Covid-19 positive Jamaatis, the condition of one is said to be serious.

Two doctors employed with the government were also admitted to the private medical college in “serious condition” two days ago, and then shifted to ICU. Now, their condition is reportedly stable. One of them, who was part of a survey team checking up on Jamaatis, had tested positive, said the CMO.

Elsewhere, the SSP and DM met with police and administrative officials and instructed them not to relax lockdown norms in areas that have been sealed as hotspots. Six localities in Moradabad — Mugalpura, Nagfani, Barvalan, Azandnagar, Tambakuvalan and Lalnagari — have been marked as hotspot.

SSP said they are now tracking the phones to collect call and location details of the Covid-19 positive cases, to find out how many people had come in their contact.

In Sambhal, SP Yamuna Prasad said they had found 11 Jamaatis from Tamil Nadu hiding at Saraitareen locality in Hayatnagar area in the district. “Their samples were sent for testing to RML Institute of Medical Sciences in Lucknow. All 11 Jamaatis were staying in Hayatnagar, which has been sealed completely. Eight of them tested positive, with one having arrived from Dubai last month,” the SP said.


