One tested positiove in Ahmednagar, 16 quarantined
2020-03-15
Nashik: The Ahmednagar district administration has quarantined 16 people, and four others have been isolated in their respective homes, after a local resident tested positive for the coronavirus on Friday, district collector Rahul Dwivedi said.

An Ahmednagar resident — who had returned to India from one of the coronavirus-affected countries on March 1 — tested positive for the virus. The samples of three of his family members have, however, tested negative.

The administration, led by the collector, and medical officers including civil surgeon Pradeep Murambikar, NMC health officer Anil Borge, swung into action and the tracked down all the people who had come in contact with this patient.

The person who tested positive has now been moved to an isolation ward on the premises of the civil hospital. Initially, he had not shown any symptoms, but he came to the civil hospital because of his travel history. His samples were then sent to the NIV. 

His condition is currently stable.

“As of now, we have one patient who has contracted the virus. Three others have tested negative. We have sent 16 more samples of swabs to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune for testing,” the collector said.

Eight persons who were associated with the patient, and eight others who had voluntarily come to the hospital to get themselves tested have now been quarantined, the officer added.

Among the people quarantined is also the person who recently came from Italy, the officer added. 

All these persons will be under observation until the reports come negative.

Four more persons have been put under self-isolation at their homes, the officer added.

According to the officer, a 30-bed isolation ward has been set up at the civil hospital at Ahmednagar to ensure that patients suffering from other ailments do not come in touch with these patients. 

A separate arrangement to quarantine people from the high-risk groups has also been set up by the medical staff.

The collector has appealed to people to not panic and stay away from rumours.

“A system is in place and people do not need to worry. All they have to do is maintain personal hygiene,” the officer added.


