One-year-old, seafarer among eight Covid +ve cases in Goa
2020-05-15
Panaji: After over a month of remaining Covid-free, Goa on Thursday reported eight positive cases—all with travel history—including a one-year-old child, among a family of five from Solapur, and a seafarer. Except the driver of a goods carrier, who came from Gujarat, the rest were all asymptomatic, health department officials said.

“Five have travelled from Solapur, two from Mumbai and one from Gujarat. Currently, they are at ESI Hospital, Margao and their condition is stable,” said director of health Dr Jose D’Sa.

Chief minister Pramod Sawant said the seafarer, who tested positive on his arrival in Goa on Thursday morning, had completed 14 days in quarantine in Mumbai and had tested negative for Covid-19 on April 30.

On Wednesday, seven persons, including the Solapur family and their driver, tested positive for Covid-19 when they underwent the mandatory check after entering Goa, a Green Zone. 

The goods carrier driver tested positive when he approached the sub-district hospital at Ponda complaining of breathlessness.

When the confirmatory tests were conducted at the virology laboratory of the Goa Medical College, all seven tests came positive on Thursday morning.

“The goods carrier driver, who arrived a day before, had visited two places. His travel history was taken to trace his contacts. Suspected contacts have been quarantined,” Sawant said.

A health department official said the driver of the goods carrier had also visited Corlim industrial estate.

“His travel history has been taken to trace his contacts. Suspected contacts have been quarantined and police have been given the task to track all his contacts,” he said.

Health minister Vishwajit Rane said the details of the driver, who drove the seafarer to Goa, has been passed on to the Maharashtra government “for necessary action”.

“He (the seafarer) has tested positive for Covid-19 after 14 days. We want seafarers to remain in facility quarantine and another 14 days under home quarantine for this reason,” Sawant said.

He also said the 60 seafarers, who were released from the facility quarantine on Tuesday, should strictly complete another 14 days in home quarantine. “They should not mix with the community for 14 days and think about their families and people of Goa,” Sawant said.

These eight positive cases have come after over a month when the state had detected seven persons—six with a foreign travel history and the seventh the brother of one of them. The last Covid positive case in the state was detected on April 3 and all of them have recovered.

Sawant also said the government has “has taken the responsibility to ensure that there was no community transmission due to these cases”.

Earlier in the day, names of six patients went viral on social media and Sawant said an inquiry has been ordered. “Action will be taken against those involved in revealing the list,” he said.

Rane also warned against the disclosure of confidential laboratory reports and said it is an act of violation of the patient’s privacy.

“Confidential laboratory reports of Goa Medical College and directorate of health Services are being currently circulated on WhatsApp and social media platforms. I request you all to not indulge in leaking or sharing such information,” Rane tweeted.


