Onion shortage likely as lockdown affects harvesting
2020-04-07
RAJKOT: Household staple onion is likely to send home budgets haywire again in the next few months. 


Farmers in Mahuva and Amreli, the two highest onion producing districts in Gujarat, are staring at a loss of nearly 30% standing crop due to the prevailing lockdown. Nearly 75% of onion crop is awaiting harvesting for the last 15 days in both districts and farmers have about 20,000 bags (each of 50kg) harvested onion lying in the fields due to lack of transportation facilities.

Farmers have filled up their fields with water so that the crop doesn’t spoil for at least 20 days. Moreover, harvesting doesn’t make sense as agriculture market produce committees (APMC) are shut due to lockdown and there is no trading.

Farmers say the sowing season started two months late this year (in January) because of prolonged monsoon and when the harvesting time arrived, the lockdown came into force. The two districts produce both red and white onions and the former is mostly sold in Gujarat. 

According to the state agriculture department figures, the total estimated production of onions is 11.24 lakh tons out of which red onion is three tons this year. This Rabi season, Gujarat farmers cultivated onion in 42,000 hectares with the hope of getting good price. The area under onion cultivation was 28,000 hectare in last Rabi season.

Chetan Malani, a farmer and sarpanch of Khadasli village of Savarkundla taluka in Amreli district, has harvested onion crop from 10 acre land. “The onion is cultivated in 250 acre land in our village, but we are waiting for this lockdown to end so that the crop can be harvested and transported.”

“We fear a loss of 25-30% crop this year,” added Malani.

However, there is some respite for farmers growing white onion as dehydration units in Mahua got conditional nod to start operations two days ago. But they are also facing severe labour shortage. 

Past president of All India Dehydration Vegetables Association, Vitthal Koradia, said “We have received conditional permission to open our units to save the white onion from damage. Out of 100 units only 6-7 are open because of labour shortage and transportation problem.”

Nearly 90% dehydrated onion is exported and there is huge uncertainty over the exports with coronavirus pandemic spreading to over 200 countries.

Ghanshyam Patel, secretary of Mahuva marketing yard, said, “The APMC can’t function because it’s not possible to maintain social distancing and that’s why we have made arrangement for direct sale of white onion to dehydration units.”

