Online food orders still down 60% from pre-Covid
2020-05-29
BENGALURU: India’s online food delivery order volumes continue to remain down by over 60% from the peak reached in the first two weeks of March, according to data from Israel’s Superfly Insights, which collated it through anonymised billing information. The data shows that Zomato and Swiggy order volumes crashed to their lowest during the week of March 22-28. In the first two weeks of March, before the crisis, the two companies were together doing 2.5-3 million orders a day, according to industry executives TOI spoke to. 


The data from Superfly, which has tracked a subset of the total orders, showed order volumes tanked by almost 90% just before the lockdown started. While platforms faced difficulties at the local level in most cities to operate during a lockdown, consumers also ordered less online as a precautionary move amid the virus outbreak. Then in April, orders started making slow and steady progress.

But they took another beating in the middle of April for two weeks due to reports of a pizza delivery boy being Covid-19 positive. Orders since then have been staging a comeback, albeit slower than usual as volatility continues. 




“We are seeing some growth coming back, but still not at a pre-Covid level and it’s so volatile that every day there is a new surprise. Consumer behaviour is also changing, some of it will be irreversible,” said Jaydeep Barman, CEO of cloud kitchen player Rebel Foods. He added that his company has launched ready-to-cook meals and marinades as customers increasingly look to cook at home. The volatility is being driven more by the spikes in shutdowns of deliveries in containment zones and cities. According to Barman, demand is recovering faster in smaller towns like Lucknow, Bhopal, Vijaywada and Coimbatore, which have not been impacted as much as the metros.

Emphasis on safety has been another area of focus for platforms like Zomato and Swiggy besides restaurants. Rebel Foods, which runs cloud kitchens like Behrouz Biryani, OvenStory and Faasos, has seen 75% of consumers who order on the platform scan the QR code to check on temperatures and medical check-up certificates of those involved in cooking the meal.

Aggregators like Swiggy and Zomato have already cut 13-15% of their corporate staff (not delivery executives), pulled back on discounts, and aggressively expanded into grocery since the crisis started in March. According to Zomato co-founder and CEO Deepinder Goyal’s email to his staff earlier this month, the company expects this situation to continue for another 6 months at least. 

“Our order volumes are down, but we have witnessed a strong recovery in these last two weeks,” a Zomato spokesperson said, attributing it to safety measures taken by the company. Currently, 15% of its order volume comes from grocery, which has been steadily growing week-on-week, the company added. An emailed query to Swiggy did not elicit a response till the time of going to the press. 

Even while platforms like Zomato and Swiggy have been operational, the number of restaurants open for delivery is less than a third of those registered — another factor leading to the fall in demand. Industry body National Restaurant Association of India (NRAI) has estimated that 50% of the restaurants in the country may shut down because of the Covid-19 crisis. 

Incidentally, on Wednesday, the NRAI sent out letters to leading mall owners in India, seeking urgent changes in rent arrangements for restaurants in their premises. While at a standalone level restaurants have managed to work out new arrangements with landlords, leading malls are yet to commit to rejigged rent structures. The association is suggesting options such as revenue-share, where one would pay a percentage of the monthly sales as rent, instead of a fixed component. “There is already immense stress in the sector and we will be lucky to get 25-40% of the old business volumes back once we restart,” said one of the letters sent by NRAI to a leading mall in Delhi.


