Online courses see 3X surge in demand amid lockdown
2020-04-13
Hyderabad: Education technology (EdTech) firms have seen a surge in enquires about online courses from professionals and corporates since the lockdown, to curb the spread of Covid-19, was announced on March 24 . 

The firms claim courses such as business analytics, data science, deep learning, machine learning, blockchain for senior manager, transformational leadership, HR management, digital marketing among others are gaining significant traction. 

“Within just three weeks, our platform has seen a 45% surge in the interest level of professionals in upskilling themselves,” Aditya Malik, CEO of TalentEdge, said. He said that considering the current economic conditions, the EdTech firms are expecting the trend to continue as more employees are looking to re-skill/upskill themselves in anticipation of difficult times ahead. “Apart from individuals reaching out on the platform, there is also an increase in corporates looking for relevant courses for their employees,” he added. 

The firms added that 70% of learners opting for these courses are working professionals, mostly employed in the IT/ITeS sector. “We have witnessed an increased interest from professionals who want to use their time to learn and upskill. This trend is also evident across all of our learning offerings, including the free as well as paid courses. We’ve seen a 3x (three-fold) increase in content consumption across the platform,” said Hari Krishnan Nair, co-founder of Great Learning. He added that Hyderabad ranks among the top four cities witnessing the highest demands for these courses. 

Coursera, an American online learning platform, said comparing the past 30 days (as of April 6) with the same period a year ago, new registration grew 505%. Raghav Gupta, managing director, India and Asia-Pacific, Coursera, said “Since the outbreak of Covid-19, we have seen change across several key Coursera metrics. Along with the number of learners turning to Coursera, content consumption has also broadened. Overall enrolments YoY increased 432%,” he added. 

Gupta said Coursera has over 50 enterprise customers, including Mindtree, Tata Communications, Axis Bank, Infosys, Airtel, Manipal Group, among others. 

Working professionals say that the last few weeks have given them time to explore various courses. 


