Online wedlock for Rajasthan groom in coronavirus hotspot and bride in Maharashtra
2020-05-17
UDAIPUR: Coronavirus lockdowns and travel restrictions have forced people around the world to delay their nuptials but this couple from two states, 650 kilometers away from each other, were too ‘desperate’ to get married that they took the virtual way.


Saurav Jain, the groom from Adarsh Colony in Nimbahera town of Chittorgarh and bride Shraddha Kothari, daughter of Heeralal Kothari from Aurangabad in Maharashtra, entered into wedlock through live streaming on Friday. A pandit in Aurangabad read aloud the mantra from his home, while the bride and groom, in their respective homes with parents and close relatives, connected through video conferencing and performed the marriage rituals. A day before wedding, other programmes like Ganapati sthapana, mehndi, haldi and ladies sangeet too were performed the same way.

“Ours is a love marriage and we were engaged in November last year. We have been in a relationship for 6-7 years and inspite of being from the same caste, Shraddha’s family was a bit hesitant in accepting our union because of the distance between our cities, they wanted her to settle in Maharashtra only,” Saurav told TOI.

The couple managed to convince their families and the wedding was decided for May 15 at Nimbahera. The lockdown, however, played a spoilsport.

“We thought everything would be normal maybe within a month and hence did not cancel the bookings but as Nimbahera too turned into a corona hotspot, our families suggested to postpone the wedding,” Saurav said.

The couple feared that the delay in marriage could cause complications further if any of the elders in the family changed their mind and reconsidered the alliance. To avoid such a situation, Saurav suggested the online wedding idea, which was agreed to after initial reservations.

The families have accepted the virtual wedding as a real one. “The pandit solemnized the wedding as per the vedic rituals. Few things like jaimala, mangalsutra, sindoor bharai and saptapadi (pheras) would be performed later on in our reception which we plan to organise in Udaipur soon after the lockdown is lifted,” said Saurav.

The groom owns a production house and makes documentaries and short films, while the bride is an actress working in serials aired on Marathi channels. Saurav’s father Sushil Jain has pledged to donate a percentage of the amount, which he had planned to spend on the wedding, for social cause.


