Online maths for Class X now, Delhi government reviews lockdown lessons
2020-04-26
NEW DELHI: Sanchit Priyadarshi, a Class XII science student of Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Yamuna Vihar, requested deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia on Saturday to continue the online classes even after the lockdown was lifted.


The education department was reviewing the progress of online and SMS/IVR-based lessons and teachers, students and parents joined in to share their experiences. 

From Monday onwards, online maths classes will start for Class X students as well in collaboration with Khan Academy.

“All of us have been discussing how helpful online classes have been. We want these to be continued even after the lockdown,” said Priyadarshi.

Sisodia then asked if the teachers were ready for it and they replied in affirmative.

Delhi’s education minister also asked the teachers to share their experiences.

Arun Sethi, a commerce teacher, said, “I was concerned about teaching accountancy online. Use of animations and practicals, however, came in handy and now, students are loving the sessions.” “Directorate of education should start a YouTube channel,” suggested Nandini, an English teacher.

“We have a pool of teachers who join the classes as panellists. If there is an issue with one teacher’s network or system, another one takes over,” said Jyotshna, a teacher.

Sisodia congratulated the education team, and said, “We wanted minimum damage to the students during the lockdown, as they are the future of this country. I wanted to see how successful we have been so far in this journey.”

“I am a hawker, but I am glad that my children are studying well even during the lockdown. My daughter has cleared her CTET too,” said Raj Kumar Jha, father of Lokesh Nath Jha, a Class XII student.

Arvinder Kaur, a resident of Geeta Colony, said, “Yesterday’s activity was about how to help each other. Today’s activity involved teaching the children how to use water judiciously. The online content is good.”


