Only 1.5% of 1.3 lakh beds in Covid hospitals used
2020-05-10
NEW DELHI: Less than 1.5% of over 1.30 lakh hospital beds earmarked for Covid-19 patients across the country are currently being utilised and this could see, depending on trajectory of cases, a review of hospital preparedness plans that might free up some beds for non-Covid care, which has suffered in the last few months.

“Our hospitals are not overwhelmed as we have stepped up capacity during the lockdown. Most cases are mild and very few require hospitalisation. At present, only 1,000 to 2,000 beds are utilised out of over 1.30 lakh beds earmarked with ICU and oxygen support (which are a larger proportion),” a senior official said.

However, with the progress of the third phase of lockdown along with relaxations and movement of migrant workers back to their native villages, the government does not want to rush to change its plans and is likely to wait to see if there is a significant increase in the number of cases.

In dedicated hospitals, 99,000 beds have oxygen support and 35,000 are in ICUs. While most of the capacity is in the public sector, around 10% of the beds are in private hospitals, mostly in metros. At present, there are around 970 Covid-only hospitals for comprehensive treatment of severe and critical patients. Besides, there are around 2,300 Covid health centres – either full hospitals or dedicated blocks with oxygen support for clinically moderate patients.

“We are watching the situation very closely. A decision on escalation or de-escalation will be centered around utilisation. I think we will wait for some time and take a call on this by end of this month,” the official told TOI.

The Centre has received proposals from the private sector to build separate Covid hospitals, similar to what China has done. However, the government is yet to take a call on it. “Some private players have expressed interest. But in the current situation we do not see there is need for more infrastructure. The utilisation is very low. We hope, even going forward we do not need one,” the official said.

The health ministry data so far indicates less severity of the disease overall in India with only 1.1% of all Covid-19 patients on ventilators, 3.3% on medical oxygen and 4.8% in ICU beds. There are also 6.45 lakh isolation beds earmarked for Covid-19 suspected cases and patients across the country. While many of these isolation facilities are in the private sector including hotels, lodges and service apartments now joining in to utilise facilities, a lot of these facilities were initially created by governments – in both Centre and respective states.

Meanwhile, both Centre and state governments are also trying to convert some of these isolation beds in hospital set up to dedicated Covid care beds with comprehensive facilities like oxygen support etc.


