Only two in 10 patients in Karnataka show Covid-19 symptoms
2020-05-19
BENGALURU: A government analysis of all cases in Karnataka up to Monday shows only two of every 10 patients exhibit symptoms of Covid-19, while each positive patient spreads the infection to at least seven others.


Of the 1,246 cases as on Monday, 1,018 or 82% of patients were asymptomatic, and they have been found positive after mandatory tests because they either entered the state from outside, or were contacts of other positive patients.

When TOI last reported on this analysis on April 28, 369 or 73% of the 512 cases were asymptomatic on that day. This means that a majority of the cases added to the tally since then have been patients without any symptoms.

Experts, while stating that such a huge percentage of patients being asymptomatic is indicative of the virus’ presence across the state, however, said that there’s a silver lining.

"What such a high percentage of asymptomatic cases shows is that the immune system of the majority, especially healthy, young adults, is robust enough to overcome the virus. This means that we can now focus more on the vulnerable population," said Dr MK Sudharshan, a public health expert and member, Karnataka’s special Covid committee.

Another doctor said the virus is here to stay and while the overall positive cases are bound to increase, the fact that most people are recovering means the strategy must be to aggressively treat those patients who have other conditions too.

Results of another analysis conducted by the government show that as of Sunday morning (May 17), nearly 12% of all active patients in the state were categorised as high-risk. However, some districts like Gadag (43%), Chitradurga (37.5%), Dakshina Kannada (32%) and Kalaburagi (22.5%) had more high-risk patients than the state average.

"Yes, there will be some high-risk cases, those with respiratory disorders or influenza among other things. And we will need to start treating them aggressively and keep the number of deaths under control, which will be the priority," Sudharshan said.

"But even the number of high-risk patients is within acceptable limits. For instance, of the 550 beds in Victoria hospital, only about a 100 are occupied. This shows that most people are recovering without complications."

Further, an analysis by the state war room shows that on average, a single root patient infects about seven others, while those Covid patients with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) and influenza like illness (ILI) infect nearly 10 others.

And, those patients with domestic travel history infect about six people compared to the two patients with international travel history are infecting. As per the analysis, just 62 root patients from across the state spread the disease to 426 others. 


