Only those who test negative for Covid-19 will board planes for Gujarat
2020-05-09
AHMEDABAD: Even as the state government embarks on an exercise to bring back Gujaratis who are stranded in different countries because of the Covid-19 pandemic, only those persons who have a Covid-negative certificate will be allowed to embark planes that are headed for Gujarat.

Beginning Saturday, six flights are expected to reach Ahmedabad, carrying about 1,000 Gujaratis from different destinations across the globe.

In another significant decision, the state government has decided not to quarantine any of the persons who return by flights, in Ahmedabad or Surat. All the international passengers will have to go through a mandatory 14-day quarantine before they are allowed to go to their homes.

State government officials told TOI that the ministry of external affairs will decide on whom to bring back to Gujarat. “This is not a mass evacuation. Only those persons who have tested negative for Covid-19 will be allowed to embark on planes that are bound for Gujarat. Even those who are Covid-negative but are displaying any symptoms, will not be allowed,” said government sources. The airlines ferrying back Gujaratis from various locations have also been asked to provide an undertaking that all passengers are Covid-negative, sources said.

Sources in the government added, “Several places have been finalised where the international passengers will be kept under quarantine for 14 days. It has been decided not to keep them in Ahmedabad and Surat. Since the matter is sensitive, the locations are not being disclosed.” When asked if the government has finalised locations that will be paid and free, officials said that the state government is yet to take a decision on which facilities will be paid and which will be free.

The office of the district development officer has been entrusted with the task of screening of passengers who are returning from different locations. Passengers will be examined by a team of medical personnel on arrival at the airport, before being taken for the 14-day quarantine period. “Over 1,000 passengers are expected to arrive at Ahmedabad over the next five or six days,” district development officer Arun Mahesh Babu, said.


