‘Only 2 months to control Covid; rains, low temperature, high humidity will increase spread’
2020-04-24
Nagpur: Many have been conjecturing on the inter-relation between weather conditions and Covid-19 virus. In his latest study, Sharad M Dhanvijay, deputy director of Industrial Safety and Health, Nagpur, and a chemical engineer, reveals how the deadly coronavirus and different weather conditions are related in an interview with TOI. 


Is the rate of spreading coronavirus related to weather conditions?

Yes. The Covid-19 virus survives for longer in cold and humid conditions. To be specific, when the temperature is below 15 degree Celsius and relative humidity is above 35%.


Why is it so?

When you breathe, your body takes in oxygen from the air. When you breathe out, carbon dioxide is release into the air with moisture because your mouth and lungs are moist. When you exhale in cold conditions, the water in your breath gets condensed into tiny droplets of liquid, which lie on the surface. This condensation is a major cause behind spreading of the disease. Also, a sneeze produces 40,000 droplets and the drying rate of these droplets is very low, so is that of the virus.


Why are ‘not-so-cold’ cities like Mumbai witnessing high number of Covid-19 cases?

Even though Mumbai is not cold, the relative humidity there is very high. The virus takes moisture from the air to survive and hence spreads more. Apart from cold places like Russia, Italy etc the virus can also survive at places with high humidity like Dubai and coastal areas like Mumbai. Even if a coronavirus patient talks, he can spread the virus though air at such places.


What is the risk of spreading of virus in Central India?

Places like Nagpur, Akola, Chandrapur etc have dry atmospheric conditions, and hence the risk of spreading the virus is comparatively low. Here, the relative humidity is lower and the temperature is above 35 degree Celsius. The spread of Covid-19 is low as the drying rate of the virus is very fast.


So does that mean people living in the region should not worry?

No. We just have April and May to control the situation. Once June comes, the relative humidity in the air will begin to increase with the rains, temperatures will go down, and thus the spread of the virus would increase.


Despite the lockdown, the number of positive cases is on a rise. What can be an effective solution to curb the pandemic?

All Covid-19 patients should be treated in an isolated space like a stadium. The atmospheric condition of that enclosed space should be low humidity (below 33%) and high temperature (above 35 degree Celsius) so that the rate of virus spread will be low, and patients will recover faster. Doctors and nurses should be present there 24x7 and all essentials should be provided from outside, without any person entering the premises. Once a patient recovers, he should be kept in quarantine for 14 days. We only have two months to act when the climatic conditions are favourable for us.


