Covid-19: Only a few courtrooms to stay functional at Delhi high court this week
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: Taking more drastic steps to reduce crowds, the Delhi high court on Monday adjourned all non-urgent cases listed before it this week to mid-April.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Due to the threat posed by the novel coronavirus and feedback received from the bar association that despite an advisory issued last week, lawyers and litigants have continued to come to the court, the senior-most judges of the court decided to adjourn all pending matters till mid-April.

As an interim measure, the court has further limited its working to fewer benches this week, till March 20, with only a select few courtrooms functional, where judges will take up urgent matters that require intervention. The new roster has been uploaded on the court website.

Last week, top judges of the high court had met and issued various directions restricting its functioning. On Monday, the court passed fresh directives after another emergency meeting of the high court’s Administrative and General Supervision Committee headed by Chief Justice D N Patel. It was attended by president Mohit Mathur and secretary Abhijat of the high court bar association to review steps taken “to contain the spread of pandemic coronavirus.”

Almost similar to how the high court works during vacations, the new roster lays down that on March 17 and 19, four division benches, four single-judge benches for civil jurisdiction and three single judge benches each for criminal and original jurisdiction will hear “only urgent matters.” Similarly, on March 18 and 20, three division benches, three single-judge benches for civil jurisdiction and three single-judge benches each for criminal and original jurisdiction would function. In the normal course, a total of 26 benches sit for hearing all types of cases.

The high court has also designated two joint registrars to determine which cases classify to be treated as urgent matters and listed them before the courts.

Monday saw most judges sit briefly in court where they heard cases that needed immediate attention, else deferred hearing. However, certain courts conducted routine hearings if the lawyers for both sides agreed to argue. 


