Bhilwara fights back, just one Covid-19 case in 9 days
2020-04-09
JAIPUR: In the last nine days, only a single Covid-19 case has been reported from Bhilwara, which was once dubbed as India’s coronavirus hotbed. However, health authorities are alert and are adopting a wait-and-watch policy till April 12. 

The last case, number 27th in the city, was reported on April 4. Tbe patient had come for treatment at the OPD of a private hospital, which was the epicentre of the outbreak. Since March 30, only a single case had been reported. 

As on Wednesday, the district administration was yet to take any significant decision. “The situation keeps changing every day. So, we have decided to wait and watch till April 12. We plan our strategy depending on the situation,” Rajendra Bhatt, district collector (Bhilwara) told TOI. 

On April 13, the second phase of ‘ruthless’ containment in Bhilwara is going to end. The first phase started on March 20, a day after the first case of Covid-19 was reported from a private hospital in Bhilwara. 

The first phase continued for 14 days and ended on April 3. During these two weeks, the district administration had imposed curfew in Bhilwara and sealed boundaries to restrict movement of the people. However, during that period, they continued supplying essentials daily. 

From April 3, they enforced curfew with more restrictions. Grocery items were supplied only once in each ward from April 3 till date. The district administration prepared a timetable and set a time for supply of items at the doorsteps of people to prevent them from venturing out. 

Teams from Jaipur and Udaipur have been camping in Bhilwara. These teams helped the local authorities in making the containment a success. 

Dr Romel Singh, who came from Jaipur and was appointed the nodal officer for Covid-19 containment said, “When we came here, there was a lot of work to do, which became possible with help of police and health department. Ruthless containment model became a success as all the departments came together to work for the same cause. 

The state government has taken a decision to set up a laboratory in Bhilwara's government hospital. A health department official said they had set up a laboratory for Covid-19 testing and now they require ICMR nod for starting the facility. Currently, they send their samples to the government-run medical college in Udaipur.


