Onus on community to stop Covid-19 spread in Tamil Nadu
2020-06-08
CHENNAI: With Tamil Nadu’s Covid-19 graph continuing its surge, chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami on Sunday appealed to the people for their cooperation to check community transmission. “Strict lockdown measures were imposed with the sole aim of ensuring that Tamil Nadu does not succumb to community spread,” the CM said in an eight-page open letter, outlining the measure in the state’s battle against Covid.




“I am well aware that people abided by the government’s appeal — to maintain social distance, to remain alert and to stay indoors,” he said. Later, in the evening, in a televised address, the CM repeated the fervent plea for people’s help. His appeal came on a day when the state’s Covid numbers soared to 31,667 and crossed the single day count of 1,515. The number of people who died of Covid was 18 taking the total death toll in the state to 269. He thanked the people, stressing the fact that their support, despite troubles due to lockdown, mattered a lot in this fight.

“While frequent cleaning of hands is of utmost importance, at home as well as at workplaces, people should desist from going out without reason. If they have to step out, they should always wear a mask and ensure social distance is maintained,” he said.

Due to the combined efforts, the number of people getting discharged and returning to their homes in Tamil Nadu is the highest in India. The number of deaths in the state, in terms of percentage, is the lowest not just in India but the world, the chief minister said, thanking the medical fraternity and health workers for their untiring efforts. The state, right from the beginning, believed that testing more people was the key. “Until June 4, we conducted 5.5 lakh tests and only because of this we were able to determine that 86% of those who tested positive were asymptomatic,” the CM said.

The chief minister said Tamil Nadu government has spent over Rs 4,333 crore till June 4 for the welfare of the people and in its fight against Covid. The contribution to the CM’s Relief Fund for fighting the Covid pandemic has crossed Rs 378 crore till June 3, he said. 


