Andhra Pradesh on alert as Covid-19 suspect cases rise
2020-03-05
In Andhra Pradesh, the government is on high alert as there is a spurt in the suspected cases of Coronavirus. On Wednesday, 11 new cases were reported from Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam, East and West Godavari and Krishna districts. 


The suspects with fever and cold have been quarantined. All of them had a history of recent travel to foreign countries. The state government has so far screened 262 persons with symptoms of Coronavirus and quarantined them. Of them, 170 have completed the two-week quarantine with no Coronavirus infection. As many as 92 people are kept under isolation at their homes and their reports are yet to be received.

However, Andhra Pradesh has not reported any positive case of Coronavirus thus far. On Wednesday the state government received reports of the 11 samples it had sent to virology labs in Hyderabad and Pune recently and all the 11 cases tested negative. Officials are on the look out for passengers who travelled by bus with the suspected cases reported on Wednesday.

A techie from Vijayawada, who returned from Germany recently, was admitted to the isolation ward in Government General Hospital (GGH) on suspicion of Covid-19 infection. He has been suffering from cough, cold and flu symptoms for the last few days. The techie working in Hyderabad recently came back from Germany after staying there for 17 days.

In West Godavari district, two people with coronavirus symptoms were admitted to isolation ward in Government Hospital at Eluru. In all three cases, swab samples have been sent to Regional Virology Centre at Gandhi Hospital in Hyderabad.

In Visakhapatnam, the three passengers from Kuala Lumpur were sent to the Government Hospital for Chest and Communicable Diseases (GHCCD). Two more people with Coronavirus symptoms were also admitted in GHCCD. Three cases of suspected Covid-19 were reported from Srikakulam. They had returned home from Kuwait.

Dr Sankara Rao, district coordinator of health services, West Godavari, said a person from B Kondepudi village came from Muscat where he used to work in a cloth showroom on February 18. He said he was doing well when he returned and went Razole in East Godavari district after five days. 

By the time he came back to his village, the suspect had developed fever and cough. Later, his father-in-law too showed similar symptoms. Both were admitted to isolation wards at Government Hospital in Eluru. 

