Opposition divided on imposing lockdown again
2020-06-13
PATNA: As the number of coronavirus cases has been increasing in Bihar and Jharkhand, Congress has demanded strict restrictions in the two states. Congress is a partner in Jharkhand government.

“Bihar needs complete lockdown. After Unlock 5.0, there is a feeling that there is no need to fear as coronavirus has gone. In Bihar, even the health infrastructure is poor and the problem will further increase. Government has to rethink now, because we are already in community spread stage though the government will never accept this,” said Congress MLC Prem Chandra Mishra. He demanded more Covid-19 tests in state.

Opposition RJD also demanded more tests and accused the government of hiding the actual figures. However, unlike Congress, it said complete lockdown was no solution as it will hamper the economy and daily wage earners. RJD national vice-president Shivanand Tiwari, instead, suggested the state government to enhance health infrastructure and increase ICU capacity to fight coronavirus.

“Even Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal once boasted of his preparations to tackle Covid-19. But look at the situation there today. They are running short of beds now. Bihar government should start preparing for extra beds and ventilators,” Tiwari said.

He said even though people were told to follow social distancing norms, it was practically not possible. “How can people living in slum and small shanty follow social distancing norm,” he added.

RLSP national secretary general and spokesperson Fazal Imam Mallick said the government should be stricter as people are coming out in large number in public places and many without masks after Unlock 5.0. “Both lockdown and unlocking were done in an unplanned manner. Opening all the markets and shops without time restrictions is not safe. State government should rethink as cases are multiplying fast. Shops and markets should be opened on alternate day and for certain period,” said Fazal.

He accused the government of intentionally leaving everyone free to roam because of election. “Elections can be held only when people will survive. The priority now should be saving life and an all-party meet should be called to discuss this issue,” he said.

While opposition parties blamed the state government for failing to tackle the situation, ruling JD(U) and BJP said the situation was being monitored on a daily basis. “There are relaxations as well as restrictions in different sectors. CM Nitish Kumar is himself monitoring it. There are restrictions in containment zones. Government will take whatever necessary measures are required as per the need. But we cannot go back to lockdown days,” said JD(U) spokesperson Rajiv Ranjan Prasad.

BPJ spokesperson Nikhil Anand said, “State government is taking necessary steps to check the coronavirus spread. But at the same time, we request political parties not to create panic among masses by playing petty politics.” 


