Order returns on Day 2 of lockdown 3.0
2020-05-06
Bhubaneswar/Cuttack/Sambalpur: After chaos marked Day I of the third phase of lockdown, things were more organised on the second day with several shops in market complexes remaining closed while standalone shops were seen abiding by social distancing norms.

Shops selling tea and betel nuts kept the shutters down while those selling groceries and similar shops have drawn circles outside their facilities and were seen asking customers to follow lockdown protocols.

“We are ready to cooperate with the administration but they need to be clear in which area they need our cooperation. There were confusions yesterday but today we know what to do. Everyone is terrified of the virus and are ready to do whatever is required to stay safe,” said Bimal Mahapatra, a hardware shop owner near Kochilai Haat in Rasulgarh area of Bhubaneswar.

But there were still some who were seen flouting social distancing norms. A range of shops in different parts of the city including those selling motor parts, scrap dealers, sanitary and furniture shops were seen gathering their customers to strike deals.

“We have a number of orders which couldn’t be cleared due to the lockdown. As we are open now, customers have started showing up and we have no other option but to talk to them. I asked my customers to maintain distance and everyone is using a mask. I don’t see any threat here,” said the owner of a sanitary shop on Cuttack-Puri Road.

Vehicular movement has also gone down in the state capital on Tuesday, but motorists, particularly those on two-wheelers, were seen riding pillion in contravention to the order issued by the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC).

“Enforcement officials are on move in the city and are penalising those found to be violating the lockdown norms. The commissionerate police is also closing down shops in the evening in line with the curfew norms. The situation is mostly under control,” a senior BMC official said.

In Cuttack, where business was almost usual, Barabati Cuttack MLA Mohammed Moquim staged a silent protest inside his residence against the Cuttack Municipal Corporation (CMC) decision to open liquor shops. Though the CMC has allowed opening of liquor shops, no shop has started opened yet.

Moquim said opening of liquor shops is the biggest threat to family life during the lockdown period. “More and more people will now consume liquor which will aggravate domestic violence in such a difficult time,” he said.

Sambalpur, which witnessed a slow start to the third phase of lockdown, was buzzing with activities on Tuesday after the district administration made the relaxation guidelines public on Monday evening.

Though Sambalpur district has been catagorised as green zone, activities largely remained suspended due to confusion on the first day of the third phase of lockdown.

Apart from the shops selling essential commodities, many other business establishments including garment stores, shops selling jewellery, footwear shops, steel and aluminium utensils, sanitary, hardware stores, electronics and electrical fittings, computer and mobile stores as well as stationary shops were found opened in the city on Tuesday.

Though the buses did not ply, auto-rickshaws were seen moving on the roads. Many people were also seen coming out of their houses wearing masks to purchase necessary items.

The district administration has issued notice that shops and market establishments can remain open from 7 am to 2 pm. This apart, grocery stories and milk booths can remain open from 7 am to 2 pm and 4 pm to 7 pm. Earlier, they were allowed to stay open from 7 am to 12 noon.

EoM


