Coronavirus scare in Patna: Ordered to vacate hostels, students leave for homes
2020-03-18
PATNA: Students staying in hostels across the city are leaving for their homes after the district administration asked all hostels in Patna, including private ones, to be vacated till March 31 as a precautionary measure against the coronavirus (Covid-19).


Coronavirus in India live updates

Several hostels in the state capital, including at NIT and IIT campuses, on Tuesday issued notices to their boarders to vacate within two days following the directive from Patna DM Kumar Ravi.

However, the NIT and IIT administrations have kept the hostels open for students from far off places. “If anyone wants to stay in the hostel, they can stay on as the mess will remain open,” an NIT official said.

Niranjan, an electrical engineering student of NIT, said, “Many students returned to their homes whereas roughly 50 students are still staying who belong to other states.” Since he is from the city, Niranjan returned home after the classes were dismissed.

Rukmini Devi, who runs a girls’ hostel in Makhaniya Kuan, said, “Students have been asked to lock their rooms properly and fill the entry/exit register. They have also been asked to take the print of leave slip, which is required to be filled up by their parents.”

Several boarders living in hostels on Govind Mitra Road, Makhaniya Kuan, Naya Tola, Dariyapur and Boring Road were seen leaving for their home with their baggage.

Manju Singh, a post-graduate student of Patna University, said, “My home is in Vaishali but I would be able to reach only by March 18 as all buses are going full. We have decided to hire a vehicle. My cousin is coming from Delhi and we would go together after she reaches here by evening,” she said.

Another woman boarder of a private hostel, Roshni Agarwal, said, “We will leave in the morning, I got confirmed train tickets to Siwan. I also bought a simple mask as medically recommended masks are out of stock. We will carry boiled water and sanitizer on train.”

Smriti Kumari, a Boring Canal Road hostel boarder who is preparing for medical entrance tests, is leaving for Nalanda with her friends after they were asked to vacate by Thursday. “The coaching classes were already suspended, so there is no need to stay in the hostel. My parents are asking me to return home, so I’m going back,” she said.

Mohan Bhardwaj, an UPSC aspirant who lives in a private hostel in Naya Tola plans to stay with his local guardian. “My parents live in Palamu and it is not safe to go for such a long journey. I have moved to my local guardian’s place till the situation gets better, then I will move back to my hostel,” he said.


