Organisers to go ahead with Panaji Shigmo amid Covid-19 concerns
2020-03-14
Panaji: The much awaited Shigmo parade in the state capital is expected to be held on Saturday evening after a hiatus of one year. The Panaji parade was cancelled last year following the demise of chief minister Manohar Parrikar.

The Panaji Shigmotsav Samiti decided to go ahead with the parade on Saturday evening. When asked about health issues in the wake of the Covid-19, ex-officio chairman Sanjit Rodrigues said precautions and advisories issued by the health ministry and disseminated to people must be followed. 

Following a meeting held by the Panaji Shigmotsav Samiti with all troupe leaders on Friday morning, Rodrigues said the Shigmo parade should abide by rules and avoid any violation of the code of conduct currently in force due to the zilla panchayat elections scheduled for March 22. 

“In the midst of an election code, timing is a serious issue. We should abide by the timing. We would not be able to support any violation of the timings with the code enforced. In the meeting with all troupe leaders, we impressed upon them to start at 4.30pm sharp and finish at 10pm - the time allotted by the administration,” Rodrigues said.

Addressing the media after the meeting, Rodrigues said that lack of discipline on the parade route as well as delay in timing will destroy the charm of the festival. “It’s almost inhuman to keep people - elders and young kids - waiting beyond midnight. The committee took this into consideration. A lot of representations have been received regarding timings and discipline along the route,” he said.

Each troupe will have one volunteer and police constable with them to maintain the time and rhythm of the parade flow, he added. 

“Members of the committee are also keen that timing is followed because this inconveniences everybody, both the organisers and spectators,” Rodrigues said.

The parade route has been shortened by 1km and will follow the Caculo island - 18th June route, and turn left on the Azad Maidan stretch along Swami Vivekananda road from Panaji municipal corporation office junction. The old route along Panaji municipal garden and MG road to Azad Maidan will not be used. 

The committee instructed those transporting floats from South Goa to bring their floats past midnight to avoid any traffic congestion on the Zuari bridge that is already stressed with ongoing work and single laning.


