West Bengal: Orthopaedic surgeon with Covid-19 dies, second doctor death in 2 days
2020-04-28
KOLKATA: Orthopaedic surgeon Sisir Mandal (69), who had tested positive for Covid-19, died at AMRI Hospital on Monday evening. A day earlier, Biplab Kanti Dasgupta, assistant director health services (equipment and stores), died after he contracted the novel coronavirus. The state government has started scouting for a hospital for the treatment of frontline Covid-19 warriors exclusively. So far, more than 60 healthcare workers in Bengal have tested positive, most of whom have been undergoing treatment, with some being cured and discharged. 

Associated with Belle Vue Clinic for more than four decades, Mandal was admitted to the hospital two weeks ago and shifted to AMRI a day after he tested positive. He suffered a steady deterioration over the past one week in the course of which, he suffered a cardiac arrest and went into coma. Mandal suffered multi-organ failure and was put on ventilation but he could not be revived. 

“This is a pandemic and healthcare workers fighting the battle upfront are at the risk of getting infected. That is why we feel the need for an exclusive facility for treating doctors, nurses and paramedics who are contracting the virus while performing their duty,” said a Swasthya Bhawan official. Sources said that once the hospital is finalised, the unit will run with manpower and expertise support from SSKM Hospital. The hospital has been already been told to keep a pool of doctors, including senior faculty members, ready to be deputed at the exclusive facility.

While recently earmarking ILS Hospital in Salt Lake and Ohio Hospital in New Town as Covid-treatment facilities, the government had initially planned to keep the New Town unit for health workers. A series of talks followed between health officials and IPGMER officials, who were even told to prepare a medical team to be deputed in New Town. “The plan was to designate the New Town hospital exclusively for healthcare workers. A team from SSKM was supposed to be roped in. But the number of beds there is too few,” said a health official. According to a source, the hospital has only 100 beds and the number will go down even further if distancing has to be maintained. 

A few days ago, Medical College and Hospital junior doctors had complained their colleagues, who had tested positive, were not being given enough medical attention. “Keeping the morale of these young doctors high is important as they are the frontline warriors. We are looking for an alternative,” said another health official. 


