Osmanabad takes lead in battling Covid-19
2020-05-06
Aurangabad: Osmanabad district implemented a host of measures to successfully tackle the Covid-19 pandemic and earn the tag of ‘green zone.’ Besides being the only district in Marathwada region to have earned the Central government’s coveted title, it is also one of the six districts in the state to have earned this distinction. 

As on date, nearly all economic activities have started in Osmanabad with the necessary safeguards as per the guidelines of the Central and state governments. District collector Deepal Mudhol-Munde and superintendent of police Raj Tilak Roushan took all the efforts to make the district Covid-19 free. The duo moved the entire government machinery and also ensured that essential commodities were home-delivered to the last house situated in the remotest area of the district. 

In addition, large-scale registration of cases against violators of lockdown norms, seizure of vehicles, slapping fines and dedicated police teams to check on messages and rumours inciting hatred in social media played a key role. Moreover, the district police even started dedicated 24 hour-helpline numbers for the public at each police station, apart from the five independent numbers made available for reaching out to the police control room for any assistance.

When contacted, Roushan said, “We strictly checked and screened everyone entering the district at all the 30 border check posts manually as well as with the help of drones. We especially kept an eye on those travelling from districts bordering Osmanabad like Ahmednagar, Solapur, Beed, Latur and Bidar in Karnataka.” 

Police also used first-of-its-kind geo-fencing technology to monitor people in quarantine. A dedicated team was also formed to take action against people not wearing masks or observing social distancing in public. 

On April 2, two people tested positive for Covid-19 in Dhanori and Balsur villages of Lohara and Omerga blocks respectively. The third case cropped up on April 5 from Omerga city.

Collector Deepa told TOI, “At gram-panchayat level, we formed Gram Suraksha Dals. The volunteers of these groups ensured no new person entered the villages. This was followed by quarantining every person coming from outside the district for 14 days in our zilla parishad schools and hostels. They were allowed to go home only after they underwent screening again.”

The district administration ran several mobile fever clinics, where all the suspected people from a particular village underwent screening. Active and passive surveillance of the patients who have recovered, their high and low-risk contacts and hundreds of other susceptible people were provided with immunity booster kits. Daily collection of data from private and government hospitals helped the administration to a great extent. 

The district even successfully observed five Janta curfews, apart from the strict implementation of the lockdown orders, that has helped break the chain of the virus and has made the district Covid-19 free. 


