Other metros proactive, Chennai streets show no signs of Covid-19 panic
2020-03-15
CHENNAI: Residents of Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Thiruvananthapuram have become extremely cautious about attending public gatherings and social functions as part of measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. In Chennai, however, life is normal either due to ignorance or indifference, encouraged largely by the Tamil Nadu government’s reassurance that all is well.


Saturday in the city was like on any other weekend. The government and health experts may have advised people against going to large gatherings and to maintain at least three meters distance between one another, but huge crowds thronged Ranganathan Street and other shopping hubs in T Nagar.

At most malls, some wore masks but a large majority was content with washing hands or using the sanitiser at the security check.

"Malls and theatres are functioning as usual. So, people will visit," said Arun Kumar, who was at a mall. "I am keeping myself safe, but I don’t think the situation in Chennai warrants a complete shutdown," he added. Such confidence seems to stem from the absence of any proactive preventive measures by the state.

Going by the way in which passengers are screened at Chennai airport, the authorities should be more cautious, said an official with an airline. 

On Friday, a passenger who arrived from the Netherlands was out of the airport in a jiffy as there was very little screening in terms of questions and health checks. 

"The authorities are depending on self-declaration by passengers. Detailed questions are asked and quarantine being advised only if the traveller is from China or Italy," said an official.

C Jeshma, a student, said she was avoiding unnecessary travel and was not going to malls. "I am taking all precautions. I am using a sanitiser and washing my hands frequently," she said, adding that is better to be safe. "The state government can be a little more strict."

Authorities at railway stations have been doing their bit, disinfecting the premises regularly, while star hotels check temperature of visitors. 

Chennai metro rail plans to disinfect its stations at the airport and near Central station for two days after services for the day are completed.

Still, the level of precautions has not reached the scale of efforts being taken in neighbouring capital cities. For instance, all theatres, malls and pubs in Bengaluru are shut till March-end.

