Out of 27 Covid-19 positive contacts of Baldev, 8 test negative
2020-04-06
Nawanshahr: Seven Covid-19 positive patients – all contacts of late Baldev Singh of Pathlawa village, who was the first Covid casualty in Punjab – tested negative on Sunday, including 78-year-old Sant Gurbachan Singh. Four grandchildren of Baldev Singh tested positive on Sunday while his son has been declared cured after his second sample also tested negative.

The negative reports came as a big relief for the family as well as for the village and people greeted each other. “All these days, the mood was gloomy after Baldev Singh’s death. While people are still mourning his death there was great anxiety about the health of others who had tested positive,” said village resident Harpreet Singh. It also came as a huge relief for the district administration and health department. The village was sealed on March 18 just after health department got suspicious that Baldev Singh could have corona infection even as he was rushed to Civil Hospital Banga with typical symptoms of heart attack. 

Sant Gurbachan Singh of Pathlawa village and Daljinder Singh, 60, of Jhikka village were late Baldev Singh’s co-travellers to Germany and Italy and former was the eldest in the 27 contacts of Covid-19 victim who tested positive. Another contact, Harbhajan Singh, in his 60s, from Moranwali village had died at Government Medical College in Amritsar. He was also diabetic. Another elder patient is Sarpanch Harpal Singh’s 75 year old mother. “She is also doing fine. We only had mild symptoms like some cough. The reports today has come as a huge relief for all of us,” said Harpal Singh, while speaking to TOI on phone from the isolation ward civil hospital Nawanshahr. “The family is still in trauma as all things came together — death of their patriarch, then all of them testing positive and then vilification campaign against the dead patient,” he added.

After Baldev Singh tested positive on March 19, state government pressed the panic button. Nawanshahr DC Vinay Bublani took the initiative of issuing orders under 144 of CrPC making violating of home quarantine, advised to anybody, an offence and later the model was followed across the state. 


