Out of office: Lockdown checks corruption cases in public departments
2020-06-08
VISAKHAPATNAM: One of the unintended beneficial consequences of the over two-month lockdown has been the drop in corruption in government offices in the state. As functioning of various departments slowed down and many officials took to working from home, cases of bribery and disproportionate assets also fell.




Officials of the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB), Andhra Pradesh unit said that between March 23 and June 7, no case of bribery or disproportionate asset was registered.

In contrast, the bureau had registered 19 trap cases (nabbing a public servant for demanding and accepting illegal gratification, such as a bribe) and nine cases of disproportionate assets from January to March 20 across its various units in the state. 

The ACB had registered its last case on March 20 after laying a trap for and nabbing one A Somayya, a village revenue officer (VRO) Gunnampalli village under Dwaraka Tirumala mandal in West Godavari district for demanding and accepting a bribe of Rs 8,000 from a farmer for processing and issuing a pattadar passbook. The bureau had also registered a number of cases following surprise checks and enquiries prior to the lockdown.

Speaking to TOI, director general of ACB, Andhra Pradesh, P Sitarama Anjaneyulu said since a majority of government offices have been closed due to the lockdown, there have been no transactions in departments such as registration, municipal and revenue, and hence no complaints from the public.

“Some of the government departments have resumed operations from the past one week and we may receive complaints against corrupt public servants in the coming days. If we receive complaints, we will trap and nab the corrupt officials,” Anjaneyulu added.

A senior officer said the state unit of ACB had registered 243 cases, including trap, disproportionate assets, criminal misconduct, regular enquiries, surprise checks and discreet enquiries, in 2019. In the same year, the highest number of cases (36) were registered against personnel of the revenue department, followed by staff of the home department at 11 cases and nine cases against the municipal department.

On an average, the ACB register seven to eight trap cases and three to four cases of disproportionate assets every month.


