Out on streets, veggie vendors increase chance of virus spread
2020-04-21
Indore: It seems like rules are meant to be broken, even if it puts lives on the line. Despite a check and restriction on sale of vegetables and fruits, vendors and hawkers continue to sell vegetables flouting curfew norms. 

The no-care-for-the-law attitude is portrayed by the number of complaints against such vendors and subsequent action by Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC). 

Official sources said that vendors engaged in sale of vegetables and fruits are not ready to understand, and even after facing action, they are found selling vegetables in residential areas, especially those located in the outskirts. 

The practice is rampant in areas like Kanadia Road, Kalani Nagar, Banganga, Kushwaha Nagar, Mangliya, Scheme-114, Dewas naka etc. 

“Vendors are selling vegetables only in the outskirts, where there is less risk of being caught by police and IMC,” they said adding that these vendors are not aware of the risk of catching coronavirus while they go out and deal with customers. 

In a latest incident, the corporation on Sunday caught one such vendor in Goyal Nagar, who was found selling vegetables from his home. A complaint in this regard was received at police control room and the same was forwarded to IMC control room. 

When a team of IMC reached the area and caught the vendor with vegetables, he started arguing with officials. His entire stock was seized by IMC. On Saturday, a vendor of Gurunanak Palace at Ward-74 was selling vegetables from his godown. The corporation seized over two trucks of vegetables from the area. 

IMC’s enforcement wing officials also admitted about the issues and said that number of complaints against such vendors have gone up in last one week. 

“We have formed 12 teams to conduct surprise checks across city. Seven of these teams make rounds in city during early morning and remaining move during afternoon hours,” said wing in charge Virendra Upadhyay while adding that the action against such vendors will continue.


