Over 60 Rims staff exposed to virus
2020-04-26
Ranchi: After three dozen staff of the Rims gynaecology department were exposed to coronavirus infection, when they helped deliver the child of a Covid-19 patient, without taking up any preventive measures, over 60 health workers of the same department on Saturday find themselves at risk of contracting the virus after they delivered the child of another coronavirus positive woman. In both the cases, the health workers had treated the patients without any precautionary measures as they had concealed their address — Hindpiri — the epicentre of Covid-19 outbreak in the city.

The doctors, who treated the patients, said the gynaecology department functions for emergency services to keep the hospital running during the pandemic and the health workers work without personal protection kits (PPE). Suspected patients, including for delivery of pregnant women, are sent to the isolation ward by the Covid task force of the hospital. In the first case, the woman tested positive on Thursday.

Saturday’s incident has sent panic waves among the staff of the department, who had been demanding personal protective kits, to treat each and every patient. In the incident, more than 60 health workers, including senior and junior resident doctors, MBBS interns, nursing staff and a trolley man, had attended to the woman, who tested positive on Friday night. The woman had undergone caesarean section on Monday night and was provided post-operation care by the hospital staff, thus exposing to the viral infection.

The gynaecology department staff have alleged serious irregularities in the functioning of the Covid-19 task force and wrote a letter to Rims director Dr D K Singh regarding the irregularities along with demand for immediate sealing of the department for the next two weeks, its sanitization, sending all high risk staff in 14-day quarantine, collection of samples of all those who had come in contact with the patients for testing, provision of PPE to all health workers and formulate a plan as per the guidelines to separate Covid-19 patients.

Talking to TOI, Rims director Singh said, “We have sent all those exposed to the quarantine centre for the next two weeks and operations at the gynaecology department have been suspended for now. We are also sanitizing the whole area and people who have had come in contact will be screened and their samples will be tested.”

A senior resident doctor, who performed the surgery on the patient, said, “I along with my team members operated on the 25-year-old woman on Monday night after she was admitted to the gynaecology department with labour pain. I have also taken post-op follow-up on the patient for the next three days till she was discharged. The moment I was informed that the woman was tested positive on Friday night, I got scared, not only for myself, but also for my family as I was in regular contact with them.”

A few senior doctors, including assistant and associate professors, rued that their students have to bear the brunt due to the mismanagement by Covid-19 task force. They said the task force has not been co-operative to all their requests. 

“I along with a few colleagues had met medical superintendent Dr Vivek Kashyap a couple of weeks ago, demanding PPE for doctors and nursing staff, but not only our demands were rejected but the superintendent didn’t even hear our requests and asked us to do our duties. Why should we be risking our lives if the administration doesn’t want to help us?” said a junior resident, who had attended to both of the positive patients. 

Dr Kashyap did not responded to calls for his comments on the charges.

The head of gynaecology department, Dr Anubha Vidyarthi said, “My whole team is working round-the-clock and is providing services to anyone who is visiting the department. The junior doctors didn’t refuse to attend to anyone even after they hid their hotspot address. But I am disappointed by the manner in which my whole department was put at risk due to the administration’s lack of guidelines and screening protocols.”

Dr Vidyarthi added that Rims has now issued PPE kits after her request following Thursday’s incident, but rued that her staff were already exposed before the gear arrived.


