Odisha: Over 200 arrested for flouting lockdown order
2020-03-26
BHUBANESWAR: More than 200 persons were arrested and 80 vehicles seized across the state in the past three days for allegedly violating the lockdown order of the state government. In Bhubaneswar, the commissionerate police on Wednesday shamed the offenders by making them do sit-ups.


Among those arrested are shopkeepers selling non-essential commodities and three grooms who were getting married amid massive congregations. Police booked the arrested persons under Section 188 (disobedience of government order) of the Indian Penal Code. Almost all of them were subsequently granted bail.

Police did not slap other stringent sections of the IPC as the mass arrests might lead to overcrowding in jails.

Between Tuesday and Wednesday, police registered 137 cases, related to violation of lockdown across the state.

“We have been requesting people to stay indoors at this time of crisis. Only emergency service providers, including doctors, are exempt during the lockdown period. The SPs have been asked to ensure the free movement of healthcare personnel and other emergency service providers. Those who come out on the streets unnecessarily in defiance of the lockdown order are facing action as per law,” senior police officer said.

The senior cop has been holding video-conference with the SPs almost every day to know the status of the enforcement and awareness drives undertaken by the police. Though no arrests for the disobedience of the lockdown order have been made in Bhubaneswar so far, police caught some persons who were moving on the streets for fun. “We warned those irresponsible persons and asked them to do sit-ups by holding their ears. They apologized after being shamed publicly and pledged to support the government’s lockdown order,” Nirmal Satapathy, a senior police officer said.

The Keonjhar district police are also planning to punish lockdown violators through public shaming. “We are planning to have a hall of shame of #COVIDIOTS who wander unnecessarily and argue with law enforcing authorities,” read a tweet by the Keonjhar district police.


