Over 70% of Solapur and Satara Covid-19 patients asymptomatic
2020-05-01
Kolhapur: The data from the health departments in Solapur and Satara revealed that over 70% of the Covid-19 cases, identified until Tuesday (April 28) night, were asymptomatic. Solapur has a roughly 72% asymptomatic rate, while Satara has recorded around 71% cases as asymptomatic.The positive cases that do not have any symptoms (asymptomatic) pose a greater challenge to the administration, as such patients are difficult to identify. One can only know about them via tracing or testing.Until Tuesday night, the Satara district had registered 41 Covid-19 cases, while Solapur district had registered 68. In both districts, the percentage of asymptomatic cases was above 70.Satara district health officer Aniruddha Athalye told TOI the fact that there is no way to identify the asymptomatic persons — who can be carriers — remains one of the biggest hurdles in containing the contagion. The only way to identify a positive case is to trace earlier positive patient’s close contacts, put them in isolation facility, collect their throat swab samples, and wait for the results.“Citizens too need to cooperate if they know about the travel history of any person so that he/she can be identified at a very early stage. Asymptomatic carriers roaming around freely in their communities can result in many more infection cases. Therefore, citizens need to be aware of their surroundings,” Athalye added.According to the district health officer, they have devised a treatment protocol depending on the patients’ condition. If the patient is young and asymptomatic, there is nothing to worry about as the chances of his/her recovery are higher. However, if the patient is over 60 years with the comorbidities, then it can be a serious challenge.Solapur district health officer Bhimashankar Jamadar said added that they are heavily dependent on the contact tracing of the close contacts. And since the number of asymptomatic patients is higher at Solapur, it has been a very hectic work for the health department there. He said a door-to-door survey is of no use if the patient is asymptomatic.