Over 1L RSS men helping 10L families beat lockdown woes
2020-04-14
Nagpur: The city-based Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), which is always at the forefront in helping needy during natural or man-made tragedies across the country, has pressed its massive volunteer base into providing relief to the poor, needy and migrants in the wake of mega crisis due to nationwide lockdown because of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak.

According to RSS sahakaryawah Suresh (Bhaiyyaji) Joshi, over one lakh Sangh volunteers are working in about 10,000 villages across the country providing food and other essential items to the needy. They’re also facilitating medical aid to villagers by helping them reach doctors.

“Today, we’re passing through an unprecedented crisis. Entire world is shaken by this catastrophe which is one of the biggest threats humans have ever faced. Only solution to get away from this deadly virus is to strictly follow directives like social distancing issued by the government and doctors. Our activists have so far reached about 10 lakh families in one or the other way to help them out,” he said.

“As and when need arises, more of our volunteers would come forward to serve the nation selflessly. In Maharashtra, they’ve reached migrants at various places and made arrangements of food and water for their families. About 1,000 of them have also donated blood,” Joshi said.

Expressing confidence that spread of the deadly virus would come under control and normalcy could be returned, he advised people to continue exercising restraint during the lockdown period.

“We all need to make a resolution that we would abide by all diktats along with rules and regulations as directed by the government to get away from this disaster. In the present scenario, there cannot be any fixed criteria on what kind of help would be required. We all should ready ourselves for helping anyone in any circumstances in whatever way we can,” he told activists.

Asserting that citizens in general have acknowledged the saffron organization’s contribution to the nation during such calamities, Joshi exhorted people to join them in this noble task.

“We’re unable to gauge magnitude of this crises at the moment, but we all should come together to fight the scourge with courage, conviction and hard work. If we face this problem unitedly, it would help in getting over the problem early. In next two weeks, we all should work hard to help each other. We also need to spread awareness and include all members of the society in this fight against the invisible enemy,” he said.


