Over 3,800 Covid-19 patients back home, recovery rate 54.87% in Pune Metropolitan Region
2020-05-30
PUNE: Shivajinagar resident Dhananjay Kshirsagar (47) is back home after fighting Covid-19. He had tested positive in the first of week May and was admitted to the quarantine centre at Balewadi.

 


After undergoing treatment for 12 days, he reunited with his wife and two children at home. Kshirsagar shared a message for all with TOI. “There is no need to panic or be afraid of the virus,” he said.

Going by the 54.87% Covid-19 recovery rate in the Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR), Kshirsagar is spot on. The national cure rate is about 42.8%.

As many as 3,848 Covid-19 patients have been discharged from care centres till May 28 after being declared Covid-free. The total number of positive cases in the region till Thursday was 7,012. The virus claimed 310 lives — around 4.42% of total positive cases — in the PMR till May 28.

Kshirsagar said, “Initially I was a little anxious when the test result came positive. But I followed each and every instruction of the doctors and the medical staffers at the quarantine facility.”

He said, “For me, the symptoms were mild. I still continued to take utmost precautions. The staffers at the quarantine centre was supportive. They used to conduct basic check-ups every day. All these efforts helped me recover. Even at home, I have kept myself confined to a separate room for almost 10 days now.”

The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC)’s health department stated that continuous efforts were under way to increase the recovery rate for the coronavirus contagion. The number of discharged patients has gone up in the past few days. Rigorous contact tracing had been taken up for early detection of the infection and immediate treatment, a PMC official said.

Sanjeev Wavre, the PMC’s assistant medical officer, said, “The daily discharge has gone up beyond the 100-mark. On Thursday, over 200 patients were discharged in the PMC limits. Now, we are conducting follow-up check of every discharged patient. We are also calling the recovered people randomly to check their health status and get feedback. Those admitted are under close observation,” he added.

A 55-year-old man from the Ganesh Peth area also recovered from Covid-19 recently and went back home. “The entire experience of tests, quarantine and then being alone at home for a few days was unexpected. But I did them all,” he said.

“All I can say is that people should not be afraid. Those who get the infection should put in all efforts to fight it back. During my two weeks of quarantine period, I followed the treatment protocol to the best of my ability. Everyone in the hospital extended huge support and my family members were very cooperative,” said the man, who did not wish to be named.


