Over 25k stranded locals reach U’khand, 503 held for violating lockdown curbs
2020-05-10
Dehradun: More than 25,000 persons, who were stuck in different states of the country, were brought back to Uttarakhand, state government officials said on Saturday.

Secretary (transport) Shailesh Bagauli, who is also the nodal officer for the process of bringing back locals, said in a media briefing during the day, “A huge number of people have registered themselves on our website. We are checking the capacity of each district in the state before bringing them back. Mainly, the healthcare and other facilities available in the districts are being checked. We are proceeding in a planned manner and a timetable has been chalked out for the exercise.”

The stranded people are currently being brought in buses but special trains would soon be run to bring them too, Bagauli said, adding that the efforts to use special trains for bringing back people from distant states are underway although the dates are yet to be officially announced. 

The state government has also worked out a plan for the next three days to bring back people. According to the plan, 9,300 people are expected to arrive from Uttar Pradesh in the next few days. 173 people are to come from Patiala (Punjab) on May 11, 167 people from Madhya Pradesh on May 10, and 290 people from Punjab on May 10. 

According to officials, 34,886 people have so far moved from one district to another, and around 6,378 people have gone to other states. Additionally, 27,717 people have registered themselves so that they can be sent to their home states from Uttarakhand. Over 1.7 lakh had registered to be brought to Uttarakhand from other states.

Meanwhile, police have registered 52 cases and arrested 503 people on Saturday for allegedly violating lockdown norms in the state. With this, the total number of such cases have soared to 2,800 while the arrests touched 15,651. Similarly, police have also issued challans to 35,329 people and seized 6,335 vehicles for violation of traffic rules. DG (law and order) Ashok Kumar said, “Our teams are vigilant and checkposts have been set up within the city limits, and along district and state borders. We plan to take strict action against any kind of violation of norms.”

Ever since the nationwide curbs were imposed on March 25, the state government has earned a total revenue of Rs 1.83 crore through the crackdown on both traffic and lockdown violators.


