Madurai: Over 21,000 houses near Covid-19 patients’ house under scanner
2020-03-30
MADURAI: As many as 21,300 houses located within a kilometre radius of the house of the family of three which tested positive for Covid-19 in Anna Nagar has come under the district administration’s scanner. “With their house as the epicentre we have started screening all the houses door-to-door to check for symptoms such as fever, cough or breathing difficulty,” district collector T G Vinay told TOI.


The collector said the mammoth task commenced on Sunday and will be carried out by field level personnel every day for 14 days. It may be recalled that a 54-year-old man from Anna Nagar had tested positive for Covid-19 and breathed his last at GRH on Wednesday. Consecutively, his wife and a son were also isolated after they tested positive.

The ‘containment zone’ has been divided into clusters of about 100 houses each. A field-level worker will inspect the houses door-to-door every day. As many as 176 anganwadi workers, domestic breeding checkers and volunteers from the Red Cross society have been entrusted with the task and will be functioning under the supervision of 28 supervisory officers,” the collector said.

Field workers will identify persons with the symptoms and report to their supervisors. These individuals will then be checked for additional complaints and a decision to shift them for isolation will be taken.

Meanwhile, a total of 283 direct contacts with the family of three have been identified and are also under the scanner. The collector has also permitted closure of the branches of seven banks that are functioning in Anna Nagar.

In Virudhunagar, the district administration has cordoned off houses in a three-kilometre radius from the house of the 60-year-old man from Rajapalayam who tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday. On Sunday, he was shifted from GRH to a private hospital on the insistence of his family. Two others from a family in Anna Nagar who tested positive are in the isolation ward of the GRH. It is said that condition of all three persons is stable and the two from Madurai are only showing mild symptoms.

