Over 3,000 booked for breaking lockdown rules
2020-04-18
Nagpur: Citizens taking the city police lightly have a warning in the statewide statistics of action taken against violators of the lockdown. Till 4pm on Friday, around 3,001 lockdown violators had been booked. The city police’s tally of action on Friday had crossed 1,119 till going to the press.

Statewide, 49,756 cases have been acted upon so far, with fines of over Rs1.82 crore recovered since the lockdown was announced in the state. 

City police chief BK Upadhyay has also made it mandatory for officers, including Zonal DCPs, to be on the roads for six hours.They are out in two phases, between 9am and noon, and again between 4pm and 7pm, since before the second phase of the extended lockdown was announced. 

On Friday, Upadhyay reviewed compliance by the 33 police station in-charges regarding the implementation of the ‘Covid Yoddha’ plan, and also the measures adopted to enforce section 144 to implement lockdown, through a ‘group call’ on the wireless. Cops are now enrolling volunteer with sound background to work as ‘Covid Yodhhas’ to make announcements and convince people to remain inside home.

Zonal DCP Neelotpal’s special squad has so far seized liquor and related material, including vehicles, worth Rs4.50 lakh in 11 cases since the lockdown was announced. The special squad, in their latest action, seized two vehicles worth Rs80,000 and liquor worth Rs20,000, arresting two persons from Mecosabagh in early morning action on Friday.

In another raid by the special squad later in the day, two juveniles were nabbed with liquor in rubber tubes in a two-wheeler. Neelotpal has kicked started a special anti-liquor drive in north and north-west Nagpur. 

The top brass has also instructed the police station in-charges to deploy bike-borne ‘beat marshal’ cops to visit market places, banks, ATMs and other places, where crowding takes place. The beat marshal cops will enforce social distancing in crowded places. 

With the increase in numbers and span of containment areas, city police are now facing a tricky challenge of organizing manpower for sealing areas and also checking activities on the road. 

Around 300 traffic constables were diverted to assist in the sealing action at Santranjipura, Mominpura, Yashodhara Nagar and their adjoining localities. Despite a depleted strength, traffic department under DCP Vikram Sali has fined 926 people and seized 10 vehicles for various violations.


