Over 7L villages to use Wardha guide to combat Covid pandemic
2020-05-29
Wardha: Taking pre-emptive steps in preparing rural masses for the battle against Covid-19, department of community medicine of Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (MGIMS) has come out with a self-assessment tool to help combat the pandemic at the grassroots-level. Recognizing its importance, Union ministry of panchayati raj has instructed chief secretaries of all states to use the tool for assessing community response to coronavirus outbreak at gram panchayat level. The department has also prepared a guide for filling up the checklist to make it user-friendly. The tool identifies eight areas for action — creating awareness regarding preventive measures, solidarity (to address associated stigma), support for home/ institutional quarantine, surveillance activities (identification), support (to needy families), ensuring availability of routine health services, prompt response in case of positive cases and maintaining hygiene and sanitation at village-level.The checklist will help gram panchayats to self-assess preparedness and identify what more is needed. This will also help health department to take timely corrective measures.“The possibility of Covid-19 spreading to rural areas cannot be ruled out. This checklist will serve as an effective tool for strengthening community preparedness,” said Sunil Kumar, secretary, ministry of panchayati raj, in a letter to Maharashtra chief secretary Ajoy Mehta.Dr Subodh Gupta, professor and head, department of community medicine, said, “Transmission of Covid-19 is largely confined to urban areas till now. It is right time to mobilize panchayats for community action at village-level, where 70% of our population resides.”“If properly implemented, gram panchayats will be instrumental in slowing down Covid-19 transmission in the next phase. This approach will also mobilize help for vulnerable groups and needy families,” he added.Before preparing the tool, the team interacted with members of gram panchayats in about 20 villages in Wardha. All of these villages had formed a Corona Committee as per a directive of the district administration. The team was surprised in several villages on the maturity with which the gram panchayats and village-level committees have acted during this pandemic. In other villages, the checklist became a training tool for informing villagers of the roles panchayats and village-level committees may play to slow down the transmission.Everyone from the department is now excited as the tool has been accepted at national-level and will be implemented in over 7,00,000 villages in the country.Meanwhile, in an online training coordinated by Village Social Transformation Foundation (VSTF), the department rolled out over 300 volunteers who will work in over 1,000 villages of Maharashtra to catalyse community response to Covid-19.