Over 1,000 in home quarantine, stamp ink coming off next day
2020-03-27
Nagpur: Even as several reports came in of home quarantined persons not adhering to guidelines, the stamps on the hands of these persons have been coming off the next day itself.

The district administration has so far stamped over 1,000 flyers, who have been either sent home with the compulsory advice of self-isolation, or held back at MLA Hostel. To ensure the flyers are not venturing out of their homes, health officials had stamped their hands, with what was supposed to be indelible ink, and stay on for the 14-day isolation period.

Sub-divisional officer Shekhar Ghadge claimed that inedible ink — used during voting in elections — had been used in the stamps. When told the ink came off, he said he will have to cross check with doctors who have been stamping passengers for any such complaints.

District collector Ravindra Thakare didn’t answer TOI’s calls and messages.

One of the flyers, who landed at Nagpur last week, said he was stamped in Mumbai. “I have to stay in self isolation till April 4. But after I took a bath, the stamp came off. Now, there is no way anyone can realize that I have been advised home quarantine, though I wouldn’t be going out till that period ends,” the flyer said.

During this period, several complaints have come in of home quarantined people found out of their homes. A woman had also fled to UP while she had to stay in her Nagpur home.

The home quarantine stamp has proved effective in recent days as people have been easily able to identify those having travel history to affected nations.

TOI had reported how a Germany returned woman was identified and her neighbour called up the police to make her comply with the norms. Another woman has been booked by Sonegaon police for flouting home quarantine guidelines. The penal action invites imprisonment for several months.

Meanwhile, a couple of home quarantined flyers continue to risk the health of others.

A medical college employee told TOI that a woman who had travelled to Mumbai and had a stamp on her hand had directly entered the private hospital premises in Hingna area. “Now, the college gates have been locked and entry restricted. But the woman was not ready to listen when she was reminded about the stamp,” the employee said.

Currently, 138 have been quarantined at MLA Hostel. Total 1,123 passengers have landed in Nagpur since March 6 from different countries. Of these, 855 were allowed to go home but stay in self isolation. On Thursday, 47 of them completed the 14-day period.


