Bengaluru: Coronavirus outbreak compels hospitals to postpone over 70% of surgeries
2020-04-09
BENGALURU: More than 70% of surgeries in Bengaluru hospitals have been deferred owing to Covid-19 outbreak and the consequent lockdown, say doctors. The deferred surgeries are non-emergency but necessary in nature and include cancer, gallbladder and uterine procedures.


“All non-emergency, but necessary surgeries have been postponed in our hospitals. This is Covid-19’s collateral damage, unintended though. The situation should be true of other hospitals too,” Dr H Sudarshan Ballal, chairman, Manipal Hospitals, told TOI.

 
TimesViewThe Covid-19 pandemic is a black swan event and it is affecting nations with far better healthcare infrastructure than India. And under the circumstances, this was inevitable. Not only will we see an enormous number of fatalities as a result of the virus, we will also witness casualties of collateral damage. The question is, how are we going to handle this? Response to the pandemic also needs to take these factors into account and a comprehensive plan for public health needs to be put in place and carried out on a war footing -- because, we are at war.

Observing that the lockdown was required but genuine patients were also not able to seek help because of it, he said the deferred surgeries are not cosmetic procedures but ones like transplants and gallbladder removal where patients continue to suffer in the absence of timely intervention.

The only units working uninterrupted in most city hospitals are the dialysis centres, which are essential for renal-failure patients to survive. 

Dr BS Ajaikumar, chairman & CEO, HealthCare Global Enterprises Limited, said non-Covid-19 deaths are likely to increase in the days to come.

“I don’t know if we are over-reacting to the Covid-19 situation. The lockdown was necessary but was implemented with poor planning. There should have been arrangements for needy patients to take public transport to travel to Bengaluru. There are many patients from other districts who are unable to commute,” he said. 

Dr Ajaikumar cited the example of a 53-year-old woman, who missed her scanning due to the lockdown. She finally got it done on April 6 by which time her cancer had progressed and spread to other organs too.

“Cardiac ailments and cancer will only aggravate with time and without timely intervention,” he said.

A prominent doctor from Bengaluru has shot off a letter to chief minister BS Yediyurappa in this regard. “By now we are all well aware of the coronavirus issues and its ability to spread. While we are focusing on this as a nation we cannot ignore the collateral damage the actions are causing on other diseases and the economy. Treatment of diseases such as cancer and heart ailment may get postponed and may cause more loss of life and more financial difficulties to the families concerned. The lower socio-economic groups and middle class will suffer a lot,” the letter read.

The doctor warned the CM of the possibility of suicides increasing given the debilitating economic impact of the lockdown.

At Hosmat hospital which looks into orthopaedic issues, the number of surgeries is down by more than 90%. “All that we are getting are fracture cases that need immediate medical attention. There are cases of people, especially the old, falling at home and of ligament tear,” said Dr Ajit Royan Benedict, medical director, Hosmat Hospitals.


Attending to fracture cases
In the thick of the lockdown, the hospital treated four cases of road accidents from Hoskote, Kolar and Bengaluru.

“Multiple hip fractures and shoulder fractures due to fall at home are operated upon as they are emergency cases. They need to be followed up with physiotherapy sessions. We are teaching these patients and their relatives physiotherapy exercises while they are in the hospital,” said Dr Kumardev Arvind Rajamanya, a city-based orthopaedic surgeon.

Children across the country are missing out on routine immunisation, say paediatricians. 

“Babies aged below six months must be immunised with primary doses of injectable polio, DPT, HIB, Hepatitis B, BCG. Parents must bring them to hospitals and get their children immunised at least. There could be a sudden surge of vaccine preventable diseases, if the lockdown continues for more than three months,” said Dr SM Prasad, professor of paediatrics, Dr BR Ambedkar Medical College. 


