Over 150 citizen volunteers join PMC’s Covid war effort
2020-05-26
Pune: Abhjit Khole, a resident of Dhankawadi and an IT professional, has been clocking his 9-to-5 from home since the lockdown on March 24. But that schedule is set to change soon.Khole has volunteered to become a ‘Covid worker’ in the Pune Municipal Corporation’s infection containment efforts. He will soon join a force of at least 150 others to carry out duties such as management of services at quarantine centres, basic health surveys of the city's neighbourhoods and extending help to the elderly. “I had expressed my willingness to join the Covid fight a month ago. I got a call from the civic administration on Monday. They asked me to report to work on Tuesday,” said Khole.Much of this volunteer force is made up of young people, mostly working professionals, who had responded to a PMC appeal that called for active citizen participation in the fight against Covid-19. A PMC official said the Covid volunteer force will be attached to five civic zones and report to the respective zonal commissioners. Their contribution will prove to be vital. The increasing number of cases in the city threatens to overwhelm the PMC’s own staff. Employees from other departments of the civic body have already been deployed by the administration to carry out Covid-related duties. “These volunteer Covid workers will help the PMC perform a few tasks more effectively,” said the PMC official. “We will also ensure the citizens are given tasks that are suitable. Our officers will hold daily dialogues with them and they will be issued temporary identity cards. We have already made it clear that the Covid workers are not entitled to any remuneration.”In addition to the Covid workers, the PMC has also received applications from about 25 people working in field of medical services, including doctors. Officials said the civic body has started to go through the applications. “We need to check their documents because the selected will go on to join the medical services,” an official said. The PMC has also not ruled out a second appeal to gather a volunteer force. “That decision — to reissue an appeal — will be based on feedback after the initial response,” the official said.