Covid-19 scare in Delhi: Over six hours at IGI without water or food, no access to washrooms
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: Passengers arriving at Indira Gandhi International Aiport from seven countries — China, Italy, Iran, South Korea, France, Spain and Germany — after February 15 have been put on a ‘mandatory’ 14-day quarantine by the Union health ministry. But because of lack of clarity amongst health authorities and airport staff on where each passenger will be accommodated for their quarantine process, people are complaining about having to wait for over six hours at the airport and even longer in some cases.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

TOI spoke to several such passengers on Monday, who had to endure a harrowing time, beginning at Delhi airport and culminating at a government quarantine facility which many said lacked basic sanitation and hygiene — primarily dirty toilets. Providing clean facilities was the least they could expect from the government was the refrain.

 
 
People complained that at the airport they were made to sit on the floor. No passenger was provided food or water and had no access to washrooms.

Nupur Sharma, who stays in Paris with her husband, had been planning to invite her brother and father to the city in March while her mother, Rama Sharma, was already staying with her. With the city now in a semi-lockdown state, Sharma says she decided to send her mother back to India, a decision she now regrets.

“My mother’s flight reached the Delhi airport around 9am and she was made to sit on the floor and wait. While we were mentally prepared for her to be put in a quarantine, we did not expect such treatment. She was not provided any food or water or allowed to go to the washroom. Those who may have been carrying the virus may have infected the rest as they were made to sit together for hours,” said Sharma, claiming that they eventually left the airport after 6pm.

“The passports had been seized the moment they reached and after that there was no information. People who were asking for food were told to wait and that they could ‘survive’ without food for a few hours,” said Sharma, whose mother was kept under quarantine at a hospital in Gurgaon before being tested negative. She was later discharged around 11.30pm on Monday.

Viren’s daughter, who too was flying from Paris, suffered a similar fate, leaving the airport at 6:30 pm. She too was sent to the Gurugram medical centre after going without food and water for hours. “Food was provided at the facility around 9 pm. They are being made to sleep in a hall that has beds next to each other and even those who don’t have the virus may get it.” That seemed to be a common worry. 

Another passenger, speaking to TOI on condition of anonymity, said he flew into Delhi from Frankfurt, reaching the airport around 9:30 am with his wife and son. After screening, their passports were taken away. He stated that those with symptoms were sent for quarantine immediately but the others were made to wait for over eight hours. “We were told to sit on the ground and we could not go anywhere. My son was hungry and I asked them if I could go and purchase food but they told us to go back and sit down,” he stated.

Many others took to Twitter, posting photographs of the quarantine facilities they had been taken to. One person tweeting as @tinkerbell9957 said her daughter, who had arrived from Spain around 8:30 am, was made to wait for several hours without food or water, before being put on a bus and taken to a facility in Narela.

“…And was told - nalke se paani peelo. Seems like the authorities have left my daughter there to die . She is having a nervous breakdown crying - mom plz get me out of here. Why is my daughter being subjected to all this. Is she a criminal Help (sic)” she tweeted.

Another user, Prerna Jain, tweeted: “My sister returned from Germany today and has been taken to the same isolation centre in Narela. There is no water, food or electricity there, even her test has not been done yet. We are worried for her safety. (sic)”


