Over 5 per cent rise in cybercrime cases during lockdown: EOU SP
2020-04-28
PATNA: There has been 5-7% increase in cybercrime cases, mostly related to hacking social media accounts and duping people, during the lockdown period, Economic Offences Unit (EOU) SP Prantosh Kumar Das said. 

“Hacking Facebook accounts, sending friend requests and then demanding money from acquaintances is the latest modus operandi of the cyber criminals. The cybercrime and social media monitoring units across the state have already been alerted about the new trend,” Das said. 

EOU is the nodal agency to deal with the cybercrime complaints in Bihar. Das said on an average 10-12 complaints of cybercrime were received through the cybercrime.gov.in portal every month. In addition, 40-45 similar complaints were forwarded to the state cybercrime cell by the district police per month.

“As people are stranded in different states due to nationwide lockdown, it becomes easier for the fraudsters to convince the acquaintances of the hacked Facebook account holders. Money is sought through different modes to avoid detection. There have been instances when the help was sought after chatting,” he said.

Retired IPS officer Suresh Kumar Bhardwaj’s wife Sadhana Bhardwaj was the latest victim of cyber criminals. Sadhana lodged a complaint with Rupaspur police station in Patna on April 22 about tampering with her social media account. She also shared the picture of the fraud.

Sadhana came to know about her Facebook account hacking when she received an email on April 21, demanding money from a few friends citing lockdown as the reason for financial crisis.

Sadhana’s is not an isolated case. A similar incident happened with one Sanjay Singh, who lodged his complaint with Patna SSP Upendra Kumar Sharma through WhatsApp last week. One of Singh’s relatives was duped of Rs5,000 by the time he came to know about the fraud.

Earlier, a block development officer in East Champaran district lodged a complaint of his Facebook account hacking. “Don’t accept friend’s request as my Facebook account has been hacked,” the BDO informed his Facebook friends.

Besides, incidents related to ATM fraud and duping people by sending fake messages using social media accounts have also been reported. A retired IG-ranked officer was recently duped of Rs2.50 lakh in the name of providing a flat in New Delhi through DDA. He later reported the matter to the cybercrime cell.

