Over 300 isolation beds at MLA hostel for Covid-19 patients
2020-03-14
Nagpur: In view of growing threats arising out from coronavirus, the district administration has readied over 300 isolation beds at MLA Hostel in Civil Lines. All the patients arriving at Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Airport from seven countries like China and South Korea, where Covid-19 cases are high, would be kept there under isolation for 14 days.

However, the residents of Priyadarshini Nagar at Damodar Colony which is behind the MLA hostel, have protested the district administration’s move to set up a temporary hospital in the locality. They met collector Ravindra Thakare and handed over a representation to him opposing any such move.

“As the city has found more cases of coronavirus, we the residents are obviously in the grip of fear. After coming to know about setting up of isolation wards, we’re more worried as the virus could be transmitted from the patients to nearby areas. We request the administration to shift the beds to other locations like Mayo hospital, Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) or outside the city, as some staff working in MLA hostel is staying in our colony,” the residents said in the representation, which was also forwarded to divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar and mayor Sandip Joshi.

The delegation, led by corporator Pragati Patil, have Pavan More, Randhir Nashine, Amar Zanke, Sumit Chandekar Suchitra Nashine and others.

Earlier, while speaking to media, Thakre, stated that the residential buildings were at a distance from the hostel where temporary beds were set up. “This virus didn’t spread by air and all precautions would be taken to prevent patients from getting into contact with outsiders. There is no need to panic for the residents,” he said.

“We had already taken the permission from secretary of state’s legislature to use the hostel, as it comes under their jurisdiction. They immediately consented for it considering the situation,” he said.

Endorsing him, divisional commissioner Kumar told TOI that it would be mandatory for all flyers from seven identified countries to undergo isolation of 14 days at the temporary facility erected at the MLA hostel. “All flyers would be directly taken here after they landed at the airport,” he said.

Accompanied by divisional deputy director of health services Sanjay Jaiswal, the collector added that they were searching for all travellers from seven countries who descended in the city since February 15. “We’ve so far screened over 774 flyers from these countries, who arrived from Doha (daily) and Sharjah (twice a week) to the city. We plan to keep all these suspects and also those flying in city from these international destinations in newly created isolation wards in MLA Hostel,” he said.


