Andhra Pradesh: Covid-19 cases spike, but a pattern emerges
2020-05-19
VIJAYAWADA: A geographical trend in the spread of Covid-19 has emerged with the rise in number of cases in Krishna district. Vijayawada rural mandal, for example, has reported a total of 28 cases and emerged a hotspot in the last 20 days. A majority of patients however, have been discharged, with the average age group of infected persons being between 40 to 50 years and only two patients above 70. 

In terms of death toll in the district, the area under Vijayawada Municipal Corporation (VMC) surpasses rural areas with six deaths. The district stands second in the state with a death toll of 15 on Sunday. 

Suburbs such as Ibrahimpatnam, Penamaluru, Kankipadu, Gannavaram, Jaggayapeta and Nandigama account for 32 cases while mandal headquarters Machilipatnam saw a jump in cases in Chilakalapudi where seven cases have been reported.

Data from the district administration show that in Vijayawada city, Covid-19 cases are concentrated in small areas. Ten cases have been reported from one place in Gupta Centre at Kummaripalem in Bhavanipuram, another ten from Ranigarithota in Krishna Lanka and 26 from Karmika Nagar in Machavaram. Taken together, Bhavanipuram, Krishna Lanka and Machavaram account for over 65 Covid-19 cases in the city. 

Officials point out that concentration of cases in other areas is only among primary contacts, while areas like Karmika Nagar and Kummaripalem have emerged as ‘super-spreaders’ of the virus with secondary contacts getting infected.

City police stated that these hotspots have been marked off as containment zones and are also among areas that reported high numbers of infections much before other areas in the city. One of the main sources of contraction has been traced to attendees at the Delhi congregation and truck drivers who drove long distances to deliver essential commodities in the region. 

Meanwhile, of the 366 cases reported in the district, as of May 14, 255 were concentrated within VMC limits. At least 66 of 255 are concentrated in three areas—Bhavanipuram, Krishna Lanka and Machavaram.


