Chennai: Over 1,000 Covid-19 cases in Royapuram, containment hard
2020-05-17
CHENNAI: The number of Covid-19 cases in Royapuram (zone 5), the initial hotspot in the city, has crossed 1,000. As on Saturday morning, the number of cases there were 1,047 — 18% of the total cases in the city. 


Special nodal officer for Chennai J Radhakrishnan said they have devised a specific plan for Royapuram and it has been effected since Friday. “We have chosen ten clusters in Royapuram. Apart from regular awareness about the do’s, don’ts and hygiene, we have identified community halls to shift people living in most affected areas, which are densely populated,” Radhakrishnan said. “We have identified 10 localities within the zone and for each of them we have one area specific plans.” SM Nagar, Thideer Nagar, Anjaneyar Nagar, PK Raja Nagar and Sathya Nagar are some of the localities. 

“Most of them are slums and getting people to even wear masks has become a difficult task,” said a zonal staff. 

Officials said mass screening will be undertaken in the zone in the coming days and the residents will be given immunity boosters like kabasura kudineer, zinc tablets and other healthy foods. 

On Saturday, residents from SM Nagar were shifted to a community hall nearby, where they will be monitored and provided with the herbal drink and healthy foods. 

According to a zonal official, there are 12 community halls in the zone, apart from the government and corporation schools, which will also be used. “The community halls were used to house guest workers. Five of them are vacant now,” the official said. 

While the initial cases in Royapuram were linked to the New Delhi conference cluster, the rise has been attributed to lack of physical distancing in the slum areas, which has forced authorities to rethink their plans. 

“In areas where we were able to do effective containment, like in V R Pillai Street, we were able to control the amplification of cases. This has been difficult in the slums and so we have intensified our awareness programmes. Unfortunately, some of them still believe that they will not be infected,” a senior official said. 

Apart from Royapuram zone, Kodambakkam (zone 10) and Valasaravakkam (zone 11) are challenging zones for the authorities. Kodambakkam follows Royapuram with 919 cases. 

While Thiru Vi Ka Nagar abutting Royapuram witnessed a surge in cases overtaking Royapuram for a brief while, it has largely been stabilized and the number of cases in the zone stands at 737.


