Coronavirus outbreak: Over 3,000 reach Bihar from Mumbai, Pune
2020-03-23
PATNA/ARA: Two special trains carrying about 3,000 passengers from Mumbai and Pune reached Danapur station on Sunday. Soon after the two trains stopped at Danapur station, the passengers were taken to the railway high school in Khagaul for screening. Later in the day, the passengers were sent to their home distriicts in 60 buses provided by the transport department. Those with coronavirus symptoms got ‘home quarantined’ tag on their hands.


 Coronavirus in India live updates

Danapur divisional railway manager (DRM) Sunil Kumar said the special train from Mumbai brought 1,400 passengers. While 46 of them got down at Buxar and 36 at Ara stations, the rest reached Danapur station around 10.30am. The passengers who got down at Buxar and Ara were allowed to go home after screening. However, those who complained of mild fever were segregated from others and a team of doctors conducted further medical check up on them. 

At Danapur, the state government had set up a makeshift medical camp on the campus of the railway high school for thorough thermal screening of the passengers. RPF, RPSF and GRP personnel were deployed at Danapur station to assist the passengers on their arrival. Patna DM Kumar Ravi and SSP Upendra Kumar Sharma personally supervised the screening process.

The special train from Pune carrying about 1,600 passengers reached Danapur around 2.15pm. A mobile medical team of railway doctors and paramedical staff conducted their primary check-up aboard the train after it left Pt Deen Dayal Upadhaya Junction.

Meanwhile, state transport department secretary Sanjay Kumar Agarwal said the buses which carried the passengers to their home districts were sanitized in the morning. “The district magistrates have been asked to ensure that the passengers marked with ‘home quarantined’ tag remain in their homes,” he said.

Bhojpur DM Roshan Kushwaha advised the passengers who reached Ara station from Pune and Mumbai to stay indoors at least for the next 14 days. He added that passengers coming from Bengaluru were also screened.


