Over 3,100 screened at Nepal border for coronavirus
2020-03-07
MOTIHARI: More than 3,100 people have been screened for any coronavirus (Covid-19) symptoms at the India-Nepal border checkposts at Raxaul, Adapur, Chauradano, Ghorasahan and Kundwa Chainpur in East Champaran district during the last fortnight.

East Champaran DM Shirsat Kapil Ashok on Friday inspected the isolation ward for Covid-19 patients in Motihari Sadar hospital and asked the civil surgeon to be vigilant and provide all possible medical facilities to the patients. The DM also asked him to provide masks to all nurses and paramedical staff. The district administration has also decided to make an isolation ward in Duncon Hospital at Raxaul for suspected coronavirus patients. 

East Champaran civil surgeon Rizwan Ahmad said two medical teams were working round the clock at the immigration office checkpost and integrated customs checkpost at Raxaul. “Around 3,100 persons, including seven foreign nationals, have been screened for suspected Covid-19, but no one was found having any symptoms of the virus,” Ahmad said. 

Director General of SSB Kumar Rajesh Chandra also visited Raxaul on Thursday and reviewed the situation. He also asked to keep a strict vigil on illegal border crossing as hundreds of roads connect villages on both sides of the border. He asked SSB officials and jawans to initiate awareness drive in bordering villagers about Covid-19.

Ahmad said ambulance service has been provided at Raxaul border to send suspected Covid-19 patients to Bettiah Medical College and Hospital. “All the truck, tanker and bus drivers are being screened at the border,” he said.

The civil surgeon said one person came to Motihari Sadar hospital with his family members on Thursday. He was suffering from fever and cold after returning from Nepal. He was referred to the Government Medical College, Bettiah, for medical examination.

East Champaran district administration has also taken several precautionary measures and launched an awareness drive in towns and remote areas about Covid-19.


