Over 50% AMU students vacate campus amid Covid-19 outbreak
2020-03-24
Agra: More than 50 percent hostellers of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) vacated their accommodations amid novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. The varsity’s vice chancellor has also appealed to all teachers to help students through email and other electronic modes of interactions for overcoming the loss of classes and tutorials.

Confirming this on Monday, varsity’s spokesperson, Shafey Kidwai, said that over 6,000 students have vacated the university’s residential halls while 5,000 are still on the campus. He said that students whose parents are coming to pick them up are going to their home towns.

“The University, however, is providing all facilities to students who are residing on the campus,” said Kidwai, adding that teachers have been asked to help students via online classes.

Vice chancellor Prof Tariq Mansoor said, “Since the Covid-19 outbreak has thrown an unprecedented challenge to the entire teaching community, the AMU teachers should make the study materials online for students. Every faculty member is provided with the facility to upload the study material in a PDF format on the webpage of the University website.”

Prof Mansoor urged the teachers to regularly upload study materials and also circulate it via WhatsApp and/or emails. “PPT of the lectures, which teachers use in the classroom, should also be made available online,” he added.

The VC pointed out that since many courses require project/assignment submission for internal assessment, students should be allowed to submit the projects online. Prof Mansoor emphasised that all faculty members should ensure that their updated email addresses and phone numbers are available on their respective pages on the University website.

Meanwhile, ‘Sir Syed and Surana and Surana National Criminal Law Moot Court Competition’ organised by the Faculty of Law, has been postponed due to Covid-19 outbreak.

“The moot court competition, which was scheduled to take place from April 10 to 12, has been postponed as a pre-emptive measure to curb the contagious pandemic. A new date will be announced later in April after a review of the situation,” said Prof M Shakeel Ahmad Samdani, dean, faculty of law and national administrator, moot court competition.

He has advised the participating teams from various law colleges and universities to cancel their travel plans accordingly and wait for fresh dates.


