Over 1,000 in home quarantine in Pune district seek health check
2020-03-28
PUNE: Sixty medical teams, comprising doctors and nurses, will visit each of the 1,065 home quarantined persons who called for a health check saying they felt they had ‘coronavirus symptoms’.


As many as 22,475 people from Pune city, Pimpri Chinchwad and the rural areas of the district are in home quarantine.

 
 
Earlier, the district administration would advise such cases to report to the local doctors. Now, a medical team will take up house visits. 

These persons have returned from high risk countries or are related to those who travelled to such countries or friends who have been in touch with those who travelled abroad.

“Those who said they felt the symptoms have got in touch with us. Our teams will check whether there is any cause for concern,” zilla parishad CEO Ayush Prasad told TOI.

The district administration has divided the monitoring into hospitalisation, isolation and quarantine. 

Hospitalisation is for a serious patient and isolation is being done at Naidu hospital in Pune and YCM hospital in Pimpri Chinchwad.

Institutional quarantine is for those who cannot be managed at home and home quarantine is when they can manage, V Deshmukh, in-charge of the district administration’s quarantine monitoring facility, said. 

Home quarantine is monitored by health, revenue and police teams. “Our team monitors them and once they rule out Covid-19 symptoms, they continue staying in quarantine and are checked at the end of it,’’ the officials added.

A web portal has been created for health authorities to supervise people under home quarantine. The portal http://www.idsp.mkcl.org, will require them to create an account with their cellphone number and submit details of their travel history, and update after 12 hours, their health observations and the precautions they are taking. 

“They can stay in contact with health officials and report their progress,” Prasad added. Doctors will register and fill in the details of patients who they feel are showing some symptoms. 

Each person has to provide information pertaining to travel history, details of the symptoms like sore throat, sneezing, fever, chest discomfort and information about the doctor they are consulting. 


