Overseas returnees to be charged up to Rs 3k per day for quarantine facility
2020-05-12
Panaji: The state government is likely to charge those returning from overseas between Rs 1,000 and Rs 3,000 per day for quarantine facilities, with the exception of seafarers, whose cost will be borne by their company for minimum 14 days. The charges will depend on the hotel tariff.

Quarantine facility for non-Goans returning from within India will be Rs 2,500, an order issued by both district collectors stated.

Asked on the modalities that will be followed in the eventuality that all the lower tariff rooms are occupied and a person cannot afford the costlier rooms, chief minister Pramod Sawant said that as and when such issue come before us we will take necessary decision. 

All those entering the state, will be sent to the institutional quarantine centre for testing on arrival. “If tested positive for Covid-19 they will be shifted to the Covid hospital as per existing protocol,” the collectors stated in their order.

Overseas returnees who test negative will have to undergo mandatory institutional quarantine at their own cost while those returning from within the country on testing negative will be discharged on the same day to be sent on home quarantine for 14 days, the collectors said. 

For those returning from within the country, “accommodation will not be charged for those persons producing proof of residential address in Goa (Goans) during their stay in the quarantine centre”, the order stated.

The order is issued in supersession of the conditions as specified by various orders of the ministry of home affairs, which will also be adhered to. 

Food, if provided by the quarantine centre, will charged based on prevailing rates. However, inmates are allowed to make their own food arrangements. 

Over 5,400 Goans living in other parts of the country have registered to come back, with nearly half coming in from the neighbouring states of Karnataka and Maharashtra. Over 12,000 Goans who are stranded overseas, including seafarers, also want to return to the state. 


