Over 6,000 calls seeking medical emergency passes in Dakshina Kannada district during lockdown
2020-04-28
Mangaluru: In the five weeks that the lockdown has been in force across the country, dealing with medical emergencies has, by far been one problem that citizens have had particular difficulty dealing with. In Mangaluru, a statistic lends some perspective on the extent to which the lockdown has made getting timely medical help hard. The smart city command and control centre, operating out of the Mangaluru City Corporation (MCC) office has, in the past five weeks, received 6,000 calls from distressed citizens seeking medical emergency passes. 

Mangaluru Urban Development Authority (Muda) commissioner Dinesh Kumar GT said that the centre received around 700 to 1,000 calls each day. Dinesh Kumar, who heads the control centre, said that, while calls seeking medical emergency passes was the clear leader in terms of the number of calls the centre received, stranded migrant labourers came in second. 

“Although a majority of those seeking medical passes are from Mangaluru, around 15 to 20% of those calling us are from other taluks. These passes are mostly issued to those in need of dialysis, for pregnant women and other patients in need of immediate medical attention,” Dinesh Kumar told TOI. 

Calls from migrant labourers, he said, had spiked following Karnataka government’s announcement that arrangements would be made for their safe return home. “Many of them have also been asking for food kits. On average, we receive around 100 to 120 calls from labourers asking for food,” said Dinesh Kumar, who intimates the labour department on distribution of food kits to those in need.

The control room functions round the clock and has 35 people working in three shifts. With as many as 10 lines, and those attending calls ensure that the citizens’ grievances are redressed as soon as possible. Revision of the terms of the lockdown and issuance of new directions by the government mean that the staff need to be equipped in responding to these changes. The traffic for calls is highest from 7am to 12pm, and from 4pm to 10pm. 

Dinesh Kumar said that, on many occasions, responding to calls from migrant labourers from Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, who seek food kits, personnel of the labour department had been importuned by these stranded people for help returning home. “Unfortunately, this is not possible under the current circumstances. We also receive calls wherein people seek passes for inter-district travel and this can be issued only if the deputy commissioner or superintendent of police authorities,” he added. 


