Delhi: Over 500 new Covid-19 cases; biggest single-day death toll at 30
2020-05-25
NEW DELHI: A 48-year-old nurse working at a private hospital in west Delhi became the latest casualty of Covid-19 in the capital. She was undergoing treatment at Safdarjung Hospital.


In total, Delhi has recorded 261 Covid-19 deaths. This includes 30 deaths — the highest casualty reported in a single day — confirmed by the state government authorities on Sunday.

“The newly reported deaths took place earlier but were added to the list of Covid-19 fatalities on Sunday following perusal of case sheets by the death audit committee,” an official said. The total number of Covid-19 count in the state crossed the 13,000 mark to reach 13,418, with over 500 more persons testing positive for the viral infection in the city for six consecutive days.

Dr R N Kalra, medical director of Kalra Hospital, where the nurse who died due to Covid-19 worked, expressed profound grief over her demise. “She hadn’t been coming to hospital for the last 10 days. We got to know about her illness only recently. Her colleagues have also undergone Covid-19 test and have tested negative,” he added.

Two days ago, Dr Jitendra Nath Pande, an eminent pulmonologist and former head of the department of medicine at AIIMS, died due to novel coronavirus. His wife, also a doctor, has tested positive for the viral infection and is undergoing treatment at AIIMS.

A mess worker who was working at one of All India Institute of Medical Sciences’ hostel also died due to Covid-19 recently.

A senior doctor said healthcare workers are at the maximum risk to contract Covid-19 because they are directly dealing with patients. “Over 300 healthcare workers, who may or may not be directly involved in the treatment of Covid-19 patients, have tested positive for the disease in Delhi,” the doctor added.

The dean of the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences at the Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital in central Delhi has tested positive for the novel coronavirus infection. Dr Rajeev Sood, who is looking after the management of Covid-19 manpower at the hospital, also tested positive for the infection recently. Sources said Dr Sood is under home isolation and contact tracing has been initiated by hospital authorities.


