Uttarakhand: 350 schools used as quarantine facilities to turn exam centres
2020-05-31
DEHRADUN: With the state government planning to conduct the remaining board examinations in the third week of June, the education department has directed all district magistrates to vacate the schools-turned-quarantine facilities that have been earmarked as examination centres before June 15.

According to officials, the education department would then undertake a massive sanitisation drive at these centres to prepare them for the board examinations. The state government’s board examinations scheduled for March 23, 24 and 25 were rescheduled due to the Covid-19 lockdown. These would now be held in the third week of June before the onset of monsoon.

Uttarakhand Board of School Education secretary Nita Tiwari said, “There are 1,324 centres earmarked for board exams across the state. Out of them, around 350 are now being used as quarantine centres.”

Officials said that apart from sanitising the premises, the authorities would ensure safety measures like face masks and social distancing among other precautions at these centres.

Sources said that while most of those lodged at these centres would complete their quarantine period by June 15, the others would be shifted to other facilities.

Meanwhile, parents of board students have raised concern about holding examinations at these facilities. Harish Tiwari, a resident of Almora, said, “It’s better to hold examinations at a centre which has not been used as a quarantine facility. It is mainly because there is always a fear of the child getting infected.”

The district administrations meanwhile said that these centres would be properly sanitised and necessary precautionary measures put in place. Uttarkashi DM Ashish Chauhan said, “In Uttarkashi alone, 31 out of 60 educational institutions running as quarantine facilities have been designated examination centres. I have asked the education department to exclude one of these centres from the list due to its strategic location. It is located on the border and buses carrying migrants halt there. We do not want to take any risk. There are over 9,000 students appearing for these examinations in the district.” Similarly, 15 quarantine centres in Dehradun, 120 in Pauri Garhwal and 65 in Rudraprayag have been marked as examination centres too.


