Owner of well-known restaurant in Meerut kills self; friends blame lockdown, kin not convinced
2020-06-04
MEERUT: The owner of a prominent restaurant in Meerut allegedly committed suicide on Wednesday. Sanjay Bansal, 51, owned Rajbhog Restaurant in the city and was also a financier. People close to him told TOI that a large amount of Bansal was stuck in the market and debtors were not returning the money, obviously due to the prevailing “uncertainty under lockdown”.

Bansal’s restaurant was also shut for the last two months.

On Wednesday morning, the businessman went to Garh Mukteshwar with his driver. Prima Facie, after asking the driver to wait in the car for some time, Bansal went away and jumped before a train. 

Station house officer (SHO) of Nauchandi police station, Ashutosh Kumar, said, “Prima facie it appears to be a case of suicide. The driver, Sunil, who took Bansal to Garh Mukteshwar was questioned. Sunil said that Bansal had left after telling him that he was going to a holy dip in the Ganga River. But he never returned. Later, when Sunil began to search for him, he found the body on the railway track. He informed the local authorities about it and returned.”

Bansal’s close friend Vipul Singhal told TOI, “He was financially sound. But a large amount of his money was stuck with some debtors, and due to the ongoing lockdown no one was willing to return the money at this time of uncertainty. This probably disturbed him a lot. But no one thought that he will take such a drastic step.”

But the Bansal’s family was not convinced that he has committed suicide.

“Why would he commit suicide? He was well-off. This is just an absurd theory. It could have been an accident. Post-mortem report has not arrived. No FIR has been filed yet. The driver’s statement has also not been recorded. But the verdict has already come that he committed suicide,” said Rajesh Bansal, the businessman’s brother.

While his son Rachit Bansal said that his father may have been robbed and killed. "We have not received some of his belongings also," Rachit said. 


