Owner of press with staff from Worli tests Covid-19 positive
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: A senior citizen living in Dadar tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, with authorities saying he was likely to have contracted the novel coronavirus from one of his employees at his printing press in Prabhadevi. 

Some of his employees were residents of Worli Koliwada, which was identified as a hot spot for the virus and sealed off some days ago, and he informed the BMC that a few of them had been found positive. The senior citizen had no recent travel history.

The G-South Ward, which comprises Worli and houses various offices, had reported 44 cases when data was compiled early in the day, the highest number in any of the 24 wards in the city. Many of these cases were from Worli Koliwada and adjoining Adarsh Nagar and Janata Colony.

During the day, municipal health workers kicked off a house-to-house survey of over 14,000 residential units in these areas for more symptomatic cases. 

Close contacts of these patients have been placed in the temporary quarantine facility at MA Podar Hospital. 

Residents of Koliwada continued to suffer with essentials like milk, eggs and LPG cylinders hard to find. 

"I have not bought fresh vegetables in the past 10 days," a woman resident said. "We get milk once every few days and that too is rationed."

Residents said the BMC or state government had not heeded to their request to allow delivery of essentials at their doorstep or to grant them permission to step out of the area for milk, groceries and gas.

A resident, Vaibhav Worlikar, wrote to chief minister Uddhav Thackeray with a list of issues. "To maintain social distancing, the authorities should deliver groceries, milk, gas cylinders at the doorstep," he said. 

He said local Shiv Sena corporator Hemangi Worlikar had failed to make groceries available. "Doctors practising here are not allowed to enter the sealed area, causing inconvenience to senior citizens and children," he said. 

Another resident, who requested anonymity, said people had to wait for hours to buy medicines at outlets. 

"We have waited for seven hours to get a new cylinder," a resident said, also speaking on condition of anonymity.

Corporator Worlikar claimed four to five medical shops were open in the area. 

"Now, I have made arrangements of special passes for those doctors practising in Koliwada area but who reside outside it," she said, adding that three temporary ATMs had become available.

Worlikar claimed that 1,000 packets of groceries, which included rice, edible oil, onions and potatoes, were supplied by local MLA Aaditya Thackeray. 


