Mumbai's packed chawls gear up to keep coronavirus at bay
2020-03-29
MUMBAI: To people zipping along Western Express Highway (WEH), Shivprerna chawl, a block of 15 kholis would seem no different from its neighbourhood huts and slums that skirt the south-west border of Mumbai airport.

But to enter or exit this chawl, you need to fill a visitors’ register, a book placed on a steel stool at the sole point of entry, manned by a local resident, wearing a mask. You enter your name, mobile number, reason and time of visit, and only then will the ‘immigration officer’ let you enter.

The chawl is part of the sprawling Rajendra Prasad Nagar airport slums that houses 8,000. It’s one of the few measures put in place by the airport slum’s ‘coronavirus samiti, formed by members of their local Navratri and Ganapati mandals, early this week to keep Covid-19 from encroaching their settlements.

“The samiti decided to scan log entries every 2-3 days for repeat offenders, people who keep on stepping out and violating curfew. Only one person per household can go out to buy essentials,’’ says Rupchandra Mandavkar, a samiti member. “Other chawls and slums in Rajendra Prasad Nagar will follow this model in few days,’’ he said. Among the other decisions taken by their 25-member core samiti, that functions out of a WhatsApp group, is to send workers who cleaned public toilets and lanes on leave. “We have taken up cleaning jobs to ensure no outsiders enter our chawl. The women who work as domestic help have stopped going out. We spoke to some disgruntled employers and convinced them. Vegetable and fruit vendors, gas cylinder suppliers are called in so that our residents don’t have to step out and go up to crowded Vile Parle station road to buy that,’’ he added. 

Most of these dwellers live in 100 sq ft kholis, packed so tightly that sunlight breaks in only over its narrow, winding lanes. Each kholi is shared by four to six family members, making even metaphorical social distancing impossible. As if to drive the point home, Mahesh Pardule, an insurance agent, who lives in Walter Misquita chawl, part of Rajendra Prasad nagar slums, stressed, “Not average of 4-6 members per family okay. Minimum of 4-6 members sharing a 100-200 sq ft home.’’ 

The scene will repeat in each of Mumbai’s slums that house over 48 lakh people or 40% of the city’s population, according to the 2011 census. “From coronavirus outbreak point of view, it is critical to note that 40% of Mumbai lives in slums that occupy only 18% of Mumbai’s land,’’ said Paraj Alavani, MLA from Vile Parle, highlighting the role population density could play in spread of the virus in Mumbai. Of all battlegrounds around the world where a war against the highly contagious respiratory disease is under way, Mumbai perhaps is the only one with half its population standing as dominoes stacked too close to each other.

At Bandarpakhadi and Renuka Nagar slums in Kandivli (W), the seriousness of a possible Covid-19 outbreak has steeped in and people have honoured the curfew, have avoided crowding when buying essentials, said local corporator Pratibha Girkar. But not at Abhilakh nagar, a slum of 10,000 residents along Link road. “There is a crowded market road, packed with vendors. Hawking has been decentralised, with the help of Kandivli (W) police. Each hawker is allowed to vend only on alternate days, onion-potato carts that attract most crowds have been segregated from those selling vegetables and buyers have to stand metres apart,’’ Girkar said.

The curfew has not worked at some airport slums too, though their ‘corona samiti’ had Vile Parle airport police visit the place and blare out warnings on a speaker on Friday evening. But given the size of slum rooms and number of people who share it, it’s no surprise that a full house happens only during meals and at night. “People come out to chat. Every chawl has 2-3 groups. They have dedicated locations, it’s a force of habit. By evening it’s an all-out jatra (fair),’’ rued Pardule. 

With failure of social distancing, what most slums are banking on is sodium hypochlorite solution, used as a common household disinfectant since 18th century. BMC’s insecticide officer approved its use, but only where Covid positive patients are reported. But in many Mumbai slums, disinfection has begun.

Then, there are those where starvation continues to be a bigger threat than any virus. Raju Korde, from Dharavi Redevelopment Committee, said their 12-15 lakh residents are concerned with feeding 10,000-odd workers who work in small manufacturing units. “They eat and sleep in these units, which are temporarily closed now, so there is no food. These migrants can’t go back as trains and buses have stopped,’’ Korde said. “We might die of corona, but no one should die of starvation,’’ he said.


