Kerala: Paid quarantine an option for ‘red zone’ returnees, says Officials
2020-05-08
KOCHI: Will persons returning from red zones in other states need to pay for 14-day institutional quarantine? Yes, if one goes by the government order of May 6.

Stating that persons coming from any red-zone district in the country shall be placed under institutional quarantine (IQ) for 14 days from the date of arrival in their home districts, the order reads, “Persons coming from the red zone districts shall be eligible for institutional quarantine facility on payment basis, subject to availability of such facility and payment by these persons.”

Added to this is the fact that local panchayat and health workers have informed many of those who returned on Thursday morning and are in home quarantine that they will need to shift to IQ, once facilities are readied.

However, when contacted, principal secretary and state coordinator for interstate transit Biswanath Sinha, who signed the order, said, “IQ is by state. Paid quarantine is only for those who desire it.”

A senior official explained that someone who is not comfortable with government’s IQ will be given the option to choose a paid facility identified by the government. “They will be under government watch. We have identified lodges and hotels for the purpose,” the official said.

Meanwhile, many persons who returned from red zones have still not been shifted to IQ. “I was contacted by panchayat and health officials who said that I may have to move to IQ once they identify a lodge or resort. Though I have adhered to strict room quarantine and avoided contact with other family members, the officials told them that they also need to be in quarantine,” said a Kozhikode resident, who arrived from Bengaluru on Monday night with a friend by car. Bengalaru is a red zone.

Ministry of health and family welfare has published a list of 130 most vulnerable districts in the country and many Malayalis from these areas have registered for their return. Though the central government has mandated separate IQ facilities for those who return from red zones, it seems many districts are yet to comply.

“There is no clarity yet on whether people from here will be placed in home quarantine or IQ in Kerala. Many of those who returned to Kerala by private vehicles were sent to home quarantine and have not been shifted to IQ,” said Reji Kumar, general secretary of Kerala Samajam, Bengaluru. 

Incidentally, the number of Malayalis returning from other states has been considerably low. “This is mainly because of the lack of transport facilities. Only people who have money and own a car can now drive home. Kerala government needs to pursue Centre to ensure train services to take many helpless and jobless Malayalis back home,” said K G Harikrishnan, president of the Federation of Gujarat Malayalee Associations.#


