Bengaluru: Paid quarantine is big profit for hotels, huge burden for travellers
2020-05-14
BENGALURU: The government, which has blocked 10,560 rooms in three categories of hotels — five-star, three-star and budget hotels — to quarantine those returning to Bengaluru from abroad and other states will see these people cough up Rs 30 crore in hotel bills, going by rates fixed by the government.

The Rs 30 crore calculation is based on the best case scenario: If all 10,560 rooms are occupied (Rs 4,100 per day per room for 5-star hotels; Rs 1,850 for 3-star and Rs 1,200 for budget hotel rooms).

Analysis of various hotel categories show that five-star hotels, which account for about a quarter of all rooms blocked by the government, will rake in nearly 50% of the Rs 30 crore that people are being forced to spend, while budget hotels, which have 6,068 or 57% of all rooms blocked, will take home 34% of the money. The rest will go to 3-star hotels.

Even at 70% occupancy in each category, hotels stand to earn Rs 21 crore. Of this, five-star hotels will earn Rs 10 crore and budget hotels Rs 7.1 crore, while the remaining will be billed by three-star hotels.

Bengaluru is expected to see at least three times more people returning than rooms booked. As of Wednesday, 55,308 had registered on the Seva Sindhu portal to return to the city. These include 101 applications that were rejected, and 21,166 that are under process.

So far, 34,041 applications have been cleared, but officials say many applications are for whole families as only one member of a family applies, but seeks permission for multiple people.

And, even as both activists and those returning to Karnataka are critical of the policy of paid quarantine — which they see as an additional burden at a time of job insecurity and pay cuts — the government has continued to keep hotels as one of the options.

The other option is to stay at government-run hostels that are available for free, but which are most likely to be used only by returning migrant workers from the unorganised sector. As reported by TOI on Wednesday, on ground, people coming by private vehicles from other states are being told to either take a hotel room identified by the government, or to return to the states from which they travelled.


