Pakur on Covid-19 map as state records 27 new cases
2020-05-25
RANCHI/RAMGARH/JAMSHEDPUR/ HAZARIBAG: Jharkhand on Sunday recorded 27 fresh cases of Covid-19, including four from Pakur, taking the total tally in the state to 377.


Pakur now becomes the 22nd of the state’s 24 districts to be hit by the virus.

Among the new cases, four each are from East Singhbhum and Hazaribag, three each from Dhanbad, West Singhbhum, Garhwa and Ramgarh, two from Koderma and one from Ranchi. The state has now 225 active cases and 149 patients have recovered. Three persons have also died with the virus.

All three fresh cases in Ramgarh were migrants who have returned from Maharashtra. DC Sandeep Singh said, “One is a middle-aged man from Dulmi block and had returned from Pune three days ago. The others returned from Mumbai and we are finding out their details

In Hazaribag, four more migrants who had returned from Mumbai tested positive. “They are residents of Bishnugarh, Barkagaon and Katkamdag blocks and include three men between 22 and 40 years of age and a 14-year-old girl,” Hazaribag DC B P Singh said.

Three more migrants who had returned from Mumbai and Surat to Garhwa also tested positive in the district, civil surgeon Dr N K Rajak said. He added, “Two are from Korwadih and one from Sadar block. All of them returned on May 17.”

Dhanbad DC Amit Kumar said, “All three cases were kept in PMCH isolation ward since their return from Mumbai and tested positive on Sunday

Koderma’s two fresh cases had returned from Mumbai and New Delhi. “They were kept at an institutional quarantine centre at Satgawan and Jainagar blocks have tested positive for the virus and had returned from Mumbai and New Delhi,” Koderma DC Ramesh Gholap said

Ranchi’s lone new case is a 27-year-old migrant who has returned from Mumbai. “He is a resident of Bundu block and was in home quarantine since his arrival,” an official said

Kolhan region, too, detected seven new cases on Sunday with four from East Singhbhum and three from West Singhbhum. All four cases in East Singhbhum had returned from Ranchi, Kolkata in Bengal and Ara in Bihar. They are residents of Baridih and Sidhgora areas. “We are tracing the contacts of the trio. Two were in home quarantine and their areas will be converted into containment zones,” East Singhbhum DC Ravi Shankar Shukla said.

In West Singhbhhum, three migrants from Mumbai tested positive. “All three men were put in three separate institutional quarantine centers in Chakradharpur upon their arrival,” an official in the district health department said.


