Pallette of the pandemic
2020-06-08
Chennai: Things have always been quiet and peaceful on the campus of Cholamandal Artists Village. But more so since the lockdown, says artist and sculptor B O Shailesh. "Hardly anyone goes outside now." He doesn’t either. For Shailesh, the days since March 23 have been spent indoors, working on what he terms "laptop" sculptures — as they are tiny enough to be created without getting up — using wood waste and paper scraps, material, he says, he would have otherwise discarded."It’s definitely a departure from my sculptures that are 8ft tall and made from single blocks of wood," says Shailesh. "The lockdown has taught me there is beauty in simplicity not just in the grandiose. It has taught me to conserve, to use what I have. In the piece of wood I see how our whole style of living has been broken into bits and I feel like I am picking up the pieces and putting them together."The only other person that Shailesh can see from his boundary wall is artist Bhagwan Chavan, who too has been trying to come to terms with the way the pandemic has changed life as he knows it. "He is an abstract artist, but ever since the lockdown, he has been sitting outside his home and sketching the trees around him for hours at a stretch. I’ve never seen him do that."Chavan says the lockdown has drawn him outdoors. "I just want to sketch nature everyday," he says. His pencil sketches of Cholamandal’s numerous trees are the second in his lockdown series. At the very beginning of the lockdown, he did an ink series dedicated to the frontline workers – doctors, police personnel and so on. All days, says Chavan, he would sit inside his studio and draw the resilience and spirit of the Covid warriors. When he reached a hundred, he put down his ink, walked out of the studio and into nature.Across the country, artists are attempting to put their thoughts on Covid-19 down on canvas. Sunaparanta – Goa Centre for the Arts, for instance, launched an online series in March, called ‘Surviving SQ (Self Quarantine)’, inviting artists to share creative strategies of survival.Dhruvi Acharya has been making a watercolour painting each day as part of her ‘Painting In The Time Of Corona’ series, almost like a visual journal of the social impact of the pandemic. In fact, she began the series on March 22, the day of the nationwide janata curfew. "I have painted the isolation one feels during lockdown, people communicating with each other only via social media, the fear of the virus, of a touch or a sneeze, of crowds, the body on a ventilator," says the Mumbai-based artist. Even before the lockdown in India, Goa-based Kedar Dhondu was mulling creating a series of sketches on the way lockdowns across Europe were changing lifestyles. "When the lockdown was announced in India, I got my series ‘Lonely Residents’ started for the Sunaparanta initiative," says Dhondu. The artist put up a post on his social media handles urging people to send in pictures of themselves at home, which he then began sketching, as a reflection of the times. "I wanted to draw them as an onlooker would see them through a window," says Dhondu, who has had pictures coming in from across the world. He has completed 35 sketches so far and has begun filling them in with watercolour, which is his forte. "I have posted the sketches online so the people who sent in the photographs can see them. It’s just my way of spreading joy. For me, it is a way of recording the emotions of the times."Sarala Banerjee of Artworld, one of the oldest art galleries in Chennai, says the pandemic is going to change the way most artists work. "Right now, people are still reeling from the daily effects of the pandemic. After a while, it will enter the psyche of the artist and will result in them transitioning to new styles, themes or techniques," she says. "Art has always captured moments in history." Take for instance, she says, Pablo Picasso’s Guernica (1937), following the German bombing of the Spanish city, or the way artists like Chittaprosad Bhattacharya portrayed the Bengal famine of 1943. Amitabh Sengupta has been inspired by the events of the lockdown and did a series on the displacement and suffering of migrants during the lockdown "Art is often a reflection of the times and that is what makes it powerful."