Palwal, Faridabad emerge as new Covid-19 hotspots
2020-04-07
GURUGRAM: Three neighbouring districts of Gurugram, all within 50km of Delhi, are emerging as hotspots for Covid-19 — Palwal, Faridabad and Nuh (Mewat). Together, these three areas have 60 cases – 25, 21 and 14 respectively — accounting for 62.5% of the state’s tally of 96.

On Monday, 22 new cases, including 20 from the Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) chain, were reported from the districts — nine in Palwal, seven in Faridabad and six in Nuh. So far, Gurugram has two TJ-linked out of 16 total cases (excluding the 14 Italians who were admitted to Medanta hospital). With more attendees being tested, the health department is expecting a spike over the next few days.

Palwal now has 25 cases, the highest in Haryana so far. Out of these, 24 are related to TJ.

“We identified 89 people from the congregation who visited Palwal. We also traced their primary contacts and quarantined 203 people. About 556 people were also under surveillance,” said Palwal chief medical officer Brahmdeep Sandhu.

Eleven villages have been sealed, 3,000 houses have been surveyed and two lakh people have been screened, he added. “We have created containment zones in 25 villages and increased sample collections. We are taking the help of police to trace phone records to identify Jamaat members.”

Faridabad’stally rose to 21 on Monday, with five of the seven testing positive linked to Jamaat. Among the other patients is a health worker from Sonipat. Two patients have recovered so far. 

Nearly117 people from the Tablighi congregation have been identified, officials said. About 1,237 people with foreign travel history have been kept under surveillance. Out of these, 170 people have completed 28 days of quarantine. A total of 272 samples have been sent for testing so far, out of which reports of 196 have come negative and those of 55 people are awaited. 

Dr Ram Bhagat, deputy civil surgeon, said that medical and paramedical staff are being trained to treat Covid-19 patients in the district.

In Nuh, out of the six people who tested positive on Monday, one is from Jammu and Kashmir while the other five are foreign nationals from Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand. Out of the district’s 14 cases, 13 are from the TJ chain.

Three villages have been sealed and the samples of 334 people have been sent to PGI Rohtak for testing. Nuh chief medical officer Virender Singh said, “We have placed them in the isolation wards at Medical College. We will have the results by Sunday.”

Police and the administration have stepped up tracing and surveillance efforts in the predominantly Muslim district to monitor the chain of contact of villagers with those who attended the Tablighi meet. In all, 1,193 people have been put under surveillance.

Another 100 people have been found to be in touch with Covid-19 patients and have been put in isolation.

 “We have identified four villages that the patients had visited in the recent past. We have completed door-to-door screening in three of them and sealed them,” said Nuh deputy commissioner Pankaj.


