Goa: Panchayats keep an eye on home quarantined
2020-06-14
PANAJI: With the Goa government going in for a new SOP on people entering the state whereby most of the travellers preferring 14 home quarantine, the role of panchayat members has come into focus. 


While announcing the new SOP which came into effect two days, the chief minister Pramod Sawant had said that in view of cases where quarantinte norms were not followed, civic authority members would be roped in to keep a close watch on those quarantined.

Panchayats have started the work in the right earnest in cooridinationwith health authorities but the task is easier said than done, according to some civic body members. Some continue to act smart and the civic body need to act tough 

“The government has quarantined some people in hotels in Calangute, so we have been making sure that the hotel staff is vigilant. We are informed about any new admissions to the hotel and in case, we find anyone attempting to move out before their quarantine period ends, we inform the police about it,” Calangute sarpanch, Francisco Rodrigues said.

With international flights having resumed, seafarers have been returning to their homes. The wards in the village of St Andre in which seafarers reside are being watched by the elected panch members.

“They have been told to directly call 104 and inform the health officers in case of any violation,” Maria Cardozo, St Andre sarpanch said.

Morjim sarpanch, Vaishali Shetgaonkar was informed by the health department about a villager who arrived in the state on Friday and has been marked for home quarantine. The concerned ward member was then instructed to keep an eye to ensure that the native stays at home.

“We are constantly in touch with government health officers for all the dos and don’ts required to monitor the home-quarantined. Panch members have been briefed to go around the wards and ensure that the protocol is followed by those that have been hand-stamped,” Guruprasad Naik, sarpanch of Harvalem panchayat said.

However, ensuring that those inked with the home quarantine stamp stay indoors can be a Herculean task for the panchayat alone. In such cases, villagers have acted as the eyes-and-ears of the civic body.

Directed to quarantine herself at home and avoid socializing, a lady from Siridao had been seen often venturing out of her home during the isolation period. Residents took it upon themselves to act as vigilantes and informed the police.

“After that episode, there has been no noise about people under home-quarantine breaking rules,” Pandurang Mangueshkar, a resident of Siridao said.

In Taleigao, a young man was often seen joyriding through the village on his two-wheeler during the isolation period.

“People really act stupid, sometimes,” Taleigao sarpanch, Agnelo Da Cunha, said.

He said that the panchayat coordinates with health officers to implement the stay-at-home policy for the quarantined and wherever necessary, they even take the help of the police.

“The villagers complained to us following which we intervened. He continued breaking protocol despite our warning. We told the officers to lift him and put him inside if he’s not listening,” Agnelo said. The panchayat has now deployed vigilantes to act as covid-19 warriors and keep an eye on the home-quarantined.


