‘Pandemic has compelled everybody to go digital’
2020-04-23
With decades of tech experience, Shashikant Chaudhary is a well known serial entrepreneur and angel investor, who has a knack for identifying disruptive technologies early on. Speaking to TOI, he gives an interesting peek into our world’s immediate future, post the lockdown.

Excerpts...

Q. What will be the new normal post lockdown?

A. Living in the virtual world is the new normal. We now will be living in a hybrid world where boundaries between physical and virtual realm will be blurred. This pandemic will force everyone to go digital, so much so that digital will become a way of life. It will be a necessity for survival itself. 

Q. In what way will our social life be affected?

A. Interestingly, there would be new connotation to “social distancing”. People with constant access to the Internet will be more privileged than others, thus increasing the gap between social classes, a new “social distance”. We are about to start new traditions, like not being comfortable with strangers, no shaking hands etc. People would be using tech solutions seamlessly and the role of Internet will become vital for survival.

Q. Is the work from home (WFH) concept here to stay?

A. Absolutely. In fact, a recent study by Global Workplace Analytics says more than 25% of the employees will continue to WFH on multiple days a week, up from less than 4% pre-coronavirus. So many companies have now realized that a lot of work can be managed from home and even employees are getting comfortable with this format.

Q. Has the home now become the fulcrum for everything, from work to entertainment?

A. Yes. Now, all experiences will have to be centred around the home. Be it education, 
entertainment, health, office work, buying groceries and medicine. Companies have to re-work their approaches to get things done and deliver services or products to the new focus — home. For the individual, it’s a survival-first strategy now. Products and services which are essential to survival will be consumed on priority. 

Q. Which are the top three sectors that will see an immediate impact?

A. Education is the first. The shift from offline to online is the new normal and not only tutorial apps, even traditional schools and colleges will have to innovate. In fact, many universities the world over have made their courses open and free. Apart from that, professionals will also continue to upgrade themselves through online content. Entertainment is second. As staying in becomes the new going out, we are already witnessing a huge demand for digital content for entertainment, including social media, gaming, news, video streaming and books as people seek to cope with boredom and fill up the time previously taken by travelling and socializing face-to-face. A lot of online gaming companies are keeping young ones busy. Health care is third. Many aspects of health care will see an increased adoption of technology. Telemedicine and online consulting is a way patients are engaging with doctors. A start-up, Yourphysio from Nagpur, is providing online consultation and physiotherapy sessions to patents who are at home. In fact, they are now serving clients from metros too. The other sectors that will do well are the ones providing the IT infrastructure to enable technology-based services.

Q. Some feel that the new converts to tech-based services will revert to offline mode post-lockdown. Your thoughts?

A. Typically, when tech usage is more than four hours a day, the technology becomes transparent. In 21 days, people have already developed a muscle memory and are now getting comfortable. These trends are now irreversible as the fear of tech-based apps will be gone due to the daily forced usage.


