Pandemic impact: Political parties gear up for virtual rallies
2020-06-09
BENGALURU: Political rallies as we know them are unlikely to return anytime soon, thanks to the pandemic. Union home minister Amit Shah’s virtual rally on Sunday ahead of assembly elections in Bihar will be the new norm, what with social distancing norms in place. Political parties say they have no choice, but to bank on digital platforms to reach out to the masses. 

Karnataka BJP and Congress are already pulling out all the stops to connect with people by changing all scheduled campaign events into virtual ones.

BJP has planned a virtual rally titled ‘Samartha Nayakatva - Samartha Bharatha’ on June 14. The party’s national general secretary (organization) BL Santosh, chief minister BS Yediyurappa and state party president Nalin Kumar Kateel will jointly address the audience.

“We want to ensure at least one crore participants,” said AH Anand, BJP spokesperson. “We have already roped in 58 lakh subscriptions. The idea is to reach out to netizens to highlight the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Shah and Yediyurappa, especially in times of Covid-19.”

Congress is also gearing up to go digital. The party plans to livestream the swearing-in ceremony of new president DK Shivakumar on various digital platforms. The event, dubbed ‘Prathijna Dina’ will also be held on June 14.

“The government has put in place rules to tackle the pandemic, so we plan to connect party workers and leaders from gram panchayats and urban wards through Zoom app. It will be much bigger than BJP’s Bihar rally,” said Shivakumar. “About 10 lakh people are expected to attend.”

Deputy CM CN Ashwath Narayan, who holds the information technology portfolio, said virtual political rallies cost next to nothing. “For A huge political rally, parties must spend huge money on hiring helicopters, chairs, flag makers, stage decorators, hotel stays, cars, buses and trucks, besides food, but for a virtual rally the party hardly needs to spend anything,” he said.

Narayan said if the pandemic scare continues, the forthcoming gram panchayat elections will see a string of virtual rallies. However, experts say connectivity will play a key role and parties may struggle to reach out to voters in remote villages.


