Hyderabad: Pandemic to push back new malls by few years
2020-04-22
HYDERABAD: With the retail sector suffering the hardest blow due to the Covid-19 pandemic, new malls, that were expected to hit the city market in 2020, could now take another five years to come up, said industry experts. Retail rentals too are likely to drop by 10% to 15%. 


According to the data available with Anarock Property Consultants, Hyderabad was expected to see as many as seven malls, spanning over nearly 2 million square feet (sft) area, this year. 



“Backed by Hyderabad’s ongoing commercial growth and the recent uptake of office spaces by multi-nationals and national firms, it was expected that both the residential and retail segments would see heightened activity,” said Anuj Puri, chairman of Anarock. 

“However, since retailers will re-look at their expansion strategies now, we will have to wait and see how much of the demand will actually remain,” Anuj added. 

The crisis is likely to impact retail rentals as well. At present, the average leasing rates range between Rs 100 per sft and Rs 150 per sft. 

Higher floors, in some areas, attracted an additional charge Rs 50 to Rs 80. 

“Mall owners might have to revise these charges, at least for the interim period, till the market stabilises again,” said a leading developer, who has a mall in the offing. “Most retail stores will now shift gears and use their physical stores only as fronts for their online businesses. Also, construction of new malls is unlikely to begin anytime soon,” he added. 

Agrees, Shubhranshu Pani, managing director (Retail Services) at global real estate services firm, Jones Lang LaSalle. “The market will be a little more difficult for retailers over the next four-five months. So, I feel they will want to wait for some time before they start construction,” Pani said, though optimistic about the sector slowing bouncing back by Diwali. 

“In India, online retail comprises only four to six per cent of the total market. Though shopping habits of people might change for the next one year – leading to the online share doubling – I think it’ll be temporary. Physical stores will continue to capture the majority share in the country,” Pani added.

