Pandemic leaves actor Jayamala’s daughter stranded in Britain
2020-05-11
London: Whilst the first seven repatriation flights bringing back stranded Indian nationals from Britain are now underway, thousands of Indian students remain stranded in the UK, who have not been allocated a seat.

Soundarya Jayamala, 29, daughter of former Karnataka minister for women and child development, Jayamala, is among hundreds of students from the state who remain stranded and desperate to get back.

Jayamala is studying a four-year Bachelor’s degree in zoology at Swansea University and was due to take her finals in the summer, but those exams and her graduation ceremony have been cancelled owing to Covid-19.

Instead she has to submit essays online and since her lectures finished in April, she just wants to get back, not least because a professor has died of Covid and two others have tested positive for the virus at her university.

“The cases are getting worse here and I feel like it is going to get harder for us to get back. I live alone and I want to be with my family,” said Jayamala. “I feel very unsafe. There is no social distancing. I am worried about leaving my apartment. It is so scary to even buy groceries. I am worried about catching Covid. The procedure to contact a hospital here is so long,” she said. “It is not what I am used to. Back home we can see a doctor immediately. I have not been out of my flat at all. It is safer for me to be in India.”

Her visa and tenancy contract will expire soon and she is running out of money.

She had even tried to fly to India on March 21 on the last flight allowed to depart the UK for India, but she and three other students were not allowed to board once they reached Dubai. They were stranded at Dubai airport for more than 17 hours before being sent back to the UK. “There were people in the airport coughing and ambulances coming back and forth carrying people who could not breathe. We did not have anywhere to sit as so many flights were cancelled. People were sleeping on the floor. It was traumatic. I wasn’t tested for Covid in any of the airports. They didn’t even check my temperature.”

When she got back to Swansea, despite having returned her keys to her landlady, she managed to get her apartment back. “I just need to get back to India, I don’t mind the quarantine,” she said.


