Pandemic spanner in Yogi@3 mega event?
2020-03-15
Lucknow: The coronavirus scare and sudden inclement weather over past two weeks are likely to throw the spanner in UP government’s elaborate plans of holding big celebrations to mark its third anniversary.

Sources said alternative plans are being drawn up since chief minister Yogi Adityanath has himself recommended restrictions on public meetings.

Initially, it had been planned that CM Yogi would hold a press briefing in Lucknow on March 18 to mark the completion of three years in power and list the achievements of his government and then spend the next six days travelling across the state and meeting people and professional groups like doctors, chartered accountants and traders.

Similarly, all the ministers, MLAs and MPs were also scheduled to visit districts and hold meetings to apprise the people with the government’s achievements in last three years.

“There may be restrictions on public events in light of the coronavirus threat, and so there may be greater stress now on distribution of booklets with details of works of all MLAs. The booklets with data on development and welfare schemes will be released to mark the event,” said a senior BJP functionary.

Sources said CM Yogi may now address gatherings in 10-12 districts, while ministers, MLAs and MPs may hold press conferences, but the programme may change since the situation on both coronavirus and weather fronts has been changing rapidly, said an official.

The ruling party leaders and senior officials are keeping a watch on changing weather while charting out alternative plan.

“We witnessed unexpected heavy rains, strong winds and hail storms. We had not anticipated such weather, but now we will have to draw up programme for anniversary celebrations keeping this factor in mind,” he said, while adding that the CM’s public engagements over next couple of weeks are also being reassessed.

“We do not want to create any panic and the CM would definitely not want to cancel events unnecessarily. However, the situation is fluid and decisions will be taken close to the dates of planned events,” the official said.


