Pandemic takes the shine off wedding shopping
2020-06-02
Kochi: Shops are now open for business after nearly two months of total lockdown. As shoppers and outlets adapt to the new normal, shopping experience in the city has undergone a drastic change. 

The prospective bride and groom, who used to try on a dozen outfits before choosing one, now clad in gloves and masks just point toward the one they like and take it home without even trying. The stylist in his/her blue gloves and sterilized scissors looks all the more like a surgeon. At liquor outlets, which are finally abuzz, tipplers as usual are a very disciplined lot as they hop from circle to circle waiting for their turn. 

With the end of the pandemic not in sight, couples who had their weddings scheduled during the lockdown have started to stop waiting and conduct a wedding following restrictions. Their shopping options however have now become drastically limited. 

“We obviously wanted a big fat wedding but it has been a year since the wedding was fixed and we were done waiting. I guess for women shopping is easier if they are selecting sarees as the fitting issue doesn’t arise. However, for men buying a suit without trying it on is a gamble,” said Bijoy Mathew, who is slated to tie the knot this week. 

At most major outlets, the customer’s phone number and name are noted at a front desk set up exclusively as part of the containment strategy. The staff then record their temperature and sprays sanitizer on both hands. Later, the customers are made to wear plastic disposable gloves before they are allowed to touch the clothes.

“We kept the shirt against my shoulder to see if it fits. For the pants, the saleswoman showed me something called the neck trick. She placed the waistline of the jeans around my neck. Apparently, if the waistline comfortably meets the back of your neck, then the pants will fit. She also took measurements to help me pick the pants. It did fit,” said Mathew. 

Meanwhile, the salons are also becoming lively. At major salons, the stylists wear rubber gloves and use disposable cloth sheets to cover customers while cutting hair. “We used to keep our sterilizer in the backroom. Now, we have placed it in the main hall itself so that customers would feel more comfortable and safe. We are asking customers to bring their own towels if they require a hair wash. All customers are made to use sanitizers and wear plastic gloves before entering the salon,” said Sujith, a Kochi-based stylist. 

Liquor shopping has also undergone a makeover. Most bars now have circles drawn for maintaining social distancing in the queues. Some have even employed bouncers to manage the queue. The staffer approaches the customers one by one and take their temperature reading. Also, disinfectant solutions are handed out to those in the queue.


