Pandemic puts brakes on big fat destination weddings in Rajasthan
2020-03-19
JAIPUR: The outbreak of Covid-19 has made a dent on fat destination weddings which were scheduled to be held in coming months.


The event managers have to return the advance which they had taken from non-resident Indian clients for weddings slated for April. Besides, managers and their clients have crossed their fingers for upcoming marriages in May, June and July.

Rajasthan and its archaeological beauty appeals many non-resident Indians (NRIs), celebrities from Hollywood and Hindi film industry to organize weddings in the state.

TOI on Tuesday spoke to various wedding managers who deal with global clients from United Kingdom (UK), United States of America (USA), Italy and some parts of Europe.

“Every day, we are getting calls from them. Since Jaipur reported the Italian couple affected by coronavirus, I got calls from my clients in US and UK who urged me to cancel their upcoming weddings in April,” said Siddhartha Chaturvedi, a wedding manager based in Jaipur told TOI.

He added that in this particular case, where people are affected and are scared of travelling, the wedding managers and the hotels are giving the full refund of the booking amounts. “Usually if our client cancels without valid reason, we don’t repay the advance we take because of various operational costs. But in this case, we have to repay their advance. This year would be worst-ever for the state when we talk about marriage management and destination weddings,” Chaturvedi added.

He said many weddings were planned in Jaipur, Jodhpur and Jaisalmer which are either on the verge of cancellations or the clients are jittery.

“This year, the auspicious days for Hindu marriages which are usually more in winters are actually more in summers starting from April to August. We were thinking of getting good business while because of the corona scare, big losses underway,” said Mohit Sand, another Jaipur-based wedding planner.


