Pandemic caused 61% drop in reporting of strokes: Study
2020-05-23
AHMEDABAD: The Covid-19 pandemic not only affected those infected by the spread of the virus, but also those with other ailments – a study covering 13 established stroke centres in India including those in Gujarat found. The study revealed that there is 61% reduction in reporting of stroke cases.

The paper, published in Annals of New York Academy of Sciences, USA, had city-based neurologists Dr Sudhir Shah and Dr Arvind Sharma as co-authors along with NIPER-A faculty Dr Pallab Bhattacharya.

Some of the institutes covered in the study included AIIMS Delhi, PGI Chandigarh and CMC Ludhiana along with NHL Medical College, Sterling Hospital, Zydus Hospital and Neuro1 Hospital from Ahmedabad. Cities covered in the study included Ahmedabad, Chandigarh, Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram, Pune, Mumbai and Kolkata.

“Overall reduction of 61.22% in reporting of weekly stroke cases has been observed across the country since the lockdown. Intravenous thrombolysis and endovascular procedures have been severely impacted with 64.76% and 67.21% reduction respectively,” said Dr Shah. “The drop in cases occurred equally in both Covid-19 designated and non-designated hospitals.” 

The study also noted similarities in the impact of Covid-19 on stroke care in India and the US.

“The decrease in acute stroke cases presenting to emergency rooms at stroke centres has been estimated at 30-40% in the US, about two-thirds of the reduction seen in India,” said Dr Bhattacharya, adding that India has higher incidence of strokes compared to the US.

The study pointed out that the efforts to raise awareness about not ignoring life-threatening emergencies such as stroke was lacking in India as patients and their relatives feared approaching hospitals.

“Extreme measures adopted to contain the spread of Covid-19 have resulted in a fall in the number of stroke patients reaching hospitals in India. The lockdown helped to contain the virus and break the chain, but it also created difficulty in timely consultation with caregivers, leading minor stroke cases to remain undiagnosed,” said Dr Sharma. “We observed that several patients delayed approaching hospitals even at the onset of symptoms and those requiring follow-ups showed up late.”


