Tamil Nadu: ‘Pandemic is not over yet, but we’re in right direction’
2020-04-17
CHENNAI: Nearly one in every seven patients who tested positive for Covid-19 in the state is now discharged. The list of people in quarantine has been cut to just 30% as the lockdown’s second phase begins.


"The pandemic isn’t over yet," said director of public health Dr K Kolandaswamy. "But we know we are in the right direction. We are screening and testing more people, yet we are seeing fewer number of positive patients. This is the first good news we are seeing."

If the decline continues, epidemiologists say, the state will be able to effectively delay and pull down the peak after May 3. "TN must continue to test more outside clusters to ensure there is no community spread. A good planned exit from lockdown should be based on test results as evidence," said Dr Manoj V Murhekar, director of National Institute of Epidemiology which is presently conducting epidemiological studies for TN. The Kerala model of contract tracing and monitoring should be replicated in TN with powerful health resources, he said.

The peak in TN began after March 31, when it reported 50 cases. Since then it has crossed the three figure mark on April 1, 3 and 12 and was in the 90s at least twice. "This means we will see a bulk of patients leaving hospitals in the next 2-3 days," said Dr S Ragunandhan of Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital.

The average admission period is 14-20 days and all are in hospital isolation for at least 14 days. To be discharged after the 14th day, a patient should test negative at least twice in 24 hours. "Some didn’t have negative results for nearly 20 days although they showed no symptoms," said dean Dr R Jayanthi.

Information from the Covid-19 control room shows 80% of patients in government hospitals have no/very mild symptoms and 20% severe cough or breathlessness. Health minister C Vijayabaskar and officials say less than 10 patients in all hospitals are on ventilator support.

The fatality rate so far is close to 1% despite high incidence of co-morbidities such diabetes and hypertension among patients. Infectious diseases expert Dr V Ramasubramanian says it is important to keep a close eye on patients in wards. "We still have about 1,000 patients in hospitals."

Nearly 30% of patients are above 50, most have at least one co-morbidity. "The average age of people who died is 56. We had at least three people less than 50, six in their 50s, three in their 60s, two in their 70s. One was 96."

All those discharged have been asked to remain on quarantine for two more weeks to ensure they rest and eat healthy and continue to come to hospitals for periodic review," said Kilpauk Medical College Hospital dean Dr Vasanthamani P. "We are encouraging a large pool of healthy patients who have recovered to stay fit so they can donate their plasma to help some other patients."

