Pandemic brings down open-defecation in villages
2020-05-13
Hubballi: Many villagers who have so far been reluctant to use toilets, are now learning to use them, instead of defecating in the open. Bagalkot ZP CEO Gangubai Manakar is making use of the lockdown to motivate villagers to use toilets, and avoid defecating in the open. As a result, people in many villages are now using toilets, which they also see as a means of maintaining social distancing.

After two people tested positive for Covid-19 in Danakshiruru village in Bagalkot, the village was sealed and declared a containment zone. Though many families had toilets, they were not using them, but defecating in the open. Due to their village being sealed, villagers were unable to defecate outside, and decided to appeal to the authorities to allow them to do so, however, Gangubai explained to them the risk of the virus spreading through faeces, and that they could maintain social distancing better if they used toilets in their houses.

“After my interaction with villagers, not only villagers from Danakshirur, but also residents of many villages in the district have agreed to use toilets in their houses. Covid-19 has come as a boon for us to convince reluctant villagers to make use of toilets to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus. We have also explained in detail about how Covid-19 could spread, including through faeces, and also how it is important to maintain social distancing to prevent getting infected. Thus many villagers in the district are using toilets now,” said Gangubai. 

“I have also recorded a voice message that explains how using toilets helps to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus, and played it through the public address system. We also created awareness on the issue by beating drums in villages, asking villagers not to defecate in the open. Our efforts are now slowly yielding results, as many people are now using toilets, and some who still don’t have toilets, are keen to make use of government funds to construct them,” she said.


