Mangaluru: Pandemic hits wedding industry hard
2020-03-28
MANGALURU: The wedding business is facing an uncertain future due to the Covid-19 crisis. For the time being, most weddings that were to be held in April, have been postponed indefinitely. Caterers, event management firms, photographers, halls, musical ensembles, hotels and other related businesses are busy attending to calls, and refunding advance payments made by their clients.


Sudhakar Kamath of Kamath Caterers said, “Most weddings that were scheduled for April have been postponed. It is a difficult phase for the industry that is currently engaged in repaying the advances taken from clients. So far, we have received cancellations till April 26, and people are closely watching the situation,” he said. 

On the other hand, people are considering organising functions with smaller gatherings, once the lockdown ends. “Instead of calling 1,000 people, they may settle for 100. All functions have been cancelled up to April 14. Almost all halls and convention centres were booked during this period for functions, including birthday parties, baby showers, engagements and other functions. Even the Uttarkriya function, observed on the 11th day, following the death of a person, is restricted to homes,” said Kamath. 

For those who have postponed weddings, finding the required venue could also be a challenge, as people have made advance bookings till February 2021. December bookings are full. One of the options left for those who have postponed weddings is to conduct the wedding in a temple, and the reception could be held as per availability of the venue, because muhurats are not seen for the reception. In Mangaluru, the trend is to conduct the wedding and reception on the same day.

Bhojraj Kalladka, manager, Sanghaniketan Convention Hall,said, “We have been receiving calls, and people have been sending letters to the office, seeking postponement of weddings. We have refunded a few people and the rest will be refunded after the lockdown is lifted and our office reopens. We had about 14 weddings booked in April, of which seven have been cancelled so far,” he said. 

With the cancellations of weddings on the rise, the commercial photography industry has been hit hard. Shridhar N Shettigar, president, South Kanara Photographers Association, consisting of 3,224 professional photographers from Dakshina Kannada and Udupi, said, “April-May is considered as the peak season, and it is unfortunate that weddings are postponed in this period. Since it is important to keep pace with the latest technology, many photographers have invested several lakhs of rupees on mirrorless cameras and other equipment, recently,” he said. 

“On an average, a photographer gets up to 10-15 orders during the peak season, in the entire year, and mostly relies on this season for earning. Everyone was happy that there was no moudya (days when weddings are not conducted as per the Hindu calendar), but with the Covid-19 pandemic, the industry has come to a standstill,” he added. 

The industry’s expectations were high this year. When compared to the previous two years, this year had no moudya for April and May, which meant more functions would be held.


