Pandemic casts shadow on iftar and Eid preparations in Jaipur
2020-05-18
JAIPUR: The usual iftars parties, eateries serving special delicacies, get-togethers and makeshift markets are being missed by residents of pandemic-hit Walled City of Jaipur.


As the month of Ramzan reached its last leg with lockdown being extended up to May 31, families are holding virtual iftaars and get-togethers over video platforms to make the most of the festive season. For Ahmed family living in a haveli at Babu Ka Tibba in Ramganj, Ramzan is very different this year.

Under curfew since March last week, for the first time the family faced a shortage of groceries to prepare special delicacies for their family. 

“My children and extended family relish special dishes which I made every Ramzan. But this year staple diet such as mutton and chicken is yet to be seen,” said Gulnaz Ahmed, one of the daughters-in-law at the haveli. 

Ahmed family lives in a probably the biggest haveli in the Ramganj with two gardens. It sees 10-15 iftar parties every Ramzan hosted by them, their relatives and by their neighbours unlike this year.

“It is really a very difficult time for us. I make sure to connect my family with our relatives and friends almost every day during Iftar and Sehri time, which actually distreses us and allows us to forget the fear of the virus,” said Sameer Ahmed, son of Gulnaz Ahmed.

He now spends time with his cousins playing basketball and badminton and prays at home. By now everyone in Walled City area is clear that they are going to be locked up in houses even during Eid.

Naim Rabbani, a father of three daughters, lives in Ramganj near Chotte Chauper which have him a clear view of the makeshift markets every year. But this year all they can see are barricaded roads with ambulances and police. 

“My daughters and my wife ususally did their Eid shopping for 15 days. This year I and my wife have convinced our daughter to not purchase clothes,” said Rabbani.

What makes most of them sad is that even mosques have not been not been illuminated this year. Locals say every individual in the Walled City is scared and under the stress as several residents have tested positive.


