Pandemic creates opportunities for realtors to find potential buyers
2020-05-10
KOLHAPUR: Developers and builders got a ray of hope this week when many of them received queries from citizens from Mumbai, Pune and even abroad keen on buying ready-to-possess housing units in the city. 

Due to coronavirus pandemic, the citizens, who have shifted to megacities, are keen on returning or at least want to shift their families to Kolhapur. They are making enquires about the available flats and row houses, developers said.

Vidyanand Bedekar, president of Credai, Kolhapur, said they had received at least 10-15 queries every day over the past week regarding purchase of ready-possession flats.

“We have discussed it and what we can for those who want to buy properties. We have started deliberations so that we can get out of the slow down caused due to the coronavirus pandemic,” he said.

Bedekar said developers have been told to keep a list ready of the projects and housing units available so that those making enquiries can be assisted properly.

The coronavirus crisis came as a double whammy for the developers, who are already reeling from the ban on construction activities in large parts of the flood-affected areas of the city last year. The ban has been lifted but many constructions have been affected due to redrawing of the flood lines.

Several housing units have remained unsold and the construction sector is looking at a setback due to shortage of labourers. The sector employs around 70% of migrant labourers and most of them have signed up to return to their hometowns. Currently, permissions have been granted to take up the projects which were stalled midway or those sanctioned before the lockdown began.

“Considering that the sector employs large number of people we expect several policy measures to be adopted to boost buying power. The interest rates and taxation should be lowered for next three years,” he said.

Recently the developers through video conferencing raised their concerns and made some suggestions to district guardian minister Satej Patil. Patil also suggested them to tap potential customers, who want to return to the city. The developers suggested that the allied services such as airport, training for local labourers and setting up the network of business should be harnessed. This, they said, would convince buyers about making property purchases.


