Pandemic fight a social battle: State govt panel
2020-04-08
Kolkata: The Bengal government has taken global professionals on board to tackle the novel coronavirus pandemic, with an aim to frame a 360-degree management strategy of primary reporting from the grassroots, identifying hotspots, running random tests, and finally treatment of patients.

“The entire process involves a whole lot of inputs from health workers at the grassroots to medical experts and from individuals to public policy-makers. The chief minister has taken a timely step to adopt a comprehensive management strategy,” said committee convenor Abhijit Chowdhury, hepatology head at SSKM Hospital.

The global advisory team is in talks with the government over ways to increase testing of people showing primary symptoms, such as cough and fever. “Fighting a pandemic isn’t just a medical issue. It is a social battle that requires a convergence of perception by scientists, doctors, administrators and communicators. A person having fever may try to hide it if his neighbours panic and try to drive him out of the locality. It will defeat the entire purpose,” the team convenor said. The advisory board will take these behavioural insights, including the fear and apprehension among individuals, into account while framing policies. “The team, therefore, includes economists, public policy experts and communication specialists, other than doctors,” Chowdhury said. 

He said a pandemic has impacted the healthcare system. Public policy-makers have to leverage the resources, based on inputs from the grassroots. “Economist Abhijit Banerjee has prescribed certain cost-effective measures to tackle the virus and its effects. He wants a strong reporting system that will enable health workers to focus on areas, where the incidence of fever and cough is high,” the public health specialist said.

Chowdhury who has worked with the Nobel laureate in rural Birbhum isn’t losing sight of the impact the novel coronavirus and the consequent lockdown are having on daily wage earners and land labourers as they can’t work. “The virus has an impact on labour productivity. Banerjee will study the impact and suggest ways to come over the crisis,” the convenor said. “Sets of measures have to be in place with proper coordination at local, district and state levels, apart from hospital management. The medical expert panel has already framed a standard treatment protocol for Covid-19 patients in hospitals. We need to get out of the perception that the novel coronavirus is fatal,” Chowdhury said. 


