Pune: Panel advises more oxygen stations, greater surveillance to cut back Covid-19 death rate
2020-04-28
PUNE: The committee that submitted the death audit report to the state government recently has suggested that oxygen stations be made available at all Covid-19 hospitals and quarantine centres. It has also called for stricter surveillance of senior citizens with co-morbidities.


An oxygen mask near the bed, connected to a central oxygen supply system or to an oxygen cylinder, helps Covid-19 patients with breathing difficulty. Breathlessness is a common symptom of such patients and delays in treatment worsen the condition, leading to death.




The audit report observed that the elderly and pre-morbid patients were largely succumbing to the coronavirus. “We have told health authorities to watch this category of patients which is in a large number. The screening of quarantined and isolated asymptomatic patients should be done regularly,” the committee said.

“The teams that visited Mumbai and Pune made similar suggestions which the state has started implementing,” said Subhash Salunkhe, technical advisor to the state government on infectious diseases. He is a member of both teams.

Salunkhe said Sassoon hospital has more oxygen stations now. The hospital accounts for more than 50 of the 80 deaths in the Pune Metropolitan Region.

Pune’s Covid-19 mortality rate on Monday was 5.8% as against 8.5% ten days ago and 6.7 % five days ago. The state’s Covid-19 mortality rate was 4.24%.


Committee advises more oxygen stations, greater surveillance to cut back death rate

Pune divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said the public works department had set up an oxygen generation plant at Sassoon hospital in 11 days.

“It has been beneficial. Other Covid-19 hospitals have been told to ensure they have oxygen supply facilities,” he said.




Public health expert R Jotkar said a helpline to facilitate self-reporting by critical patients, standby ambulances at each isolation facility for transporting critical patients, measuring oxygen saturation of residents during containment, a survey with thermoscanners and oxymeters, and transfer of those below 94% saturation to oxygen stations will bring down the mortality rate.

A central health team that visited Pune last week said Covid-19’s doubling rate in Pune was seven days, a little higher than the rest of the country.

Every ninth sample in Pune was found to be Covid-19 positive while it was every 23rd sample in the rest of India.

Mumbai team member Avinash Supe said they had strongly recommended provision of early oxygen to patients with breathing trouble.

“The mortality rate will come down if all our recommendations are implemented,” he said.

He added that the cremation protocols of the Covid-19 patients should be adhered to.

The team had advised that high-risk persons be identified fast, testing and surveillance be increased and contact tracing done quickly.

Lockdown protocols must be enforced in slums and markets where social distancing does not exist.

Institutional quarantining instead of home quarantine should be stressed upon for slum areas, the members said.

