Panic-stricken people look up to siddha to fend off Covid-19
2020-04-01
TRICHY: Scores of people looking for protection from Covid-19 have been making a beeline for the government siddha hospital in Trichy to catch hold of the scarcely available Kabasura Kudineer Chooranam. This comes in the wake of an advisory from the Union Ayush ministry, suggestions from siddha doctors through media as well as anonymous WhatsApp forwards prescribing it as a shield to boost one’s immunity level.


The government siddha hospital has been functioning on the campus of Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH). “Nearly 800 people collected the mixture of Kabasura Kudineer Chooranam and Nilavembu Chooranam from us in a single day today,” district siddha medical officer (DSMO) Dr S Kamaraj told TOI. Since the supply of Kabasura Kudineer from Tamil Nadu Medicinal Plant Farms and Herbal Medicine Corporation Limited (Tampcol) is limited, government siddha doctors have prescribed the combination of 25 grams of Kabasura powder and Nilavembu powder. 

DSMO Kamaraj said the quantity will be enough for five days of medication to a person. “The concept of siddha medication is mixture of herbals. So, we mix Nilavembu with Kabasura chooranam and prescribe it,” he said. While Nilavembu Kudineer is an anti-viral available every day at the government health centres to tackle dengue, Kabasura Kudineer Chooram is an anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory prescribed regularly for treatment of fever, cold, cough, sneezing and sore throat — symptoms of Covid-19 also. Another siddha medicine, Aadathodai Manapagu for 10 ml, along with Kabasura Kudineer and Nilavembu mixture has also been suggested by the Ayush ministry. 

“Kabasura Kudineer Chooram acts as an immunomodulator because of the ingredients in the medicine. It will boost the immunity level of those taking the extract as a prophylactic measure as advised by the physician,” said government assistant siddha medical officer Dr M Vathsala. “Not everyone is required to take Kabasura Kudineer. Those with the exposure to the disease can take as a preventive measure. People are under the wrong impression that taking medicine and roaming around the town will keep them immunized against the virus. Stay at home is the medicine they should follow mandatorily,” said Dr Vathsala. The homeopathy wing at the government siddha block has seen a steady increase of crowd to get Arsenicum Album 30 medicine for Covid-19 prevention, as suggested by Ayush ministry . 


