Coronavirus panic spreads faster than virus in Telangana
2020-02-12
HYDERABAD: Among the 140-odd people in the state who have been currently kept in isolation facilities at home or hospitals for over 28 days, many are under the false impression of having contracted the disease, even after testing negative for the virus, said officials on Tuesday. Officials said that few members have been constantly asking for retesting and are calling district level monitoring teams seeking guidance. At least two repeat tests were done at the ICMR lab recently to assuage the panic-stricken patients.

“While so far severe psychological illness has not been reported in the suspected patients, there are some who had returned from China and tested negative for the virus but continue to believe that they are infected. They are very worried on what to do or what not to do. They are being counselled,” said Dr Shiva Balaji, head of state, Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP).

 
 
Meanwhile, being in quarantine means that a person cannot go out of a room or not meet and speak to anyone (mobile is allowed only at home and not in hospital isolation) for days together. This can easily take a toll on the mental state of the person in quarantine, say experts, adding that being a highly social people, remaining secluded for longer periods has proved difficult to deal with for most Indians.

“Being in quarantine can cause severe psychological distress to the suspected patients if the aspect of their mental health is not addressed. Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and depression are common in such cases as their social health can be kept be viewed as a separate entity. Heightened fear regarding their health and death can lead into panic attacks, which can develop into an anxiety disorder in patients. Sometimes not getting timely updates on their health and not having someone to discuss or instil confidence can cause psychological trauma,” said Dr Virinchi Sharma, consultant psychiatrist.

The state government had assigned counsellors to address the issue of patients in quarantine slipping into depression and a few patients at the Gandhi hospital were counselled by psychiatrists at the hospital.


