Jaipur: Panic at Central railway hospital as 13-year-old girl found Covid-19 positive
2020-05-09
JAIPUR: Panic prevailed at the railway hospital in Ganpati Nagar when a 13-year-old daughter of a railway employee was found positive.

What is more worrying is the fact that after almost 48 hours a staff working at the hospital was also found Covid-19 positive. Though railway authorities said they have sent almost 11 people, who were the primary contacts of the girl, to self-quarantine, there were unofficial reports that these staff members were on duty till Friday.

It all started on May 6 when a girl, along with her parents, came to the hospital complaining of abdominal pain. “She was kept in general ward for two hours and was later shifted to Mahatma Gandhi hospital. I don’t think the railway hospital, so far, has followed the guidelines for Covid-19 patients. They should have prepared a list of those to be quarantined which were in primary contact with the girl. However, they have merely sent four people including some doctors and nurses to quarantine,” Mukesh Mathur, general secretary, north western railways employees union (NWREU), told TOI.

He claimed that neither the hospital was sanitized nor the authorities worked to find out other employees who were in contact with the girl and her family prior to the day she was found positive. “I have met the chief medical director of the railway hospital and urged him to develop proper quarantine facilities and follow the SOPs in such cases. If needed we will meet and give a memorandum to the General Manager, NWR,” he added. He added that an employee of railway hospital Jaipur was also found positive.

However, authorities maintained that SOPs are being followed and a list of 11 people has been prepared who were the primary contacts of the girl. “Doctors of NWR are monitoring the situation closely. Contact tracing of patient has been completed and the contacts have been advised for quarantine as per protocol,” claimed Abhay Sharma, chief public relations officer, NWR.

However, sources claimed that some of the doctors and nurses who attended to the girl were working till 5pm on Friday.

TOI attempted to call medial director M L Chaudhary of Central Hospital, Jaipur, to know the protocol followed and also if the railway authorities have given intimation in this regard to the state government, but he was unavailable.

Manjusha Jain, divisional railway manager (DRM), Jaipur, said, “Our hospital is regularly being sanitised and we are following the required protocol. In this particular case, the CMD would be the right person to comment further. We did random sampling of natives of railway colony and also the report of parents of the girl was negative.”


