Panic, resentment among Muslims over Tablighi fallout
2020-04-02
NAGPUR: Several members of Muslim community woke up to panic calls from their friends and relatives after claims that over 50 Tablighi Jamaat members from Nagpur alone attended the Delhi congregation earlier in March and they were connected to positive Covid-19 cases across the country.

The development drew sharp criticism from clerics and intellectuals who slammed the city administration and governments for allegedly communalizing the issue even during the time of a crisis.

As touring is an integral part of the Tablighi jamaat belief, many Muslims were even doubting members from the group with whom they came in contact in last two weeks.

A general insurance consultant from Jaffar Nagar said, “A non-muslim friend called me up in the morning cautioning me to be careful in my area. Others called to ask if I mingle with Tablighis often so they could go for a test. I was clueless but later read about it.”

Javed Alam Khan, from the same area, said there were deliberate attempts to malign the community. “It is wrong to say Muslims are spreading the disease. All should be treated as suspects and not belonging to a particular religion. I am not against investigation. Suspects must be traced to control the disease and those responsible must be questioned,” he said.

A Mominpura resident accused the media and government of targeting Muslims and creating Hindu-Muslim rift. “Tablighis themselves informed police that so many of them were there but police asked them to stay where they were. This wasn’t handled properly,” he said.

Jamiat Ulema Nagpur district former general secretary Hafiz Sohel Arthur said six had returned by train from Nizamuddin Markaz on March 11 to Nagpur. “Rest may have come to Nagpur but how can the administration link them with the congregation. Many visit the National Capital for different reasons, not necessarily everyone had gone only for the international meet,” he said.

He added, “It is wrong to say 54 jamaatis came to Nagpur. The seven who had gone don’t have any problems. It is being portrayed that they travelled after Janata curfew and nationwide lockdown. Muslims are most law abiding. We shut masjids and madrassas on cops’ orders. We are praying at home only in national interest though we used to pray 5 times a day in masjids,” he said.

Lawyer Mohammad Fazal blamed the mismanagement of lockdown. “It was not planned. We have such a huge population and it is difficult for people to return on such short notice. Later, apologizing to nation doesn’t sate the hunger of poor. Tablighi is a tip of iceberg. There are number of religious groups that were stranded. This means there was administrative fault. Kejriwal had said there will be action in case of administrative failure. Clerics (markaz) have copies of letters given to local authorities regarding de-congestion at Markaz. Who’s failure is it,” he asked.


