Bihar: Panic buying, violation of lockdown on Day 1
2020-03-24
PATNA: People in most districts of the state defied lockdown imposed by the state government to curb spread of coronavirus on the first day on Monday.


The lockdown remained a failure in the first half of the day in Patna as most people came out of their houses like any usual day. They thronged vegetable markets, groceries and medical stores, which were exempted from lockdown purview. Many youngsters were seen riding two-wheelers without any specific purpose.

Cops were seen deployed at all major road crossings, but they were seldom stopping commuters till noon. “The government had announced the lockdown only last night and people have come out to buy necessities. We are keeping a strict vigil on every vehicle,” a constable at Boring Road crossing said.

Many autorickshaws were seen running till afternoon and some private interdistrict buses were also seen jam-packed with passengers in the morning.

Patna divisional commissioner Sanjay Kumar Agarwal later instructed the administration to seize all autorickshaws and buses which were flouting the norms. More than 50 autorickshaws were seized in the city.

Agarwal, who is also the transport secretary, said all bus stands across the state were locked down.

In Madhubani, the lockdown was by and large effective. With empty railway platforms, bus stands and roads, all modes of transport, including autorickshaws, were off the roads. Entry points of the city were barricaded to check movement of people. Police and other government vehicles were seen moving in the town, asking people to remain indoors.

However, the lockdown was not much effective in Nawada. Cops had a tough time controlling traffic. Vegetable vendors, with the intent of making an extra buck, jacked up the prices of various vegetables. Dr Shatrughan Singh, a private physician of Nawada town, said nurses were questioned by cops and asked to go back.

In Begusarai, people blatantly violated the lockdown. Youngsters were seen moving in the town till the forenoon. In the morning, even tractors carrying construction materials were seen plying on the roads. Almost all streets of the town had e-rickshaws, motorcycles and four wheelers moving. Panic buying of essential commodities was also seen in the town. Police swung into action later in the day and petty shop owners not dealing in essential commodities were shut.

In Samastipur, the lockdown evoked a good response. Few people came out on the streets but the market remained closed throughout the day. The railway station remained deserted. An anti-CAA dharna site had just five people due to the lockdown.

Heavy rush was seen in the vegetable and fruit markets in Gaya. Reports of panic buying of essential items were received from several areas of the district. The Gaya police warned violators of punitive action, including registration of criminal cases against them and imposition of fine. Gaya SSP Rajiv Mishra led a campaign for the effective implementation of the lockdown.

Residents of Biharsharif and Sheikhpura sadar showed least concern of the spread of coronavirus as they remained in markets in groups for hours. A police team led by Nalanda DM Yogendra Kumar Singh and SP Nilesh Kumar later took out a flag march which passed through the main thoroughfares of Biharsharif for creating awareness among the people.

In Madhepura, people were seen moving frequently and gathering on the roads, especially at Gudri market. Many youths were also seen enjoying joyride on the roads.

The lockdown evoked complete response in Khagaria district. All shops and business establishments, except groceries, vegetable markets, dairy booths, petrol pumps, hospitals, medical stores, LPG agencies, ration shops, ATM kiosks and banks, remained closed. Khagaria SP Meenu Kumari marched through the main thoroughfares of the town for creating awareness among the people.

In West Champaran, the lockdown was effective as all shops and business establishments downed their shutters. Rickshaws and buses were off the roads, while few private vehicles and motor bikes were seen plying on the roads.


(With inputs from C S Jha ‘Azad’ in Madhubani, S B Sinha in Nawada, Rajiv Kumar in Begusarai, S K Jain in Samastipur, Abdul Qadir in Gaya, Farrukh Nadim in Biharsharif, D N Saha in Madhepura, N P Thakur in Khagaria and Tirthraj Kushwaha in West Champaran)

