Kerala: Paramedic cops team up for Covid-19 fight
2020-04-28
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Being the frontline warriors in the fight on Covid-19 pandemic, the police are considered highly vulnerable as they often come in direct contact with the public, including those in quarantine.


To reduce the risk of police personnel contracting the virus, the state police have initiated a project, 'protecting the protectors', by using their in-house human resources.

Personnel with professional degrees in various paramedical courses have been selected, formed into a team of paramedics and have been deputed to various districts to examine those on duty and their family members and report to the higher authorities. 

Among the short-listed 100, as many as 54 personnel are on active duty while the remaining have been kept as reserve. They were handpicked from different units. Their fields of expertise include nursing and midwifery, pharmacy and pharmacology, social work, perfusion technology, health and safety, medical laboratory technology and diploma holders in sanitary inspector course. 

“Any symptoms of Covid-19 like illness or flu-like symptoms should be promptly documented and reported,” state police chief Loknath Behera’s order to all the SPs and other senior officials regarding the task assigned for the paramedic teams, said.

The healthcare teams cover all the police stations, traffic units, barracks, police buildings, special units, railway police stations, telecommunication units, battalions, detachments, police quarters and duty points in each district within their allotted jurisdiction. Ten police hospitals in the state are attached to various armed reserve battalion units, India reserve battalion, Kerala armed police battalion units, rapid response and rescue force unit, special armed police unit and the police headquarters. 

“We are also in the process of upgrading all these hospitals to the level which can be a primary treatment centre for Covid-19. This will be mainly for the police officials and their family members which in due course will be extended to the public as well,” Behera told TOI.

Each police paramedic team has been deputed under the local police doctor-in-charge. The coordination of the field level work of the team has been handed over to the commandant of Kerala armed police battalion-I Vaibhav Saxena, who is also a professionally qualified medical practitioner, under the overall coordination of ADGP (training) B Sandhya.

The team has been provided with sufficient personal protection equipment and medical equipment including masks, gloves, thermometres etc, and have also been asked to promote awareness among the police personnel and their family members.


