How evacuees bypass Wuhan authorities
2020-02-28
AGRA: Wearing T-shirts at 8-11 degrees Celsius and drinking 2.5 litres were some of the measures that people resorted to in order to keep their body temperature normal so that they get clearance from Chinese authorities to board the IAF plane that has brought them back from Wuhan to Delhi on Thursday morning.

Ashish Yadav (35), associate professor of photonic and plasmonic at Wuhan Textile University, and his 30-year-old wife, pursuing her PhD in computer science, were among the 112 people brought to Delhi from Wuhan by C-17 Globemaster of IAF. 

Narrating how they managed to get clearance to board the plane, Ashish said, “We had been warned by Chinese authorities that anyone with body temperature of over 37 degrees Celsius will not be allowed to board the plane. Therefore, at multiple locations, our body temperature was checked. Due to anxiety at one point, my body temperature rose to 37 degrees Celsius, and I was flagged by Chinese officials after which I drank several litres of water and wore only one T-shirt even when the temperature in Wuhan was between 8 and 11 degrees Celsius to bring my body temperature below 37 degrees Celsius.” 

“On Wednesday mid-noon, the Indian embassy contacted us and informed about the evacuation operation. At least 10 Indians and three Bangladeshi nationals were also flagged by Chinese authorities, after which the Indian embassy officials intervened and started negotiating with them. All the flagged passengers were given two hours’ time to bring down their body temperature to normal. We were asked to remain calm by Indian embassy authorities. Every passenger drank at least 2.5 litres of water. Finally, all were given clearance to board the plane,” said Ashish Yadav, who originally hails from Jalesar in Etah district, but lives in Agra city. 

Around 6:45 am on Thursday, the military cargo plane brought the couple, along with others Indians and 36 foreign nationals, to India. All are currently lodged at the ITBP quarantine facility in Chhawla.

Married in November 2018, the couple started living together in an apartment allotted by Wuhan University a year later, though Ashish had been living in Wuhan for much longer time. After arriving in India, the couple was overwhelmed with joy and spoke to TOI over phone after physical fitness check was done at the quarantine facility.

The couple, along with other evacuees, will be under round the clock observation for the next 14 days before being declared fit and discharged from the ITBP quarantine facility.

