Paralytic +ve Covid-19 patient makes full recovery, discharged
2020-04-15
Nagpur: Three more Covid-19 patients— a paralytic man, his wife and son— have been discharged from Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) on Tuesday. It may be a rare case of a man having suffered a stroke and making complete recovery from Covid-19.The man (43) had tested positive on March 29. A day later, his wife (42) and younger son (14) also tested positive. His elder son was found negative.The man, a resident of Jaripatka, North Nagpur, had paralytic stroke two days before being tested positive. He was admitted for paralytic stroke first in Jaripatka-based Janata Hospital, examined at Panorama MRI Centre, Shankar Nagar, and then shifted to GMCH. When his positive status became known, Janata Hospital, MRI Centre and a ward of GMCH to shut for three days. All medical staff who attended on him were tested and quarantined though all tested negative.Relatives told TOI, “Man had no symptoms during 17 days at GMCH. He responded very well to treatment and tested negative twice,” they said.The man got infected from his younger brother who was working as assistant in the shop of Khamla businessman who had tested positive on March 25. Businessman and his manager had gone to New Delhi for purchasing goods for his shop and got infected.Manager, his daughter, and assistant, and his daughter are undergoing treatment at IGGMCH. Manager and assistant had tested negative on 14th and 15th day but daughters were still found positive. Samples of two girls were taken again and reports are awaited.A 55-year-old lawyer who is also a Iskcon member from Central Nagpur had tested positive on March 29. He is being treated at IGGMCH. His test report is awaited for last three days delaying his discharge.The total number of discharged persons from the city now stands at 11 out of total positive cases of 56.The 59-year old mother of Khamla businessman had diabetes and high blood pressure but made full recovery. Businessman too had diabetes but recovered.Corporator from Jaripatka Virendra Kukreja, also chairman NMC Health Consultative Committee said, "The paralytic man’s recovery is a positive sign. All should stay at home to control Covid-19. Those having any symptom should come forward and get tested. Patients can recover if they get treatment from initial stage.” 