‘Parents should limit talks about Covid-19’
2020-03-25
PATNA: Parents are exploring different ways to keep their wards busy as children and teenagers are having a tough time in comprehending the monotonous environment during the lockdown. Be it lifestyle, social or environmental changes, the Covid-19 pandemic is impacting the children in many ways.

The UNICEF has talked about six strategies that can be used to cope up with the growing anxiety in teenagers and children during lockdown. It has also put forth a list of educational platforms and resources in order to help parents, teachers and school administrators to provide an educational set up for children and interact with them during the long periods of school closure. 

Psychiatrists in the city said it is important for parents to stay informed about the current situation and to look after their children’s mental well-being. “In situations like these, children tend to get irritated and frustrated, which further leads to anxiety disorders and depression. Since, the usual lifestyle has completely changed in the lockdown scenario, the urge of going out is even more,” said Binda Singh, a clinical psychiatrist.

She added: “Parents and adults in the family should limit their talks about Covid-19. Besides, they should be careful about what they say in front of their kids.”

Some of the parents have been spotting behavioural changes in their kids. “My 11-year-old daughter suddenly started screaming about getting infected with coronavirus. She also said she had a sore throat. It took us several hours to calm her down. We then decided to limit her exposure to television and mobile phone,” said Arpita of Jagdeo Path.

Several parents said they are using various ways to divert their kids’ minds. “Recently we found a website which has made a number of children’s books free to listen to. It is better than watching online videos. Besides, it keeps my children distracted from what’s happening outside,” said Neetu Rakesh Singh of Kankarbagh.

“I have got my son enrolled in an online class as the pressure will quadruple once the schools get reopened,” said Rashmi Sinha of PC Colony.


