Covid-19 scare in Bihar: Parents & students heave sigh of relief
2020-03-17
PATNA: With the closure of schools, colleges and coaching institutes in the state, parents have heaved a sigh of relief amid fears of the spread of Covid-19. The step of closing all private as well as government institutions was taken by the government on Friday as a precautionary measure.

Parents claimed that the move was rightly taken in a view of the current global outbreak. While most parents, teachers and students hailed the decision, others were worried that the kids would not be able to complete the syllabi on time.

Welcoming the government’s step towards the safety of children, Buddha Colony resident Reena Singh, a mother of two, said, “I am happy that a step like this has been taken. Small kids are careless and hardly follow instructions. Hence, keeping them at home is the safest way to protect them.”

Boring Road resident Rajiv Ranjan said it was a much need move. “Although my children are grown up, I was quite scared to send them to college. The current situation does not allow us to be part of mass gatherings,” he said.

Seema Gupta, a resident of Danapur, told this newspaper, “We have no idea for how long the situation will continue. Closing schools in the beginning of an academic session will affect studies.”

Meanwhile, school and college authorities gave a mixed response. “I support the precautionary measures taken by the government. At the same time, just closing institutions is not enough as we live in a densely populated city. I doubt if the situation will come under control by March 31,” said Fr T Nishant, principal of St Xavier’s College of Management and Technology.

He added, “Students don’t realise the importance of time when they are enjoying holidays. But at the end of the day, they are the ones, who will suffer.”

CA Ram Shankar, secretary of Institute of Chartered Accountants (Patna branch), said, “All our members and students have been directed not to conduct any programmes or classes till April 14. A directive has also been issued to cancel or postpone classes that were already announced and in progress.”

‘Send report cards online’: Patna DM Kumar Ravi on Monday asked all the schools to try to send report cards on line. “To avoid gathering in schools, we have asked them to send the report cards online. If it is not possible, then they will only call one of the guardians to collect it. Children will not accompany the guardians to avoid mass gathering,” said Ravi. State government has already ordered closure of schools, colleges and educational institutes till March 31 as a precautionary measure against coronavirus in Bihar.


