Parents learn home therapy amid lockdown
2020-04-02
AURANGABAD: The ongoing coronavirus lockdown has prevented children with autism and other physical or learning disabilities from going to their therapists, and the therapists from making home visits for occupational, physical, speech and other therapies.

As a result, parents are being virtually trained on basic therapy lessons so that the lockdown doesn’t break the cycle.

According to Aditi Shardul, the project director at Vihang Special School, persons with autism have the right to self-determination, independence and autonomy, as well as the right to education and employment. However, the coronavirus-related impediment in the provision of support systems is preventing them from exercising these rights, she said. “Children with autism require a fixed schedule and must follow a routine. If the routine is disturbed, many find it difficult to cope,” Shardul said.

Therapists, special schools and parents of children with autism and those with other disabilities are working together on making home a school and using technology to connect, interact, analyse and learn.

According to Gaurav Mhaske, neuro-physiotherapist, Gaurav’s Neuro Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Centre, Satara Parisar, physiotherapy in autism includes active exercises that build motor skills, improve strength, posture and balance. “During the lockdown, we are using telerehabilitation ie. video-calling with children and their parents to provide physiotherapy treatment,” he said. Mhaske advises the parents to ensure the use of soft toys and soft furniture in the home setting which can make it easier for children to exercise.

Manjusha Raut, who has been working as a speech therapist for the past 15 years, is filling the gap of practical lessons by producing videos and sending them to the parents. “The role of the mother and father is crucial when we are communicating with the children over technology. As the children know me, they enjoy the song videos I am producing,” Raut said. She had also produced a jingle about handwashing to stimulate the speech and motor skills of the children having developmental disorders.

Parent of Shantanu Ghanekar, a student from Vihang School, said she is engaging her child in everyday cleaning activities as they are specific and time-bound and her son enjoys them. 

Meanwhile, Trishna Mali and her son Swaraj enjoy music and shlokas all day and spend time at their farm with animals and plants.


