Covid-19 scare in Agra: Parents ask administration to shut down schools
2020-03-06
AGRA: Parents of students studying in St Peter’s College and its junior wing St Felix Nursery School created a ruckus on Thursday. Parents wanted the school administration to keep the school shut for a few days as a precautionary method against Covid-19. 


Under the supervision of health department officials, both the school premises were sanitized by mopping of sodium hypochlorite solution. 

College authorities informed the parents that they can’t close the schools because examinations are taking place. “All possible precautions are being taken for the safety of students. The school will be shut down only after the orders of the district administration,” authorities said. 

However, St Felix Nursery School was closed for the second day on Thursday on parents’ request. 

The principal of St Peter’s College Father Andrew Correia said, “Under the supervision of health department officials, sanitization of the school premises has been done. Parents need not panic. We are making the best possible arrangements for the wellbeing of our students.”

“In the morning assembly, I informed students about the precautions to be taken. In this regard, notices have also been placed in the classrooms. Teachers have been asked to keep a watch on the health of children and immediately inform if any student is found suffering from cold, fewer or bad throat,” he added.

Mother of two, Vinita Goyal, who had come to drop her kids to school wearing N95 masks said, “I have informed my kids about the dos and dont’s to prevent coronavirus infection. Besides N95 masks, I have given them hand sanitizer to use at regular intervals.”

Divisional joint director (education) Mukesh Agarwal said, “A task force of 50 scouts and guides has been constituted to spread awareness about coronavirus. They will be trained by teachers and experts to explain the subject in an interesting way. Groups of these volunteers will be visiting different schools very soon.”

