Chennai: Parents start Facebook page to auction kid’s lockdown art
2020-04-19
CHENNAI: What began as proud parents sharing their children’s lockdown paintings with friends and family has turned into a virtual auction house that is a win-win for the little artists as well as the cause of animal welfare.

Since the lockdown began, C Thangamani, a homemaker, has been keeping her children engaged in activities like art and craft.

 “Since the summer holidays started early this year due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the kids have been painting a lot. It keeps them away from gadgets,” says Thangamani. She then started sharing the paintings with family on social media and they too began doing the same with their children’s artwork.

That’s when Thangamani and her brother, Boothanathan Ramesh, a housing finance agency owner, decided to take it a step further to encourage the children to paint more often. 

The siblings started a Facebook page, Podhigai Charal, to auction paintings and craft work done by children.

“As we were sharing pictures, we thought of giving some prize to the children for their paintings and that is when we thought of auctioning their work,” she says, adding that some of the proceeds go towards animal welfare. “We work closely with Blue Cross and other bird saving groups across the state. We want to help these organisations,” says Ramesh.

The artwork is classified by age group – work by children between three and 10 years, between 11 and 18 years and above the age of 18.

“The art and craft work is uploaded with a number and price, decided by the artist. Once we have a minimum of 15 uploads, we put out a date for the auction, and we let the parents of the children know,” says Thangamani, adding that the person who wins the auction pays the artist using Google Pay. 

The next auction date is tentatively May 3 when the lockdown is likely to be lifted. “When we get the money deposited in our account, half of it is transferred to child’s account and another half used for animal welfare. The original artwork is sent to the auction winner by courier,” says Ramesh.

Ramesh says they have received several works of children not just from Chennai but neighbouring Puducherry as well. 

“We also have some adults who have uploaded their artwork, and have requested that the entire proceeds of their work be given to charity,” says Ramesh.


