Covid-19 concerns: Parents complain as private school in Madurai tries to hold special classes
2020-03-22
MADURAI: A private school at Nagamalai-Pudukottai area in Madurai district has allegedly been attempting to hold special classes for Class XI students during last few days despite the state government’s closure order except for board exams. On Saturday, state board exams for Class X, which were to begin on March 27, were also postponed to April 15.


Pandiarajan B, member, Child Welfare Committee (CWC), Madurai said “Parents came to us saying that during the past few days, the school authorities have been telling Class XI students that special classes will happen. Even school buses came to pick up students as usual. However, a few hours later, the students were sent back home. Some students were dropped off by school buses creating distress for parents.” He added that despite informing an official at the office of the chief educational officer (CEO), Madurai on Thursday, students were still forced to come to school till at least Saturday.

Many parents, especially those who live or work in areas far from the school were unable to immediately to pick up their children either. “On Friday, my child was forced to come to school but was later dropped off by the school bus much earlier than the usual time putting me in a fix to pick up from the usual drop off spot. My child was alone and had to get an auto-rickshaw to come home. We are all worried about our child’s safety,” said a parent, on condition of anonymity. 

Further, the parents claimed that students were even sent to teachers’ houses for classes. “On Saturday, the school told us that the students were at their teacher’s house and gave us an address to pick up our child from. We were shocked,” added the parent. Speaking to TOI, Madurai district CEO R Swaminathan said that he will immediately look into the matter. “I will definitely call up and warn the school. Anyone with information that a particular school is holding special classes can immediately inform us. We will take strict action,” he said.


