Parents use lockdown to spend more time with family
2020-03-29
Nashik: Several parents in the city, who are now working from home, are using the lockdown period to spend more quality time with their families.

Anupama Karve, who works as a development manager in an IT firm in the city, said, “I begin my work while everyone is asleep in the house. As soon as my seven-year-old son wakes up, I spend some time with him. After that, my husband, who is also working from home, takes over and I resume my work. We help each other in completing the household chores,” said Karve.

While working from the office, there is a fixed time of work. But at home, timings become more flexible. 

“We have a small garden and my son waters the plants with me. We talk about how few plants grow faster while some take longer to bear fruits. I never knew he would be interested in gardening,” she added.

Vandana Gupta, a single mother, who works as a senior clerk in the railways, said her daughter is a fitness freak and is teaching her how to cure her backache through working out at home. 

“I did not get much time to spend with Nupur, my teenage daughter, as I work for long hours and she has her tennis practise. The lockdown period has proved to be blessing in disguise as we are spending some quality time together. She also helps me in cleaning the house,” said Gupta.

Jyoti Patil-Borse, a programme coordinator of Adiwasi Vikas Bhawan, said, “Drawing has been my hobby since childhood. I could not pursue it much, but now I have time to teach my son Mayank. He is also enjoying it and incorporates his ideas,” she said.

She learnt to repair her mixer-grinder herself as there is no help available.

“We should be able to do all these small things on our own. My husband, who is also working from home, and I tried to repair our electronics. As I am spending all the time at home, I have been making aprons out of old clothes,” she added. 

Ritu Mathur, an English teacher in a private school, in between preparing e-learning material for her students, takes times to cook delicacies with her in-laws. “My son is working in Mumbai and did not come here for the lockdown period. I am spending most of my time with my in-laws now. We hardly get time with each other,” said Mathur. 


