Parsis upset with Punchayat over Covid-19 victims' cremations in Mumbai
2020-05-30
MUMBAI: Parsis in the city are upset with the Bombay Parsi Punchayat (BPP) for not making a representation either to the BMC or state government to allow them to practise their traditional funeral rites for community members who died Covid-19 positive. The Punchayat, which manages the Doongerwadi property where Parsis are laid to rest has taken the view that pall bearers could get contaminated while handling Covid-19 victims. 

Over the past month, more than half-a-dozen cases of Parsis who died Covid-19 positive being forcibly cremated were reported in Mumbai and a few more in Vadodara and Ahmedabad. Some of their distressed relatives narrated their tragic experiences on social media, leading to protests within the community.

Parsi activists point out to a recent Bombay high court order which had ruled in favour of Muslims and allowed them to bury their community members who died Covid-19 positive. The court had observed that the dead have "a right to decent burial according to his or her religious rites" and had added that there was no scientific data by the World Health Organisation to indicate that cadavers spread coronavirus.

For over a thousand years, Parsi Zoroastrians in India have practised an ancient system of disposing of their dead (sky burials). Bodies are placed in open-to-the-sky large consecrated wells called the Dakhmas where they are desiccated under the harsh rays of the sun and eaten by birds of prey. In Mumbai, the Parsi dead are taken to the 350-year-old Doongerwadi complex, a 55-acre verdant forest at Malabar Hill. Almost 90% of the community in Mumbai still prefer this method of disposal.

Said advocate Khushru Zaiwala, "The BPP trustees have refused to even make representations to the BMC or state government. They have failed in their duties as trustees by conveniently looking the other way." 

Activist Zoru Bhathena said that no Parsi can be forced to be cremated when they don't want to and the "BPP's inaction results in exactly this happening". 

In a letter to the BPP, Bhathena stated, "This discrimination between Covid positive and Covid negative corpses follows no rationale nor medical logic, as dead bodies do not spread viruses. Access to Doongerwadi has never been denied based on such diseases. Even during the plague epidemic, Doongerwadi was functioning for all Parsis." 

Responding to widespread criticism for its inaction, the BPP finally released a statement on Wednesday. It said the method of consignment of the dead includes giving the body a ritual bath. "It means our pall bearers will have to touch the body at various stages, and hence be subject to infection," said the trustees. 

Further, the BMC has informed the trustees that a Parsi victim of Covid-19 would not be given a death certificate to be taken to Doongerwadi. "The board of trustees discussed this at length and felt it would be prudent to follow the government's directive," said the statement. 

The BPP also feared that in case anyone gets infected at Doongerwadi, the authorities would place the entire complex under quarantine and "we would not be able to consign our other dead there either".


