Parties support Bihar govt in fight against Covid-19
2020-03-28
PATNA: All political parties, irrespective of their ideologies are coming forward to extend their support to battle the Covid-19 pandemic.


RJD has offered to make a part of its state headquarters at Beer Chand Patel here, a quarantine centre or an isolation ward for Covid-19 diagnosis and treatment. “A newly developed shed in the party headquarters here has a capacity of over 500 people and a large number of beds can be put in it, whenever needed. Besides, there is sufficient availability of basic amenities including water, electricity, generator sets and lavatories on the premises. Party state president has sent a proposal to the state government that if it wants, then it can use this area in our party office,” RJD spokesperson Chitranjan Gagan said.

RJD national vice-president and former CM Rabri Devi also wrote a letter to Vaishali district magistrate on Friday to inform that she has recommended a funds of Rs1crore from her legislators' local area development fund to be utilized for treatment of Covid-19 cases and procurement of medical safety kits, including testing kits, sanitisers, mask, hand wash and thermal scanner among others. She said that Rs50 lakh would be used for such purpose in Mahua assembly segment, which is presently represented by her elder son Tej Pratap Yadav and remaining Rs50lakh to be used in Raghopur assembly segment represented by her younger son Tejashwi Prasad Yadav.

Tejashwi also sent a cheque of Rs1.25crore for to the CM relief fund. He also wrote a letter to all his party MPs, MLAs, MLCs and other workers, asking them to provide all necessary support at different levels to help people and the government to fight the Covid-19 pandemic.

MLAs and MLCs of BJP on the other hand, are contributing their one-month salary to CM relief fund. BJP state spokesperson Nikhil Anand said that a number of MPs have also made significant contribution from their MP- LAD funds to battle Covid-19 in their respective constituencies. “Union minister Ashwini Kumar Chaubey contributed Rs1.25crore on Friday for Buxar constituency. Similar contribution of Rs.125crore have been made by Union minister of state for home affairs Nityanand Rai, Saran MP Rajiv Pratap Rudy and party’s state president Sanjay Jaiswal among others. MLAs have also recommended funds to be used from legislators' local area development scheme for procurement of equipment and preventive kits, such as sanitisers and masks among others,” Anand said.

Generous contribution to CM relief fund has been made by legislators and MPs of ruling JD (U) as well. JD (U) national president and Bihar CM Nitish Kumar, along with seven other JD(U) ministers, , three MLAs and four MLCs made separate contributions to the CM Relief Fund on Thursday.“Apart from contributions being made by parliamentarians and legislators to help the government in fighting the Covid-19 pandemic, all party workers have been asked to spread awareness about the virus in their areas,” JD (U) spokesperson Rajiv Ranjan Prasad said.

Congress’s Bihar unit president Madan Mohan Jha on the other hand, said that they are focusing on providing food and shelter to daily wagers and laborers.

