Parties for staggered exit from lockdown
2020-04-29
PATNA: Political parties in state have expressed mixed opinions on the government’s future course of action after the end of lockdown-II on May 3.

Though most parties are concerned over spike in Covid-19 positive cases in the state, they are looking forward to a staggered exit plan, which could provide some respite to the stressed economy, migrant workers and people in unorganised sector. 

RJD state president Jagdanand Singh said although any decision on the lockdown was discretion of the government, the party is of the view that migrant workers from Bihar stuck in other states should be brought back. “More than the pandemic, tens of hundreds of such workers are facing hardships due to hunger and homelessness. The state government is also unable to ensure doorstep supply of essential commodities, thereby forcing people to venture out of their houses,” he said.

Ruling JD(U)’s senior functionary and state water resources minister Sanjay Jha, on the other hand, said the state government was taking all possible measures to fight the pandemic apart from extending assistance to migrant workers stranded in other states. 

“As far as lockdown is concerned, Centre will take a call. CM Nitish Kumar has already said that Bihar government will follow the Centre’s decision. My personal opinion is that districts with minimum or no Covid-19 cases should be allowed to resume some economic activities and red zone districts should continue to remain under restrictions,” he said.

Bihar Congress’s working president Kaukab Quadri batted for staggered exit from the lockdown. “People have followed lockdown despite facing hardships. There should be a staggered exit from the lockdown. People have now adopted ‘work-from-home’ culture and online studies,” he said, adding restrictions should continue in red zones. 

BJP’s Bihar unit vice-president Devesh Kumar said there should not be relaxations in red zone districts, but some relaxations should be allowed in orange and green zones for economic activities.

RLSP’s national secretary general Madhav Anand said lockdown should be extended and social distancing norms should be followed even in green zones. “I have also demanded announcement of a special financial package of Rs 1.50 lakh crore by the Centre for Bihar so that alternative sources of livelihood could be provided to migrant workers who have returned to the state,” he said.


