Partial lockdown in city, panic button pressed
2020-03-19
Nagpur: The city administration directed closure of all non-essential services and establishments till the month-end to contain further spread of the novel coronavirus even though no fresh cases were reported across Vidarbha on Wednesday. This is believed to be the first-ever lockdown type situation in the city.

The drastic step comes in the wake of section 144 of CrPC — prohibiting gathering/assembly of four or more people at one place — failing to make any impact on citizens who continued to ignore the advisory.

District collector Ravindra Thakare and municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe separately issued notifications for instant shut down of all hotels, bars, restaurants, wine shops, clubs, kiosks selling fast food by 5pm on Wednesday.

The move sparked rumors on social media regarding shutting down of essential services like petrol pumps where citizens queued up in large numbers till late in the night. “Petrol pumps will also remain open,” said one of the fuel station owners Vilas Salphekar.

People thronged shops and panic buying was witnessed almost across the city. According to the collector, hospitals, petrol pumps, medicine shops, vegetables sellers, groceries, milk shops and all those covered under essential supplies will remain open. 

Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar said this enforcement is restricted to Nagpur city only. 

Exercising the power under section 30 (2) (v) and (xviii) Disaster Management Act, 2005, the district collector has ordered to shut all beer shoppes, wine shops, permit room bar and restaurant, all club houses, country liquor shops, restaurants and pan kiosks till March 31.

Thakare said the decision was taken in the backdrop of four positive cases of coronavirus in the city. Looking at the experience of countries fighting the virus, the collector said the virus spread exponentially. Social distancing and home quarantine are needed to stop spread of the virus, the notification issued by Thakare stated. 

The municipal commissioner issued two notifications. Citing that the state government has declared coronavirus an epidemic on March 13, Mundhe has directed closure of various establishments other than essential commodities till March 31. Shops selling daily need items, milk, vegetables and chemists will remain open.

He also directed owners of banquet halls and clubs to postpone functions including marriages and family gatherings. If a function cannot be cancelled, then the number of guests will have to be restricted to 50. The civic chief also asked them to take preventive measures.

Mundhe has asked all assistant municipal commissioners and zonal officers of all zones to ensure 100% implementation of the notification.

Nagpur city police even went round market places appealing street vendors to shut their establishments for at least three days. In a violent reaction, a police sub inspector was manhandled by a pan kiosk owner near Telangkhedi Hanuman Mandir after the cop asked the owner to close his establishment. An offence in this regard was registered at Sadar police station against the pan kiosk owner. 

City commissioner BK Upadhyay confirmed that police are asking street vendors to shut their establishments for at least three days. “The appeal is being made as a large number of people gather around these vendors. Sometimes the food at such places is also unhygienic, so we want citizens to be more careful. Also section 144 (CrPC) is imposed, so more than four people cannot gather at one location. 

“If anyone does not comply with the order, strict action will be taken against them under relevant sections,” CP Upadhyay said. 

President of Nagpur Residential Hotel Association, Tejinder Singh Renu said that closure of restaurants and bars is certainly going to harm the industry, “but there is no other way as people tend to become casual at such establishments”. 

“There has been a slight drop in the number of customers, but people are still not aware that they should not visit public places. Some of the restaurants owner were recently discussing that they should close their establishments as it was not affordable due to drop in customers. So, it (the closure) is a good thing. Small gatherings and parties are also already being cancelled,” he said. 

Mayor asks citizens to cooperate

Mayor Sandip Joshi said that as compared to other countries, the number of positive patients here is less. He gave the credit for this to preventive measures taken by the Central, state governments and local machinery. “Now, we have to take measures for the coming few weeks and we should also abide by the directives issued by the government,” he said.

“People’s cooperation is needed in the fight against coronavirus. Do not rush, do not spread rumours and be careful. If you do not do so, we have to make some tough decisions for the masses,” said the mayor, who chaired a meeting convened to review the situation.


