Coronavirus in Pune: Pashan centre may be ideal for isolation
2020-03-30
PUNE: The authorities seem to have missed a sprawling property that could easily be added to the list of facilities, where people suspected to have contracted Covid-19, can be quarantined. The state government-proposed centre for training in mental health has been lying vacant in Pashan for more than three months.

 
 
Built at the cost of Rs18 crore, the 7-acre building premises in Pashan can be effectively used to quarantine about 250 people suspected to have contracted the novel coronavirus infection.

“We are aware of the property. The building can easily offer quarantine facility to over 250 suspected persons till they get tested for the contagion,” said spine surgeon Ajay Chandanwale, dean of Sassoon General Hospital and B J Medical College.

The building is a proposed training centre under Maharashtra Institute of Mental Health (MIMH), on Sassoon Hospital premises. MIMH is a centre of excellence for the union government’s manpower development initiative in mental health under the National Mental Health Programme.

Elaborating further, chief administrative officer of MIMH and psychiatrist Nitin Abhivant said, “The premises can be an ideal isolation facility for people needing institutional quarantine. There are four independent buildings and there is enough spacing among them so there won’t be any overcrowding situation. All rooms have cross ventilation. The buildings are ready and can be converted into a quarantine facility within a week.”

The union government has provided the institute funds to the tune of Rs18 crore to build the training centre and run courses in mental health. The land on which the centre has been developed belongs to the MIMH.

“The State Public Works Department has developed the building. Four buildings together can easily offer quarantine facilities to 250 to 300 people. Again, there are no housing societies around so quarantined individuals will not get exposed to the community at large until they get cured,” Abhivant said.


