Passengers from Singapore advised home quarantine for two weeks
2020-02-18
COIMBATORE: With the number of COVID-19 cases increasing to 75 in Singapore as of Monday, the health department has begun asking all visitors from Singapore to home quarantine themselves for at least two weeks. 


While people with flu symptoms are strictly told to stay indoors for 28 days and be monitored, those without symptoms are also told to stay home and avoid public places for at least two weeks. Every day, close to 80-100 people fly into the city from Singapore. 

Meanwhile, many Coimbatorians who have booked tickets and trips to Singapore in February and March, are desperately calling helplines and travel agents, trying to get at least a portion of their trip refunded or rescheduling their tickets and bookings. 

Many of them stand to lose close to Rs 1.2 lakh each, because they are choosing to cautiously not travel now. 

The Singapore tourism board has acknowledged the panic but maintains that their country and tourist attractions are open, and thus no refunds will be ordered. 

The public health department on Monday confirmed that they have begun requesting even asymptomatic patients landing in the district from Singapore, to home quarantine themselves for two weeks, which will be incubation period for the virus. “Unlike passengers coming from China, where we compulsorily tell them to home quarantine themselves and carefully monitor them through the 28-day period, even without symptoms, we only request asymptomatic patients from Singapore to home quarantine themselves for two weeks,” said deputy director of public health, Dr Ramesh. 

Patients who fly in after visiting and spending a few days in Singapore, and show symptoms of the flu, are told to home quarantine themselves for 28 days and if their condition gets more serious, to get tested for the virus. “Since cases in Singapore are rising, we have decided to closely monitor patients from Singapore who show symptoms of the flu while passing our thermal scanners,” said the deputy director. 

“We are giving refunds only to passengers who have a travel history of China. The rest of Indian passport holders don’t get refunds, because neither the Indian nor Singaporean governments have issued travel restrictions between both countries,” said an agent of an airliner in the city.


