Covid-19 outbreak: Passengers stranded in Italy uncertain about their return
2020-03-14
THRISSUR: The Keralites, who are among the 40-odd Indians stranded in an Italian airport against the backdrop of the Covid-19 outbreak, and their relatives back home are keeping their fingers crossed about the possible date of their return. Most of them remain stranded at the Flumicino airport in Italy since last Tuesday, while a few of them have shifted to a house near the airport.


Speaking to TOI from Italy over the phone, the passengers said that even though the reports that an Indian health team had departed for Italy have brightened their hopes, they have not yet received any official communication. Their relatives here too are clueless about it. The Indian embassy officials in Italy too had thrown up their hands, the passengers said.

“We had booked tickets on the flight operated by Emirates, but when we reported at the airport on Tuesday morning, the airlines staff told us that we cannot fly,” said the passenger Fego Francis, son of K C Francis of Neithakudy in Mala. His wife Gloria Fego and his three-month-old baby Enrico Fego are among those stranded at the airport.

“According to airlines staff, the Indian authorities had informed them that passengers can travel to India only if the Italian authorities gave them a certificate that they haven’t contracted Covid-19,” said Daniel Palatty Joy of Puthenvelikkara.

“It is practically impossible to get such a certificate from Italian health officials stating that these passengers free from Covid-19 at this stage since they are now busy treating the patients,’’ said Hima Biju from Kakkanad who is among the stranded passengers. Hima was working in a media company in Kerala earlier, and she is now studying at the University of Cassino in Italy.

Joy Palathy, father of Daniel, said from Puthenvelikkara that the airlines informed the passengers about the new regulation for travel to India only after they reached the airport. They would not have gone to the airport, had they been alerted earlier, he said.

Both Francis, father of Fego, and Joy were also working in Italy and had returned to Kerala only recently.

Fego has shifted to a friend’s house near the airport along with his wife and baby. 

Daniel said the remaining passengers have been spending the last three days at the airport without proper food, or adequate drinking water. The supplies available at the airport are costly and not part of the regular meal, he said.

