Passengers with 'home quarantine' seal offloaded from trains, BEST bus
2020-03-22
MUMBAI: The city on Saturday witnessed several cases of people with the 'home quarantine' stamped travelling in outstation trains and buses. They were deboarded after co-passengers complained and either sent to hospitals or handed over to the police. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

In the morning, railway police stopped 16 'stamped' passengers from boarding trains. "After arriving from Dubai, they came to CSMT to travel to their homes in Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and other states," said senior inspector Hemant Bavdhankar, CSMT GRP. They were sent to hospital. In another incident, two Dubai-returned passengers in Rajdhani Express were deboarded at Surat. 

A man with a home quarantine stamp travelling in a BEST bus on route number 309 from Goregaon to Kurla was handed over to the police in Kurla. Union leader Shashank Rao demanded that BEST give conductors and drivers 'paid leave' and also arrange for masks and sanitizers. BEST general manager Surendrakumar Bagde said due precautions were being taken to ensure safe travel. 

While the RPF at LTT did not allow eight Dubai-returned people to board a train to Allahabad, and instead sent them to SevenHills Hospital quarantine centre, at Kalyan station, RPF constable S N Mundey noticed a 30-year-old man with the 'home quarantine' stamp. After the man told Mundey that he had recently flown down from Dubai and had come to Mumbai from Uttar Pradesh on March 17, he was sent to hospital. 

In another incident, two Dubai-returned people, aged 27 and 42, were forced to get off Bandra-Surat intercity train at Virar station after fellow passengers pulled the chain and complained to railway officials. In a similar case, a man who had returned from Qatar and had boarded a train from Mumbai to Kalaburagi in Karnataka in Udayan Express was deboarded at Daund station in Pune district after passengers raised an alarm about his constant sneezing and coughing. "He was sent to Pune for testing. The coach was sanitised and all passengers shifted to another coach," an official said. 

In a similar incident, two people, aged 25 and 46, who had arrived from Dubai on Friday night and took the Geetanjali Howrah Express the next morning from Mumbai to reach their hometowns in Gondia district in Maharashtra and Koderma in Jharkhand were deboarded by the railway police at Igatpuri after co-passengers raised an alarm. They were sent to a hospital in Nashik.


