Andhra Pradesh: Flyers bend rules to bypass quarantine
2020-06-09
VISAKHAPATNAM: In gross violation of Covid-19 norms in Andhra Pradesh, a section of residents returning to the state from high-risk states such as Delhi and Maharashtra are reportedly coming in via Telangana (Hyderabad) and Karnataka (Bengaluru) to avoid institutional quarantine in the state.


“The rule states that returnees coming from the six high-risk states, like Maharashtra and Delhi, should be in institutional quarantine for seven days. But we have received tip-offs from the airlines that many passengers from these states are coming via Hyderabad and Bengaluru and they are being sent to home quarantine. We have raised the concern with the district administration,” Pavan Kartheek, vice president of Hotels and Restaurants Association of Andhra Pradesh told TOI. 

The district administration, however, has claimed that a proper monitoring plan is in place to track the travel history of returnees and to send them home or for institutional quarantine as per the state government norms. “I have not heard of such an allegation. I don’t think such things are happening as there is a proper mechanism in place. I will look into it,” joint collector (1) of Visakhapatnam district, M Venugopal Reddy told TOI.

Officials and passengers at the airport told TOI that the latter are being screened by a medical team as soon as they come out of the aircraft and health officials stamp ‘home/institutional quarantine’ on their hands depending on the city they have returned from. This means, health officials are putting ‘home quarantine’ stamps on all passengers coming from Bengaluru or Hyderabad and ‘institutional quarantine’ stamps on passengers coming from Delhi.

“Passengers coming from Maharashtra have no choice because airlines are providing them connectivity via Bengaluru. But several Delhi passengers are coming via Hyderabad or Bengaluru. Many of them are deliberately concealing information to avoid institutional quarantine,” said B Vijay Mohan, president of Andhra Pradesh Tours and Travels Associations. 

Another telling factor, airline officials said, is the low demand for direct flights from Delhi to the state as opposed to flights from Bengaluru and Hyderabad.

