Passengers spot man with ‘home quarantine’ stamp, bring train to halt, force him to disembark
2020-03-22
AGRA: New Delhi-Varanasi Shiv Ganga Express was delayed for nearly 30 minutes and brought to an unscheduled halt on Friday night at Etawah junction after passengers raised an alarm when they spotted a fellow passenger with ‘home quarantine’ stamp on his hand.


According to railway sources, the passengers panicked and pulled the chain multiple times. They asked the railway authorities to deboard the passenger with the stamp and sanitize the entire 22-coach train. 

The passenger had landed at New Delhi’s IGI airport from Muscat (Oman), where he was stamped for ‘home quarantine’. He boarded the train from New Delhi railway station.

“He had boarded a sleeper coach of the train and later walked into the AC coach. Some passenger noticed a stamp on his hand and tweeted about this to @RailwaySeva. As soon we received the information, we traced the passenger. He looked scared, possibly due to other passenger’s aggressive stance of deboarding him. He had attempted to hide himself in the coach lavatory and also tried to erase the stamp. After help from the GRP squad, we calmed him down and then alighted him at Etawah junction,” said a railway source. 

At 9:58 pm, Shiv Ganga Express was brought to an unscheduled halt at Etawah junction. At 10:02 pm, the passenger was taken off the train and sent to Etawah district hospital. Six coaches, including the pantry car, of the train were sanitised.

Multiple sources claimed that the passenger was humiliated by his fellow travellers. He was made to stand in a corner in the train as well as at the Etawah junction, until the medical team arrived.

Etawah CMO Dr Naresh Singh Tomar said, “The passenger was in deep distress. He was thirsty and hungry when he was brought to the hospital. After a thorough check-up, we found him normal.”

Dr Amarnath Tiwari, who inspected the passenger’s health, said, “Though he is normal, we have kept him in the isolation ward of the district hospital as a precautionary measure. After 72 hours, if shows any symptoms of Covid-19 infection, we will send his sample to KGMU.”

Earlier on Thursday night, Old Delhi-bound Kalindi Express was delayed for nearly an hour at Tundla junction after a woman passenger made distress call about a 64-year-old passenger, who had coughed in the AC1 coach while interacting with his relative over the phone. The passenger has returned from Dubai on February 29 and was heading back to Delhi for his medical check-up, as he was not screened at IGI airport when he landed.

Ajit Singh, chief public relations officer of North Central Railway, said, “The passenger was attended by a railway doctor who found him fit to continue his journey.”

According to railway sources, the senior citizen was secluded in a coupe on the demand of other passengers for the rest of the journey. 


