Passes not mandatory for people exempted from lockdown: Police
2020-03-25
Bhubaneswar: Police on Tuesday said passes were not mandatory for people exempt from the lockdown. Police took the decision after officials of different departments engaged in emergency services were found crowding the DCP office for passes. Police introduced the pass system to ensure social distancing and not allow unreasonable people out in the streets.

DGP Abhay, who has sent letters to all the district SPs, DCPs and range DIGs, said police were working to develop a web-based system of passes for all exempted people. “Because of lack of capacity and other constraints, pass system during lockdown is not yet robust. Since a web-based system will take time to develop and stabilise, doctors, nurses and healthcare workers employed in government and private hospitals should be allowed to move during lockdown in their vehicles showing their identity cards,” said the DGP’s letter.

Taking a similar line, twin cities police commissioner Sudhanshu Sarangi said people need not panic because they don’t have passes. “People who need to travel because of medical or other emergencies are being allowed to move around if there is a patient or medical paper,” he tweeted. He further said police were cancelling the process of issuing passes to emergency workers as too many people congregated for it. “We will introduce an IT platform to automate the process of issuance of passes,” Sarangi said.

The government has exempted emergency service providers such as employees of health, police, urban local body, fire, bank, telecommunication, postal and hospitals among others from restricting the movement.

On Tuesday, the Khurda administration seized 36 vehicles, which included five cars, for violating lockdown norms. The government on Tuesday came up with the ruling that the movement of essential commodities will not be disrupted due to police check during lockdown.

The government said showing of trade licence will be considered authentic to allow a vehicle transporting essential goods. “Trade licence certificate is given to a trader by the respective urban local body. The trade licence should be photocopied and a copy should be available with the driver of the vehicle transporting the goods. The vehicle should be allowed to move freely without obstruction,” said the government order.

The East Coast Railway (EcoR), divisional railway manager (Khurda), Sashi Kant Singh, has also written to collectors of 12 districts seeking permission for free movement of vehicles carrying essential commodities and railway staff. Even after stoppage of passenger trains, the railways is operating goods train to transport essential commodities, said the letter.


