Paste posters outside houses of all quarantined migrant returnees: UP govt to DMs
2020-05-25
AGRA: The Uttar Pradesh government has reiterated its May 1 order directing all district administrative officials to ensure that quarantine posters are put outside the houses of all new entrants into the state, including the 23 lakh migrant workers who have returned in the past few weeks. 

Officials revealed that while many districts, including Kanpur (urban), Saharanpur, Ghaziabad, Muzaffarnagar and Mainpuri had not even got the notices printed, some others, like Aligarh, Bareilly, Hapur, Chitrakoot, Ghazipur, Etah, Gonda, Mathura, Lalitpur, Varanasi and Pratapgarh, had not covered all the houses and merely completed the task for less than 40% of such households.

When contacted, Agra divisional commissioner Anil Kumar said the quarantine posters were put earlier also in a few districts, but the government has now reiterated it in view of the influx of the migrants. 

A senior official said that this is the time when special attention needs be given to rural areas as the system in remote areas is not robust and strict observance of home quarantine is the key to curb the novel coronavirus infection. “Any negligence can prove costly as the infection may rise if it is not monitored closely,” said an official. 

Mainpuri DM Mahendra Bahadur Singh said that 1,500 posters have been pasted in a day and the process is on. “Around 5,000 migrant workers have returned to the district till now and all gram panchayats have been informed about it. Their homes, where they are quarantined, will also be painted with a (+) mark for easy identification.”

Aligarh DM CB Singh said that he has directed his officials to ensure 100% compliance in pasting these posters within a week. The aim is to ensure strict home quarantine so the returnees from other states, which are around 17,000 in the district, observe strict adherence to the quarantine protocol.

"Gram Nigrani Samiti (village monitoring committee), headed by the respective village head, has been given the responsibility to monitor the houses where migrant returnees have been quarantined,” said CB Singh, adding that medicines will be supplied to the quarantined persons. “If they need any medical help and if they develop any Covid-19 symptoms, they can inform Asha workers or the chief medical officer for treatment. They can also give a call to toll free number,” the Aligarh DM added.

According to health officials in Mathura, over 2,500 migrant workers have returned to the district and posters have been pasted at almost every house. “Legal action can be taken if any of the family members are found violating the quarantine rules,” the poster read. It also added that none of the family members would go out during the quarantine period and no one should visit them. 


