Patanjali gets govt soil testing project in Nagpur
2020-03-02
NAGPUR: While Patanjali Ayurved hopes to restart work on its stalled food processing plant in Nagpur soon, it has also been allotted a pilot project by the union agriculture ministry to carry out soil testing and recommend fertilizer requirement to farmers. 


Nagpur is among the three districts where the work will be implemented, Patanjali’s managing director Acharya Balkrishna told TOI. “The districts chosen to take up the project on a pilot basis include Nagpur in Maharashtra, Haridwar in Uttarakhand and Hamirpur Uttar Pradesh,” said Balkrishna. 

As this would help in increasing the farm yield, Patanjali may also give a buy back guarantee for some of the crops, he added.

“We have already started collecting data for the soil tests. In Nagpur, data from 3,000 farmers has been collected,” said Balkrishna.

“The project is being supported by the union agriculture ministry but even Patanjali is investing its resources in the project. The objective is to help the government in doubling the income of farmers,” he said. 

Balkrishna said the company has made arrangements to fund projects, including the one in Nagpur. Patanjali has taken up 230 acres of land in the non-SEZ portion of Mihan for setting up a food park. Even as machines have been procured, the work for setting up the plant has come to a standstill since more than two months due to a financial crunch. 

Along with the FMCG business, Patanjali is also banking on its recently-started IT venture. “The start-up was made operational on a secret note to avoid the glare of rivals,” said Balakrishna. 

The company, Bharwua Solutions, already has four patents and has developed a software platform that can replace SAP, he claimed.

“It’s a purely Swadeshi software and can do away with dependence on any foreign technology. We have come up with a software that enables real time tracking of the movement of goods. The traceability software will prevent adulteration of the food products. We have already begun the application of the traceability software in milk, honey and grains like wheat and bajra made by Patanjali,” he said 

Balkrishna claimed that the software will not only cut Patanjali’s IT expenditure, but also give it an edge over rivals, enabling real time monitoring of movement of goods.

“The software arm is a different company and apart from catering to the in-house needs of the FMCG business, we are keen to offer our services to other companies in the sector. “Its like being a Ayurvedic practitioner whose services are open for all,” he said. 


