Patient at PGI tested negative for coronavirus
2020-01-30
Chandigarh: The patient admitted to the PGI on January 27 for suspected novel coronavirus (nCoV) has tested negative for the strain. This was confirmed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, through a report that was received by the PGI authorities on Wednesday. The patient will be discharged after three days of hospitalization in the communicable disease isolation ward at the PGI . 

“The patient will be discharged today. We had sent his throat swabs and blood samples for the H1N1 and nCoV tests. None of them have been found to be positive,” said Dr Vikas Suri from the department of internal medicine, PGI.

The 28-year-old patient was admitted with fever and some nCoV-like symptoms after he came back from China recently. As per the protocol, he was admitted to the PGI as he had recurrent fever three days after his return from China where the outbreak has originated. 

The family members of the patient were also quarantined at home. He is the only such patient admitted in a city hospital so far. Those who had a travel history to China recently had been asked to stay at home as they had shown no symptoms. 

A press statement issued from the PGI stated that the patient was stable and was likely to be discharged soon. The throat swab and blood sample were sent to Pune on January 27. The patient had come to the emergency and when he informed the authorities about his travel, he was immediately admitted to the communicable disease isolation ward. The doctors at the PGI had also traced his contacts not to risk the transmission as he was suspected to have contracted nCoV. 

Till date, this is the only sample sent to NIV Pune from Chandigarh, Punjab and Himachal Pradesh. “As the virus strain is new, there will be many cases. The same happened with H1N1 when it made inroads in the country and now its mortality and prevalence has been declining,” said Dr Suri. 

The doctors added that as the virus appeared to be novel, the information on seasonality and virulence was still not clearly known. 


