Patil Estate slum residents wary of moving into quarantine after thefts
2020-05-03
Pune: Panic has gripped residents of Patil Estate slums after two recent incidents of burgalry, making them wary of leaving their homes and moving into quarantine facilities.

On Friday, Ruksana Wahid Shaikh (32) returned to her home after 14 days' quarantine to find it burgled and ransacked. 

Not only did the thieves take away gold ornaments, television set and Rs 7,000 cash, but also some new clothes the family had bought for children. 

People from the slum said that this was the second such incident in the past few days. Two days ago, a pan tapri was broken into. They said the residents were scared of moving into quarantine facilities because of the thefts, putting Pune Municipal Corporation’s plans to move them into safer places in jeopardy.

Shaikh, her sister, her brother and her children stay in a two-storeyed house in the slum. "My brother and father tested positive for Covid-19 and, subsequently, all of us were moved to a quarantine facility. My husband is a construction worker and he was staying at the project site in Vimannagar. Hence, he wasn’t quarantined," she said. Her father is recuperating in a hospital at Dhankawadi.

Shaikh and her two children were quarantined at a facility on Sinhagad Road. "After completing the 14-day quarantine period, we returned on Friday to find that our home had been broken into. We had some gold jewellery and Rs 7,000 cash. We had bought the new television set on Diwali," she said. The family does not own an almirah. Hence, all the valuable were kept in a bag. "The bag is gone along with the new clothes we had bought for my children. Already, we are suffering due to loss of daily wages and now this terrible thing has happened," she said.

Shaikh works as a maid, while her mother is a sweeper in a hotel on JM Road.

Pramod Solanki, a ration shopowner in the same lane, said that there was fear among people. "Day before yesterday, a pan-tapri was broken into in the dead of night. Yesterday, we came to know about this incident. Nobody heard anything. It must be the handiwork of someone who knew that the family had been sent to a quarantine facility," he said.

Shahrukh Quereshi, another resident of the area, said that people have decided not to move out of their homes. "The PMC officials wanted us to move out, but how can we leave everything and just move out. We are hearing about many such incidents here, but don’t know how many of them are true. Once people start returning from quarantine, we will be able to know how many homes have actually been broken into," added Quereshi.

Shaikh's statement was recorded by the Khadki police on Friday night. "We will register a case soon. We have started our investigation into the case. In the meantime, we have arrested a thief who had stolen cash and cigarettes from the two pan shops in the area," said senior inspector B J Misal.

Burglary in Dattawadi

Dattawadi police on Friday night booked unidentified persons for stealing gold ornaments worth Rs1.2 lakh from the locked house of a family from Parvati Darshan area quarantined for the last 10 days.

Police said the theft occurred between April 20 and April 30.

One of the family members, who tested negative for the virus, stepped out of a quarantine facility on Ganeshkhind Road and walked to the police station to lodge a complaint.

Devidas Gheware, senior police inspector, Dattawadi police station, said "We have lodged a complaint against the complainant (42) for neglecting the safety of other people."

He said, "The entire family of five persons, including two children, has been quarantined fter one of them tested positive for the virus."


