Coronavirus scare in Pune: Patients told to fill self-declaration forms
2020-03-16
PUNE: Private hospitals in the city are asking patients to fill out self-declaration forms. They have also established screening checkpoints in entry areas to reduce the risk of exposure from those likely to be infected with the novel coronavirus (Covid19) infection. 


Patients with flu-like symptoms and a recent history of overseas travel are being sent to Naidu Hospital for further screening. “We are screening every patient, visitor, even our employees entering the premises of our hospitals at Sassoon Road, Wanowrie and Hinjewadi,” said Ruby Hall Clinic’s chief executive officer Bomi Bhote.

Explaining further, Bhote said, “As per national health regulatory guidelines, we urge every individual to fill out a self-declaration form for flu-like symptoms such as fever, cough or cold as well as any history of recent overseas travel or contact with a suspected or confirmed coronavirus-infected patient.”

On the basis of the details in the form, individuals showing positive signs of the Covid-19 infection will be directed to a designated hospital in Pune, like Naidu Hospital, for further action, Bhote said. “Those showing signs of respiratory distress will be redirected to our hospital’s chest physicians for further evaluation. Those who have passed the screening test will be requested to carry the stamp with them at all times within the hospital premises,” Bhote added.

The hospital has also deployed frontline health care teams at entry-level screening checkpoints wearing protective gear. “In addition, a thermal thermometer has been provided to the teams to infer body temperature as well. Continuing to follow the highest safety protocols, every contact surface within our hospital is being thoroughly disinfected at regular intervals in accordance with WHO guidelines.”

People visiting hospitals have also been asked to play their part in preventing the spread. “We are advising patients to avoid bringing children, family members or friends to the hospital unless they need assistance. To limit social interaction among vulnerable populations, we encourage visitors to only frequent the hospital if essential,” Bhote said.

Jehangir Hospital’s medical director Satyajit S Singh said, “Taking into consideration the state government’s implementation of the Epidemic Disease Act, a few process changes have been adopted.”

Singh elaborated, “We have created a triage area near the entrance to check the travel or exposure history of patients complaining of cold, cough and fever. Visitors entry has been suspended for the time being and only one pass holder is allowed with the patient. A special isolation ward has been kept ready and on standby, if the need arises.”

Eye surgeon Sanjay Patil, president of Indian Medical Association, said, “Most private hospitals have adopted stringent measures so that every flu patient with an international travel history gets referred to Naidu Hospital for further screening and testing, if needed.”


