Patient count exceeds capacity at regional Covid-19 centre
2020-05-07
Aurangabad: The regional Covid-19 centre-cum-district civil hospital in the Chikalthana area ran out of space on Wednesday, forcing the authorities to adjust the beds to accommodate patients.

The centre has a total intake capacity of 140 patients, but 149 Covid positive patients have already been admitted to the facility. 

The day witnessed a heated exchange of words between the authorities from the health department, zilla parishad, civic body and the district administration. 

The Covid centre officials argued that the centre was meant for non-serious Covid patients and that it was packed to capacity. However, the authorities insisted that more patients be admitted there.

When contacted, district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said, “We are working to the best of our abilities. We have an intake capacity of 140 indoor patients at our hospital, but 148 are currently being treated for Covid-19.”

As a policy matter, the district administration, civic body and the health department have unanimously decided that only critical Covid-19 positive cases would be referred and admitted to the Government Medical College and Hospital, which has reserved an entire building besides keeping aside dedicated resident doctors, senior medicos and class-IV staffers for the purpose.

With no space to admit fresh patients at the civil hospital, the health authorities were in a dilemma about the hospital to which the woman health staffer of Aurangabad Municipal Corporation, who tested positive on Wednesday morning, should be admitted to.

Amidst the confusion, the health team that went to pick up the woman health worker, a resident of Bajajnagar area had to wait for at least four hours before the ambulance took the patient to the hospital. 

The delay in the admission saw the police team and the health staff standing outside the house of infected woman and unnecessarily getting exposed for hours. Senior police officers too expressed their concerns over the lack of coordination between the health authorities belonging to different institutions.

“As the woman is resident of a rural area, it is the duty of the civil surgeon to admit her to their hospital. It is wrong on their part to blame the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation for the same,” said a civic official.


