Patients of other dists shouldn't be quarantined in Nainital, say local officials
2020-05-25
Nainital: As the number of coronavirus cases continue to rise in the state and the medical facilities near saturation point, the Nainital district administration has raised the issue of other districts not quarantining their own patients which is leading to “undue burden on the medical facilities in the district”. 

Speaking to TOI, Nainital district magistrate (DM) Savin Bansal said that he has raised the issue with the state government as even the asymptomatic coronavirus cases from districts like Almora and Bageshwar are being taken to Dr Susheela Tiwari Hospital (STH) in Haldwani.“The medical facilities in Nainital district are limited and therefore, I have raised this issue with the state government that other districts should quarantine and hospitalise coronavirus positive cases with mild symptoms at their respective district hospitals or quarantine centres,” Bansal said. Notably, Nainital is a gateway to the other districts of Kumaon region and therefore, the trains or buses carrying migrants pass through the district. And though most of the people are from other districts, they are tested and quarantined in Nainital. The administration has argued that majority of the positive cases who returned in Shramik Special trains over Saturday and Sunday (May 22 and 23) belong to other districts of Kumaon. 

DM Bansal said that it is impossible for the district administration to test and quarantine every person coming from outside the district. “We are ramping up our capabilities and health infrastructure but it is impossible for us to test and quarantine every person coming from outside. STH is meant for treating people with severe and serious symptoms. Therefore, we have asked the state government to tell other districts to at least quarantine and treat their asymptomatic positive cases,” Bansal said. 

Meanwhile, STH officials told TOI that they have more than 100 active coronavirus cases, including 58 patients who have returned to the state in Shramik Special trains. “We have 34 ventilators, 85 ICU beds, and around 300 normal beds. Though the medical facilities are not overwhelmed yet, we fear that if the cases continue to rise like this we will not have enough facilities,” an official said. 


