Aurangabad: Patients allege Covid-19 infection spreading in quarantine facilities
2020-05-01
AURANGABAD: The relatives of patients and former Covid-19 suspects have alleged that the quarantine facility where patients are placed until their throat swab reports are received have poor infrastructure, risking the exposure of virus to non-Covid patients.


They said that the quarantine facilities have a common rest room which could be a possible place where the infection could be transmitted. 

According to a patient who tested negative for Covid-19, their family was taken to the district civil hospital after one of the family members tested positive for the infection. “Our throat swabs were collected and we were placed in a quarantine facility at the district civil hospital. Apparently, the facility had kept the patients in a general ward-like set up and all were using the same bathroom for two days. Only after the swab report was released did we come to know that Covid-19 positive patients too were in the same facility along with us. Probably, some may had acquired the infection during the hospital stay,” the person, who did not wished to be named, said. 

In another case, a Covid-19 recovered patient alleged that he had contracted the infection while waiting for the throat swab report at the quarantine facility. He said that there was no other way he could have contracted the virus. “Though one of my family members tested positive for Covid-19, I had not come in contact with that person,” the recovered patient said.

According to district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni, the district civil hospital has stopped screening Covid-19 patients about two-three days ago. They have also stopped admitting suspects. “Earlier, our first floor was dedicated for Covid-19 suspect cases only. They were placed in the said ward until their reports were received. Once tested positive, the patients were sent to the second floor — Covid-19 positive isolation ward. Those who tested negative were discharged from the hospital. With the rise in cases, we are only keeping Covid-19 positive cases at the hospital now,” Kulkarni said.

Municipal officer of health Nita Padalkar said that instructions has been issued to all hospitals to keep each Covid-19 suspected patient in segregation while they are awaiting the throat swab reports. 

