Patnaites change food habits amid lockdown
2020-05-14
PATNA: The Covid-19 pandemic has changed the food habits of many people in the city. 

When the nationwide lockdown was announced on March 24, most residents rushed to grocery shops and supermarkets and bought rice, flour and packaged food in bulk. But with the subsequent extensions of lockdown, their priorities changed and they started buying items like noodles, sauces and pasta more than the normal ‘chawal-daal’. 

Executives at online retail stores and supermarkets said there has been an unprecedented rise in sale of baking products, including baking powder, pizza sauce and cheese. 

Dhananjay Singh, the city head of an online retail store, said the needs and requirements of residents switched from basic groceries to luxury items. “The residents have started buying products like cake mix, pancake batter, cheese slices, cream and ready-to-cook Chinese and Indian food products,” he said.

Shishir, manager of a supermarket in Kankarbagh area, also said there was a high demand of pizza base, mozzarella cheese and different kinds of sauces and seasoning.

As most people are spending time indoors, they are experimenting with different kinds of dishes to keep busy and beat the lockdown blues. “We have been experimenting with dishes like cake, pizza and garlic bread that were available at restaurants,” said Abhishek Shrivastava of Kurji.

“Being a foodie, the lockdown was a curse during the initial days. However, with time and videos streaming online, I realized that I can easily cook anything. I have been living on Chinese and Italian food over the last few weeks. Home-cooked junk food is not just delicious but less harmful too,” said Kadamkuan resident Bobby Raj.

Many people also claimed that they feel hungry most of the time. “I feel like eating all the time. I munch snacks and chips even at 2am in the night,” said Deepa Biswas of Nala Road.

But dietitians say people should look after their eating habits as it could lead to severe ailments. “People nowadays are taking all kinds of unhealthy food items, be it refined flour or excess sugar. Cooking junk food at home is fine, but anything extra can lead to digestive problems,” said dietitian Meghna Krishna. 


