Patna University hostels likely to be vacated due to Covid-19 scare
2020-03-16
PATNA: All the hostels of Patna University (PU) and colleges affiliated to it are likely to be vacated as a preventive measure against coronavirus. A formal decision to this effect would be taken at a meeting of the wardens and superintendents of PU hostels on Monday.

PU students’ welfare dean N K Jha said since classes have already been suspended and all examinations scheduled till March 31 postponed, there is hardly any purpose of allowing students to reside in hostels. Students would feel more secured and safe with their parents at homes, he said.

Meanwhile, the wardens and superintendents of all the hostels have been directed to ensure sufficient supply of cleansing materials in hostels and get the washrooms cleaned regularly, said PU registrar Manoj Kumar Mishra. “The railings of staircases and handles of doors of rooms must be sanitized frequently for preventing the spread of coronavirus,” he said.

The registrar further pointed out that efforts are being made to get the entire PU office sanitized so that the officers, employees and teachers visiting the university remain safe and protected from the deadly coronavirus. The principals of colleges and heads of departments have also been directed to strictly follow the advisory issued by the state government and the UGC against the coronavirus.

The UGC has requested all universities and their affiliated colleges to take necessary precautions for “a coordinated and collective effort in a mission mode”. It advised the universities and colleges to avoid large gatherings on campus. “Any student/staff with travel history to any coronavirus-affected country or in contact with such persons in last 28 days, should be monitored and home quarantined for 14 days,” the UGC advisory said.

The advisory further states that everyone should throw away used tissues in a bin and wash their hands after contact with coughing/sneezing. Frequently touched surfaces – door knobs, switches, desk tops and hand railings should be disinfected and alcohol-based hand cleaners and sanitizers provided in frequented spots of the university and colleges, it adds. 

Patna University Teachers’ Association president and warden of Patna College hostels Randhir Kumar Singh, however, said most colleges and PG departments of PU, especially the hostels for boys and girls, are not at all prepared to face the threat posed by coronavirus. “Most of the departments do not provide for clean water and they do not have well cleaned washrooms either. Hence, it is better all the institutions are closed completely till the threat of coronavirus ends,” he added.


