Patna all for ‘Janta curfew’ to keep virus at bay
2020-03-22
PATNA: PM Narendra Modi’s call for a ‘janta curfew’ from 7am to 9pm on Sunday to encourage social distancing has found enthusiastic response from city residents.


Several housing societies have issued instructions and requested residents not to go out, others have decided to lock the main gates till the ‘curfew’ ends late in the evening. All domestic help have been given the day off to take part in the social distancing exercise.

“Social distancing is the only way to limit the spread of the virus in such a critical situation. Avoiding gatherings and staying at home is very important right now. We have asked all domestic help to take off and stay at home as part of the Janta Curfew,” Abhay Nandan, secretary of Pataliputra Vikas Manch, a residential society, said on Sunday.

He added: “In addition to applauding health workers by clapping and ringing bells at 5pm, we have asked residents to unfurl our national flag from their balconies.”

Paltliputra Cooperative Society secretary Rai Ajeet Prasad said that announcement has been made in the society for staying indoors during the ‘janta curfew’. “We have asked residents to purchase all necessary items beforehand in order to participate in the Janata curfew,” he added.

Residents of other areas in the city, too, vowed to take part in the initiative. “Roaming outside at this time is like putting everyone’s lives at risk, including my own. I appreciate and support the initiative for which I have decided to stay indoors on Sunday,” said Meenakshi Sinha, a resident of Boring Road.

Kadamkuan resident Pritee Prasad said the ‘janta curfew’ is not just an activity but a way to encourage and appreciated doctors and health workers, who are risking their lives and working throughout the day. “My entire society has decided to stand in the balconies and clap hands and ring bells at the scheduled time of 5pm,” Pritee said.

Transport services, including buses and auto-rickshaws, will remain affected. Bihar state auto-rickshaw drivers association’s general secretary Rajkumar, said all auto-rickshaw drivers will remain off-duty in order to curb gathering on the roads.

Supermarkets and local wholesale shops will be closed. Raju Gupta, owner of a wholesale shop in Kadamkuan said, “There are around 10 grocery shops in this area and all of them will be closed on Sunday. We have informed our regular customers about it.”

Petrol pumps, on the other hand, will remain open. Ajit Kumar, owner of Indian Oil petrol pump at Bailey Road said the pump will remain open on Sunday, but the staff will participate in the clapping activity. “In order to follow the ‘janta curfew’ fewer numbers of staff have been asked to be on duty on Sunday,” he said.


