Patna HC seeks status report on quarantine centres in Bihar
2020-05-14
PATNA: The Patna high court on Wednesday directed the disaster management department secretary to file a personal affidavit giving report on status of quarantine centres across the state due to Covid-19 pandemic. The court has fixed May 19 as the next date of hearing.

While hearing a PIL filed by advocate Rajiv Ranjan, the division bench of Chief Justice Sanjay Karol and Justice S Kumar observed that quarantine centres were set up as per the guidelines of the state and central governments, but it appears that there was some difficulties in their proper management at ground level.

The court sought reply on number of quarantine centres in state, migrants kept there, those who returned home after completion of quarantine period, migrants expected, capacity of the quarantine centres, provision of security, sanitation, food at each centre and if such facilities are outsourced or being provided directly by the state government, any provision of medical aid and facilities and mechanism for lodging complaints and their redressal.

The court also observed that relevance, significance and importance of ensuring proper sanitisation, cleanliness and orderliness at quarantine centres are highly imperative, more so looking into the economic conditions, demography and population of Bihar.

“Today, 1/10th of the population of India lives in Bihar with highest density of population ratio. Hence the need, all the more, for monitoring the centres directly by senior level officer(s) at the level of the government and with a greater vigil,” it observed.

The petitioner had brought on record reports on ruckus by migrant workers at quarantine centre in Nawada and Motihari and escaping of 20 migrant workers from a centre in Katihar for lack of basic amenities and food.

The petitioner urged the court to direct the state government to provide adequate and hygienic food to people quarantined and follow Centre’s guidelines in this regard.

Appearing for the Centre, additional solicitor general SD Sanjay opposed the petition submitting that the central government has already issued directions on quarantine centres. Additional advocate general PN Shahi represented the state and sought time to reply, which the court accepted.


