Covid-19 scare: Passengers avoid trains as neighbouring states shut down
2020-03-15
CHENNAI: As governments in Karnataka, Kerala and Telangana have declared a near shutdown to check spread of Covid-19, people have started to defer travel. Trains from Chennai to Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Thiruvananthapuram have low patronage for this weekend and the coming weeks.



Seats are available for the next few days to the three cities, which otherwise see a huge rush. Usually, all trains are in waitlist for 24 hours advance booking and sometimes there will be a regret waitlist notification on the online site. 

 
 

But all of next week, Brindavan Express, on the Chennai-Bengaluru route, has 934 to 1,000 seats available on second sitting. Shatabdi Express that departs at 6am has more than 600 seats available on AC chair car on weekdays and weekends in the coming week. Similar is the situation for trains to Hyderabad. Chennai-Hyderabad Kacheguda Express has 71 seats available for booking on AC III tier on March 16. B Rema, who was planning a trip to Thiruvananthapuram, has decided to put it off because of the checks. “The district authorities there have asked people not to step out unless it is unavoidable. My relative has told me that not many autos are plying,” she said.

A railway official said the availability of seats in airconditioned class show people are hesitating to travel. “The demand for berths is high at least during weekends to these towns because there are many who travel on weekends and book tickets in advance.” Sleeper coaches have some demand unlike the air-conditioned coaches but the tickets are not getting sold as quick as it should be at this time, said an official. 

However, a senior official said “seats are likely to get filled in the coming days. Seats often gets filled slowly only in this season because of exams. “The travel picks up by mid April,” he said. 

 As a measure to contain spread of Covid-19, South Central Railway has issued an order saying they will not issue woollen blankets to passengers in airconditioned coaches, unless people ask for it. Passengers will be given sheets and a pillow. Railways is also taking steps to disinfect trains after every trip in a bid to prevent the spread of the virus.

