Pay lockdown wages before letting Saurashtra diamond workers go: GDWU
2020-05-05
Surat: Before allowing the diamond workers to travel to their native places in Saurashtra and North Gujarat, they should be paid their lockdown salaries, demanded Gujarat Diamond Workers Union (GDWU). The workers’ body has given the state government 24 hours ultimatum to instruct the diamond unit owners to pay dues to their stranded workers. 

GDWU has also threatened dharna in Varachha, if the unit owners, both big and small, fail to pay the wages.

Ramesh Jilariya, president of GDWU said, “Diamond workers have not been paid the lockdown wages and even if they are allowed to go to their natives, they will be poverty stricken. We have made strong demands to the state government to ensure that they are not only paid their dues, but also given special buses to transport them to Saurashtra and North Gujarat.”

According to GDWU, about 90% of the diamond workers in Surat have not received lockdown wages. The diamond unit owners paid the wages till March 22, with the promise to pay the dues when the units would reopen.

“In the early days of lockdown, about one lakh people from Varachha have moved out to their hometowns in Saurashtra. Still, about 7 lakh people, mostly diamond workers and merchants are waiting for the government’s nod to travel to their hometowns,” said Jilariya.

Sources in the labour department stated that about 80 diamond companies have been issued with notices for paying the lockdown wages to the workers.

A senior officer in labour department said, “Since we are unable to visit the factories, we sent the notices on the official WhatsApp numbers of the diamond company owners to pay the lockdown wages to the workers. Majority of the owners have replied that they will pay the wages once the units are made operational.”

Meanwhile, the BJP MLAs from Varachha, Katargam and Kamrej met state health minister, Kumar Kanani at his residence demanding the diamond workers to be allowed to travel to their hometowns in Saurashtra. Kanani is believed to have represented the issue to chief minister Vijay Rupani too.

Talking with TOI, Kanani said, “The government is making arrangements for the travel of diamond workers to Saurashtra and North Gujarat, which will be announced soon.”


