PCMC chief starts talk show on living with coronavirus
2020-04-29
PUNE: Pimpri Chinchwad municipal commissioner Shravan Hardikar has taken to the social media to talk on the topic of “living with coronavirus” as many places in the city are slowly opening up.



In the first of the five talk shows planned by him on Facebook, Hardikar on Tuesday gave out statistics on how the growth rate has been across the township since the first case on March 11, 2020. The show was viewed by about 600 people.

He said when things opened up, it would be imperative for people to behave differently to beat the virus. “It is not that the virus will disappear when the lockdown opens. We have to learn to live with it,” Hardikar said, adding, “The city has successfully managed to navigate similar threats, like the swine flu.”

The positive cases in areas under the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation’s (PCMC) limits surpassed 100 on Tuesday. The commissioner said over 80 of them were “completely asymptomatic” and signed an order extending the hours of business in the city’s non-hotspot zones. 

Except for 16 containment zones, the commissioner said vegetable and grocery stores would remain open from 10am to 4pm. This is an extension of two hours over the previous version. In the containment zones, the shops will be open for two hours, from 10am to noon.

“We have to focus on how our habits have to change when the industries and markets open. All of us are slaves to our habits,” Hardikar said, citing how he has personally given up his habit of biting nails following the Covid-19 outbreak. 

Positive Covid-19 cases in Pimpri Chinchwad doubled in 11 days and one in every 23 people tested was found infected. “Though eight among 10 patients are asymptomatic, the problem is with them being carriers who can affect other people,” the commissioner said.

Hardikar said the subsequent sessions woud focus on social distancing and hand hygiene during the time when various sectors started opening up. 


