Covid-19: PCMC in talks with eight private hospitals to quarantine people
2020-03-18
PUNE: The Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) is in talks with eight private hospitals in the twin industrial townships for carrying out isolation of people coming in contact with the Covid-19 affected persons and have developed symptoms such as cold, cough and fever.


Municipal commissioner Shravan Hardikar, who met the representatives of these hospitals, on Tuesday said the health hubs have responded positively and agreed in principle to make 48 beds available for isolation . 

Pimpri Chinchwad has so far registered 10 Covid-19 positive cases, highest in the state so far. 

“Our effort is to have adequate facilities for isolation and ensuring quarantine of the infected people. Though the current inventory is meeting our requirements, support from private hospitals is being planned as a contingency measure,” he told TOI. 

The civic body has made available two more hospitals to quarantine patients, if required. An additional capacity of 80 beds could be available for isolation purposes, Hardikar said, adding that the hospitals might need at least two or more months to establish the required set-up for testing of samples after getting the requisite permissions from the authorities. 

Hardikar also said instead of ostracizing anyone, housing societies must focus on home quarantine. “It is the best strategy. There is no other way. Societies telling infected people to go out is like sending the infection out to a broader population”.

Hardikar added that societies must ensure all support, such as providing food, for the home quarantined people so that they did not have to come out. He said people with travel history must self-quarantine for 14 days.

The commissioner said quite a few people from the PCMC limits have approached the corporation to state that they have come from outside. “We are lucky that a lot of our people who travelled and possibly came in contact with the infected people have come forward to self-report,” he said.

Hardikar said of the 10 people testing positive, eight had shown no-symptoms whatsoever. “The ninth person is showing only mild symptoms. The tenth person, who tested positive on Monday, also had very mild symptoms,” he added.


