Pensive Nepalese labourers, stranded by lockdown, yearn to return home
2020-04-08
Pithoragarh: Evening in Dharchula, one of the two border crossings with Nepal in Uttarakhand, now closed from both sides under lockdown. Sitting on the ramparts ofDharchula stadium, a pensive Nem Bahadur, daily wager from Jajarkote in Nepal, could be heard singing:

Usae aayo Bhukhmari ta, Usae aayo Haija,

Keta Hamlai goli thok de, Keta Firta keja

(On one side, there’s hunger, on the other Haija

Either shoot us or take us back)

Nem Bahadur has been stranded here for a week, and has no clue when he and his fellow countrymen would be able to return to their homes. Speaking to TOI, he said that he has no idea what Covid-19 is. All he knows is that Haija (cholera) is an epidemic that wreaks havoc in his village every year.

Across Dharchula tehsil — in the stadium, government inter-colleges at Baluokote, Baram and Jauljibi — the local administration had made temporary camps for 1,016 Nepalese labourers, said Dharchula SDM A K Shukla. He added the labourers are part of a large contingent of Nepalese citizens who cross the open border to work in the stae. They have been trying to return home ever since the lockdown was imposed, but by the time they reached the border crossings, Nepal, too, had gone into lockdown, preventing the cross over, leaving them stranded.

Dr M K Jayaswal of the Community Health Centre, Dharchula, said, “Our medical team is regularly checking them for corona symptoms. They are healthy, but anxious to reach home. We have advised them to engage in physical activity and sing songs to keep their morale up.”

Nem Bahadur was working with a road construction firm in Malpa, when the lockdown left him jobless. He said that the labourers have another cause for worry. 

Bispat (Visvat Sankranti on April 14), the Nepalese new year, is a big festival in the country, when all Nepalese try to be at home. "If we don't reach home by then, it is considered very inauspicious," Bahadur said.


