People more worried about life after Covid: Mental health study
2020-05-03
Kochi: Though there were large concerns about the mental health and welfare of people sitting at home, most people suffered only mild stress caused by the uncertainty of the lockdown rather than Covid, according to a mental health study done by the department of psychology, Rajagiri College Of Social Sciences.

The survey, using WhatsApp as the medium to share around 100 questions in both Malayalam and English was circulated among a large cross-section of the society in the state between April 15-20, just after the Centre extended the lockdown period till May 3. The study found that those who were most stressed were in the age-group of 35-45 years. Only 16% among the elderly were under severe stress.

As for genders, the men had more anxiety and depression than women, more worried about the financial situation and the job crisis due to the weakened economy.

“We did it as part of our research work and also because we have a teleconsultation helpline (9895343515) to reach out to people under stress and any mental health problem. The study looked at mental health (stress, anxiety, depression), coping, how relationships are faring and perceptions of the future,” said Jessy Fenn, principal investigator of the project with Sanju George, Noble Chacko, Fr Varghese K V and Tony Thomas being the others doing the analysis.

Around 1,073 respondents participated with 42% males, 58% females in the age group of 15-75 years and incomes ranging from less than Rs 20,000 (16%) to more than Rs 80,000 (25%).

According to the researchers, stress is a normal reaction to everyday pressures of life and some amount of stress is desirable and beneficial. But when it becomes more than what a person can handle, then it affects the functioning of the individual and is called distress. Covid-19 and the ensuing lockdown has created stress from both external and internal causes: external — loss of job maybe, restrictions, reduced social contact, reduced comforts of life; and internal — fear of the disease, restlessness, etc.

Fenn said that a perceived stress scale was used to measure stress and its scores reveal the level of stress and the percentage of the sample in each level. In short, 40% of the people are experiencing marked level of stress during this lockdown (moderate + high).

The top two sources of stress were generalized anxiety about state of health, collapse of major world powers and what would happen in future. This was followed by worries closer home about financial condition, and future of job/ business of the respondent.

“We did the survey when our death numbers were the lowest and hence anxiety regarding Covid came in the 6th place. Fear of dying, and fear of Covid was not so high. Loneliness, and loss of socializing which is one of the main worries in western countries was not as severe in India where people lived with families and close to others. Still, it was a problem for 26% of the people, and most were men,” she added.

On how they coped, 75% said adopting Covid prevention methods, reading about Covid, increased communication, watching movies and reading books, jokes on social media, stocking food, being updated, sleeping. Praying came at number 11, with 32% saying that they are spending more time praying than usual.

No stress

7%

Mild stress

53%

Moderate stress

37%

High stress

3%

No Depression & Anxiety

13%

Mild levels of depression and anxiety

38%

Moderate levels of depression and anxiety

28%

High levels of depression and anxiety

21%

No.

Top Coping Strategies used

1

Adopting Covid prevention /hygiene measures -75%

2

Reading on Covid prevention - 61%

3

Increased communication with family -56% 

4

Watching movies / Netflix/ reading - 54%

5

Reading jokes on social media - 50%

6

Stocking food and essentials - 49%

7

Being updated on Covid news - 52%

8

Increasing immunity/ health- 45.5%

9

Sleeping - 42%

10

Indulging in hobbies (cooking, gardening, gaming) - 41%

Praying came as number 11 at 32%


