Gujarat: People positive of a fresh start post-lockdown, shows GU-NGO survey
2020-05-12
AHMEDABAD: The lockdown measures that are in place to deal with Covid-19 pandemic seems to have left some positive impact on the people of Gujarat, which is one of the worst-hit states in terms of the number of Covid-19 cases registered in the country. 

This is reflected in a recent survey carried out jointly by Gujarat University’s department of psychology and Mehrizm Foundation, a non-profit organization. 

 

While a majority of the participants said that they haven’t lost their appetite or sleep due to the lockdown situation, about 40.87% participants ‘agree’ and 39.75% ‘strongly agree’ that they feel happy to spend time with their family. 

The survey saw participation from 712 persons. As many as 22 questions were asked to the participants. The study was conducted in Gujarati and English both. A free helpline has also been set up for counselling purpose by the GU and Mehrizm Foundation. A team of 50 psychologists of various specializations have been roped in. 

“As psychologists, we believe the current physical health crisis would lead to mental health crisis in the near future. We were not sure what will be the nature of the crisis. So, rather than assuming, we designed a survey with a combination of positive and negative impacts of lockdown,” said Jasbirkaur Thadhani, head, Psychometrics and Counselling at Mehrizm Foundation. Thadani along with Kamayani Mathur, director of psychology and education department of GU initiated this project. 

“Based on the survey results, we will design remedial and prevention methods, so that we can cope better with any crisis related to emotional well-being,” added Thadani. 

The survey also showed that a majority felt their work productivity was affected due to the lockdown. 

In a question where people were asked if everything will be allright and if we can have a fresh start, 46.77% participants, ‘strongly agreed’ and 36.24% of said they ‘agree’. However, only 11.52% of people felt ‘neutral’ about this statement, whereas 3.23% said they ‘disagree’ and 2.25% ‘strongly disagreed’.

Despite Gujarat being one of the worst-hit states, people have strong optimism towards a fresh start, Thadani. 

Usually a global pandemic might give us a feeling that the lockdown situation, rising cases of infection, new vaccine yet to be found, and sitting idle at home would induce a negative feeling about our health, said Thadani.

However, this was not the case here, she added. A question where the participants were asked if they had negative feelings about their health, 36% ‘disagreed’ to it and another 18% ‘strongly disagreed’. While 18% remained neutral in their opinion. However, 23.03% of them did ‘agree’ that they were getting negative thoughts with regards to their health, a small percentage of participants, i.e., 4.78% ‘strongly agreed’ to this statement. 

