Bengaluru: People returning from China, neighbouring places throng hospital for coronavirus test
2020-01-28
BENGALURU: People with travel history to China and other countries in its neighbourhood are knocking on the doors of Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD), seeking clinical examination to ensure all is well. This despite the fact that they haven’t shown any symptoms of the novel Coronavirus (nCOV). 


Seeing the panicky reaction, the hospital on Monday called for an emergency meeting to set up a help desk to handle queries pertaining to the new virus infection. “Anyone with a doubt can approach us. However, there’s no need to panic. So far, there have been no positive cases,” doctors at RGICD said. 

Hospital sources said seven persons came to them with queries on Monday alone, but officials maintained there were just two such instances. 

“A man approached us stating his wife had recently travelled from Delhi to Bengaluru by air. Apparently, she sat next to a man who looked like a Chinese national. She has had fever for the last two days and the family is worried. We suggested he bring his wife for a check-up,” said Dr C Nagaraja, director, RGICD. In another similar instance, a person sought check-up at the hospital stating that he had recently travelled to Hong Kong. 

“Given the alarm, the number of such cases seeking clinical examination is likely to increase,” said health department authorities. 

Screening of passengers returning from China began at Kempegowda International Airport from January 20. Those reaching Bengaluru and Mangaluru from China are now being screened and a health surveillance team will be tracking them for 14 days. 


Three patients in isolation ward

Currently, RGICD’s isolation ward has three patients with travel history to China. Two of them got themselves admitted on Sunday night with symptoms of cold and fever. The 37-year-old woman and the 22 year-old man, both working in Bengaluru, have been kept in the isolation ward.

A 25-year-old Yelahanka man who tested negative for the deadly virus infection is yet to be discharged.

The woman, a globalsourcing professional from Jalahalli, had travelled to Foshan in China between December 22 and January 11. “After that she went to Punjab. She may not have any infection. We just wanted to get her tested, as she was in China when the infection was spreading,” her family member told TOI.

The 22-year-old man returned from China in January. Throat swab and blood samples of both patients have been sent to National Institute of Virology, Pune for testing and the results are expected in a couple of days.

