People in Patna expect lockdown extension beyond May 3
2020-04-22
PATNA: Several people, including doctors, teachers and residents are expecting another extension of the lockdown, which has been imposed till May 3 to contain Covid-19 spread. However, the poor and daily wagers are expecting some relief from home isolation to start working again for livelihood.


Ashiana-Digha Road resident Ayush Kumar said the lockdown should continue till a vaccine for the virus is found. “Ending lockdown is like inviting death. I am hoping for another lockdown extension,” he said.

Paediatrician Dr Vivekanand said the number of Covid-19 cases is increasing at rapid pace. “Only one Covid patient can transmit the virus in tens of hundreds of people and the government should not take any risk. Moreover, there are many hidden cases taking more than usual time to develop the symptoms. Hence, the authorities should lift the lockdown only in a staggered manner,” he said.

Schools are also in favour of extended lockdown. International School director Farhat Hasan said the lockdown might affect the students but at least it is keeping them safe. “I hope the government finds some alternative plans to keep the students safe and away from getting infected. As far as studies are concerned, we are providing them with all necessary study materials online. Besides, proper online classes are being conducted for all students,” she said.

Trade and industry bodies and economists also raised concerns over the increasing number of cases in the state and country. They, however, said any further extension would affect the country’s economy badly. “We definitely need another extension and it seems the government is preparing us for that because it will be very difficult for them to handle cases if we enter the third stage of the pandemic,” said Mukesh Kumar Jain, vice-president of Bihar Chamber of Commerce and Industries.

Talking about the lockdown impact on industries, he said most of the workers have returned to their native villages and they are not even ready to come back. 

Aviral Pandey, assistant professor of economics at A N Sinha Institute of Social Studies, said the extent of losses will depend on the lockdown extension. “Both aggregate supply and demand have been impacted by Covid-19 pandemic. The state government’s focus now is on animal husbandry and agriculture as the lockdown has somewhat impacted these sectors adversely,” he said.

Pandey said the pandemic might end up bringing a change in the mode of production. “The dependency on workers, especially migrants, might decrease with an increase in automated ways in several sectors in the coming times,” he said.

Meanwhile, daily wage workers, especially autorickshaw and e-rickshaw drivers, are hopeful that the lockdown will end on May 3. “We have not received any help from the authorities and we are not even expecting anything now. We just hope the lockdown to end on May 3 and go back to work,” said Rinki Devi, a woman autorickshaw driver.


