People living near thermal power plants will be hit harder by Covid-19: study
2020-04-06
Nagpur: People residing near coal-fired power plants are more prone to respiratory illnesses and diseases like coronavirus than others, reveals latest scientific study done by Chhattisgarh State Health Resource Centre (SHRC).

The cross-sectional study establishes that people living near thermal power plants have greater exposure to particulate matter. It compares samples from exposed population living within a 10 km radius of the power plants in Korba, which has the world’s second largest open cast mines and 10 power plants in its vicinity producing 6000MW of electricity. 

The second group of samples is taken from Katghora, a village 20 kms from Korba. The findings show significantly elevated prevalence of respiratory diseases like asthma and bronchitis, which were 11.79% and 2.96% among the exposed group respectively. Both diseases were at 5.46% and 0.99% in the unexposed group, thereby establishing the higher disease burden in communities residing around the thermal power plants. 

The air sampling was carried out in nine locations in Korba. The results indicated that five of them had PM2.5 levels above the permissible limit of 60 micrograms per cubic metre (mpcm) as prescribed by the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC).

Levels of manganese exceeded in six out of seven samples by 2.2 to 6.03 times the safe limit while the levels of lead in one location (Kharmora) was found to be 1.02 times above the safe levels. Apart from this, the levels of arsenic in two samples (Dari Nagoikhar and Kharmora) exceed the government standards by 1.01 and 1.51 times respectively and levels of nickel in five samples were 2.05 to 3.0 times above the permissible limit.

Based on the findings, experts have warned that Covid-19 is likely to hit harder in air pollution impacted communities. “It is because exposure to air pollution in long-term reduces the capacity of organs to function fully and makes it more vulnerable to infections and diseases. In the context of the current pandemic, such individuals are likely to face higher complications, including serious ones," said Dr Yogesh Jain from Jan Swasthya Sahyog, Bilaspur.

Stating that the findings corroborate serious impacts on public health due to pollution from thermal power plants, Korba-based environmental activist Laxmi Chauhan said, “We have been complaining about health problems, severe air pollution, contamination of groundwater and soil in the region for several years now. We welcome the findings of the report and now urge the state administration to ensure these recommendations are implemented in a time-bound manner.”

In its report, SHRC Chhattisgarh has recommended setting up a specialized healthcare infrastructure operated by the state health departments at polluters’ cost, under the ‘polluter pays’ principle. It further suggests the state government to conduct a cumulative health impact study of various industries on the health of residents in the area to formulate a mitigation plan.

Dr Prabir Chatterjee, executive director of SHRC, said, “This study is important as it documents the health burden of the population due to the operations of the power plants. Studies like this help us identify clusters of vulnerable populations and design services that are most needed for them. Not just during normal circumstances but also during pandemics like Covid-19.”


