People eagerly await relaxation in lockdown norms
2020-04-20
Dharwad: With the state government expected to issue guidelines on relaxation of lockdown norms from April 21, the people are expecting chief minister B S Yediyurappa to give some relief to those who are adversely affected by the lockdown, and make their lives easier.

There are many people, including migrant workers, who are stranded and away from their homes due to the lockdown, who want to return home and be with their families. Similarly, those depending on daily wages and vendors of non-essential commodities, want to return to work, so that they can earn their livelihood. Small business establishments are expecting the chief minister to allow them to conduct business, on the condition that they should follow norms like social distancing.

A group of 29 migrant labourers who walked from Goa to Karnataka, and are stranded in Alnavar in Dharwad taluk, are desperate to reach their homes in Koppal and Gadag districts. All these 29 migrants have been provided food, clothing, shelter and medical care, but they are homesick, and want to go home.

People are also expecting the sale of liquor to resume, once the lockdown is relaxed. Tipplers are desperately waiting for liquor shops to open, so that they can stock up. Occasional drinkers, are feeling bored sitting at home, and want to find solace by having a peg or two. However, liquor is currently selling at a very high price, due to the lockdown.

Prasanna Bijapur, a resident of Malamaddi, wants haircutting saloons to be allowed to remain open for a few hours, so that people can get haircuts. However, an official ruled out such a possibility, because the work does not allow social distancing. We have asked dental clinics to remain closed, as it is not possible for a dentist to maintain social distancing from his patient. When this is the case, permitting haircutting saloons to open is ruled out,” the official added.

Lockdown norms at APMC yards to be relaxed

Dharwad: District minister Jagadish Shettar has stated that the government will relax some lockdown norms for farmers, traders and customers at the APMC yard, during the lockdown. However, if any merchant or customer is found flouting the conditions, subject to which the relaxations are given, the trade licence of the wholesale merchant will be seized, and stern legal action will be taken against them, he warned.

Business can take place at the APMC yard, throughout the day, but by practicing social distancing. Permission has been given to transport agriculture produce from neighbouring states. Excluding chilli, online tender for other agriculture produce is being allowed.


