Coronavirus scare: People queue up at hospitals in Patna
2020-03-13
PATNA: Queues are getting longer at government hospitals in Patna and elsewhere in the state as people with fever, cough and cold are making a beeline to get themselves checked for Covid-19 virus. Doctors say even those with mild cough and cold symptoms are queuing up.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“The fear has grown so much that numerous people with common cold are seeking medical help here on a daily basis. Instead of getting intimidated, people in the city should create awareness and educate each other about the virus. People are panicking and adding to the mass hysteria with little or no knowledge of how the virus spreads,” said a senior doctor at the PMCH virology department. 

He added: “We are only considering people who have returned from affected countries or those who have been in direct contact with a Covid-19 patient. A normal cold or flu can’t turn out to be Covid-19 until and unless there has been some connection with a positive case.”

Amid the global spread of the novel coronavirus, the state health department has identified six government hospitals for setting up quarantine facilities to combat this highly infectious disease. Health officials said all 38 districts have been linked to medical college and hospitals for collecting samples and providing isolation facilities to Covid-19 suspects.

Altogether 10 beds have been designated to provide quarantine facilities to the suspects of Covid-19 at the PMCH.

Sharing similar views, Krishna Gopal, medical superintendent at Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS) said, “There has been a surge in people seeking help for normal flu and common cold in the last few weeks. The numbers decreased a little during Holi, it might increase in the coming days. We have designated two beds to monitor Covid-19 suspects.”

Bettiah civil surgeon Arun Kumar Sinha said quarantine of 10 Covid-19 suspects has been completed. “People here have become restless due to the growing number of Covid-19 cases. Isolation facility for treating the virus has been prepared at the Government Medical College in Bettiah,” Sinha said.

Officials at several hospitals claimed that there has not been any increase in the number of patients suspected of having Covid-19. Dr Sunil Shahi, superintendent at Shri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH) in Muzaffarpur said, “The outbreak has not affected people here as the number of patients has not increased. Besides, the situation is quite normal here,” he said.

He added that there’s no reason to create panic in the state. “Even though, we are ready for treating any kind of case in the state, people should understand that they can only get affected by the virus if they have been around someone who has tested positive with Covid-19. As of now we have 10 isolation beds at SKMCH,” Shahi said.

