Covid-19 outbreak in Bihar: People ‘help’ domestic helps in social distancing
2020-03-24
PATNA: Hit by reports of Covid-19 positive cases in Bihar, many city residents and housing societies have decided to ask their domestic workers, including cooks, maids and drivers, not to come to work for their mutual safety.


Samanpura resident Shabana Imam asked her domestic help to stay at home till the situation improves. “Though the lock down was announced from Monday, I gave leave to my help from Saturday because we were hearing the news about the spread of Covid-19 across the country. Since my help comes by autorickshaw, it was not safe for her to use public transport as well as for my family because she will ultimately come in contact with us. I have also given her some salary because I do not know when she will be able to come next time.”

Shabana added that she was involving her kids in the daily chores as their school and colleges are shut.

Anita Ranjan, a resident of Aneesabad in the city, has asked her help not to come for a fortnight and assured her that there will be no deduction from her monthly wages. “I asked my domestic help not to come to ensure social distancing and prevent the spread of Covid-19 virus. The virus is highly contagious and we don’t know where all she has gone and whom she is interacting with. Thus, we have asked her not to come for the time being, but I have told her that she will get her full monthly wages,” she said.

However, Gayatri Devi, who works a few houses in Ashiana Nagar area to make ends meet, has not yet been told by any of her employers to stop coming to work. “I work in eight houses, but nobody has asked me so far for not to come to work. Most people keep sanitisers and I clean my hand using it before entering the house,” she said.

Many residents said they are not stopping their domestic help from coming as they live nearby. “I haven’t stopped my help as she stays next to my house and goes to only a couple of houses. Besides, since everyone is staying at home, the workload is more for which I need her help,” a Kankerbagh-based homemaker said, wishing anonymity.

Seema Sinha, a resident of Saguna Mor said she has given emergency leave to her driver to go to his native place in Bhojpur. “I told him that I would not deduct his salary under the present circumstances. Besides, we are not traveling long distances as schools and offices are closed. However, my maid is working on alternate days as a precautionary measure,” she said.

