People should be wary even after lockdown: Expert
2020-04-09
TOI’s Pushpa Narayan went live on Facebook with Dr V Ramasubramanian, senior consultant at the department of infectious diseases, Apollo Hospitals, asking him questions on Covid-19 posed by our readers. Excerpts from the discussion. 


Why is this more serious than influenza or any other flu? 

The flu is less infectious. For example, flu can spread to 1.5-2 people from every infected person, while Covid-19 can spread to 2-3. The symptoms, though similar, are slow to occur in Covid-19. It starts with fever, dry cough or sore throat and it takes 5-6 days before it worsens. 80% of people have mild or moderate infection and do not require hospitalisation. Flu mortality is 0.1%, while that of Covid-19 can be as high as 2%-3%.


How do I know whether I am infected. Should I get tested? 

Anyone who has fever or dry cough or sore throat should home quarantine themselves for 2-3 days. If it settles in 2-3 days, then it is unlikely to be Covid-19. If the symptoms persist, they need to get medical help.


We buy vegetables/ newspapers everyday. How to use them? 

As long as vegetables are thoroughly washed, there is no problem. Many people are also asking if we should stop reading newspapers, for fear that it will carry the infection. It is ridiculous. The chance that a paper might carry a virus, even if it is handled by an infected person, is so remote.


Can we expect a vaccine? 

There are only two ways as of now to get over the pandemic. One is that 60% of population should get infected, survive and develop antibodies. This is herd immunity. Second is, you vaccinate everybody. Vaccine development takes anywhere between 3 and 0 years. If we fastrack, it might be possible in 1.5 years but anything under a year seems highly unlikely at this point. 


What should our exit strategy be, now that we are nearing the end of the lockdown? Can we lead a normal life? 
Lifestyle changes have to be made to ensure we get out of the problem. This 21-day lockdown has probably helped flatten the curve but we still have not got rid of the virus. Even after the lockdown ends, we have to curtail physical proximity with other people. Congregations, especially at places like cinemas, malls should be dealt with carefully. The elderly should be extra careful. We should continue to wash hands often, follow cough etiquette, etc., 

Check out Facebook.com/chennaitoi for live discussion with Dr Raj B Singh, senior consultant and head of department of respiratory medicine, Apollo Hospitals, at 10am on April 9. 


