Coronavirus in Bihar: People returning from abroad asked to stay in home isolation
2020-03-07
PATNA: Amid coronavirus scare, two persons who returned from abroad on Friday, were advised by the state health department to remain in home isolation for 14 days. The one from Rejendra Nagar returned from Indonesia while a Darbhanga native came back from Saudi Arabia. However, both are asymptomatic, said Patna civil surgeon Dr Raj Kishore Chaudhary.

He said the report of another city resident of Gandhi Maidan area was found negative. He had returned from Malaysia five days ago with cough and cold. Total four persons are staying in home isolation in the state capital now — one each in Rajendra Nagar, Kankarbagh, Gandhi Maidan and Boring Road.

Chief secretary Deepak Kumar formed a coordination committee of various departments on Friday to create awareness about coronavirus.

Nalanda Medical College Hospital (NMCH) on Friday increased the number of beds in its isolation ward from the existing seven to 27 to tackle any suspect of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19). The decision was taken in a meeting of the doctors of allied departments like medicine, paediatrics and microbiology chaired by NMCH principal Dr V K Gupta. “Though there is no case of suspected coronavirus here, the hospital is prepared to tackle any situation and we have requisitioned 5,000 masks and universal protection kits from Bihar State Health Society (BSHS) for our doctors and paramedics,” said Gupta.

It was also decided to put up placards reading “Not to panic” with awareness tips on personal precaution at all important places of patients’ activities and outpatients department (OPDs).

DGCA officials inspect Gaya airport: Two Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) officials on Friday inspected Gaya international airport to take stock of preparation for coronavirus. Gaya airport director Dilip Kumar said the officials were satisfied with the preventive measures being taken and instructed them to put more signage near the aerobridge area.

Gaya DM Abhishek Singh said both domestic as well as international tourists were being screened at the airport. “We have even instructed Gaya airport authority to coordinate with Anugraha Narayan Medical College and Hospital and dispose of mask and personal protection equipment used by the airport staff on daily basis,” said Singh.

One positive case of swine flu in Patna: Amid the alarm over novel coronavirus, a city resident on Friday tested positive for swine flu. Patna civil surgeon Dr Raj Kishore Chaudhary said the 26-year-old woman from Gaighat area in Patna tested positive. She had no travel history. “Her sample was tested at Rajendra Memorial Research Institute (RMRI) in Patna and her report came today. We have advised her and other family members to remain inside their home. We have also given them necessary medicines,” Dr Chaudhary said.


