People at quarantine centres in Jaipur complain of inhuman treatment
2020-04-21
JAIPUR: People in the city’s quarantine centres have been calling up their relatives and government authorities on the mismanagement, especially unclean washroom and delayed supply of meals. Many also complained of inhuman treatment towards them since they are seen as suspects of Covid-19.


TOI on Monday spoke to various people who are quarantined and are kept at hotels, private institutes and other places. A majority of them requested anonymity while sharing their experiences. 

Recently, a man at SMS hospital tried to run away twice and finally broke his leg in a desperate attempt to jump out of the quarantine centre. “There is no regular time for meals, especially lunch and dinner. Also, we expected that health workers will come and check our basic health including measuring temperatures, but nobody visits us,” said a 42-year-old man at Jyoti Vidhyapeeth.

Most of them are counting their days and hoping to get released from these centres after completion of 14-day quarantine period. “Even the guards and the employees are scared to an extent that they push or throw food packets towards us. This is inhuman. Even if we are suspects, we deserve some respect,” said another man at the quarantine centre.

Some of them also complained of unclean toilets and pathetic behaviour of the staff. “People here are treating us as if we have committed some crime. We have no symptoms, but brought because we were in contact with a person who was found positive,” said Anil Kumar (name changed), at Manipal University.

Meanwhile, Ajitabh Sharma, principal secretary, energy, and nodal officer for Covid-19 control inspected a few quarantine centres and urged the authorities to ensure basic infrastructural facilities, timely food and sanitation at the quarantine centres. Sharma directed the authorities to ensure timely food, proper disposal of garbage and also for following quarantine protocol. He also urged to have PCR tests for primary quarantines.

In Jaipur, 13 places including hotels, housing societies on the outskirts and educational institutes have been developed as quarantine centres in which 1,448 people are kept. 

