Delhi: People ignore lockdown restrictions, vehicles out in large number on roads
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: The capital may be headed for a curfew with Delhi Police beginning to enforce the lockdown meant to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus. On Monday, entry and exit to and from the city through the 151 border points were restricted through strict checking, with those entering Delhi required to show proof of the purpose of visit. 


At least 8,000 vehicles were turned back from the border posts. Cars on city roads were similarly treated when found to be driving without a specific purpose.

In stark contrast to Sunday when the janata curfew turned Delhi into a ghost town of sorts, Monday was a grim reminder of the challenges the government would face in locking down the city. Many people were out in the open. A few traffic jams were even reported in some areas. While public transport like Delhi Metro, buses, autorickshaws and app-based cab services have been prohibited, many people were using their private cars on Monday.

Atul Goyal, president of the United Residents Joint Action, an apex body of city RWAs, rued, “After Sunday, people thought that things had normalised. While the situation was under control in many of Delhi’s colonies, some places still saw large gatherings. A complete curfew, as announced by central government, would be the only way to fully implement the lockdown.”

Amid all this, police were forced to register an FIR against four people, including an Air India employee, for violating conditions of their home quarantine. They have been charged under the Epidemic Act.

Traffic built up at the borders due to the bar on entry, but the cops held meetings with their counterparts in UP and Haryana to provide turnaround facilities to non-destined vehicles being denied permissions to enter Delhi. By noon, thousands of daily wagers were seen walking past the border posts to reach their working destinations in the capital. They were allowed entry in batches of two-three people because of the prevailing Section 144 of CrPC banning the assembly of more than five people.

In the morning, police made rounds of the city announcing the new shopping guidelines. Shop owners were asked to ensure that only one customer was present at the counter at a time, the others required to be queued up at a distance. Police also advised children playing on the streets to go indoors. Morning walkers and joggers were similarly asked to head home. Patrols were conducted near popular food hubs to ensure only takeaway services operated.

Arun Sharma, a resident of Vasant Vihar in southwest Delhi, said that the inner lanes in his colony appeared to be fairly peaceful on Monday, but saw all sorts of vehicles on the main road when he went to the local market for groceries. “It seemed like it was any other day. It was as if an official lockdown and prohibitory orders weren’t in operation. People appeared to be moving freely,” he said.

Himanshu Chhabra, a resident of west Delhi’s Punjabi Bagh, also reported a large number of private vehicles moving around in the locality. “I woke up in the morning and went to the balcony when I heard someone honking continuously. I was surprised to see that everything looked the same as on a regular day. It looked nothing like a lockdown,” Chhabra said. “People don’t care about their health and are still taking things casually. For a place like Delhi, a curfew like the one on Sunday has to be implemented. Only such a measure can force people indoors.”

Many like Navneet Singh of Hari Nagar made a conscious choice not to venture into the streets. He had to, however, make a quick dash to the grocery shop to stock up on essentials, especially for the needs of his small child. “The panic is getting to us. A person living in our colony recently returned from Canada and his entire family has been requested not to come out from their house,” Singh said. “Delhi is such a place that even if one person catches the virus, it will affect a huge number of people around him or her.”


