People throng markets before complete lockdown in Mhow
2020-04-01
Dhar/Mhow: Before the three-day complete lockdown along with sealing borders of Mhow, people rushed to markets to buy groceries, vegetables and other items at Mhow on Tuesday. People from Mhow town and nearby areas thronged almost all vegetable and grocery shops.

Markets remained crowded till 4 pm as the administration had ordered the closure of markets by 4 pm. Home delivery of grocery items continued till late evening as it was allowed by the authorities.

People also came out to celebrate the festival of Ashtami of Navratri which falls on Wednesday.

On the other hand, preparations for sealing Mhow town were carried out on Tuesday. Barricades were erected at all four entry points viz Dharnaka, Simrol Road, Kishanganj and near DSOI square. The barricades were closed at midnight restricting any movement.

After the Nizamuddin incident, the administration conducted a search in the mosques of Tablighi Jamaat at Mhow. During this, 11 outsiders were found at Tin Gali mosque which is Markaz of the Jamaat at Mhow. All of them were taken to Mhow civil hospital and were examined for coronavirus. Hospital in charge Dr HR Verma told TOI that no symptoms of Covid-19 were found in any of them, on which they were allowed to go but were advised to remain in isolation.

Earlier on Monday late evening, five women out on the roads and a shopkeeper Arvind Pal selling groceries were taken to Mhow police station. Mhow TI Abhay Nema told TOI that though no case was registered against them, they were made to sit in the police station for more than an hour as a punishment.

Despite lockdown ordered by Dhar collector Shrikant Banoth, its wasn’t enforced at Pithampur. Almost all shops were found open and none of the customers at any shops maintained physical distance.

In Dhar, 13 samples were sent to the laboratory on Monday evening, out of which 10 have been found negative while reports of three patients have not come. Till now, 76 persons have been kept under isolation at house or hospital and 17 have been discharged from isolation after the medical authorities were they were confirmed to be negative.


