Personal grooming takes a hit during lockdown
2020-04-19
Ranchi: As all salons and beauty parlours remained shut due to the lockdown, most Ranchiites are facing problems when it comes to personal grooming. While boys are sporting long hairs with difficulties in maintaining them, some others, who take care of their special hair styles, are on the verge of tears. Girls, who needed hairdos, facials, waxing and other treatments, are also relying only on home remedies.

Abhishek Singh, an entrepreneur and resident of Dibdih, who loves to keep his hair short and simple, said he is finding it tough to maintain his long hairs. He said, “Long hairs are very irritating. I was about to go for a haircut but the lockdown was announced. Now, I have to do shampoo and apply oil regularly to keep them smooth.”

Vishal Dangi, a post-graduate student of Ranchi University, said, “I love colouring my hairs with different shades, but they are now fading. I can only wait for the salons to reopen.”

He added, “My parents do not like my hair now. Earlier it was fine and most of the time, I was outside. But now, I am getting regular sarcastic comments.”

Girls are also at the receiving end during the lockdown. Suffering from hair split ends to eyebrows which had not been threaded for nearly a month, they are frantically calling up friends and beauticians of the now shut parlours to get advice. Deepti Mehta, a post-graduate student of the Central University of Jharkhand, said, “I have no other option but to rely on home remedies. I am using eggs for my hairs and fortunately, my mother is helping me in threading my eyebrows.”

Beauticians said they are getting regular calls from their customers, inquiring about the opening of the parlours shops and seeking advice for home remedies. Poonam Gupta, owner of a beauty parlour at Kutchrey Road in Ranchi, said, “On an average, I am getting 10-12 calls per day. I am busy advising them on how to groom themselves at home and if they need my personal care, I requested them to wait for lockdown to complete.”

Gupta said she had to deny home service requests, considering the infection risks.


