Pet peeved: Your dog has lockdown issues, warn IVRI experts
2020-04-22
BAREILLY: The lockdown is taking a toll on the health of pet dogs as well. They, too, have been confined at home, unable to exercise. This is not only affecting their digestive system but can cause obesity and host of related problems, say scientists at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) here.


A healthy dog, especially the big breeds, requires a run or a long walk at least twice a day. Long periods of confinement also make many dogs irritable.

Talking about the common ailments that afflict most pet dogs, an IVRI scientist said lack of proper exercise causes digestive problems among canines. Less intake of food and vomiting are signs of poor exercise among pets. These symptoms are more acute when their living space is small.

Abhijit Pawde, principal scientist and incharge of the Centre of Wildlife, IVRI, told TOI, “The dogs which are habituated to go on long walks but are now unable to do so are the worst-hit. Denied their routine walks or runs, dogs develop gastric problems and loss of appetite. Reduced intake of food has become a matter of concern among many pet owners. Things get worse when a dog throws up after a meal. Besides, halitosis (bad breath) among dogs is also a common complaint among owners.”

Scientists said the sudden change in the normal routine also affects most dogs psychologically. Experts said many pet dogs are finding it difficult to adjust to reduced exercise. “When a dog undergoes physical activity, it is able to have proper sleep. Reduced activity is making dogs sluggish, obese and irritated,” said Pawde.

RK Singh, director, IVRI, said, “Due to the Covid-19 crisis, some pet owners are unable to access the kind of food the dog is used to. The reduced physical activity coupled with a change in diet in some cases can affect dogs."

He suggested that owners should adopt innovative methods like playing with their pets at home to make them feel happy.

Experts advised that during non-curfew hours, owners should take their pets out for short walks and play with them. They should groom their canine friends regularly as dogs enjoy it. In fact, such activities are beneficial for pet owners as well.

