Pets of Covid-19 patients turn homeless in Tamil Nadu
2020-05-16
CHENNAI: His voice is hoarse and muffled over the phone but Manoj*, who is undergoing treatment for Covid-19 at Tamil Nadu Government Multi Super Specality Hospital, Omandurar Estate, is more worried about his pet Rocky’s future.

“I tested positive for coronavirus on May 10 and was hospitalised. My wife, who is due to deliver next week, and my parents tested negative but have been asked to test again. I am afraid of what will happen to my dog if everyone tests positive and have to go to hospital,” says the 29-year-old, who lives in Triplicane. “My house owner has been asking them to throw out Rocky but he is 11 years old and he won’t survive on the streets,” he says.

Like him, several families who have tested positive for Covid-19 don’t know what to do with the pets they have to leave behind. With social distancing the norm and widespread fear of contracting the virus, extended families and friends are reluctant to take on the animals. Private boarding is not an option for many as the facilities charge about Rs 500 a day.

Animal welfare activists say they have been receiving calls from anxious pet parents. “Two weeks ago, an animal rescuer called saying her friend had contacted her regarding a family, where everyone had tested positive and didn’t know what to do with their two dogs. They finally sent them to a boarding,” says animal welfare activist Jennifer Jacob.

Another activist, Dinesh Baba says there have been plenty of cases wherein people have abandoned their pets. “On Thursday, a woman from Valasaravakkam called for help. Her mother had tested positive for Covid-19 and been taken to hospital. The three other family members are home quarantined and awaiting test results and she wanted to know where she could board her pet dog if they also had to be hospitalised,” says Baba.

Some owners are forced to abandon their pets. “All of a sudden, they are asked to go to hospital. Many don’t know whom to contact for help, so they just leave their pets behind,” says Baba. “Most people cannot afford private boarding, especially as they don’t know when, or if, they will be back.”

Animal lovers and activists are now requesting the government to extend help. “It would be good if they can use the city corporation’s dog shelter in Kannamapettai and cow sheds in Madhavaram as a temporary holding facility for these animals during this crisis. Once the family is back home, they can take their pet back. Otherwise the animals will be abandoned and may die,” says Baba. “A few of us have been trying to reach out to the concerned authorities in vain. We hope they will help.”

(*name changed)


