Pets can get Covid-19 from humans: Study
2020-05-16
NEW DELHI: Animals can get Covid-19 from humans, researchers from Hong Kong have concluded after closely studying the pets of 15 corona-positive people.


Two out of the 15 dogs from these households — a 17-year-old neutered male Pomeranian and a 2.5-year-old male German Shepherd — were found to be infected by the virus. Both dogs, however, remained asymptomatic during quarantine.

 

In a study accepted for publication in the journal Nature, the researchers have concluded that the evidence suggests these are instances of human-to-animal transmission of SARS-CoV-2 or Covid-19. “It is unclear whether infected dogs can transmit the virus to other animals or back to humans,” they add.

India doesn’t have a policy for quarantining the pets in case their owners test positive. In Hong Kong, its agriculture, fisheries and conservative department (AFCD) offers to isolate them at its facility and release them after they test negative for the virus.

In the US, the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that people with Covid-19 and those in home isolation should be advised to restrict interaction with household animals. 

“Specifically, while a person with Covid-19 is symptomatic, they should maintain separation from household animals as they would do with other family members, and avoid direct contact with pets, including petting, snuggling, being kissed or licked, sleeping in the same location, and sharing food or bedding,” states its guideline. It adds that such people should wash their hands before and after caring for their pets.

The first animal that the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) confirmed as positive for novel coronavirus was a tiger in a New York zoo on April 4. On April 22, two pet cats were found to be positive. “The cats lived in two separate areas of New York state. Both had mild respiratory illness and are expected to make a full recovery,” the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said.

People with pets are advised to keep them indoors when possible to prevent them from interacting with other animals or people. “Walk dogs on a leash maintaining at least six feet from other people and animals. Avoid dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather. If your pet gets sick or you have any concerns about its health, talk to your veterinarian,” USFDA advises.

