PFA extends a helping hand to tongawallas hit by lockdown
2020-04-26
MYSURU: The month-long lockdown has badly affected the tongawallas in Mysuru who are left penniless to feed even their horses. However, city-based People For Animals (PFA) has been providing fodder for horses at all the five stables in the city. The fodder is distributed once in ten days and grass once in two days. The PFA has not only reached out to horses but also to street dogs and cats as well.

Since lockdown, the life of tongawallas has come to a standstill. Earlier they used to sent Rs 200 to Rs 300 to their family. Now, fearing trouble at home, most tongawallas do not go home and they sleep in their respective tongas or at bus stand.

Fayaz Ahmed, president of Mysore Shah Pasand Tonga said: “Volunteers from People for Animals are helping us. Though we are facing lot of hardships and even finding it difficult to provide food for horses, no elected representatives or government authorities have come forward to help us. However, Savitha Nagabhushan, managing trustee of PFA, Mysuru chapter came and asked us how we were managing our animals and family after lockdown. When we narrated our plight, she immediately arranged for grass and horse grams. We really salute them for their care towards animals.”

He also said they never faced such a situation which they are facing today. “Our life depended on every day business. Earlier we used to sent Rs 200 to 300 home, spent nearly Rs 200 for food for horse and nearly Rs 100 for us. Now it has become difficult to meet our ends,” said Fayaz.

Savitha Nagabhushan told TOI: “After coming to know the plight of horses, we are providing two bags of food and grass to all the five horse stables in Mysuru. Fodder is distributed once in 10 days and grass once in two days. The Mysuru City corporation has given us permission to distribute horse fodder and dog food to the volunteers.”

“Due to the lockdown, dogs are also finding it difficult to get food due to closure of bakeries, restaurants etc. There is no public feeding of street dogs due to restrictions on movement. Hence, till today, PFA has distributed more than 2,500 kg of dog food to the volunteers in Mysuru who are feeding the street dogs. US-based scientist Madhavi Doddabele is sponsoring the feeding,” she said.


