PG medicos in Covid-hit D’gere not paid stipend for 15 months
2020-05-12
BENGALURU: Arun (name changed), 26, is a first year PG student at JJM Medical College in Davanagere. While he should be earning Rs 30,000 every month as stipend, he’s not got a single penny in the last 15 months. 

Arun knows how difficult it’s to keep asking his father, a ragi farmer in Hassan, for money. He is among the 233 PG medicos who are working in the district government hospital and have not been paid for months. 

PG medicos are the frontline staff in the Covid-19 ward of the Davanagere district hospital. Currently, Davanagere is the fifth worst-hit district in Karnataka with 68 cases as on May 10. 

Their stipend payment is in a limbo as they are studying in a private medical college under the government quota seats. The department of medical education (DME) had paid stipend till 2018 when an audit objection was raised and it was stopped since then.

While the college says the stipend has to be paid by the government, director of medical education Dr PG Girish said: “It’s the district hospital (under the health and welfare department) that has to pay the students.” 

The health department, however, said it’s the responsibility of the college. Stuck between these three authorities, the medicos are threatening to protest. 

“We’ve student loans to pay off and bills to pay on a monthly basis and it has become difficult to live. If a final decision is not taken before May 17, we’ll go on an indefinite strike,” the Junior Doctors’ Association has said. 

Dr SB Murugesh, principal, JJM Medical college, said the stipend must be given by the government considering the college has paid clinical fees to the Chigateri district hospital and the Women & Children’s health hospital. “The matter has been discussed and communicated to the DME,” he said.

As per the data shared by the medical college, Rs 2 crore was paid by the college to the two hospitals as clinical fee. 

The same problem was earlier faced by a private medical college in Mangaluru whose medicos work in the district government hospital. “The issue was resolved with the private hospital agreeing to pay the medicos on the government’s directions. The same has to be followed by the private hospital in Davanagere also. The health and family welfare department has got nothing to do with this issue and the matter should be sorted by the college,” said officials in the health department. 

“We’ve an annual fee of Rs 4.4 lakh and monthly hostel fee of Rs 5,000. I’m 26 and it’s embarrassing to keep asking parents when your counterparts have already started earning,” said Arun. 

“They call us the Corona warriors. But it doesn’t translate into food on our plate,” said another resident doctor.

PG students get a compensation of Rs 30,000-Rs 40,000 monthly and MBBS interns Rs 20,000. 


