Pharma, FMCG stocks beat lockdown blues
2020-04-09
Rupali Mukherjee & Partha Sinha | TNN

Mumbai: At a time when almost every sector is struggling with production and revenue generation and staring at probable losses due to coronavirus-related issues like the current lockdown, stocks of pharmaceutical and FMCG companies have come out as the outliers.

A host of pharma stocks have gained up to 40% and outperformed the Nifty that’s down 29% since its mid-January high. Along with select pharma scrips, stocks of a handful of FMCG and retailing companies have also shown good run, rising as much as 27%, BSE data showed. Some of these stocks are also at lifetime-high levels. 

Analysts said even after the lockdown is lifted, these stocks could lead the gainers for a few more quarters as people are set to change their preferences about how they go about their daily life.

According to brokerage house reports, the domestic pharma market has been consistently witnessing 10-11% growth over the last few years, driven by a healthy mix of volume and price hikes in several therapies. The market continues to be buoyed by strong growth drivers such as the rising penetration of medicines, increasing affordability and a growing incidence of chronic disorders like diabetes, cardiac and oncology. Analysts believe the pharma outperformance will continue even in a slowdown as it offers stable revenue and profit streams from a secure domestic market, along with a gradually improving outlook for exports. An industry report by CLSA, released last week, said that the “domestic business offers high growth visibility and a low probability of major disruptions. Within exports, while US compliance issues remain a concern, industry dynamics for generics are gradually improving with stable price erosion and emerging markets like Russia, Brazil, South Africa and southeast Asia having strong underlying drivers, albeit risk from currency fluctuations”. The outlook for the export business is gradually improving, it said.

The demand is unlikely to be affected, and production by companies should continue unabated as medicines, classified as essential commodities, isolate pharma companies from being impacted by the recent restrictions.

Within the pharma sector, companies with higher contributions from domestic revenue like Abbott India and Ipca have seen relatively stronger outperformance. In addition, after India lifted the exports ban on some pharma products, including active product ingredients on Tuesday, analysts have another reason to be bullish on the sector, dealers said.

In FMCG, food and home & personal care subsectors are expected to perform better during and after the lockdown period since they are part of essential products. In its latest report, A foreign broking major upgraded HUL, Nestle, Colgate-Palmolive and Godrej Consumer Products. And according to a report by Centrum Broking, for the January-March quarter, sector leaders like HUL, ITC, Britannia and Colgate-Palmolive together are estimated to show net profit growth of 10%, coming from an estimated revenue growth of 5.5%.


