Phase-wise removal of lockdown or extension plan?
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: After the Centre-imposed lockdown ends on April 14, the state government may either continue it for another 28 days or stagger it with fiveday break periods for certain sectors, it is learnt.


State health minister Rajesh Tope on Friday had indicated that he personally felt the lockdown cannot be lifted in certain areas. On Saturday, he had said, “We are still to take a call on the method to be followed. But everything depends on how people behave. For now, they need to follow the rules (and stay indoors).”

 

However, sources in the health department said that two main options were to either continue the lockdown for another 28 days or stagger it with periods of breaks that would help people buy stuff or continue with their jobs. “A new study from Cambridge University has said that a 49-day period is the best way to break the transmission chain most effectively,” said the official.

However, not many are in favour of this method because of the economic hardships it would mean for the people. The other method is to provide a partial relaxation for five to seven days. This could be regionwise or at the corporation-level, even at the ward-level. “Depending on our data, we could work out a system where the worst hotspots could be continue to be sealed for a longer period,” said the official.

The Cambridge University paper had suggested that the best lockdown method is to first observe it for 21 days, and thereafter, with two five-day breaks, continue it for 28 days and another 18 days. Experts say that the two-month-plus lockdown is the best to break the infection completely, with the Cambridge model suggesting that less than 50 cases would remain at the end of the entire lockdown.

Bhopal-based public health specialist Dr Anant Bhan said that there cannot be a total return to normalcy at the end of April 14. “It has to be gradual and in some parts of the country where Covid-19 cases are high, the lockdown has to continue in some form,” he said.

The decision will have to be taken on evidence and data generated during the ongoing lockdown, said experts. “Focus areas could have more of the lockdown, while other areas could have higher movement,” said Dr Bhan.

However, health minister Tope said lifting the lockdown – even in a phase-wise manner – would depend on “people’s discipline” and their willpower to not gather in crowds”.

