Gujarat: Phone calls come as painkiller for coronavirus patients
2020-06-14
AHMEDABAD: Archana Raval didn’t know any patients at Covid-19 hospital at Gujarat Cancer Research Institute (GCRI) last week. But now she can proudly say that she has touched the lives of 10-odd patients through telephonic conversation with them.


An engineer by profession, Raval had come across a social media post about volunteers required at the GCRI to engage Covid-19 patients. “I agreed to talk to them over phone, sharing their anxiety and offering a few words of solace. The experience has been cathartic in a way – one of the first patients I was talking to was an octogenarian. A simple question of how many times he talked to his family triggered emotions that made him – and in turn me – cry for minutes,” she narrates.

In another instance, she talked to a very young patient who was in the hospital for nearly a month over phone. “I assured him that he would be fine. He told me that it was easy to say – he was also suffering from other health conditions. But I asked him to keep faith. It was such a great news when I heard that he got discharged after a couple of days,” says Raval, who insists that it’s her bit for the patients and she’s no counsellor or psychologist. “Often what all one needs is talking things out,” she says.

Raval is one of the volunteers from the city who responded to an appeal by the GCRI staff online to get engaged with the Covid-19 patients. They only had to donate some time and send across messages, song, play music or do activities such as yoga.

Dr Rajan Garg from the GCRI, who is part of the initiative coordination, said that the idea was to keep the patients engaged in a fruitful way. “We have several screens in the ward that play videos from the members of the society. We did not want celebrity as the patients should relate to the person on screen,” he said. “Someone had sent a video of playing flute, whereas a staff member had sent across a prayer.” Dr Shashank Pandya, director of the GCRI, said that the initiative has got a good response and the team is doing their best to ensure that the patients are in good spirits. Dr Parijat Goswami, professor and head of microbiology department at the GCRI, said that mental well-being becomes as important as physical well-being of Covid-19 patients and they are hopeful that the initiative would help the patients.


