Ahmedabad: Phone, jewellery stolen from Covid patient’s body in Civil hospital
2020-05-12
AHMEDBAD: After a Covid-19 patient, Bindu Rajput, 50, of Amraiwadi succumbed to the infection on Monday morning in the 1,200-bed Covid hospital in Civil, her husband Shivpujan Rajput informed police control room that her jewellery, mobile phone and charger were missing.

Jagdish Rathod, the Congress councillor of Amraiwadi ward shot a letter to M M Prabhakar, the superintendent of Civil Hospital raising the issue. He marked copies of the letter to the chief minister, the health minister and the city police commissioner.

 Stating that it was most unfortunate that such a thing happened with the body of a Covid-19 patient, Rathod added in the letter that the act was unpardonable and the person responsible should be dealt with severely according to law.

“Two gold earrings, one gold nose-bud, her mobile phone and charger were missing when her husband went to receive her body from Civil Hospital,” Rathod told TOI.

Rathod added, “This is not the first such incident in the hospital. On Monday morning a man had approached me and said that on May 5, his wife’s jewellery was stolen from the same hospital after her death. He didn’t approach cops as he was then in a state of shock.”

“If the footage from the CCTV cameras of the hospital are checked we are sure that whoever committed this crime will be caught. If nothing is done, then such theft will continue to happen in one of the most reputed hospitals of the country,” Rathod said.

Inspector M B Barad, who is in-charge police inspector of Shahibaug police station said the application in the case has been sent to the superintendent of the Civil Hospital. “We have not received anything as of yet,” Barad said.

The husband of the deceased told TOI that after his message to the control room in the morning, he has now been called to Shahibaug police station to lodge an FIR. 

‘Today, the Civil Hospital authorities took me along and roamed the entire hospital without giving me any protective gear. Isn’t this wrong?” Rajput asked. “It was the policemen at the gate who asked me why I had gone inside without protective gear. They made me sanitize my body and then I came back home,” he added.

