Covid-19 scare: Pink City goes into self ‘lockdown’ mode
2020-03-22
JAIPUR: The increasing threat of Covid-19 seemed to have compelled people in the city to go into a self-imposed curfew on Saturday. A day prior to the Janata Curfew proposed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the markets, shops and malls remained closed in the city. 


Likewise, the roads wore an empty look even in the evening. At some places, the police were seen using their powers of CrPC and asking tea stalls, fruit sellers, sweet shops etc to close their shops or to ensure that there was no over-crowding at their shops. The only ones that were seen open were grocery shops or diagnostic centres. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

TOI on Saturday visited various parts of the city including the Walled City and found that the traders were closing their shops on their own. “Ab khatra badh raha hai, hum to kuch din band rakhenge (Now, the danger seems to be increasing, we will keep our shops shut for some days),” said Hukum Chand Tekwani, a wholesale trader of clothes at Chandpole Bazaar. 

Similarly, the small vendors selling ice-cream, snacks and other roadside eateries, were also seen closed. “If it is better to be at home, then so be it. I will not open it for next couple of days or may be for a week,” said Raju Chahar, who sells paranthas near Polo victory area in the city. The roads also wore an empty look in the afternoon and evening, as people confined themselves to their homes and offices. 

Areas including Raja Park, Jawahar Nagar, Aadarsh Nagar, MD Road, Janta Store, Gopalpura, Jagatpura, Mansarovar, Sikar Road, Jhotwara, Murlipura, Kardhani and others witnessed almost 70 per cent closure of shops. At some of the shops, traders pasted a notice saying, “Due to the danger of Covid-19, the shop will remain closed.” 

However, in many areas, the police teams were appealing to the public to close their shops and to ensure no overcrowding takes places. “Using CrPC powers, we are not allowing any gathering of public. At the sweet shops, tea stalls, ice cream parlours, coffee shops, where we see gathering, we are asking the traders either to ensure no overcrowding takes place or are asking them to shut down,” said a senior officer of Jaipur police commissionerate. 


