'Prashant Kishor is testing waters in Bihar’s poll arena'
2020-02-20
PATNA: Expelled JD (U) functionary Prashant Kishor’s announcement to launch a campaign targeting the state’s youth has set the ball rolling for political machinations to begin ahead of the assembly election slated to be held later this year.

Despite his two-hour long interaction with mediapersons here on Tuesday, Prashant has kept the media and poll pundits guessing about his plans behind enrolling 10 lakh youths from the state in 100 days. “These youths would choose a leader to usher the state into a faster pace of development, and bring Bihar among the top 10 in the next 10 years,” Kishor had said.

Social scientist and professor of economics at Patna-based A N Sinha Institute of Social Studies, DM Diwakar, is of the view that Kishor is testing the waters in the state’s poll arena, which is why he did not make any direct attacks on either the ruling or the opposition alliance.

“With numerous claims and counter-claims made on Tuesday, Kishor has only thrown a stone in the water and will watch ripples form ahead of the elections. He is looking for opportunities for the upcoming elections and has floated this idea of a forum for the youth only to show a sizeable support of youth with him,” Diwakar said.

Senior BJP functionary and Bihar deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi accused Prashant of constantly trying to break the NDA in Bihar. “Kishor could not digest the return of NDA in Bihar, hence he kept making attempts to bering Nitish and Lalu together again. When he could not succeed, he used CAA as an alibi to target Nitish Kumar,” SuMo said on Wednesday.

RJD vice-president Shivanand Tiwari conceded that Kishor had met him around six months ago to talk about Nitish’s leadership. “It is true that Kishor came to meet me around six months ago and talked about Nitish’s leadership, with the idea of bringing Nitish to RJD- fold. I gave prior information about this meeting to Lalu Ji as well. However, later we realized that Nitish might be trying to play a game by portraying it to BJP that he has invitation from us as well,” Tiwari told TOI on Wednesday.

SuMo claimed that Kishor is working for RJD. “He is working for Lalten party that is why he is neither able to see the corruption in RJD nor the fact that NDA government brought electricity in every village. The consumption of electricity in Bihar has increased by five time since 2005 but Kishor seems to have taken the contract of taking back Bihar to Lantern era,” he said on Wednesday.

Kishor had said in his presser on Tuesday that though electricity has reached every household in the state, but per capita energy consumption in Bihar is still the lowest in the country.

Kishor had also mocked the governance model of Nitish. “Since there is no one to say anything to Nitish Ji on governance here, he is following the agenda that whatever he has done, is enough... Bihar no longer wants to know what you have done in comparison with previous governments but what you will do in the next 10 years.”

Political observers claimed that Kishor’s development agenda is going somewhere similar to the agenda of upcoming Yatra of recently appointed LJP president and Jamui MP Chirag Paswan christened ‘Bihar first, Bihari first’.

“After Delhi, if elections in Bihar are also held on the agenda of development, then it will provide direct benefit to people of Bihar. I am quite sure that elections in Bihar will be fought on the agenda of development. The Bihar first, Bihari first Yatra to be launched from February 21 is aimed at linking Bihar with the wheel of development,” Chirag had tweeted on Tuesday evening. 

Key points of PK’s statements:

Accept decision of Nitish to sack him from JD (U)

Not working for any party of leader

Piggybacks cannot lead Bihar 

To rope in 1 crore youth with Baat Bihar Ki 

Development has been sluggish

Quality education is lacking

Gandhi and Godse cannot go together 


