Coronavirus outbreak: Plan to speed up security check at Chennai airport hit
2020-02-06
CHENNAI: The Airports Authority of India’s (AAI) plan to speed up security check by installing an automatic tray retrieval system at Chennai airport’s domestic and international terminals by February or March is set to be delayed because of the spread of coronavirus in China.


A Chinese company was selected to supply six conveyor machines that will remove and bring back trays used by passengers to place electronic items and wallets for scanning at security check and two machines have been installed at two security check counters at the domestic terminal as a pilot project, but AAI officials now feel the rest may not arrive before the deadline of March.

An official said that one of the machines, put up under the pilot project, is helping speed up security screening that used to be delayed. The queues became lengthier as the CISF personnel on duty took time to bring back the empty trays. Under the new check rules, which mandate wallets and belts being placed in plastic trays in addition to electronic items, almost every passenger has to use a tray.

Sources said the decision to install more machines was made after a study showed that passengers cleared the check-in process fast, but were getting stuck at slow security check counters. This gave them very little time to spend at retail shops, including food outlets, in the security hold area. The new machines help CISF personnel scan 800-900 cabin bags an hour compared to the 400 bags per hour that are cleared by scanners that do not have the automatic system.

“The number of pieces of cabin baggage screened is high at the domestic terminal and passengers often reach the check-in counter an hour before departure. We found that most of these passengers get stuck at security check and in most cases hardly spend any time in the security hold area where retail and food outlets are located. This is going against the concept of airport retail by which passengers are supposed to spend time shopping before boarding flights,” said an official.

