Plan to ease lockdown brings worry to working women
2020-04-20
Kochi: Even as discussions are going on to restart partial functioning of various government offices by relaxing restrictions, many working women are worried about the non-availability of housemaids. With no public transport available, employees as well as those who work as domestic helps and ayahs at day care centres will not be able to reach their workplaces. As children and other family members are at home, working women will have a tough time ensuring safety and well-being of their children as well as elderly parents.

Though people are eager to get back to work, the non-availability of buses and Metro trains will make commuting a difficult task. Kochi corporation councillor Gracy Babu Jacob said that many women employees who work with the local body have shared the problems they face. 

“The househelps mostly come from suburbs or neighbouring districts. They stopped coming ever since the lockdown was imposed. Like many government offices, even the local body’s office is operating with minimal staff. However, its mostly male employees who report at workplace. Not all women employees have their own vehicles. It will be difficult for them to reach office in the absence of public transport system,” she said.

Many working women, employed both in public and private sector, say that they are dependent on domestic workers, who belong to the unorganized sector. While some of the domestic workers say that their employers have agreed to pay a month’s salary even though they have not reported to work, there are others who say that employers have refused to pay for the period they could not work. 

“Not all are registered domestic workers. They work at various houses for three to five hours a day, and their daily wages depend on the kind of tasks that are assigned as well as the hours spent working. There is this informal agreement between the employer and the domestic worker. The payments for the lockdown period largely depend on the kind of the bond between them,” said Shyama P V, a domestic worker from Ezhupunna. 

She also said that in the absence of buses it will not be possible for her to reach the city where she works. The city is also dependent on the domestic workers who come from the islands in its suburbs. Househelps from Vypeen depend on the boat or Ro-Ro service to reach their workplaces at Fort Kochi and neighbouring areas.


