Covid-19: Plan to send samples to Thiruvananthapuram irks healthcare providers
2020-03-28
KOCHI: Healthcare providers in Ernakulam district are upset with the state government’s decision to send samples of those suspected to have Covid-19 in the district to a lab in Thiruvananthapuram. 

Now, the samples from the district are send to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Alappuzha, for testing and the results arrive in 2 to 3 days. On Friday, 24 samples were send to NIV, Alappuzha.

Health officials fear that sending the samples to Thiruvananthapuram, which is almost 200 km away, means that more time will be lost and there would be further delay in announcing results if there is a surge in numbers due to community outbreak.

The matter was discussed by the Ernakulam district medical officer (DMO) and doctors in the district Covid-19 team with the district collector and he was requested to take up the matter with the state government.

“We are still sending the samples to NIV, Alappuzha. We are concerned that there may be a delay if we send it to Thiruvananthapuram. We have taken up the matter with the collector. For us, the closest testing lab is NIV, Alappuzha,” said district medical officer (DMO) Dr M K Kuttappan.

As per the guidelines for distribution of laboratories issued by health secretary on March 25, it has been instructed that district surveillance officer from Ernakulam will have to send samples to Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram. The lab will also receive samples from Kollam district. Meanwhile, NIV Alappuzha will henceforth cater to testing samples from Alappuzha and Malappuram districts, as per the government guidelines.

NIV, Alappuzha, was one of the first testing labs in the country that was permitted to confirm Covid-19 positive samples without sending them to NIV, Pune. Due to increase in the number of people who needed to be tested for Covid-19, Kerala received permission from Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) to set up two more labs. Now the state has nine labs, all in the public sector, with four in the state capital alone. No lab in Ernakulam district has yet received permission for Covid-19 testing yet.

ICMR has updated the protocol for coronavirus and now the criteria have been expanded to include health workers attending to Covid-19 patients who start showing symptoms. Earlier it was limited to symptomatic people with a travel history to affected countries or those who come into contact with infected persons.

Incidentally, as the number of people in quarantine increases, there is excess burden on the approved testing labs with a government official admitting that often the waiting time for test results now is 3 to 4 days. Health officials said that what they need at the moment is not more private labs but more testing kits at reasonable price to be made available to the states.

