Plasma therapy for Covid-19 patients may start by next week in Bhopal
2020-04-25
BHOPAL: AIIMS-Bhopal, Gandhi Medical College (GMC) and Chirayu Medical College could begin therapeutic plasma exchange for critically ill Covid-19 patients as early as next week.


The hospitals have asked for permission from Indian Council of Medical Research to begin plasma therapy. A list of healthy recovered people is being drawn up to act as donors.

 

Over 200 patients in MP have been cured of Covid-19 and returned home. Doctors hope to choose some of them as donors for plasma therapy in which antibodies from the blood of those who have recovered from the infection are used to treat severely ill patients. Top health officials met to discuss this, after which proposals were sent to ICMR said GMC dean Dr AK Shrivastava on Friday. “We have applied (for permission) and are ready to conduct therapeutic plasma exchange as soon as we get clearance. It could be as early as next week,” said Chirayu Medical College MD Dr Ajay Goenka. The hospital has the most number of Covid-19 patients. About 80 of them are said to be on oxygen support. Over 135 people from the hospital have recovered after being tested positive for the deadly contagion.

At this moment ICMR does not recommend plasma therapy as a treatment option outside of clinical trials. Recently, ICMR invited letters of intent from institutions with the equipment and infrastructure to participate in a clinical trial to study the safety and efficacy of the therapy on Covid-19 patients.

Therapeutic plasma exchange is an experimental procedure. Hospitals and institutions planning to provide this form of treatment will have to do so in a clinical trial with protocols that are cleared by the institutional ethics committee.

The protocols must be registered with the Clinical Trial Registry of India and they should be approved by Drugs Controller General of India, Central Drugs Standard Control Organization. Mechanisms to report adverse and serious adverse events need to be put in place.

