Gujarat: ‘Plasma therapy trial to treat Covid begins at SVP’
2020-04-22
AHMEDABAD: The country’s first open label randomised and controlled convalescent plasma therapy trial against Covid-19 infection began at SVP Hospital, Ellisbridge on Monday evening. Two women donors, who recovered from the disease and had antibodies in their blood plasma, have been identified for what is called the phase 2 of the clinical trial.

According to the strict guidelines of the India’s apex biomedical body the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the recipient of the plasma late on Monday evening was a moderately ill patient aged between 18 to 55 years with no co-morbid conditions, so that the results don’t deviate. Another patient being the control. 

 

The SVP plasma trials are an important milestone in the country. Though Kerala was one of the first states to apply before ICMR and be ready for trials, it did not have patients for the trials till four days ago. Trials began in Delhi at a hospital in Saket area. There will be 226 such groups following a strict standard protocol in anywhere between 25 to 40 multi-centre trials. “This is mainly to check the safety and effectiveness of the therapy after which the trials will proceed to Phase 3,” says a senior AMC official. Both the donor and recipient in phase 2 trials have to be between 18 to 55 years of age. 

In case of the blood plasma donors, the choice was scientifically made, which is there should be no co-morbid conditions, with no vices, but in case of women they should be either unmarried or married without children. In case of the recipient only those who were either on light oxygen or no oxygen and had no co-morbid conditions or immune compromised were chosen for the trial. One donor can give anywhere between 400 to 500ml of blood plasma. A donor can donate after three months of the first donation. 

"Through a special Plasmapheresis machine, only the plasma of the blood is extracted while the rest of the blood components are returned to the patient. Only matching blood groups are supposed to be involved in the trial," says the senior AMC official.

Another important criterion is that only donors who have tested negative twice for Covid even after 36 days are required to be included in the trial. “SVP is the country’s first centre where the controlled trials have begun. This will be an important milestone for us and for our capabilities," said municipal commissioner Vijay Nehra. He said that more donors are being convinced for the therapy. 


