Plasma therapy to soon help in treating Covid-19 patients
2020-04-29
Kolhapur: The Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya (CPR) has received a nod from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Pune for collection of blood plasma, said Minakshi Gajbhiye, dean of the Rajarshi Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj Government Medical College and Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya.

According to Gajbhiye, the FDA received a letter from the directorate general of health services on April 27 granting permission for preparation of blood components as additional products through a process called aphaeresis. Apheresis is the process of separating the cellular and soluble components of blood with the help of a machine. The hospital’s blood bank has been asked to carry out all tests on the blood components from time to time for all quality control parameters as laid down by the FDA.

Gajbhiye said that in order to use the available plasma from the recovered Covid-19 patient on another critical patient, the hospital authorities will require permission of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), which is underway.

According to Gajbhiye, to collect the plasma from the recovered patient, the willingness of the patient to donate his/her plasma is a must.

“The ICMR has allowed states to allow the Convalescent Plasma Therapy which is being used in cities where the condition of Covid-19 infection and the number of patients is much more. Here, in Kolhapur, we have only one patient who is said to be critical at present while in the centres like Pune, Mumbai, Nagpur, and Solapur, it is much higher and most probably helps to ease the condition,” she said.

Gajbhiye said that they have collected blood plasma from the first recovered male patient after his consent. It would now be used for the Convalescent Plasma Therapy on patients who are having the co-morbid conditions and weak immunity. The antibodies from the plasma of the recovered patient can help boost their immunity level.

The therapy involves drawing out blood from a patient who has recovered a minimum of two weeks back from Covid-19. The plasma is then separated from the blood. About 400 ml of plasma can be used to treat two patients. The therapy is based on the fact that antibodies are generated in a patient suffering from an illness, Gajbhiye explained.


