Playschools struggle for survival as lockdown drags on indefinitely
2020-05-31
Madurai: With no clarity yet from the state government regarding reopening and functioning of playschools, the schools and their staff are struggling financially and face an uncertain future.“For the last three months, playschools have had no source of income and are struggling financially. In Madurai district alone, there around 150 playschools with 1,500-2,000 teachers and caretakers, all of whom have been affected. Most playschools are run by women entrepreneurs. With no income, many are also unable to pay rent which may force them to close down,” said Calvary N Thyagarajan, president, Madurai preschools welfare association. He further said that though many representations and discussions have been put forth by preschool associations, so far there has been no clarity from the state government for playschools to reopen.On the other hand, parents are also hoping for playschools to reopen soon since they are at their wits’ end taking care of their children especially as they too have slowly started returning to work. “Playschools shutting down is a big blow for parents too. As of now, we are trying to be in touch with our students and giving them activities to do with parents at home but it is only a temporary fix. Online classes are not possible for them since for parents, the whole idea behind playschools is for their children to learn socializing and fall into a routine,” said Jeya Rajesh, correspondent, Kutties Villa, Anna Nagar and Teppakulam.Further, teachers also stressed that students who have remained confined within their homes during lockdown are facing a lot of stress. Playschools are also actively discussing how to conduct classes when they reopen including preventive measures for Covid-19 like social distancing, using hand sanitizers and wearing masks, which would be highly difficult for such young children. The schools are hoping to reopen at least before ‘Vijayadasami’ season by September-October, which usually sees the most number of new admissions.