Pleas in Delhi high court on Covid-19 test rates, easing of restrictions
2020-06-10
NEW DELHI: Delhi high court on Tuesday asked Delhi government to treat two petitions as representations. While one of them sought a cap on rates that can be charged by private hospitals for treating Covid-19 patients, another filed on behalf of a toddler highlighted the considerable risk faced by him and other minors due to government’s decision to lift the restrictions.


The first plea sought a direction to Delhi government to develop a mechanism where the hospitals display availability of Covid-19 beds at a prominent place on its premises and their websites.

The second petition by a two-year-old boy through his father said he resided in a joint family comprising working members who would be resuming work pursuant to the “Unlock” announced by Delhi government with effect from June 8. He claimed that the move would put him at a considerable risk of contracting the virus through his family members due to the lifting of restriction on movements. He said the situation has been further aggravated due to shortage of requisite healthcare infrastructure such as hospital beds and ventilators.

The plea highlighted the hardship and challenges faced by the residents in getting admission in a hospital despite having tested Covid-positive or showing symptoms, and being a high-risk category patient facing difficulty in breathing and in urgent need of getting medical assistance.

The court asked the government to treat both the petitions as representations and decide as per law. Meanwhile, it also disposed of a batch of petitions challenging Delhi government’s June 7 order directing all the government and private hospitals as well as nursing homes to admit only “bonafide” residents of Delhi for treatment, after it was informed that the lieutenant governor has restored the earlier situation.

The petitions had sought setting aside the June 7 order saying the decision was unconstitutional, arbitrary, against the humanity and results in discrimination on the basis of residence of a citizen.

