Pleasant March weather & lockdown effect make migratory birds stay longer in northern wetlands
2020-04-08
Bijnor: With flutter of wings they lifted their tiny frames into the air, one after the other, stirring the still water of the lakes in Terai region of northern plains. There was no traffic around to drown the din, and to fill the void left by their departure. As the mercury soars, flocks of migratory birds are taking flight back to Central Europe, Russia, Tibet, Mongolia and other colder regions. While some are off to the wetlands in other parts of the country. They stayed longer this time, over two weeks. And in some parts of Hastinapur Wildlife sanctuary, falling in Meerut and Bijnor districts, parcel of migratory birds can still be spotted.Forest officials and experts attribute the birds’ prolonged stay to the cold weather in March and also to the factors arising out of negligible human activity due to the lockdown, including the absence of emissions.“These birds usually start their retreat from the wetlands in the mid of March when mercury shoots up. But, this year, they have started it now. Even at this time, some species are being spotted on the banks of wetlands in Harewali and Amangarh areas,” said divisional forest officer (DFO) M Semmaran.“It is because of low temperature and pollution-free atmosphere,” he added.GS Khusharia, a wildlife expert and former DFO, said, “Incessant rain and several spells of hailstorm led to a pleasant weather. Entire March was cold and the wetlands had enough water to retain the birds’ interest. The lockdown also helped in making the climate favourable for the birds. There was no emission, no traffic on roads and negligible human interference in the region. It all led the prolonged stay of the migratory birds.”A treat for bird watchers, Hastinapur sanctuary hosts over 20,000 birds of 267 species. “For a break, humans find themselves outnumbered by birds here,” says DFO Semmaran. Of the total species counted, about 100 go out of the country while the rest migrate to other states.The birds return to the higher reaches during the summer season due to the abundance of nesting territories. With the melting of snow, they also find weeds and grass in plenty there.The birds spotted in the sanctuary were identified as Greylag Goose, Bar-headed goose, Ruddy Shelduck, Gadwall, Eurasian Wigeon, Spot-billed duck, Northern Sholveler, Northern pintail, Eurasian teal, Red-crested Pochard, Common Pochard, Ferruginous Duck, Tufted Duck, Little Grebe etc. 