Pleas to unlock hotels as business takes a beating in Delhi
2020-06-10
NEW DELHI: Hoteliers in the capital represented by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) National Tourism Committee have written to deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia, demanding reopening of hotels in the city as suggested by the Union ministry of home affairs guidelines to let them restart their businesses gradually.


The hoteliers have also expressed their concerns at the ‘sudden’ requisition of hotels for the purpose of treatment of Covid-19 patients.

The letter, written by veteran hotelier and advisor to the CII committee Dipak Haksar, requested the Delhi government to allow opening of the sector as it would serve as a catalyst to kick-start business activity and act as a lifeline in these times of hardship.

With the opening of domestic flights in the country and malls and hotels in Haryana, the letter stated that it was important to open hotels in Delhi to prevent revenue loss and facilitate a path of faster recovery.

The letter also expressed ‘surprise’ at the notice over requisition of hotels for the purpose of hospitalisation of Covid-19 positive cases as no notice was sent or any inspection carried out before issuance of such a letter. Haksar, in the letter, argued that the decision be reconsidered as hotels are neither designed or equipped to deal with cases of this nature where ailing patients would need careful supervision in a sanitised environment.

Speaking with TOI, Haksar said only special facilities such as turning stadiums or indoor exhibition halls would be a better option as hotels do not have the right size of elevators for patient transport, right beds, oxygen support in rooms and professional knowledge of handling and treating patients suffering from the viral infection.

Ankur Bhatia of Roseate Hotels and chairman of Northern India Tourism Chapter of CII said the lack of coordination between the Centre and state governments is causing difficulties for the hospitality sector. He said that aviation, transport and stay complete the tourism industry and one sector could not work in isolation while others remain closed.

Bhatia said since malls and airlines are functional, hotels should also be allowed to reopen. More so, as hotels in Haryana are open, it would attract visitors to their state causing a revenue loss to businesses in Delhi. He also stressed that requisition of hotels as Covid-19 facilities made no sense as the interiors, construction, air conditioning, carpeting and even paneling, across the rooms do not qualify it to be a treatment facility.

Both Haksar and Bhatia opine that the way forward for Delhi government to restart hotels and generate revenues is to hold consultation with the industry, take their suggestions and yet follow strong protocols in fighting the novel coronavirus pandemic.

