PM holds meet with CMs over Covid-19 risk
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi interacted with chief ministers of various states via video conferencing on Friday to discuss measures to combat Covid-19 and said the threat of the pandemic was common for all states and underscored the need for the Centre and states to work together.


He said while participation of citizens was necessary to combat the challenge, panic had to be avoided. He added that given the global context of spread of the virus in various countries, constant vigilance was of paramount importance.

“The next 3-4 weeks are crucial in efforts to contain the spread of the virus, and the most important measure for containment is ‘social distancing’,” Modi said and requested the CMs to ensure effective implementation of the same.

The PM appreciated the steps taken by states and thanked them for sharing their experiences and giving suggestions. He talked about the urgent need for capacity building of healthcare workers and augmentation of healthcare infrastructure.

He suggested that CMs should do video conferences with trade bodies in their states to prevent black marketing and undue price rise. He urged them to use soft power of persuasion as well as legal provisions, wherever necessary.

Modi said the Covid-19 economic task force set up by the government would formulate the strategy to devise suitable approach to tackle the economic challenge. He urged the CMs to ensure that all necessary steps were taken and all advisories adhered to in order to ensure the safety of citizens.

Health secretary Preeti Sudan talked about the steps taken to contain the spread of the virus. She gave an overview of cooperation with states, monitoring of international passengers and use of community surveillance.

The CMs thanked Modi for the Centre’s support in combating Covid-19 and also appreciated the impact of his address to the nation.

During the course of their presentations, the CMs requested augmentation of testing facilities, greater support to vulnerable sections, advancement of financial disbursement for 2020-21 and roping in private labs and hospitals in larger numbers.

