PM: Identify more places for quarantine
2020-03-08
New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi directed the officials to identify locations for sufficient quarantine facilities and make provisions for critical care as he reviewed the coronavirus situation on Saturday. 

While complimenting all departments for the work done so far, Modi stressed that as the coronavirus scenario evolves, India has to be prepared in its response.

“All departments should work in convergence and action should be initiated for creating awareness about the disease and the precautions to be taken,” the Prime Minister was quoted as saying in an official statement. “He exhorted the officers to identify the best practices for Covid-19 management from across the world and within the states, and ensure their adoption,” it said.

The PM also highlighted the need for advanced and adequate planning, and timely response which is critical for managing this infectious disease. 

At the meeting with all the ministries and departments concerned, Modi said that in view of experts’ opinion, people should be advised to avoid mass gatherings as much as possible and made aware of the dos and don'ts.

The meeting was attended by health minister Harsh Vardhan, his deputy Ashwini Kumar Choubey, external affairs minister S Jaishankar, cabinet secretary Rajiv Gauba, Niti Aayog member Vinod Paul, chief of defence staff General Bipin Rawat, and secretaries of health, pharma, civil aviation, MEA, health research, home, shipping, NDMA and others.

The secretary in the department of pharma informed the meeting about availability of sufficient stocks of medicines, active pharmaceutical ingredients and other consumable items for use in India. Issues related to the need for continued vigil at all airports, seaports and land border crossings were discussed among others.

While Vardhan emphasised the need for effective coordination with the states for timely response, Niti Aayog member Paul stressed on increasing capacity for hospitalisation. The request obtained for evacuation of Indians from Iran was also highlighted at the meeting.

Earlier, while interacting with the owners of Jan Aushadhi Kendras and beneficiaries of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojna (PMBJP) through video conference, the Prime Minister urged people to stay away from rumours regarding coronavirus and emphasised on the need to follow the advice of doctors. He also asked people to avoid handshakes and start greeting others with ‘namaste.’ 

“I appeal to my fellow countrymen to stay away from rumours regarding coronavirus,” Modi said. We need to follow the advice of doctors in this regard, the PM added.


