PM Narendra Modi lauds courage, resilience shown by Amphan-hit states amid pandemic
2020-06-01
BHUBANESWAR: Prime Minister Narendra Modi appreciated the courage and resilience shown by the people of Odisha ahead and in the aftermath of Cyclone Amphan amid the raging pandemic. Modi, in his monthly address ‘Mann ki Baat’ on Sunday, said the whole country stands united with the cyclone-affected states of Odisha and West Bengal.


“At a time we are busy combating the corona pandemic, we were recently confronted with a natural calamity in some parts of eastern India. In the last few weeks, we have seen the havoc wreaked by Super Cyclone Amphan in West Bengal and Odisha,” the PM said.

He had visited the state on May 22 to take stock of the damage caused by the severe cyclonic storm. “Many houses were razed by the storm. Farmers also suffered heavy losses. I had gone to take stock of the situation in Odisha and West Bengal last week. The courage and bravery with which the people of West Bengal and Odisha have faced the ordeal is commendable. In this hour of crisis, the country also stands in unison with the people of these two states in every manner whatsoever!” he added.

After an aerial survey of the damages caused by the cyclone in the northern districts of the state, Modi had announced a cash relief of Rs 500 crore for reconstruction work. He had also praised the state government’s evacuation measures resulting in zero casualty during natural disasters.

He also underscored that the eastern region has the capacity to be the country’s growth engine and its workforce has the capability and the might to take the country to greater heights. 

“It is only the development of the eastern region that can lead to a balanced economic development of the country. Ever since the country offered me the opportunity to serve, we have accorded priority to the development of eastern India. In the last few years, much has been done in this direction which gives me inner satisfaction. And now, considering the migrant labourers, the need of the hour is devising a new solution-paradigm…we are ceaselessly taking steps in that direction,” Modi added.


