PM Modi interacts with, praises Agra family of Covid-19 survivors
2020-03-30
AGRA: Prime Minister Narendra Modi interacted with novel coronavirus survivor Ashok Kapoor, a shoe exporter from Agra who along with his entire family, including wife, two son, daughter-in-law and grandson was infected after he visited Italy in January. 


Interacting with Kapoor in his Mann Ki Baat on Sunday, PM Modi said, “Without panicking, by taking the right decision at the right time, by contacting doctors in time and by observing all the precautions, we can defeat this pandemic.” 

Sharing his experience in a short interaction, Ashok Kapoor told PM Modi that his two sons and son-in-law who live in Delhi had caught the virus in Italy and infected other family members upon returning. PM told the 73-year-old and his family members to spread awareness about anti-coronavirus measures in Agra and use social media for the purpose. 

Talking to TOI, shoe export’s son Amit Kapoor said, “We were overwhelmed to get a call from PM Narendra Modi where he enquired about our wellbeing and the entire experience of our fight against Covid-19. We feel motivated to spread awareness about precautions against the disease and help those in need during the country-wide lockdown.” 

Talking to Ashok Kapoor, PM Modi said, “I have called you up because your entire family got entangled in the crisis. I will definitely want to know about your problems. How you defeated the infection? What happened at the hospital?”

Responding to PM Modi, Kapoor said, “I have two sons who went to Italy to attend a shoe fair. We have a shoe manufacturing unit here. Our son-in-law, who lives in Delhi, also returned from Italy, with them. He had some health issues and went to Ram Manohar Lohia hospital in Delhi where he tested positive for Covid-19 and was shifted to Safdarjung hospital in Delhi.” 

He said, “We received a call from there that our two sons must also be tested. Hence, my two sons went to Agra district hospital for a test. The doctors at the district hospital asked them to bring the family along for a test, so we all went there. The next day, six members of my family members – my two sons, wife, myself, daughter-in-law and grandson – were declared positive and asked to come to Delhi.” 

He further said, “We were not frightened. We thought it was good that the infection was detected. We went to Delhi’s Safdurjung hospital in two ambulances provided by the Agra district hospital free of charge. We are greatly thankful to the doctors and district administration of Agra who extended their full cooperation”. 

“The ambulance left us at Safdarjung hospital where doctors were already there to help us. We were shifted to the designated ward where each of us was given a separate room. They were nice rooms and we stayed there for 14 days. We received excellent cooperation from doctors and the staff. They all used to come dressed in similar uniforms, so it was difficult to differentiate between a doctor, nurse and a ward boy. We obeyed whatever instructions they gave and we did not face even the slightest of trouble.” 

In response, PM Modi said, “Your confidence is also commendable. Your family faced such a grave crisis. Even your 16-year-old grandson was infected.” 

Ashok said that his grandson had to appear for the ICSE examination, but he asked him to forego it.

To this, PM said, “Your experience came in handy for the family. You kept up their morale.”

“All the family members were supporting one another. Though we could not meet, we remained in touch through telephone. Doctors provided us optimum care and we are grateful to them and to the staff nurses,” Ashok concluded. 

PM Modi said, “My best wishes to you and your family. Please spread awareness in your own way in Agra. You can feed whoever is hungry, care for the poor and can spread awareness among people to follow the rules. You can tell them about the plight of your family and how can they prevent that by following rules. If everyone follows the rules, country can be saved”. 

