Covid-19: PMC intensifies drive against spitting, fine over 880 people in 3 weeks
2020-03-20
PUNE: Intensifying its anti-spitting drive against the backdrop of the coronavirus scare, the Pune Municipal Corporation has registered 880 cases against people spitting in public places in the first three weeks of March. 

The number of such cases never went beyond 500 in a month.

In the entire February, the squads of the corporation had collectively booked 102 people for spitting at public places. In January and December last year, action was initiated against 140 and 280 people, respectively.

During March, the number of cases has already crossed the collective figures of the past three months. A fine of Rs1.08 lakh has been collected in 887 cases registered between March 1 and 18, with an average of 50 cases every day.

An official from the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC)’s solid waste management department said, “The civic body conducts drives continuously against spitting in public places, throwing garbage and open defecation. Since the beginning of March, our teams were told to step up the vigil to restrict people from spitting and throwing garbage in the open.”

Dnyaneshwar Molak, the PMC deputy commissioner, said the intension behind the rigorous drive was not to impose fines but to create awareness. “While initiating action against offenders, we told the squad members to create awareness among people about practices that should be followed to tackle the coronavirus spread. In addition to action against spitting, our squads have booked 27 people for urinating in public places,” Molak said.

The civic body also booked over 1,050 people in the past 18 days for throwing garbage in public places.

The PMC’s anti-encroachment department said it was planning to intensify the drive against roadside vendors involved in illegal dumping of garbage in the next few days. “We want to keep public places free of garbage. There will be round-the-clock vigil,” an official from the department said.

