PMC push and residents’ nod stem Covid-19 cases in hotspot
2020-05-28
PUNE: The Patil Estate slum in- Shivajinagar-Ghole Road ward, till recently a Covid-19 hotspot, has turned a corner. 


After civic health officials contained the spread of the coronavirus here, the number of fresh cases in this pocket has dropped drastically in the last two weeks. 



The area, with a population of over 9,000, reported two new cases in 10 days, while the total cases registered so far remains at 190. 

The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) appears to have bent the curve in this slum even as the virus rages in other pockets under the Dhole Patil Road ward office, three km away.

Civic officials initiated a rigorous contact tracing exercise in the entire slum pocket after the outbreak. The area was sealed and there were restrictions on movement of people. The strict measures in the area are continuing. 

Civic authorities said though new cases have not been detected in the recent past, they have continued with the lockdown measures to eliminate the possibility of a resurgence. 

The slum is spread on both sides of the old Pune-Mumbai highway. The pocket that goes down to the Mula river is identified as Patil Estate slum, while the dwellings between the highway and railway tracks is known as Mahatma Gandhi Vasahat. Covid-19 cases in both pockets have not increased in the last 10 days. 

Too many people, houses packed together, and common toilets make slums a challenge for civic authorities. 

But deputy commissioner of zone-II Nitin Udas said efforts by the administration and cooperation by local residents were crucial in containing the spread. Eight factors worked in the last two weeks, he said. 

“Soon after the outbreak, our teams concentrated on the lanes that had the most number of cases in the initial stage. The swab collection of high and low-risk contacts was increased. All positive cases were sent to quarantine facilities immediately while symptomatic patients were told to isolate themselves,” he added.

Every lane and gap was sealed. People got grocery kitsat home and local shops were shut to avoid possible contact points. 

Civic authorities said there was more emphasis on maintaining hygiene. 

The toilets were kept clean throughout the day, hands free washbasins were installed, tapped water supply was supplied round-the-clock, people were told to wash their hands regularly with soap. Residents were told to use masks. People responded well to all the steps advised in the last two weeks, officials added.


