PMC to let patients with mild Covid-19 symptoms go for home quarantine
2020-04-30
PUNE: The Pune Municipal Corporation on Wednesday decided to let patients showing mild Covid-19 symptoms and pre-symptomatic people to go home from institutional quarantine facilities after producing affidavits assuring that they would follow the isolation guidelines.


Patients having enough space at home for home quarantine would be given this option. Currently, around 2,000 people are in institutional quarantine facilities in the city.



A senior official of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) said, “The number of positive or symptomatic patients is increasing day by day with repeated screening and survey in sealed as well as other areas of the city. Accommodating all these patients in institutional quarantine is proving to be a tough task because of limited beds available in the centres. So, the option of allowing select patients to go home is being explored. It will reduce the load on the civic infrastructure.”

According to the PMC officials, the decision to allow select patients to choose home quarantine provided they gave an affidavit was taken based on the instruction from the Union government. 

The guideline issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare for home quarantine stated, “Very mild/pre-symptomatic patients having the requisite facility at his/her residence for self-isolation will have the option for home isolation.”

State health minister Rajesh Tope, who was in Nashik to review the situation in Malegaon, said, “I have just been told by Mumbai Municipal Corporation commissioner that the ICMR (Indian Council of Medical Research) has issued fresh guidelines through which we can home quarantine asymptomatic patients if they have facilities and if the can do so. Mumbai has 83% asymptomatic patients and most of them can be home quarantined, if they are able to do so. This will help us to accommodate more patients who lack such facilities at their home.” 

In Pune, the senior PMC official said a patient would have to sign an affidavit saying that he/she would abide by the guidelines and rules laid down for home quarantine before leaving the institutional quarantine facility. These patients would have to make sure that they do not venture out of houses and contribute in any way to the spread of the virus.

The PMC official said they had come up with a cellphone application to track the patients in home isolation. The patients willing to go back home and follow the norms set for quarantine would be monitored through it.

Pune divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said the state government was likely to come out with a detailed guideline on home quarantine.

Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram said a uniform rule on home quarantine cannot be implemented. “It is impossible to allow home quarantine for mildly symptomatic persons in slum areas. The state will have to issue the necessary guidelines on it,'' he said. 

(With inputs from Nisha Nambiar in Pune and Abhilash Botekar in Nashik)

