PMC starts home survey in slums to check Covid-19 spread
2020-03-30
editedPune: The civic administration has started home-to-home survey in the dense slum pockets that accommodate over 30% of the city population. Officials said the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has taken the step to extend its surveillance and contain the spread of coronavirus in the slums.The surveyors are getting the forms filled by residents with basic information of members in every family, their recent history of outstation travel and if any one of them have come in contact with anyone with an international travel history. Details of women and those working in nearby housing societies as domestic helps, especially those visiting the homes of people with recent international travel history, are also being collected.The surveyors are also collecting information on the health status of people living in the slum pockets, especially those with symptoms of cough, cold or sneezing. The symptomatic people would be immediately referred to the medical staffers for help, officials in the administration said. The city has slum pockets in almost all areas. Some of the major slum areas are Patil Estate, Janata Vasahat, Kasewadi, Market Yard and Indiranagar. All these pockets are densely populated with small-sized homes. A senior official said anticipating some resistance from citizens in furnishing information, the surveyors have been provided with identity cards and letters explaining the reasons for collecting the information. The official said, “People sometime do not want to reveal details about family or ailments. We are appealing to all citizens to provide necessary information. This is vital to curb the spread of Covid-19. The administration is strict about the home quarantine of those who have come in contact with the people with international travel past. Any such cases identified during the survey will be immediately referred to the medical teams.” The PMC has appointed staffers from its various departments, besides the Asha workers, clerks and officials from the education department for the survey. Separate teams are being appointed to visit the slum pockets in each ward. The officials said besides gathering information, the surveyors would conduct awareness drives to educate people on the practices to be followed to restrict the spread of coronavirus.