Coronavirus scare: PMC launches disinfection drive
2020-03-18
PATNA: The Patna Municipal Corporation (PMC) has launched a disinfection drive in different localities of the state capital as a preventive measure against coronavirus (Covid-19). Sanitation workers wearing full body cover are spraying disinfectants on roads, drains and garbage dumping points.


Coronavirus in India live updates

PMC officials claimed that emphasis under the disinfection drive is being laid on public places, including bus stand, government offices and court premises. The executive officers and sanitation inspectors have also been asked to identify crowded places in their respective circles and get the disinfection done.

The disinfection drive was carried out on the premises of Patna civil court on Monday and continued in Kakarbagh circle on Tuesday. A statement issued by the PMC on Tuesday evening stated that cleanliness drive was conducted at Mithapur bus stand in Kankerbagh circle. All buses parked there were disinfected using insecticides and other chemicals. Besides, anti-viral chemicals were sprayed in waiting rooms and all carts on the bus stand premises.

The PMC officials claimed that disinfection drive was conducted at various places under Patliputra circle as well, including at the collectorate office, public grievance redressal office and the guest office inside the residence of Chief Justice of Patna high court.

Disinfectants were also sprayed in the office of sub-divisional office, DSP office, Gaighat roundabout and Alamganj police station among several other places in Bankipore circle.

PMC’s public relations officer Harshita said the drive will be conducted regularly at all places of people’s gathering.

“Alcohol and other anti-viral chemicals are being sprayed in public places and government offices under the ongoing drive. All 75 sanitary inspectors have been asked to regularly conduct the drive in their respective areas. Besides, the workers involved in disinfection drive are being given boots, gloves and raincoats to ensure that they are not exposed to bacteria or viruses. They are also being given towel, soaps and asked to clean their hands frequently as preventive measures,” she said.

Patna civil surgeon Raj Kishore Chaudhary said the municipal corporation has been asked to ensure utmost hygiene and frequent disinfection across the city to prevent any scope of the spread of Covid-19.

“The PMC has been asked to conduct disinfection, cleanliness as well as fogging in all areas in the city to prevent the spread of the virus. The civic body apart, residents should also ensure highest level of personal hygiene, including frequent handwash and cleanliness in homes,” Dr Chaudhary said.


