PMC to rope in pvt hostels to boost capacity for quarantine
2020-03-26
Pune: The civic body has planned to take over 10 private hostels and convert them into isolation wards in a bid to increase the quarantine capacity by 2,000 beds in the first phase. “A number of cases have come to light where patients have flouted the rules set for home quarantine and have ventured out. In such cases the only option is to put them into institutional quarantine,” said Sanjeev Wavre, a senior health official of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC).PMC officials said the step had been taken in consultation with the district administration. Hostels run by government departments as well as those owned by private institutes would be acquired.According to the civic administration nearly 5,000 beds can be acquired for isolation by converting the hostels. Nearly 2,000 would be available in the first phase while the remaining would be added in the days to come. The authorities want to be prepared with 15,000 to 20,000 beds for isolating suspected and positive cases across the city. Around 45 hostels would be acquired for the makeshift arrangement. “These hostels are to be acquired on a temporary basis. Converting them into quarantine facilities will be easier and we hope to start the first phase of acquisition in a week,” said Rajendra Muthe, head of PMC’s land and estate department.He said, “Basic facilities like beds, separate rooms and sanitation facilities are already present in these hostels. The PMC would have to provide protective equipment like masks, hand gloves and sanitizers in these hostels to convert them into isolation wards. The civic body would also take care of maintaining cleanliness and hygiene. Talks are underway with both government authorities and private institutions. Five institutions have already consented.”PMC officials said most of the hostels have mess facility, but most of them were empty right now because the workers and staff members had left the city due to the coronavirus scare. Thus, catering services needed to be outsourced they said.The civic administration has already converted two PMC properties at Sinhagad Road and Sanas ground into additional isolation wards. These facilities have a capacity of 350 beds. Even the Naidu hospital has space and to isolate nearly 100 patients. 