Coronavirus: PMPML’s daily ridership and revenue badly hit
2020-03-17
PUNE: The daily ridership as well as the revenue of the PMPML buses has taken a huge hit in the wake of the novel coronavirus spread, which prompted shutting down of educational institutes among others. 

The Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML) said the adverse effects on the transport utility’s functioning were being seen in the last six days, ever since positive patients for the novel coronavirus were detected in the city. The daily ridership has gone down by almost 3 lakh and the revenue has reduced by around Rs50 lakh. 

According to authorities, daily ridership has come down to 9 lakh from the previous 12 lakh and the revenue has slumped to Rs1 crore, which used to be over Rs1.5 crore. Authorities said they were not expecting a revival unless the restrictions on the educational institutes were lifted.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“School children, staff and college students comprise a majority of PMPML users. There has been a drop in footfall at bus stands. Even bus trips to the market places have been witnessing lesser crowd,” an official from the PMPML said.

The PMPML’s ‘bus day’ initiative was also affected last week, in the wake of the novel coronavirus spread. As per the initiative, the transport utility had introduced maximum number of buses on road on a single day. The PMPML had expected to mop up Rs2 crore, but was able to generate Rs1.8 crore, an official said. 

Meanwhile, the transport utility said that despite a considerable drop in ridership it has not cancelled trips so far. “There is also a flip side to it. If the trips are cancelled or clubbed, it would lead to overcrowding in remaining trips. The district administration has instructed to prevent overcrowding. The issue has become tricky,” a senior official said. 

The PMPML said it was planning to discuss the proposal of re-scheduling bus trips with the district administration. “We are seeking opinion of authorities on re-planning trips and how it can be executed to avoid losses,” the official said. 

The PMPML operates about 1,500 buses everyday in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad.

The PMPML has also started the disinfection drive of its buses. Steps are being taken to wash and disinfect buses everyday.


