Gujarat: Poems were his panacea to triumph over Covid-19
2020-04-17
RAJKOT: ‘Khushi ke saath duniya me hazaaro gham bhi hote hai, Jahan shehnai bajti hai vahan matam bhi hote hai.” (Along with moments of joy, there are thousands of moments of grief.. , where blow the trumpets of celebration, so do the laments of mourning.)


Ninety two-year-old Razaak Qadri couldn’t have summed up his experience of fighting Covid-19 in a better way than reciting lyrics of this immortal song by Shakeel Badayuni penned for Dilip Kumar’s 1950 starrer Babul. As Qadri walked out amid applause from Bhavnagar’s Sir T Hospital on Thursday, he expressed his triumph through a slew of shayaaris, which has been his passion. 

Qadri is the the oldest Covid-19 patient in Gujarat to have defeated the virus and reportedly the second oldest in India after Kerala’s 93-year-old man. 

On coming out of the hospital, his eyes dilated in discomfort on seeing sunlight after 20 long days. He was in the isolation ward since March 28 when he tested positive. 

Being a heart patient for several years, Qadri’s weapons to fight death staring at him were his mental strength and his love for poems. His stay in the isolation ward was actually a delight for other patients and hospital staff as Qadri enthralled them with Hindi and Urdu shayaaris. 

“I survived three heart attacks, the last one being in 2018. Three weeksss ago, I experienced symptoms similar to heart attack. I felt uneasy and started perspiring profusely,” he told TOI over phone from Bhavnagar. He was admitted in the emergency ward and tested for coronavirus too. “The only two words I could hear from doctors and nurses were negative and positive. After two days, I was told I had coronavirus and would be discharged if two more tests are negative,” he added.

“But I was firm that I won’t lose courage. Doing namaz five times a day, reciting poems and doing yoga was my routine in the hospital,” he said.

Hospital administrator Dr. Harshad Gathani said, “Razakbhai himself was mentally strong which helped us in his treatment. He was reciting shayaaris, so we deputed a dedicated person to listen to his poems and appreciate him. This gave him positive energy and speeded his recovery." 

 Two other patients, 50-year-old Farooq Telia and 38-year-old Asif Pathadiya were also discharged from Sir T Hospital on Thursday. 

