Pol leaders urge admin to shift quarantine facilities outside city
2020-04-12
Jaipur: Political leaders of both BJP and ruling Congress party on Saturday met Jaipur city nodal officer in-charge of preventing spread of coronavirus, Ajitabh Sharma, and Jaipur collector Joga Ram and expressed their concern over identifying quarantine centres in the city area.

They also requested the administration to prevent anybody from giving a political colour to distribution of ration packets in city.

Jaipur City MP Ram Charan Bohra and former BJP MLA Mohan Lal Gupta met Sharma on Saturday afternoon. Even Congress chief whip and Hawa Mahal MLA Mahesh Joshi met Sharma and Joga Ram.

Congress and BJP workers clashed over distribution of ration and grocery by the civil defence team at Shipra Path locality on Friday. Two persons of both the groups were injured in the clash with both parties accusing each other of selective distribution and interference in civil defence work.

“I also appealed to them to reopen all the community kitchens in the walled city and curfew-affected areas so that nobody is left hungry. I urged them that water and electricity bills should be waived off for three months and also the rents of the poor tenants living in the Walled City. Also, the quarantine centres, which are being identified within the city area, must be shifted to far off areas,” he added.

He also said only authorized persons should be issued passes. Citing the Bhilwara model, Bohra said same measures could be taken by the government in Ramganj area, Hawa Mahal or Adarsh Nagar area. “At least, 75% of the positive cases are being reported from Muslim-dominated areas and in their communities. The administration should restrict movement of people in these areas. The movement of the quarantine teams and health officials working in these places must be restricted,” he said.

Meanwhile, Congress leader Mahesh Sharma said, “I requested them to identify hotels for quarantine facilities outside the city area. I asked them to cancel the ones identified in the city.”


