Police & health staff combating Covid-19, face a salary cut salvo
2020-04-09
Aurangabad: Health department staffers and police personnel were left fuming after the bills submitted by the respective account officers proposed salary cuts as per the Government Resolution (GR)

Salaries of Class I and II employees will be cut by 50%. For the Class III employees, bills with 25% salary deduction have been sent to the treasury department. There is no cut in salaries for the remaining classes.

The authorities in the police department, citing that theirs is a “disciplined force”, refused to come on record. A senior officer said, “So far, there is no GR or state’s communication exempting police from the salary deduction. If we do not get it, we will have to send the bills with deducted salaries.”

However, the medicos and healthcare professionals have termed the move ‘demotivating and demoralising’ for those working on the frontline in the Covid-19 fight.

This deduction is result of the recently issued GR by the government. Sources in the administration said that though there was news on social media that the state will not deduct salaries of health and police departments, no official communication has been received by accounts officers.

Many health officials heading different government medical colleges and hospitals apart from those heading public health institutions refused to comment. At least two accounts officer of health institutes confirmed that they have sent the salary bills in accordance with the recently issued GR.

Aurangabad’s Government Medical College and Hospital’s dean Kanan Yelikar told TOI, “We welcome the state government’s move to exempt police and health department from the current stop-gap salary arrangement. However, we are still awaiting a GR in this regard, due to which our bills claiming 50% salaries have been sent.”

On March 31, deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar, who is also the finance minister, issued an official statement, said that the salaries of Class I and II staff will be cut by 50% while for Class III employees, it will be cut by 25%. There will be no cut in the salaries of remaining classes in the state bureaucracy. His nephew and MLA Rohit Pawar took to Twitter on the same day, and assured the police, health and other departments that their salaries will not be deducted.

A medico said, “The apex court on Wednesday told the centre that doctors, healthcare professionals are warriors, they have to be protected. In the name of protection, our salaries are being released partially.”


