Police beef up security; 20 held for lockdown breach
2020-04-12
PRAYAGRAJ: Police continued aggressive patrolling and beefed up security in Old City as the nationwide lockdown announced in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak entered its 17th day on Friday.


Police also assured Prayagraj residents that helplines are being launched so that the former do not have to make do without essential commodities. Police said the commodities would be delivered at the residents’ doorsteps. 

Police also conducted foot marches Old City area, while asking residents to stay indoors and follow the lockdown rules strictly. 

Thirty four persons were booked in the past 24 hours for allegedly violating rules of lockdown enforced to check the spread of the novel coronavirus. Police also arrested 20 persons after lodging 13 FIRs under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, which deals with violations of section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code. 

Security has been tightened after acknowledging that people were coming out on streets during evening hours on the pretext of purchase of essential articles like milk and vegetables. Meanwhile, residents living in localities coming under the Prayagraj West assembly constituency and struggling with lack of groceries during the lockdown announced amidst the Covid-19 outbreak now have somebody to help them out.

A group of 10 local residents have launched a special helpline (1800313444449) to reach out to those citizens facing difficulty in procuring ample groceries and fetch the commodities for them for free. The helpline will cater to residents living in Mundera, Transport Nagar, Preetam Nagar, Sulemsarai, Rajruppur, Jhalwa, Manori, Bamrauli, Bakrabad, Chhapiya, and other rural areas coming under the constituency.

One can dial the helpline and ask the team to deliver commodities like eatables, medicines, surgical equipment and other items at their doorstep. The helpline will be functional on all days from 8am to 8pm.

 The citizen-driven initiative is being funded through voluntary contributions from the team members. The complaints usually involve ill residents in need of grocery items, medicines or those who might need to be taken to hospital.

Dhananjay Singh, who is heading the initiative, said, “The initiative aims to offer assistance to residents, particularly the elderly and those who are ill, who cannot step out of their homes on their own during the lockdown.” 

“Once we get a call, we first ascertain the caller’s identity, compile their details and then process their request,” said Singh.


