Ernakulam cops launch app to track home-quarantined
2020-04-04
KOCHI: As part of their efforts to fight Covid-19, Ernakulam rural district police launched a mobile application named ‘Happy@Home’ on Friday to track those who are in home quarantine and to gather periodic updates about them.

The app helps the users in maintaining a log of his health status by answering yes or no questions which enables cops to arrange medical care for them if needed. The app also lets the users maintain a travel history so that their ‘contacts’ can be tracked in case they become Covid-19 positive in a later stage. 

District police chief (Ernakulam rural) SP K Karthick said the mobile application was developed to strengthen the communication between police and those who are in home quarantine under its limits.

Officials said those under home quarantine can log into the app using the phone number that was used to register with health/police department. “If the user has been registered, then he/she will be sent a 4-digit OTP to the number concerned, using which they can log into the app,” a police officer said.

The app, according to police, can track daily health status of home-quarantined persons. “In case of an emergency, the app can be used to alert police so as to provide immediate medical care,” said officials.

The app will inform the users on how many days they have spent in home quarantine and how many more days are remaining in quarantine.

Rural police said the app can track the location of home-quarantined people as well. “The telephone numbers of police, ‘Disha’, counsellors, food aggregators and corona control are also available in the app and home-quarantined people can choose the service they want,” officials said. 

Police will also use the app to send messages and important notifications as well to those in home quarantine.

“The app is available on Playstore for free. Software developers Dipin K Das, Jingle Elias and Mohandas P G helped us in developing the app. Arrangements have been made to keep checking the effectiveness of the app and to update it accordingly,” said SP Karthick.

