Covid-19 outbreak: Pune police to allow weddings planned before March 11
2020-03-24
PUNE: Only those wedding ceremonies with not more than 25 people in attendance, and which were decided and planned before the outbreak of Covid-19 around March 11 will be allowed, the Pune police have said.


They will not allow weddings that will be organized now or in the near future. The hall’s owner or manager will be booked under relevant provisions of the law if there is any violation, the police added.

Joint commissioner of Pune police Ravindra Shisve cited imposition of Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which bans assembly of five or more people. 

He said, “Social and cultural gatherings have already been banned. People can fix their wedding after the situation returns to normal.” 

The police have sought data of pre-decided weddings from marriage halls or lawns.

 Alternatively, families which have planned and distributed wedding cards a long time back, can approach the concerned police station to seek permission.

“Only close relatives and a few friends will be allowed to attend such pre-decided weddings considering the social distancing requirement,” said Shisve.

He said people who will fix their weddings this week or in the near future will not be allowed to conduct ceremonies considering the prevailing situation.

 “We will not allow such gatherings that are decided now,” he added.

Shisve said, “In the last few days, a few incidents have been reported from across the state wherein people infected with Covid-19 have attended wedding ceremonies, following which many people were screened or home quarantined by the medical authorities.”

The police have decided not to permit any wedding procession taken out of the wedding halls or lawns as part of rituals to offer prayers to the local/family deities.

 There are more than 150 marriage halls and lawns in areas under the Pune police jurisdiction. 

For the wedding ceremonies, people from far off areas travel using various modes of transportation and infected persons can spread the virus among the wedding ceremony attendees, Shisve said.


