Police tighten lockdown measures
2020-03-26
Thiruvananthapuram: As many as 1,751 cases have been registered in the state by the police for violation of lockdown orders. With this, the police have registered 3,612 total cases in two days since Tuesday.

The highest number of cases have been registered in Kozhikode (338) while the least number of cases have been registered on Wednesday in Kasaragod (10). While Kottayam (208), Idukki (214), Alappuzha (178) and Kollam city (170) registered more number of cases, the number was lesser in districts like Malappuram (11), Kozhikode rural (13), Palakkad (19) and Kannur (20). 

Police have tightened the enforcement measures across the state on the second day of lockdown, in the wake of Covid-19 outbreak. The police have resorted to harder measures like sending those people back whose reasons for moving out of their houses sounded unconvincing. 

While the overall number of people who left their houses on the second day was lesser compared to that on Tuesday, in some places where the public still used their vehicles to move out, the police confiscated the vehicles and slapped charges for violation of CrPC section 144, that clearly imposed several restrictions including on grouping of people. “The situation has improved when compared to yesterday and the public largely are responding well to the restrictions. But for those who are yet to understand their responsibility, we will be stricter tomorrow,” Thiruvananthapuram city police commissioner Balram Kumar Upadhyaya said. 

When compared to other places, the enforcement in the capital became harder for the police as the government employees were given exemption along with other essential services and a large section of the capital city’s population are government employees. 

At the same time, the enforcement in other parts of the state were much smoother. The police also resorted to some innovative ways of monitoring the public movements. In Thrissur, the police are using drones by which they can monitor by-lanes and pocket roads where the public movement is likely to be more. “We are using four drones covering the city during the peak hours of morning and evening. This is proving to be much effective for us,” Thrissur city police commissioner R Adithya said. 

In northern parts of the state, people are generally confined to their houses. The police contacted all the people who came to the state through Kannur and Kozhikode airports from March 1. “People have begun cooperating with the government orders. Also, we are contacting them every week, tracking their movements, and also ensuring that they are strictly quarantined in their houses,” DIG (Kannur range) K Sethuraman said. 


