Police warn landlords against forcing tenants to pay rent amid lockdown
2020-04-27
Kolhapur: The state government has asked owners who have rented out their properties not to force their tenants to pay the rent as long as the lockdown is not lifted. 

The Maharashtra Housing department has already asked the landlords to postpone collecting rent from tenants for at least three months as everyone is going through financial straits amid the lockdown that has been imposed to curb the spread of coronavirus. 

According to the circular issued by the department, no financial transactions were happening across the market and factories due to lockdown and many employees were not getting their full salaries. In such a situation, most people may not be in a position to pay the rent hence, landlords should not force their tenants for the rent.

Superintendent of police (SP) Abhinav Deshmukh has already issued a statement appealing to tenants to dial 100 or come forward and lodge a complaint if they are forced to pay rent.

“The landlords have been asked not to collect the rent from tenants. If anyone is being forced to pay the rent, the tenants should dial 100 or convey the message to the nearest police station. Appropriate action will be taken against the landlords,” read the statement issued by the SP. 

A large section of the population live in rented accommodations and a significant amount of their salary—in some cases upto 40% of the total income—is set aside as the monthly rent. A number of students stay in rented apartments in the city, especially in the vicinity of Shivaji University and Rajarampuri area. Most of the students are stuck in the city due to the lockdown and can afford to pay the rent only after their parents send them money. 

“We have not received salaries for last two months and are barely sustaining on all that we have saved in the last one year. We do not have enough money to pay the landlord, who is very particular about getting the rent within the first week of every month. With the government’s directions and the assurance of police, we are hoping that the landlord will not harass us for rent,” said an employee attached with a local goods transport company who resides in the the Rajarampuri area of the city.

“We are unable to go home due to the lockdown and are left with little cash to meet our daily needs. We are in no position to pay the rent unless we get money fromour parents,” said a student preparing for competitive examinations residing in a rented room near Shivaji University.


