Police move govt for dedicated Covid hospital for personnel
2020-05-13
Bhubaneswar: The commissionerate police has sent a proposal to the state government to set up dedicated Covid care facilities for policemen with 6,000 personnel running a high risk of infection as they are engaged in Covid duty in Bhubaneswar and Cuttack. The commissionerate police is worried over the high rate of Covid infection among police personnel in Maharashtra, including Mumbai police. Till now, no Covid-19 case has been reported from among the Odisha police personnel.

“We will again discuss the issue with our state police headquarters and request the government as we have now come to know that Mumbai police have such facilities for their personnel,” commissioner of police Sudhanshu Sarangi told TOI while speaking about the video conference with Mumbai police on Monday evening.

“We wanted to gain first-hand information from Mumbai police about the reasons behind the alarming spread of Covid-19 among policemen. We held a video conference with Mumbai joint commissioner of police (admin) Nawal Bajaj. He suggested that we should set up our own Covid care facilities. But we have already moved the government for it,” Sarangi said. 

Several senior officers of the commissionerate police interacted with Mumbai police in the video conference. “Often, knowing the actual causes gives us a better understanding of the reality. We expect our officers to be aware and act responsibly. The interaction was mainly to create awareness,” Sarangi said. 

In the meeting, the commissionerate police apprised the Mumbai police of its preparedness. Segregation of personnel with comorbid conditions, decongestion of barracks, operation of fever clinics with infra-red thermometers provided to all police stations and deployment of medical officers to monitor health conditions of cops are the key precautions adopted by the commissionerate police to keep its force free of infection. 

Additional commissioner of police Anup Kumar Sahoo said police personnel, who are being exposed to Covid hospitals and containment zones, have been undergoing RT-PCR test. “We regularly sensitise our personnel to maintain social distance at work place, barracks, homes and on streets. Personnel, who come in direct or indirect contact with Covid patients, are being sent on home isolation,” Sahoo said. 


