Police constable posted in Malegaon dies of Covid-19
2020-05-10
Nashik: A 51-year-old constable attached to the headquarters of the Nashik rural police died of Covid-19 on Saturday morning. This is the first case of a policeman succumbing to the infection in Nashik district. 

District civil surgeon Suresh Jagdale said that the police constable was a resident of Konark Nagar in Adgaon in Nashik district.

The constable was suffering from mild symptoms of Covid-19 when he was on bandobast duty in Malegaon. He was admitted to the isolation ward of Nashik civil hospital on May 2. 

Medical officials at the civil hospital said though the report of the constable’s throat swab samples arrived on May 8, which confirmed that he had tested positive for the contagion, they had already started treating him and his body was also responding well to the treatment.

On Saturday morning, he started suffering from breathing problems and the oxygen levels in his body also dropped. “Doctors treating the constable put him on ventilator and tried their best to revive his health. However, the constable did not respond to the treatment and succumbed to the infection,” said Jagdale.

So far, 104 personnel, both from the police and the State Reserve Police Force (SRPF), have contracted Covid-19 while performing bandobast duties in Malegaon.

Police said that most of the personnel were deployed in the 82 containment zones of Malegaon. As many as 497 people have been infected with Covid-19 in Malegaon till May 8. 

Police personnel deployed in the textile town of Malegaon are performing the bandobast duties under the constant fear that they might get infected by Covid-19. Malegaon’s additional superintendent of police Sandeep Ghuge said, “We are taking all efforts to boost the moral of the policemen deployed for bandobast duty in Malegaon.” 

“We are getting their health checked, providing them protective gear, hygienic food, medicine, proper accommodation and immediate treatment to whosoever is not feeling well,” said Ghuge. 

There is a special officer of the rank of additional superintendent to address health-related complaints of the personnel on duty in Malegaon. There are four officers of the IPS cadre looking after the various aspects of bandobast in Malegaon, added Ghuge.

Currently, approximately 1,000 police personnel and six companies of the SRPF are deployed in Malegoan to ensure people do not venture out unnecessarily out of their homes. Each company of the SRPF comprises nearly 90-100 personnel.


