Kolkata police, civic body strive to protect Covid-19 ‘cold spots’
2020-04-29
KOLKATA: After sealing 227 micro-neighbourhoods to contain the spread of coronavirus, Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) is focusing on protecting the rest of the city from where no case of Covid-19 infection has been reported yet. 


The task to defend the ‘cold spots’ though is challenging, concede KMC officials, as most of them are located next to high-risk areas. But hope hinges on the successful containment strategy that was rolled out last week.

 

“We have sealed high-risk Covid zones across the city and imposed restrictions on movement of people to the cold spots so that people living there do not get infected. Similarly, we are keeping a close vigil on movement of people who are living in safe zones to ensure that they don’t move around carelessly and contract the infection,” said a KMC official. 

Though KMC has devised an action plan to allow phased opening of shops and services in these ‘cold spots’, some officials are wary that they could easily switch from ‘safe’ to ‘sensitive’ if one Covid-19 positive case is reported from there. And that, officials say, is very much possible given the proximity of these locations to the sensitive zones.

No Covid-19 positive cases have so far been reported from areas like Janbazar, Goaltuli Lane or parts of Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Road. But at the same time, these locationns are surrounded by areas like Taltala, Beniapukur, Collins Lane or Nirmal Chandra Street which have been declared high-risk Covid zones. Similarly, areas such as Haridevpur, Kudghat, Bansdroni, Naktala have so far remained out of bounds of Covid-19 even though adjacent neighbourhoods like Behala (for Haridevpur and Kudghat) and Garia (for Bansdroni and Naktala) have had residents testing positive for Covid-19. 

The novel coronavirus is yet to make its presence felt in areas such as Golf Green, Lake Gardens or Jodhpur Park but a section of the civic officials feel the residents living in these areas would have to exercise extreme caution and abide by Covid-19 guidelines since adjoining neighbourhoods like Dhakuria, Golpark or Ballygunge have seen the emergence of fresh Covid positive patients. Jadavpur is another locality where no cases of Covid-19 has so far been reported. However, a 74-year old patient and a resident of Baghajatin who was tested Covid-19 positive on Sunday (now admitted at a private hospital) comes as a warning for Jadavpur residents as Baghajatin is a neighbourhood not far from Jadavpur. 

As a special plan of action for Covid-free zones, KMC has intensified its fever survey. “First we need to put up a barricade segregating the cold spots from the infected zones. Also, we need to conduct a house-to-house survey, especially in the slums. If we find any such case, the person should be sent for immediate testing. Besides, we will start random testing of people in the cold spots once the testing kits are available,” said a KMC health department official. 

Some residents in the ‘cold spots’ have extended cooperation in isolating their neighbours. Residents at Karunamoyee Bazar in Tollygunge have put a barricade and put up posters asking people from Siriti neighbourhood (in the Covid-19 map) not to venture into their areas.


