Police, KMC back lockdown extension in micro-clusters
2020-04-27
KOLKATA: The city police, KMC and the health department are working on a plan to continue with the dynamic containment model in all micro-clusters where Covid cases are reported for a fortnight more, even if lockdown norms are eased in non-affected zones. A central report on the district-wise prevalence of Covid cases in Bengal indicates that 47% of cases are from Kolkata. 


In addition to this, Kolkata, Howrah and North 24 Parganas account for 78.8% of the total Covid cases in Bengal, the Union health ministry data indicated. Bengal chief secretary Rajiva Sinha has already indicated greater containment thrust in these three zones, which are throwing up more cases due to increased mobility and population density.

 

Sources indicated that the state is also weighing in this plan for a fortnight-long containment strategy in these micro-clusters. “The spread of the containment zones will depend on the number of positive cases being reported and the possible spread,” an officer said.

Police sources said lockdown measures across several containment zones were already showing the desired results. “Both Mudiali and Chetla Haat Road in the Chetla-Alipore belt had reported cases. The lockdown was implemented strictly here and people cooperated. There has been no fresh case in either of these zones for more than 10 days,” an officer said. 

“In north and central Kolkata, strict containment measures have been taken depending on fresh cases being reported across Madan Mohan Burman Street, Pathuriaghata, Armenian Street, Burtolla, Beniatola, PK Tagore Street, Hari Ghosh Street and Mondal Street — all lying between Posta and Jorabagan. And in the past three days, no new case has been reported,” the officer added.

According to sources, Kolkata now has nearly 150 containment zones, Howrah has 60, North 24 Parganas has 40 and East Midnapore has five containment zones. These four districts fall within the Red Zone. Sources said there has been no report of new positive cases or suspects in nearly 10% of the containment zones.

KMC officers said longer containment was necessary to stop the spread of the disease to new zones. Fifty new containment zones have been created in Kolkata in the past 10 days in places where cases have been reported. A KMC team is also keeping a close watch on some areas in the south which have so far remained safe from the virus attack.

 “We are keeping vigil on some areas which have not been touched by the virus. We can’t let people from these areas get infected,” said a KMC official. 

Sources indicated the limited relaxations in the non-affected zones will include opening of shops, but salon, pubs, liquor shops, tea stalls, shopping malls and cinema halls will remain closed. 

Offices and factories may open, but they will have to work with a skeletal staff of 15% to 20% and in rotation. Public transport will not be allowed and local markets will have to follow strict social distancing and disinfection protocols.

