Policeman, 17 others test positive for Covid-19 in Kashi
2020-05-25
Varanasi: On Sunday, 18 persons including a policeman were confirmed Covid-19 positive in Varanasi while Azamgarh and Chandauli also recorded an increase in their count of positive cases with the arrival of fresh reports.

DM Varanasi Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “Reports of around 300 samples were received on Sunday of which 18 were found infected. Count of Covid-19 positive cases in the district reached to 147 of which 82 were discharged from DDU district and BHU hospitals by Sunday while four had died. Total active cases in the district are 61.”

The police constable who was tested positive is the follower of circle officer Sadar, said the officials adding that now the total number of police personnel infected in the district has reached to 12. Other 17 are migrants including 16 returned from Mumbai and one from Ahmedabad. The new cases led to creation of 13 new hotspots in the district. Officials said that now there are 73 hotspots in the district.

In Azamgarh total number of Covid-19 positive cases reached to 40 after detection of three new cases on Sunday. The report of a middle aged person of Atraulia area, who had died at district hospital on May 22 night, confirmed him infected, said CMO Azamgarh Dr AK Mishra. Other two cases are from Kaptanganj and Mehnagar areas, he said adding, nine patients have been cured and two had died, the total active cases here are 29.

Meanwhile, in Chandauli district two new cases were found since Saturday late night. An employee of a mobile phone manufacturing company, whose sample was collected in Noida on May 16 after which he reached his home in Dharav village of Dhanapur area, was tested positive. DM Chandauli Navneet Singh Chahal said that the CMO Noida alerted the Chandauli officials on Sunday. Earlier, a Gujarat returned youth of Jeguri village of Shahabganj area had also been tested positive. Total number of infected persons in Chandauli has reached to 19.


