Police crack whip on lockdown violators
2020-03-24
Jaipur: Alarmed with the reports of people blatantly disobeying the government orders of lock down by assembling at various places in numbers, the state home department on Monday asked the police to act as per law against such people for disobeying the guidelines.

Police have arrested four persons in Jaipur for flouting rules under Section 188 (disobeying the orders of public servant) of IPC and claimed that they will not let anyone roam around in the city from Tuesday without a valid reason or emergency purpose.

As people in almost every part of the state except Jhunjhunu and Bhilwara where curfew is on in some of its parts, the senior officials of the home department and police discussed the scenario especially the safety of public amid the increasing number of positive cases of Covid-19.

When TOI informed Rajeeva Swarup, the additional chief secretary, department of home on people blatantly violating the lock down, he said, “We too are aware of this. Thus, we have directed the police to take strict action against those who are roaming around and disobeying the government orders. Whatever is been done is for the safety of public at large. Thus for their safety only we have asked police to take strict action against the violators.”

`Senior officers of the police stated that section 144 of CrPC is already in the state, which disallows the assembling of more than five people at a place. “So, if anyone violates it is becomes punishable under section 188 of IPC,” explained a senior police officer.

` Senior police officers across the state were also been asked to be strict on the lock down. “We have categorically asked our Inspector General of police and Superintendent of police in various districts to ensure strict compliance of the lock down. Action would definitely be taken against the violators,” Said BL Soni, additional director general of police (Crime).

Meanwhile, in Jaipur police already started cracking a whip against the violators. “On Monday, we took action against the violators and registered cases under section 188 of IPC. We will not let anyone to roam around without any emergency,” said Anand Srivastav, commissioner of police.

At Bikaner the police also seized the vehicles of the violators especially the revellers who were roaming around the city without any emergency purpose. “This has to be followed strictly. We have taken action against the violators. I would appeal the public not to go out firstly without mask and also without an emergency purpose,” said Jose Mohan, Inspector General of police, Bikaner Range.

Responding to a call that a medical store was overcharging for masks a team of policemen rushed to Chandpole situated shop. Senior police officers said that every day they are attending and responding to the calls on black marketing of masks.


