Delhi Police step in to feed those left jobless due to lockdown
2020-03-27
NEW DELHI: Since the announcement of the lockdown, most slum dwellers are out of job and several of them have been dialling the police helpline number requesting for food. On Thursday, Delhi Police got food packets and ration delivered at many of these slums.


The Delhi Police commissioner has also directed the district deputy commissioners of police to identify areas where people are going hungry. The cops are in touch with NGOs and local good Samaritans to arrange necessary supplies. 

The helpline, 011- 23469526, has received 1,700 calls in the past 24 hours. A senior officer said, “At least 26 calls were for ration, food and money.”

The district DCPs are trying to reach out to as many as possible. At Dwarka district, the station house officers have made WhatsApp groups with residents welfare associations (RWAs) to take help of those willing to volunteer. Pradhan Dev Choudhary, RWA president of Om Vihar, said, “Volunteers are making announcements about food and ration distribution at slums. To avoid crowding, we are keeping the packets at their doorstep. We are trying to arrange a cook as some people are homeless.” 

Dwarka DCP Anto Alphonse said, “Police teams, along with local NGOs, are distributing food packets and water bottles to poor people, and at slums and JJ clusters at Sector 3, Dwarka Mod, Najafgarh, Mohan Gardern and other areas.” NGOs have been given curfew passes for the work.

In south and northwest Delhi, beat officers have been visiting senior citizens living alone to ensure they don’t have to step out at all. “Some of them required groceries, some other essentials,” said Atul Kumar Thakur, DCP (South). 

Ravi Shankar, a painter living at a south Delhi slum, said they had no money as there was no work. “Today police, along with some others, gave us cooked food. We hope this comes every day.” 

At Dwarka Sector 3, Gurpreet Singh, a businessman, are helping labourers along with two friends. “As the demand has grown, we are now preparing langar at a gurdwara and distributing meals thrice a day. The gurdwara is helping us with some ration too.” They are also feeding strays. 

At Majnu ka Tila in north Delhi, cops distributed rice and dal. Two youths, both migrant labourers from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, were fed at the Inderlok police post when they made a PCR call saying they had not eaten anything for the past four days.


