Delhi Police find coronavirus hasn’t spread in nine days of closure
2020-04-14
NEW DELHI: Police in southwest Delhi had a challenge at hand when a man in a slum cluster at Shastri Market was discovered to be Covid-positive on March 31. His family was immediately shifted to a quarantine centre, where his wife and two children too tested positive. On the recommendation of the district magistrate, the entire jhuggi-jhopri colony was designated a containment zone.


In the nine days of strict closure, the cops not only arranged rations for nearly 2,000 colony residents, but created a volunteer force to deliver these to the shanties. The shops in the JJ camp were allowed to open on alternate days. Every household has been medically examined for the past nine days for the novel coronavirus, and police are now waiting for the 14-day period to end to determine if the camp can be declared safe.

The police team was informed about a positive corona case on March 31, when an employee of a hospital and camp resident got infected. The cops immediately shifted the man to a hospital and his family to a quarantine centre. “We were worried that if the virus spread in the JJ colony itself, it would be a huge disaster,” a police officer said. “There was no means of quarantine in the crowded slum. We shifted the family and got in touch with a team of doctors who agreed to monitor the other residents regularly.”

The area was sanitised by an South Delhi Municipal Corporation team before it was declared into a containment zone and sealed off. While the residents were asked to stay in their houses, the cops and the district administration created a voluntary force comprising youths from the colony to help in the distribution of food and essentials. They were given protective suits.

The phone numbers of the volunteers were shared with the residents of the camp, who could call them and ask for the goods which were delivered to the doorsteps. The cops also asked the local vegetable sellers to open their shops on alternate days. “The first, third, fifth shops and so on along a row were allowed to function on odd dates, and the rest on the following day,” explained a cop.

The biggest challenge for the civic bodies and the cops was to keep the area sanitised. “Unlike proper housing colonies and residences, the shacks here do not have an attached bathroom and the people have to step out every time to use the common toilets,” an officer said. “We made efforts to keep these as clean as possible.”

So far, more than 50 cops from different units in the district have been deployed in the JJ colony to implement the quarantine.

