Police presence sought for last rites of Covid patients
2020-05-09
Aurangabad: A letter has been sent by Government Medical College and Hospital dean Kanan Yelikar to city police chief, requesting him to assign police constables for performing the last rites of people dying of Covid-19.

The letter also complained about policemen not remaining present during the last rites of the Covid-19 patients. This request from Yelikar has not gone down well with policemen across all hierarchy.

One of the senior police officers said the police personnel are neither medically trained nor duty bound to handled infectious bodies. Despite repeated attempts, Yelikar could not be reached for her comments. However, district administration officials have supported the views of the GMCH dean.

When contacted, Aurangabad commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad said, "We have received the letter from the GMCH dean and are looking in to it. Our mend are already under stress due to exceeding duty hours and threats of getting infected."

The officer citing technical limitations said that each time our policemen perform the last rites of a person dying of Covid-19, we will have to quarantine them for a period of 14 days. "We will look at all the legal, logical and moral perspectives before considering the dean’s request," Prasad said.

The letter, a copy of which is with TOI, seeks police presence during the last rites of Covid-19 positive patients.

"I request you to personally pay attention and issue instructions to your subordinates so that they undertake the responsibility of performing last rites of patients dying of Covid-19," the letter read.

The dean has also highlighted the concerns surrounding the issue of handing over the infected bodies to their kin. Any kind of mishandling will lead to the relatives getting infected. The letter went on to cite the example of 65-year-old woman’s body being handed over to her family in Bhavsinghpura area and said that it is essential to have police presence during the bandobast. 

Authorities informed that after the woman’s body was handed over to her relatives for last rites. Over 100 people reportedly had attended her funeral. This led to sudden panic in the district and the civic body administration had to work overtime to identify all those attended the funeral, and quarantine them. So far, 12 people have died across the district of Covid-19.


