Police team on lockdown duty attacked in Pilibhit, two cops injured
2020-05-08
PILIBHIT: At least 23 named and around 50 unidentified people, including women, were booked for allegedly attacking a police team that had visited Bhikhampur village under Bilsanda police station in Pilibhit district late on Wednesday. Earlier, two policemen, patrolling the area on lockdown duty, had sustained injuries when they were assaulted by a mob. The villagers, on the contrary, alleged that the policemen had forcibly entered several houses and vandalized their property.

The complainant – Eintgaon police outpost in-charge Manoj Kumar – said that constables Nivesh Sharma, Varun Kumar Som and Arjun were attacked by a mob of villagers in Bhikhampur when they were returning to the police station on Wednesday night after completing their duty in Tanaya and Naugma Ambar villages.

Kumar said the violence started when a drunk army jawan, identified as Sunil Kumar, a resident of Bhikhampur village, accosted constable Arjun and began to abuse him. When the constables retaliated, he called his family members and villager who assaulted the cops with sticks and pelted them with stones.

According to the complainant, when another police team came to their rescue, the violent mob pelted stones. Two constables sustained serious injuries in the attack.

Local BJP MLA Ramsaran Verma of Bisalpur, who visited the village on Thursday morning, claimed that the police team had thrashed many villagers, intruded into their houses and damaged their property.

He said that that he will “take up the matter with higher-ups if Bilsanda police did not lodge an FIR against the erring policemen”.

Station house officer Naresh Kumar said that 23 named and 40- 50 unidentified men and women were booked under sections 148 (rioting armed with deadly weapons), 333 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt to a public servant in the discharge of his duty), 307 (attempt to kill) of IPC and sections 3,4 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, section 51 of the Disaster Management Act and section 7 of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act.

