Pongala today amid Covid-19 vigil
2020-03-09
Thiruvananthapuram: Around 350 volunteers of disaster management authority task force of the district administration, 250 volunteers of green army of city corporation, health department staff and residents associations will observe strict vigil during the Attukal pongala festival on Monday, which is being held a day after five new positive cases of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) were reported in Pathanamthitta district. Attukal pongala, the largest congregation of women in the state, will begin at 10.20am on Monday.

Railways and police have given instructions to its personnel on duty for pongala. Senior police officers have directed police officers on duty to carry extra handkerchiefs and masks while on duty. Rajesh Chandran, senior divisional commercial manager, Thiruvananthapuram division, Southern Railway, has directed the railway staff on duty at Thiruvananthapuram Central station to wear full sleeve clothes and surgical gloves. He said railway employees should take caution as large group of devotees will be arriving at Thiruvananthapuram for pongala.

District collector K Gopalakrishnan has asked devotees to be alert in the wake of fresh Covid-19 cases. The district administration has arranged 23 health teams in city areas. On Sunday, health minister K K Shailaja flagged off five bike first responders along with fourteen 108 ambulances. In order to coordinate activities, a 108 ambulance emergency response centre has been started. This will be coordinated with the support of ham radio operators under Radio Amateur society of Ananthapuri. 

Bike first responders will have an emergency medical technician of Kanivu 108 ambulance and a ham radio operator. They will visit the spot and provide care for needy patients. If further medical care is needed, they would call for ambulance. The service of 108 basic life ambulance will be available in Attukal, Thampanoor, Killipalam, Karamana, Manacaud junction, East Fort, Kamaleswaram junction, Kalady, Power House Road, Konchiravila, Kallooramoodu, Bypass, Manacaud Valiyapally junction, etc.

The district administration has asked residents associations to identify persons who returned from Covid-19-affected countries and also about persons who show symptoms. 

In order to track cases in the future, the district administration will record videos of pongala offering in the city. It will also conduct awareness sessions at railway stations, bus stands, temples, etc.

Deputy collector Anu S Nair said that there was nothing to panic as community spread was not reported. 

The rituals will begin at 10.20am when temple tantri Thekkedathu Kuzhikattillathu Parameswaran Namboothiri hands over the lamp from sanctum sanctorum to chief priest P Eswaran Namboothiri. The chief priest will light the hearth inside the temple and hand it over to the co-priests to light the pandara aduppu, which will mark the beginning for pongala offering. The pongala will be sanctified by 2.10pm.


