Pool testing of 72 Nepalese labourers in Kheri after asymptomatic tests Covid +ve in Bahraich
2020-04-24
Bareilly: After a Nepalese labourer was tested positive for Covid-19 in Bahraich district, local administration in Kheri has decided to send the samples of 72 Nepalese labourers, who are under quarantine at a school in Dhaurahra area of Kheri which is adjacent to Bahraich district, for pool testing. Though all the four Covid-19 positive patients here have recovered, the district administration doesn't want to take any chances and sending regular samples for testing. Earlier, three Covid-19 patients detected here were asymptomatic and the possibility of more asymptomatic carriers still loom large in the district.So, in another step, Dhaurahara SDM Sunandu Sudhakaran has sealed a village, on Thursday, where one of the Covid-19 positive patients from Bahraich, had stayed for nearly a week, earlier in the month. Sixteen people, who reportedly came in contact with him, are also quarantined and their samples would be sent for testing on Friday.Sudhakaran told TOI, “We are conducting pool testing of all the Nepalese labourers to ensure that none of them is infected of Coronavirus. We have also quarantined 16 people who came in contact with a man who recently tested positive in Bahraich. We have sealed the entire village and no one is allowed to move out until the test reports of quarantined people are available.”He further said, “The vigil on the district border has been heightened and we are doing thermal scanning of every person, entering with permission. We are taking every step to keep the area safe.”The swab samples of doctors and other officials, who had come in contact with several migrants in recent past, have also been sent for Covid-19 tests and report is expected by Saturday.Explaining the concept of pool sampling, CMO Manoj Agarwal said, “One pool contains 10 samples. If a pool is tested negative for Covid-19 then it means that all 10 people whose samples were in the pool are tested negative. However, if a pool is tested positive, all 10 people have to undergo individual testing for Covid-19 tests. We can only send 25 samples every day from our district and pool sampling would help us in testing more people.”