Pool testing effective in clearing backlog of samples at BHU lab
2020-04-27
Varanasi: Pool testing has emerged as an effective solution for the problem of delay in conducting tests and increasing backlog of samples of Covid-19 suspected cases at the Banaras Hindu University’s microbiology department laboratory. Now, the lab is all set to test even 400 samples per day. 

The lab is the nodal centre for testing samples being collected from 13 districts of east UP region.

Talking to TOI, BHU laboratory authorities said, “In order to start the pool testing of Covid-19 samples we had started process for sterilisation from April 22. Finally the pool testing process was started in the laboratory from Saturday. For each batch, samples of five persons are being pooled for testing. It saves both, the testing material and time. Due to the same reasons by Saturday night we had cleared all the backlog.”

However, the officials in the district, where numbers of Covid-19 positive cases witnessed an alarming rise in past two days, are still waiting for reports of many samples. District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said that reports of 295 cases are still awaited. 

The lab officials said that district administration has the figures of samples sent to lab till April 24, when the process of sterilising the samples was in process. Till Saturday evening most of the samples had been tested while pool test of remaining samples was in progress, they added.

The lab officials mentioned that till last week, the lab was conducting test of around 350 samples per day against the capacity of testing 300 samples in a day. A large number of samples started accumulating in the lab following random sampling by the officials in all 13 districts leading to a huge backlog of samples to be tested. The random collection of samples was topped after the officials realised the capacity of the laboratory, they added.

Due to the same reasons, even after clearing tests of over 350 samples per day the samples to be tested remained above 400, they said. To clear this backlog, the man power in the lab was enhanced massively and on April 24 about 600 samples were tested in a day. 

Around 2,408 samples were tested between April 20 and 25. Since the beginning of Covid-19 test at BHU lab in March first week till April 19 as many as 3,251 samples had been tested. While on Sunday afternoon this figure had reached to 5,659, said the lab officials.


