Poor will suffer if private hospitals treat Covid-19 patients: Telangana  minister
2020-05-22
HYDERABAD: A day after the Telangana high court said that private labs should be given an opportunity to test coronavirus suspects and treat patients, health minister Eatala Rajender said that poor people will be in trouble if private hospitals are permitted to treat coronavirus patients. 

Speaking to media after inaugurating a mobile ICU clinic for Covid-19 patients, the minister said that contact tracing plays a crucial role in the containment and treatment of coronavirus. “ Private hospitals cannot take up such things but a decision on allowing the tests and treatment for the virus will be taken in view of the high court order in the coming days,” he said. 

He pointed out that the state government is of the view that indiscriminate tests are not good and, therefore, was working in that direction but under the guidelines of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) norms for testing. He denied allegations that the state government is not doing enough tests. “We are acting in the most scientific manner and for that reason the death rate in the state is much less in comparison to other states in the country and also developed countries,” he argued.

Meanwhile, close to 300 private hospitals in the state, mostly in the city, have the required infrastructure to treat Covid-19 patients. ICMR had specified the guidelines with special ventilation wards in hospitals. While most hospitals are ready to treat patients, they are seeking further guidelines on the same.

The private hospitals also wanted permission for testing. Currently if a suspected patient comes, the private hospitals are taking their swabs and sending them for testing in NIMS Hyderabad. 

Few days back, the medical and health department had given guidelines to private hospitals on how to run regular operations. The guidelines include treatment for Covid-19 patients in hospitals which have ventilation facility.


