Port, VCT step up to deal with coronavirus threat
2020-02-01
Visakhapatnam: After the first coronavirus case in the country was reported in Kerala, arrangements inside the Visakhapatnam Container Terminal (VCT) where international shipping lines load and offload their consignments have been stepped up, with immigration officials not allowing any crew members to disembark from ships.

“Immigration officials are not granting shore permission for the crew members. No crew member is allowed to get down from the ships,” a senior VCT official told TOI.

Around 25 to 30 ships dock at the VCT berths every month. At least 75 per cent of the vessels are from east and north Asian countries.

“We are also not allowing any of our officials to enter the ship. Only one official is allowed to enter with the load plan. But as per the doctor’s advice he is not allowed to touch anything on board, nor is he even allowed to shake hands with crew members,” the official added.

The VCT had organised a workshop on coronavirus on Thursday under Dr KVV Vijaya Kumar, superintendent of Chest and Communicable Diseases Hospital, Visakhapatnam. As per the doctor’s advice, all employees at VCT are using N95 masks while on duty. 

Meanwhile, the Visakhapatnam Port Trust has also initiated measures to fight the disease at the port area under the supervision of port health officer (PHO) Amit Gayan. 

Medical staff at the port trust have been provided with 500 N95 masks, 20 hand sanitisers, 500 sets of disposable gloves, five sets of disposable full-length body gowns and a thermoflash hand gun.

“Recently, a vessel ‘Fortune Sun’, carrying 21 Chinese crew members docked in Vizag Port. Only after carrying out all mandatory examinations by the PHO did we permit port officials to enter the vessel. We are prepared to handle the situation,” said a port official.

Port officials have also made it mandatory for themaster of the ship or vessel to give a health declaration for its entire crew every day. Any symptom of ill-health has to be brought to the notice of the PHO or port authority immediately and any suspicious case will be shifted to the isolation ward at the Infections Diseases Hospital (IDH) at Pedda Waltair.


