Port lens on coronavirus at Kolkata, Haldia, Budge Budge
2020-01-30
KOLKATA: With new cases of coronavirus being reported in China every day, port officials in Kolkata, Haldia and Budge Budge have started checking incoming foreign vessels before they are allowed to berth. This was in accordance with the instructions from the ministries of shipping and health, an official confirmed. 


While three ships entering the Kolkata Dock System (KDS) have been scanned, all 25 crew members of a cargo vessel to Haldia Dock Complex (HDC) have been tested. “All incoming foreign vessels will be screened before berthing. Paramedics and other port staff with hand-held thermal scanners are screening 100% officers and crew members. Shore-leave passes are being issued to officers and crew members on-board the vessel, only if they do not show any coronavirus symptom. The exercise will continue in Kolkata, Haldia and Budge Budge till further instructions arrive,” a Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust (SPMPT) official said. 

Documents of ships are being checked to find their last ports of call and greater emphasis is being laid on vessels visiting China or countries, where the virus have been detected. Medical staff are paying more attention to Chinese-origin crew, who have visited home recently. Ten infrared thermal scanners have been procured, five each for KDS and HDC. 

“We are holding sensitization and training programmes for all stakeholders . People are cooperating and shippers have also been told how the vessels will need to be checked before berthing. Our SOP and advisory have been displayed on our (KoPT) website. Most of the foreign ships entering the ports of Kolkata and Haldia travel from Singapore, Port Kelang, Colombo and countries in South East Asia. If any suspected case is detected, the ministry or health will be alerted and quarantine protocol will be followed,” the official added. 

The three ships scanned at KDS are MCP Amsterdam (16 crew members), Sinaar Pomalaa (17) and Kota Tabah (21). At HDC, 25 crew members of the MV PACIFIC AWARD has been completed.

