Maharashtra: Posers on extension of Covid-19 impact period in realty sector
2020-05-21
PUNE: The Mumbai Grahak Panchayat has sought modification of the Maharashtra Real Estate Regulatory Authority’s (MahaRERA) order extending the Covid-19 impact period to September 14 from the earlier March 14 as force majeure under the provisions of the Real Estate Regulation and Development Act.


The consumer protection organisation representatives have reached out to the authority stating that “force majeure” should not be mistaken with blanket amnesty scheme for defaulting builders. Shirish Deshpande, the chairman of Mumbai Grahak Panchayat (MGP), told TOI on Wednesday that the MahaRERA order of May 18 giving concessions to builders might be legally unsustainable.

The force majeure clause provides temporary reprieve from performing obligations under a contract.

MahaRERA secretary Vasant Prabhu on Monday issued an order stating that the pandemic and nationwide lockdown had triggered a reverse migration of workers, breaking the supply chain of construction material and impacting construction activities. It stated, “The possession dates mentioned in a registered agreement for sale should be deemed to be extended till the force majeure period was over. The authority said any refund due during the force majeure period would be allowed to be executed within a month after the force majeure period ended. Similarly, any amount to be recovered under Section 40 of RERA should be recovered after the force majeure period was over, the circular stated.

Deshpande said, “There is no doubt that Covid-19 pandemic is a force majeure and MahaRERA is fully justified in automatically extending the validity period of registration of projects by six months, up to September 2020. The extension of the date of possession in the lockdown period by six months is also understandable. But hundreds of real estate projects were virtually at a standstill before March 22, 2020.”

The Mumbai Grahak Panchayat stated that these projects were at standstill not because of lockdown but because of builders’ own failures. It would make a representation to take necessary corrective steps so that citizens did not suffer.


