Positivity, sleep, food & treatment can help you beat virus, says Covid-19 survivor
2020-04-26
BHUBANESWAR: Debasis Srichandan is the first in the state to have tested positive for Covid-19, a tag he would quickly like to forget because of the immense discomfort it brought forth over a span of two-three days.

The 30-year-old from Badagada locality in Bhubaneswar had been in Italy, working in a research programme on machine learning at the University of Milan. He reached Delhi on March 6 and stayed at a guest house before reaching Bhubaneswar on March 12 evening on the Rajdhani Express. When his symptoms started to show, Srichandan visited Capital Hospital on March 14 and was kept there in isolation.

“I got to know about the test results on the same night. I could not understand what will happen next. I was scared of the virus. I was worried for my father because he had come in contact with me. I told everything to the doctors and the police about my journey and contact details,” said Srichandan, who was discharged from Capital Hospital on April 4. “On the night of March 15, I got high fever. The colour of my tongue turned white and I could not feel the taste of the food that I was eating. The doctor prescribed me liquid food,” he said.

But more than the lack of taste and the fever, it was the body pain that Srichandan found difficult to handle. “The joint pain and headache were unbearable for two consecutive days,” he added. However, he did not cough or sneeze and had no problem in breathing. The pain subsided after two days and he started feeling better. “As I did not show any symptoms till April 1, the doctors there tested me twice and I was allowed to leave on April 4,” Srichandan said. During his time in the hospital, he tried meditation and pranayam and that gave him lot of mental strength. “I was taking normal diet and watching videos on my mobile phone on Lord Jagannath and spiritualism. I also watched some films, including the Rajesh Khanna-starrer Anand,” he added. He was taking hot water and vitamin supplements along with other medicines in the hospital. “I am really grateful to the doctors and hospital staff for taking care of me,” he said.

