Positive news! Sion Hospital delivers over 100 healthy babies of Covid-19 moms
2020-05-14
MUMBAI: In a heartening feat, by Wednesday, civic-run Sion Hospital had delivered babies of over 100 Covid-19 positive women, a majority them from the city’s high-risk or containment areas. What made it more special is that there was not a single case of mother-to-child transmission of the infection.


Though not a dedicated Covid-19 facility for child births, the hospital, which has traditionally handled the highest load of deliveries among civic hospitals, continued to see its usual number of pregnant patients from Dharavi, Mankhurd and Govandi. Around three weeks ago, the gynaecology department created separate wards for Covid-19 patients, and began delivering wearing PPE suits. By Wednesday, the number of deliveries touched 103, of which 55 were done through C-Section and 48 were normal.

“We were lucky to have most mothers coming in a stable condition. As most are young, they are largely asymptomatic or have mild symptoms. All have been allowed to breastfeed their babies wearing a mask,” said Dr Arun Nayak, head of gynaecology at Sion. 

While there were no cases of in-utero transmission—from mother’s womb to baby—three babies tested positive when their swabs were sent. “They subsequently tested negative,” said a doctor, adding those could have been false negatives or the babies might have contracted the virus after birth. “All babies are doing fine now,” said Dr Nayak.

On the other hand, there have been three maternal deaths and five abortions. “Those who died had comorbid conditions,” said Dr Nayak. A 30-year-old woman, who died on Tuesday, had pregnancy-induced hypertension and liver failure. The hospital said not a single healthcare worker involved in deliveries has been infected. The operation theatres are swiftly disinfected while the doctors replace their sterile gowns and gloves before every delivery with new ones.

On the other side of the city, B Y L Nair Hospital in Mumbai Central, a designated facility for Covid-19 positive women, too, has carried out 69 deliveries. Here, too, none of the babies have tested positive. Dr Ganesh Shinde, who heads the department, said they have managed to carry out more deliveries normally. “Covid-19 infection is not an indication for C-Section. We use it only where it’s indicated,” he said, adding there haven’t been many complicated cases.

Dr Sushma Malik, head of paediatrics at Nair, said babies should be allowed to breastfeed unless mothers are serious. The hospitals have adopted a strict no visitor policy. A staffer, donning PPE, runs down and informs the waiting family of a birth. “Only a mother is allowed to hold a baby,” said a doctor.

