‘Post lockdown, almost 80% people would have mild Covid-19 infection’
2020-05-26
Professor of Pathology Department of AIIMS, Nagpur, Dr Rasika Gadkari is a life member of Indian Association of Pathologists and Microbiologists. Cytology, cancer and hemato-oncology are her fields of expertise. While speaking with TOI, she elaborated on various aspects of Covid-19, its confirmatory molecular test and the status of disease post lockdown.

Q. Why novel coronavirus is dangerous? Will it infect more people post lockdown? 

A. It is a new virus and our population is still not fully exposed to it. When a new virus comes, a large number of persons can get infected within a short period of time. Post lockdown, almost 80% people would have a mild disease due to it. A small percentage of those infected by the virus can die. Most of the deaths so far have been among old and ailing people but some young people can die too. Ours being a country with a huge population, even a small per cent of death amounts to crores of people. Due to this high infectivity and lethal potential, novel coronavirus is to be feared.

Q. Should we all get tested for Covid-19?

A. Confirmatory test for Covid-19 is an expensive molecular test. Testing everyone will be wasting our resources. ICMR testing guidelines are becoming more inclusive now. More number of people will get tested as more labs are being set up but not everyone needs to get tested. 

Q. Viruses are so small and cannot survive unless they infect the host. How does the infection occur?

A. The virus can enter your body when you bring your hand close to the nose or breathe in the air containing the virus. If we use mask, wash hands frequently and keep safe distance, the risk of virus reaching our airways is reduced. Each virus has its own way to attach to a cell. For Covid-19, it’s a receptor called ACE-2. Once virus latches to a cell, it’s taken inside the cell. It behaves as a bad guest and uses entire cell resources for its own growth and proliferation. 

Q. Why the disease is mild in some and severe in others?

A. Age is very important factor in Covid-19. Severe disease is also seen in those suffering from diabetes mellitus, high BP, with history of heart attack and many other diseases. For most of young and healthy, it’s a mild disease with cough and fever like any other flu like illness. If our immune response is good and viral load is less, the virus is eliminated. Any imbalance between immune response and number of viral copies in body can cause severe disease, especially in old and diseased. An excessive immune response can also cause severe illness.

Q. Why do patients need ventilators?

A. Most patients do not need ventilators or ICU admission. In case of severe disease, in small number of cases the patient is unable to breathe and amount of available oxygen in blood is very low. This is due to damage to part of lung where oxygenation occurs or due to multiple clots in blood, reducing blood coming to lung. Ventilators provide mechanical assistance to breathing and give more oxygen so that person lives and recovers. In Covid-19, currently low pressure oxygen therapy is advised.


