Post-lockdown rules: Auto union seeks fare hike
2020-05-15
Bareilly: The auto drivers’ union in the city has declared a fare hike, to minimum Rs 20 per passenger, after the transport department and district administration announced that in case the state decides to allow public transport to operate after lockdown is relaxed, auto-rickshaws and tempos can carry only two passengers besides the driver, in order to maintain social distancing. 

Under the banner of Auto-rickshaw Drivers’ Welfare Society, the auto-rickshaw union has requested district administration and regional transport department to permit operations of public transport vehicles in the city, also saying they will be charging passengers extra to maintain physical distancing. Ordinarily, auto-rickshaws carry several times more than the three passengers they are provisioned for. 

President of the drivers’ union, Pankaj Kumar, said, “Ever since lockdown was enforced, operation of public transport vehicles like auto-rickshaws and tempos has been restricted. Drivers, owners and other people involved in the running of these vehicles have been dealing with financial crisis for two months since then. We’ve requested authorities to grant us permission to operate autos and tempos, so that we can earn our livelihood. And since social distancing norms have to be mandatorily followed in public transport, we’re planning to raise the fare.” 

Kumar added, “During normal days, 4-6 people commute in auto-rickshaws, while tempos accommodate up to 8-10 passengers. However, directions have been issued to ferry only 2-3 people now as precaution against infection spread. This will take a toll on our earnings. Thus, we’re planning to increase the fare. We’re awaiting approval for the same and will also meet Bareilly DM Nitish Kumar regarding this.” 

Speaking to TOI, senior ARTO (Bareilly) R P Singh said, “As of now, public transport is restricted in the city, and shall not be permitted till we get directions from the administration. Things will get clearer post-Lockdown III. Fare hike too hasn’t been finalised yet.”

On Wednesday, union members made changes in one auto-rickshaw by placing a wooden plank as partition, to ensure social distancing. It was displayed for approval to divisional commissioner Ranvir Prasad at the commissioner’s office in Civil Lines.


