Postpone marriages, other social functions to prevent coronavirus outbreak: Kerala health minister
2020-02-01
THRISSUR: A day after a female student who had returned from Wuhan tested positive for novel coronavirus (nCoV), health minister KK Shailaja asked families of those who have returned from China and other coronavirus-hit regions and currently under home quarantine to postpone marriages and other social functions to prevent possible outbreak of the disease.

“Relatives of those under home quarantine after returning from China and other coronavirus-affected countries must postpone marriages and other social functions in their families for a period of 28 days. Those family members who had direct contact with the returnees must also remain in their homes for the period,” said the minister.

“The health department officials will provide all assistance to these people in their homes,” said the minister.

A high-level meeting was convened by the health minister at Thrissur collectorate on Friday to review the situation.

The health department shifted the girl from General Hospital to Thrissur Medical College Hospital on Friday morning.

On Friday morning, the minister called a meeting of private hospital authorities and IMA members and then another high-level all department meeting at collectorate. 

Isolation wards have been set up in major private hospitals and all facilities are in place, said the minister. 

“Training will be provided to all department heads to manage the situation. None should spread panic. A control room has already opened for monitoring the special situation in the district,” she said.

“The private hospitals should inform the health department if any person comes to their hospitals with symptoms of nCoV infection,” she said.

“The government has already arranged facilities to screening the people coming from nCoV-affected countries at international airports,” said Shailaja.

A total of 125 people are under observation in Thrissur district and 15 have been admitted in isolation wards, 12 in medical college and 3 in general hospital. A total of 110 people continue to be in home quarantine, said Shailaja later during a news conference.

2 classmates of student with nCoV in isolation ward

Alappuzha: Alappuzha Medical College Hospital sources have said that two persons had been admitted to the isolation ward of the hospital. “The admitted students were classmates of the student, who tested positive for nCoV in Thrissur,” sources said. 

“Their body fluid samples have been sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune and we hope that the results will be received soon. Their condition is stable, ” said an official from the MCH.

