Potato growers in north Bengal hit hard by lockdown
2020-03-28
Jalpaiguri/Hooghly: The lockdown has hit the late potato harvest in north Bengal’s six districts, spelling doom for small growers. Labourers aren’t coming to the fields to collect the tuber and there are few vehicles in the local market.

Trucks from outside were blocked by locals in Cooch Behar’ Haldibari wholesale market a few days ago over the virus fear. Some labourers are not stepping out of home while others say police aren’t allowing more than seven labourers on one bigha when the minimum requirement is 10-12.

Dinesh Burman of Mandalghat, who had taken loans for potato farming on 12 bighas, said: “I couldn’t take the yield to the market. Potatoes are lying on the field.” He pointed out cultivatation on one bigha costs Rs 17,000-18,000. Except for Dhupguri wholesale market, the scene is similar in Falakata, Mekhliganj, Belakoba and Moynaguri.

“A total of 25 lakh metric tonnes of potato have been produced in north Bengal’s six districts. In Jalpaiguri, the total acreage is 30,000 hectares of which 15,000 are spread across Dhupguri block,” an agriculture department official said. “There are only 43 cold storages in north Bengal and the storage capacity is only 531,094 metric tons.” This makes storage and marketing of the late tuber dependent on traders from south Bengal. The latter have stopped coming, though chief minister Mamata Banerjee has addressed some of the transportation problems on Friday. 

Farmers want the government to procure part of the produce for midday meals and ration, and distribute them to the poor. “We aren’t getting labourers. Even if we get some, there is no transport to market the yield. Meanwhile, potato is selling at Rs 18 a kilo on the Jalpaiguri market,” trader Debashis Chakraborty said.

The matter has been referred to the task force set up to remove commodity transport bottlenecks. “We are trying to contact north Bengal’s potato farmers. We will soon send trucks to some of these blocks and load the produce for the city market. We will load potatoes on the field, sort them and market them through the 140 Sufal Bangla stalls spread across the state,” the CM’s agriculture adviser Pradip Mazumdar said after the task force meeting on Friday.


