Coronavirus in Mysuru: Poultry farmers in distress as no takers for chicken, egg
2020-03-19
MYSURU: Poultry farmers, who were already reeling under a slump due to coronavirus scare, are now staring at a bleak future as chicken sales have nosedived after the outbreak of bird flu in the district.


The prices of chicken and eggs have crashed following a complete ban on movement of poultry products from Karnataka to Kerala. It further fell in the domestic market after people desisted from consuming chicken at hotels, roadside eateries and at their homes due to bird flu outbreak.

The roadside eateries and kebab stalls that sell non veg-food are also on a sticky wicket as consumers are keeping a distance due to coronavirus and bird flu scare.

The price of chicken, which was Rs 150 per kg some 15 days ago, is now available for Rs 40 and 60 per kg. The price of egg has also come down to Rs 2.9 from Rs 5. Over 20 lakh eggs and tonnes of chicken produced by over 100 big and small producers in the district remain unsold resulting in a huge loss to the poultry layer farmers, said sources in the animal husbandry department.

The district has over 100 poultry units, both broiler and layer farms. These are concentrated on roads connecting Gaddige, Bogadhi, Hunsur, Nanjangud and H D Kote, Bannur and T Narasipur. Major egg suppliers like Mangaluru Coastal Broiler Supplies, Suguna, Venkateshwara and others have suffered huge losses due to the bird flu scare.

“Last year, the poultry farmers suffered losses due to the rise in prices of poultry feeds. However, this year, the coronavirus scare and bird flu have forced them to shut down their business after suffering heavy loss. The cost of production per egg is nearly Rs 3.7. Now, the poultry producers are forced to sell them at a throwaway price of Rs 2.9, and that too with hardly any buyers. What is worrying the layer farmers is that the price of egg is likely to come down further once eggs from Tamil Nadu’s Namakkal district arrives in city market,” said Lakshmikanth, one of the layer poultry producer on Nanjangud Road.

Another poultry producer from Chowdenahalli village in Periyapatna taluk, Lokesh, said both small and big poultry have suffered an unprecedented blow due to the virus and bird flu scare. The price of one kilo broiler chicken has come down to Rs 8. “Even if we are ready to sell chicken at throwaway prices, people are not coming forward to buy as most of the chicken and egg stalls have been issued closure order by municipal bodies both in neighbouring Kerala and several districts of Karnataka,” he said. 

Mysuru district poultry producers, who used to supply tonnes of chicken, are now worried about their future. The poultry producers, including both small and big ones, rear nearly 20 lakh chickens in the district.

“The cost of production of broiler chicken comes to nearly Rs 100 per kilo including Rs 19 to buy a chick, poultry shed, power, vaccination and other costs but there are no takers due to the outbreak even if we are ready to sell in distress,” said Lokesh.

