Poultry farms feel heat of lockdown
2020-03-29
Coimbatore: Vincent, who owns a poultry farm that has more than 7,000 birds near Sathyamangalam, says he has lost 200 chicks in the last one week. He blames it on underfeeding as he has not received fresh feed for the last eight days, despite it being classified an essential commodity. Now, he is forced to ration the three bags of feed left.

Like the 30,000 poultry farm owners in Coimbatore, Vincent hopes the chief minister’s announcement on no restriction on transport of cattle, poultry, fish, eggs and cattle feed will give some relief. 

Layer poultry (egg laying birds) farmers in Namakkal were also not receiving feed till Friday, says president of the Tamil Nadu Poultry Farmers Association R Nallathambi. "Trucks carrying oilseed cakes and rice husks could reach here after repeated requests. But it meets only 30% of our requirement. We are struggling without soya cakes that come from Karnataka via Hosur and maize and small millets like jowar and bajra that come from Mysore via Dimbam," he says.

Feed shortage has led to many poultry farmers starving their birds, Nallathambi says. "Production in the poultry cluster has fallen by 50 lakh eggs. We have 4.5 crore to five crore birds and used to produce four crore eggs a day. But now we are sending only 3.5 crore eggs. As we can’t even sell our birds to markets in Kerala and Karnataka, we have no choice but to see them starve."

“We could bring vehicles carrying rice husk and oilseeds only after pleading to district collectors and submitting the vehicle numbers,” says Nallathambi.

Though the collectors and animal husbandry department officials have slotted livestock feed under ‘essential commodities’ and promised not to hamper movement, revenue officials and police personnel on the roads have not received the instructions, says general manager of Suguna Foods Ravindhara Babu. “So, trucks carrying feed from Udumalpet to other districts often get stopped and officials harass the drivers. Due to this, drivers are afraid to come for work, hampering feed distribution.”

Meanwhile, severe drop in business has affected the broiler chicken farms in the Palladam region. There are 26,000 broiler chicken farms in Palladam alone.

"We are able to send only 30% of our stock though people are now consuming chicken confidently. This is because all chicken shops are closed,” says Saadhai Kannan of the Broiler Chicken Farmers Association in Palladam. “As we can’t send the birds to markets, they are just consuming feed and getting fat. Some weigh three kilograms.”

“All these will eventually affect our ability to buy feed and pay our employees,” Kannan adds.

Local administration minister S P Velumani on Saturday reiterated that vehicles carrying livestock feed will not be stopped. Poultry farmers hope police will listen to the minister.


