Poverty, starvation force the lockdown march home
2020-05-15
SURAT: It has now become a regular sight – either groups of migrant workers resting under trees or under flyover bridges on the National Highways in south Gujarat, or some walking on relentlessly despite the sun scorching over their heads. 

One such group of 12 was spotted resting under the flyover at Kadodara crossroad on Thursday afternoon. While the children were sleeping on the luggage, the elders were repairing their broken slippers. Their exasperation was writ large on their tired faces and nobody was in any mood to talk to anyone, not even among themselves.

After much coaxing, one member relented and said: “Why are we walking? Instead of asking us this silly question, why don’t you go and ask the government or the business owners in Surat why they have rendered us homeless and starving for the past 15 days?” 

Ajit Nishad, 30, who was employed in an embroidery unit, is tired of not only walking home along with his wife Kiran and their two minor daughters Anshu, 4 and Anshika, 1 and carrying whatever meagre belongings they had, but also of the city’s heartless rejection of its migrant population.

The family was part of a group that started walking from Godadara in city in search of some transport. “We did not get train tickets despite paying money. Those who paid more than the regular charges got tickets despite submitting their forms late. We cannot and so walk we must,” said Kallu Nishad, another 30-year-old migrant who said they were trying for some mini truck to hitch a ride or are prepared to walk all the way to Prayagraj in Uttar Pradesh. 

Another similar group on the national highway 48 comprised about 11 young employees of embroidery unit from Pandesara who too were on the lookout for some transportation back to their home in Ambedkar Nagar district in UP. “Each of us have paid Rs 1,000 to an agent for train ticket but did not get any. We lost our money as well as the agent now refuses to take our calls,” said Brijesh Gupta, a member of the group who said that they had no option but to walk home in desperation amid joblessness, poverty and near starvation for the past 10 days.

“We are planning to reach Bihar taking the railway track route. We are not sure when we will reach but the hazardous journey is much better than our present condition in the city,” said Bhola Mandal, another migrant who started walking from Varachha with 10 friends.


