PPE crucial to protect frontline workers in fight against Covid-19: Medical experts and scientists
2020-05-02
PUNE: Medical professionals and scientists have come forward to educate Indian citizens about the essential plastic items to prevent the further spread of Covid-19 virus, while ensuring their safe disposal and recycling/treatment afterwards. 

KK Aggarwal, former president of Indian Medical Association and president of Confederation of Medical Associations of Asia and Oceania said, “To protect the medical workers from Covid-19 infection, especially in a hospital setting, we need protective gear which are made from an impermeable and non-porous material, such as plastics. Hence, the currently used masks, gloves, protective shield for eyes/face, head and shoe cover, apron etc. are made from plastics. Impermeable material stops virus containing droplets from touching the skin and the virus stays on the outer surface of the protective gear. It is also essential that healthcare workers change their personal protective equipment in every 8 hours, and regularly decontaminate the hospital. Currently, 40 lakh health workers are fighting against the Covid-19. We need 20-25 lakh protective equipment every day to protect the workers from the infection.” 

Ashok K Agarwal, president– Indian Association for Hospital Waste Management and former Dean, IIHMR, New Delhi said, “Improper handling and disposal of medical waste can put healthcare workers at a higher risk of infection. All biomedical waste needs to be disposed in colour-coded categories - yellow, red, white and blue – as per the guidelines stipulated in the Biomedical Waste Management Rules 2016 and by the Centre of Pollution Control Board. These guidelines must be followed studiously to contain the Covid-19 infection. The government should ensure the availability of plastic garbage/disposal bags in hospitals, quarantined and general households, so the waste can be collected and treated (medical waste) or recycled (general waste).” 

Vijay Habbu, adjunct professor from Institute of Chemical Technology said, “The protective equipments such as masks, gloves, PPEs and plastic bags/bottles used in delivering essentials such as grains, oil, water etc. must not be carelessly thrown away. They must be properly disposed so they can be treated/recycled. The earth is healing itself; it is an ideal time to cut down on non-ecofriendly human practices such as littering and utilize this time to strengthen the plastic waste management ecosystem in our country. Scientifically, all types of plastic products/equipments are recyclable as every Indian citizen must know this fact. The responsibility to ensure proper disposal of waste and source segregation is on every Indian citizen. It will prevent the highly hazardous practice of waste dumping in landfills/waste bodies and help in keeping our earth clean and green.”

