Pragati Maidan OC, wife test Covid positive
2020-05-04
KOLKATA: The officer-in-charge of Pragati Maidan police station and his wife tested positive for Covid-19. The couple resides at the Kolkata Police quarters in Bowbazar and the building, where they live, has been disinfected by Kolkata Municipal Corporation on Sunday.

After the former OC of Garden Reach, he has become the second officer to be diagnosed with the disease. Police sources said he has been admitted to a Covid hospital off EM Bypass near Ruby Crossing. Besides, the OC becomes the eight confirmed Covid case among cops in Kolkata and Howrah.


TimesViewCops are one of the groups on the front-line of the city's fight against this new virus. Emergency services have to go on but every precaution should be taken to protect the foot soldiers.
The big relief, however, was that the officer’s condition was stable and he had no fever till Sunday evening. “He had last come to the police station on Wednesday. On Thursday, he and his wife had undergone the mandatory test, the results of which came on Saturday. Since he showed only mild symptoms during his quarantine period, he had wanted to stay home following the recent government orders. After his test result was positive, senior officers ensured that he got admitted to the private hospital,” said a police officer.

According to sources, the commissioner of police Anuj Sharma has already spoken to him. “He appeared to be positive and given his mild symptoms, he was confident to return home soon,” said an IPS officer.

Disinfection drives were also carried out at the Pragati Maidan police station and Tiljala traffic guards along with Hare Street police station located close to the couple’s residence. Following the protocol, when the Garden Reach OC had taken ill, his driver and guard were quarantined.

Senior officers are in touch with ACMOH to ascertain whether anyone else at the Pragati Maidan police station will have to be sent in quarantine. Sharma is likely to visit the police station soon to boost the morale of the force.

As the chief of the Pragati Maidan police station, he was directly responsible for arranging the smooth cremation of Covid patients at Dhapa. He was also in charge of a portion of the Hathgacchi area where a couple of people had shown Covid-like symptoms. Meanwhile, cops at Lalbazar said they have introduced several new measures to tackle the Covid challenge in the city. 


