Prayagraj back on Covid-19 radar as new cases surface
2020-04-25
Prayagraj: Less than a week after Prayagraj was declared a ‘green zone’, three new novel coronavirus cases — two from Shankargarh and one from Shivkuti — were reported from the district on Friday.

Of these patients, two were daily wagers who had returned from Mumbai in Maharashtra three days back and the other was a youth who travelled along with a novel coronavirus patient in a train.

The three were admitted to Covid-19 Level One Hospital in Kotwa for treatment.

Additional chief medical officer and nodal officer Dr Rishi Sahai said, “The two labourers were aged about 17 and 20 years and were native to Kapari in Shankargarh. The third patient is a 37-year-old youth from Shankarghat in Shivkuti area.”

Sahai said that the two labourers had returned from Mumbai and their swab samples were collected by a team of health department officials on Wednesday. The two tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday. “The two labourers had started for Prayagraj on April 19 to attend the funeral of their father and had been issued e-passes for the purpose,” the ACMO added.

Health department officials are now collecting samples of the two labourers’ family members for testing. 

Sahai said that youth from Shivkuti had travelled in a train coach along with a Covid-19 patient. His co-traveller later tested Covid-19 positive in Varanasi. Later, Varanasi SSP alerted Prayagraj police.

Acting on the inputs, a team of health department officials had collected the youth’s swab sample on Thursday and he was diagnosed with the disease on Friday. 

“Health department has declared Shankarghat and Kapari in Shankargarh as novel coronavirus hotspots. The area around one-kilometre radius of Shankarghat and three-kilometre radius area in Kapari (Shankargarh) has been sealed. Health department teams are going door-to-door to check for suspected cases,” he added.

Till last week, nine novel coronavirus cases were reported from districts comprising Prayagraj range — one from Prayagraj, six from Pratapgarh and two from Kaushambi. Of these, seven were linked to the Tablighi Jamaat event. The lone Covid-19 patient from Prayagraj was an Indonesian national who had come to the city after attending the Delhi event in March. All the patients had recovered. 


