Prayagraj: Covid-19 victim’s funeral shifted to ghat after protest
2020-05-07
PRAYAGRAJ: The district administration had to shift a 47-year-old civil engineer’s funeral, who died of Covid-19 (novel coronavirus), from an electronic crematorium to Phaphamu Ghat on Wednesday, following protests from residents of Shankarghat, Teliyarganj and adjoining areas.

Prayagraj reported its first Covid-19 casualty when a Lukerganj-based man, who tested positive for the virus on May 1, died on Tuesday night in Swaroop Rani Nehru Hospital’s isolation ward.

Additional chief medical officer and nodal officer Dr Rishi Sahai said, “ Initially, the victim was to be cremated at the electric cremation in Shankarghat. However, as residents of Shankarghat, Teliyarganj and adjoining areas came to know about the cremation, they started protesting. They were led by a corporator and started pressuring officials to not cremate the man in Shankarghat, as it had been declared a novel coronavirus hotspot.” In April last week, a 37-year-old resident of Shankarghat tested positive for Covid-19. He had travelled along with a patient in a train coach in March first week. He is currently undergoing treatment at Covid-19 Level One Hospital in Kotwa.

“Later, the civil engineer was cremated at Phaphamau Ghat around 2 pm. Apart from administrative, police and health officials, five members of his family were also present there. The cremation was also video-graphed,” said Sahai.

After being diagnosed with the disease on May 1, the engineer was initially admitted to Covid-19 Level One Hospital and was later shifted to SRN Hospital on May 3.

Health department officials said that the patient was also suffering from hypertension and he was put on ventilator support after his condition deteriorated on Tuesday.

His wife, mother in -law and two other family members also tested Covid-19 positive last week. Doctors said that the man was responding to the treatment, but his condition became critical late Tuesday night.

His wife (37 years) was first taken to the special hospital set up for Covid-19 patients in Kotwa and was later shifted to SRN Hospital’s isolation ward. Doctors said her condition was stable.

Meanwhile, the locality where the man lived in Lukerganj was sealed by the district administration and officials are looking for suspected cases.

