Covid-19 in Maharashtra: Prayers, discourses move online
2020-03-18
For the first time in history, the largest temples in Maharashtra closed for public darshan indefinitely from Tuesday due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Shirdi Sai temple, Tuljabhavani in Osmanabad and Shani Shingnapur in Ahmednagar shut. Some invited devotees to watch live prayers online on the temple app or website. In Mumbai, Siddhivinayak and Babulnath temples did likewise.


Siddhivinayak chairman Aadesh Bandekar said devotees can watch all aartis live from morning till the night shejarti on their web site.

In a rare move, lectures held in upashreyas—lecture halls and residences for Jain monks—have been called off. The upcoming holy week of Ayambil from March 31 till April 8, which sees the community eat at temple-kitchens, has been cancelled. Instead, groups of neighbours will take turns to cook food sans oil and masalas. “Police closed some upashreyas where lectures were still on,” said Babulal Jain, editor of the All India Jain Chaturmas Suchi. Some monks and Jain gurus have moved online. Shrimad Rajchandra Mission streamed a weekly lecture on Youtube.

 St Michael's Church in Mahim also suspended public entry to the Wednesday Novena prayer. The prayer will be streamed online. St Peter’s Church, Bandra, streamed the evening mass. Church services are expected to be suspended, with a formal decision likely on Thursday.

Parsi houses of worship began to close on Tuesday. The Seth R N Rustomframna Agiary in Dadar closed at the behest of Matunga police station. Managing trustee Nasha Jassawalla said the boi, a ritual held five times a day for the consecrated fire, and other ceremonies, will continue.

Haji Ali mgmt appeals against overcrowding

To contain the spread of Covid-19, managements of Haji Ali and Makhdoom Mahimi dargahs have appealed to devotees against overcrowding. They have been told not to stay for long at dargahs’ premises and leave as soon as they have performed essential prayers. Meanwhile, Maulana Burhanuddin Qasmi, director of Jogeshwari’s Markazul Maarif Research Centre said local madrassa is shut. 


Nehru Planetarium shut

Nehru Planetarium and Nehru Science Centre, both at Worli, will provisionally shut till March 31. The planetarium gets about 500 visitors a day and the centre 1,000 at this time of the year. Nehru Science Centre director Shivprasad Khened said, “We organized an exhibition about Coronavirus.”

(Inputs by Hemali Chhapia, Bella Jaisinghani, Mohammed Wajihuddin, Srinivas Laxman & V Narayan)


