Pre-operation Covid-19 tests for all general patients illogical, unethical: Experts
2020-05-13
PUNE: Forty-year-old Abhishek, an IT professional from the city, was asked to take a Covid-19 test before a minor kidney stone surgery. He was surprised. 


“I did not have any symptoms. And except for radiating pain, I was absolutely fine,” he said. “But doctors insisted I be tested before surgery. The test cost me Rs 4,500 at a lab; I emerged negative for Covid-19.”



Many private hospitals nationwide are insisting on Covid-19 tests before any surgery or procedure — essential or otherwise. Their decision is despite a directive from the Centre, which told states and hospitals not to make Covid-19 tests compulsory before treatment. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had also asked hospitals to stick to guidelines laid out by the Indian Council of Medical Research. 

The ICMR’s instructions are clear: Test the symptomatic and those who have had contact with lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases. 

Experts TOI spoke to described the practice of mandatory tests before treatment as “illogical” and “unethical”. 

Sanjay Patil, a former president of the Indian Medical Association, said: “Pune is one of the worst-hit districts of the country. So doctors should just look at every patient as someone ‘potentially positive’ and adopt all infection control measures. Insisting that general patients, and those who don’t fit the ICMR criteria, take Covid tests violates ICMR's norms.”

A central argument against mandatory testing is Covid-19’s incubation period — time between exposure and onset of early symptoms. Even if a patient has contracted the infection, he or she is likely to remain illness-free for as many as 14 days, studies show. “A negative test does not completely rule out infection,” said infectious diseases expert Mahesh Lakhe of the Columbia Asia hospital in Pune. “There is always a chance of an electively operated patient with a negative test emerging positive later. There are chances of false-negatives as well.”

A negative test then could bring in a sense of false security among hospital staff. “It’s possible the operating doctors and nurses may drop their guard. We should maintain the highest levels of infection control, irrespective of test results,” Lakhe added. 

But there are hospitals in the city that are insisting on Covid-19 tests before procedures. At Jupiter hospital, authorities confirmed they have made the test a part of the pre-operative protocol. 

“We have included the Covid-19 test, along with the other viral marker tests, for patients getting admitted for any surgery or procedure. This is to ensure that infection is detected at the right time,” a spokesperson for the hospital said. 

Doctors said facilities that are steadfast on test-before-treatment are only concerned about a spread within hospital premises. 

“Hospitals that ask for pre-procedure Covid-19 tests are worried about staff contracting infection. These centres will stop insisting on the test once they have a more mature response to the outbreak,” said Dhananjay Kelkar, the medical director of Deenanath Mangeshkar hospital.

But Kelkar insisted that doctors should not rely on test results for total safety. 

“Negative results could make hospital staff complacent. All patients should instead be treated as asymptomatic carriers and universal Covid-19 precautions should be enforced.”


