Precaution must as Covid-19 situation worsening: Nitin Gadkari
2020-04-08
NAGPUR: Union minister Nitin Gadkari on Tuesday warned that the Covid-19 situation was worsening with the sudden spike in positive cases across the country. “It is the administration’s failure if people fail to stay indoors during lockdown for social distancing. If necessary, lockdown will be extended further,” hinted Gadkari.


He was speaking at the review meeting he convened, after being appointed as an observer by the Centre to review the situation in Maharashtra post the coronavirus outbreak. It was for the first time such meeting in the city. 

He directed all three government hospitals (Government Medical College and Hospital, Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital, and All India Institute of Medical Sciences) to stay prepared for the worst. He said that many developed countries were unable to control the pandemic, which has infected over 13 lakh globally and killed over 72,000 so far. 

During the meet, the Nagpur Member of Parliament (MP) was informed that the coronavirus tests were being conducted at IGGMCH and AIIMS in the city, and now Maharashtra Animal Husbandry and Fisheries University will also start Covid-19 tests.

Gadkari, however, expressed displeasure over limited test kits available in the city and shortage of crucial equipment like ventilators and oxygen cylinders at GMCH, IGGMCH and AIIMS. 

Though the present stock of testing kit is sufficient, however, if the number of Covid-19 patients shoot up, the city will require more testing kits, ventilators, oxygen cylinders, intensive care units and medicines, the MP was informed.

When informed that only the staff working in isolation wards are given personal protective equipment (PPE) kits, Gadkari said all staff working in hospitals treating Covid-19 patients should get protective gear. He also directed the authorities to ensure PPE stock for over a month.

The minister directed deans and directors of all three institutes to improve stock of this essential equipment. He also asked them to ensure ample stock of testing kits of Covid-19 with them. 

The meeting also brought forth the fissures within the local Congress unit and its acrimonious relations with the BJP. Except the leader of opposition in Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC), Tanaji Wanve, none of the Congress leaders attended the meeting. Guardian minister Nitin Raut was conspicuous by his absence, and so was animal husbandry minister Sunil Kedar. 

Mayor Sandip Joshi, MP Vikas Mahatme, BJP legislators Vikas Kumbhare, Krishna Khopde, BJP corporator Pravin Datke, collector Ravindra Thakare, additional divisional commissioner Abhijit Bangar, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe, and GMCH dean Dr Sajal Mitra, Dr Ajau Kevliya, AIIMS’s major general Dr Vibha Datta, deputy director (health) Dr Sanjay Jaiswal, police commissioner BK Upadhyay among others were attended the meeting. 

Gadkari also expressed anguish over the reports of sale of edible oil over and above the printed retail price. He directed the district collector to take strict action against shopkeepers indulging in such a malpractice.

The city MP slammed Dr Patil of Super Specialty Hospital for failing to keep medical equipment in running condition and also cited the example of non-functioning cath lab.

During the meet, the municipal commissioner spoke about the status of Covid-19 patients, suspected people, people in quarantine etc. Gadkari also directed the collector to allow companies or industries to start production if these can ensure social distancing by their employees.

Gadkari also claimed to have provided Rs5 crore from his discretionary fund for distribution of ration to BPL card holders. He also directed the collector to ensure availability of ration to poor who do not possess ration cards.


