Bihar: ‘Precaution best way to avoid coronavirus’
2020-01-26
Surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra, who has been given the responsibility to deal with coronavirus threat in the state, talks to TOI’s Sheezan Nezami about symptoms, precautions and measures being taken by the health department to prevent the spread of this deadly virus. Excerpts:


What is coronavirus?

Not much can be said about this virus as of now. Since its strain has not yet been identified, it is called novel coronavirus. It is being said that the virus originated from seafood market in Wuhan city of China. However, the source of its transmission has still not been confirmed. The first infected person has to be identified to reach the source. If that person is dead, the process of identifying the source will be much more difficult.


Is the state health department ready to prevent the spread of coronavirus?

All districts have been put on alert. Health workers are also being sensitized. Hospitals have been asked to keep an eye on people having symptoms similar to those infected by coronavirus. Teams have been formed in all government medical college and hospitals to collect the blood samples of suspected patients and send the same to virology laboratory in Pune for tests.


What are the symptoms of this virus?

Symptoms are similar to typical viral symptoms, such as high fever, cough and respiratory distress. In a case study of a person who died in China due to this virus, kidney failure was also reported, which means the virus causes organ failure at last stage.


What is the incubation period (duration in which symptoms are visible) of this virus?

This is still not clear. General viruses incubate in two to seven days.


How does the virus spread?

It spreads through coughing and sneezing. Touching the infected person is also dangerous. Even furniture can have the droplets containing the virus. 


Can this be treated?

As of now, there is no anti-viral available for coronavirus. Only symptomatic treatment can be given. Precaution is the best measure to avoid the virus. World Health Organisation has taken note of the virus and started working on it.


How can this virus be avoided?

Though coronavirus has not yet reached India, one should take precautions to stay safe. People should always wash their hands and wear mask. Utensils in which we eat should be clean. 


