Pregnant woman who died at civil hospital tests coronavirus positive
2020-05-06
NASHIK: The 20-year-old pregnant woman, who died within hours of admission to the Nashik civil hospital on May 2, has tested positive for Covid-19, marking the first death in the city due to the contagion and taking the total number of such fatalities in the district to 13, 12 in Malegaon alone. 


District civil surgeon Suresh Jagdale said the woman was eight months pregnant and was suffering from some heart problem and died in less than two hours after being admitted to the hospital. 

“The woman was in a critical condition and was initially taken to the labour room. When her condition started deteriorating, she was shifted to the emergency ward and then to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), where she died,” a senior medical officer of the Nashik civil hospital said.

A statement from the Nashik Municipal Corporation (NMC) said that the woman had come to Nashik from Sinnar for delivery around a month ago.

On April 24, the woman had gone to a civic-run hospital for routine check-up. Since she was suffering from high blood pressure, she was referred to the Vasantrao Pawar Medical College and Hospital for further examination. But she did not go to the hospital and stayed home without any medication or further treatment. 

About a week ago, her brother-in-law, who lived in a containment area in Mumbai and was home quarantined there, managed to reach Nashik to inquire about her health.

On May 2, the woman started experiencing pain and breathlessness, following which she was taken to the civil hospital where she breathed her last.

Soon after it was confirmed that the woman was Covid-19 positive, the NMC sealed the Bajrangwadi area , where the woman lived, and declared it a containment zone.

“The civic health teams are searching the contacts of the deceased woman. It has once again been proven that people from outside Nashik are the cause of spread of Covid-19 in the city,” said a civic official said.

