Pregnant SI prefers Covid-19 duty to maternity leave
2020-04-23
BHUBANESWAR: Any woman in the eighth month of pregnancy would avail maternity leave. But sub-inspector (SI) Mamata Mishra posted in Mayurbhanj district preferred the dangerous Covid-19 duty, winning accolades from different quarters, including DGP Abhay.

“During my Mayurbhanj visit yesterday (Tuesday), I met SI Mamta Mishra. This braveheart in eighth-month of pregnancy insists on working. In view of her health, she is given duty at Betnoti police station and not on road or checkpoint. My compliments to her,” tweeted DGPs Twitter handle on Wednesday.

Mamata’s unwavering commitment to Covid-19 duty is similar to that of scores of other police personnel doing so and hailed as frontline Corona warriors, is akin to healthcare professionals. 

Mamata, who was recruited by Odisha police recently, joined Betnoti police station as her first posting on January 20, 2019. “It was my own decision to discharge Covid-19 lockdown duty, though my seniors and colleagues have been persuading me to avail maternity leave. I am planning to apply for leave after the end of extended lockdown on May 3. For my and baby’s safety and good health, my seniors are not assigning me any arduous duty,” said Mamata, who is not conducting patrolling in vehicles and registering FIRs in police stations. 

Mamata also exhibited tremendous resolve in the crisis situation by taking care of herself. “My husband Bedaprakash Nanda is also a police sub-inspector, posted at Bisoi police station, about 85 km from my police station. He is unable to visit me regularly because of the tight schedule of lockdown duty. I have to take care of myself and my baby. My family members and in-laws are also not able to visit me due to the lockdown,” said Mamata, who belongs to Jajpur district.

Earlier on Monday, DGP Abhay was all praises for two women police personnel in Sundargarh district after the duo postponed their weddings and joined Covid-19 duty. Home guard Tilotama Meher’s wedding was scheduled for April 12 while constable Sunita Adha was supposed to tie the knot on April 25.


