Pregnant, ailing cops withdrawn from strenuous lockdown duty
2020-04-01
Nagpur: City and district police have decided to send the pregnant and ailing cops on leave relieving them from the strenuous round-the-clock duty imposed to enforce Section 144 across the district. Police personnel are playing a crucial role in enforcing the lockdown and compel citizens to remain at home.

City police have relieved the personnel who are undergoing chemotherapy including one traffic cop who was on duty despite suffering from blood cancer till earlier this week. Cops suffering from cancer have been also sent on leave by district police chief IG, range, KMM Prasanna in four districts of Wardha, Bhandara, Chandrapur and Nagpur rural.

District police have gone a step ahead to ensure all cops aged 55 years and above are sent on leave while ones aged 50 years and more were kept on reserve duty to save them from getting infected. 

Dr Sandeep Shinde of police hospital at headquarters informed that a 24-hour helpline and his service were available for assistance related to Corona-like symptoms and related health issues. “We are going through the third phase of the pandemic cycle in which the community spread is the common feature. Hence every precaution is being taken to safeguard the sizeable police force,” he said.

“Cops, especially the pregnant ones, elderly and ailing ones, are susceptible to infection as they are exposed to the masses all the time,” he said.

Dr Shinde has also started visiting the nakabandis across the city to raise awareness among the cops deployed there. “I have told the personnel to avoid touching the barricades repeatedly and also the documents shown to them by the public. They should have meals before leaving home and clean themselves and clothes after returning,” said Shinde who was at Manewada junction on Tuesday to meet the police on duty.

“I have also told them to maintain social distancing and not to go close to the people for checking. They should also stop using sanitizers from unknown persons as it may trigger allergy,” he said.

City police chief BK Upadhyay too is learnt to have now allowed the in-charges of different units to send their personnel on medical leave unlike in the past when doctor’s certificate was a must. 

Despite the health hazards and rising outside temperature, city police showed resilience throughout the day stepping up the checking and seizing activities. City police have taken actions against 3,286 persons on Tuesday which included penalizing 3,148 vehicle owners for violations. In all 11 cases, including one for spreading rumour, were registered against violators. City police also detained 123 people for loitering on the streets. 

In the districts, police have so far taken action against 152 violators starting from March 24. Maximum action was taken by Chandrapur police (67) under SP Maheshwar Reddy.

Police personnel were left in a shock when a message had surfaced that state government had decided to cut salaries of employees to meet corona-related expenses. However, it was short-lived as it was clarified that police, healthcare, and other workers dealing with the crisis were exempted from the cut.


