Pregnant woman with Covid symptoms not admitted by 8 hospitals, dies in ambulance
2020-06-07
NOIDA: A 30-year-old woman in the eighth month of her pregnancy died on Friday evening in an ambulance after eight hospitals either referred her to another facility as she showed symptoms of Covid-19 or cited lack of beds. The woman and her family were on the road for 13 hours when she breathed her last. 


The episode jolted the Noida administration, which ordered a probe on Saturday and, in a subsequent meeting with all hospitals representatives on treatment protocols during Covid-19, instructed them not to turn away any patient from the emergency. Narendra Bhooshan, nodal officer for Covid-19 response in Noida, admitted this was a growing concern.

Neelam Kumari, a resident of Ghaziabad’s Khoda Colony, and her family shuttled from one hospital — first in an auto and then an ambulance — beginning around 6am on Friday.

When she began experiencing labour pain, Neelam’s husband Bijendra, who works in the maintenance department of a media firm, his brother Shailendra Kumar, an auto driver, and his wife Sushma rushed her to ESIC Hospital in Noida’s Sector 24. For this, they used Shailendra’s auto.

Neelam, who worked at a wire manufacturing company, had an ESI card. “ESIC hospital took her in for some time and gave oxygen, and then referred her to the District Hospital in Sector 30. But the staff there didn’t admit her and told us that since we had come from Khoda, which is a containment zone, we should return and get treatment there. They did not even examine her,” Shailendra told TOI.

The family then took Neelam to Shivalik Hospital in Sector-51, which said she was serious and should be taken to a ‘better hospital’, Shailendra claimed. “No referral slip was given,” he added.

Around 11am, Neelam’s family took her to Fortis Noida, but again hit a wall. “The staff said they did not have a vacant bed and a ventilator, and asked us to take her somewhere else as her condition was serious, Shailendra said. They next went to Jaypee Hospital in Sector 128 but could not get her admitted there either. Pointing out that Neelam had Covid-19 symptoms and should be taken to Sharda Hospital or Government Institute of Medical Sciences (GIMS) in Greater Noida, both designated Covid facilities, the family claimed the hospital sent them away.

“We drove to Sharda since it was closer than GIMS. There, we were told she needed to be tested for Covid first. They charged us Rs 4,500 for it, but even before the test, referred her to GIMS, saying they did not have a vacant bed. We tried to call an ambulance through 108 but did not get any. We hired a private ambulance for Rs 5,800 since Neelam required oxygen support and took her to GIMS,” Shailendra told TOI. But GIMS, he added, claimed it did not have vacant beds.

On the brink of losing hope, the family said it took Neelam to Max Hospital in Ghaziabad’s Vaishali, which also allegedly refused admission.

They headed for GIMS again, but by the time they reached, Neelam had expired in the ambulance. “When she did not respond, we asked the staff to at least check whether she was alive. They declared her dead around 7.30pm,” Shailendra said. “What has happened to our family should not happen with anyone else. We will write to the chief minister about this,” Shailendra added.

With the Noida administration initiating an inquiry by ADM (finance and revenue) M N Upadhayay and chief medical officer (CMO) Deepak Ohri, statements of the woman’s family members and some of the hospitals were taken.

Ohri said Neelam had been undergoing treatment for hypertension at Shivalik Hospital for the past four days. She was discharged from the hospital on June 4, and the next morning, she went to ESIC hospital. “From here, she went to multiple places and was not admitted by anyone. A committee has been formed and action will be taken against anyone found guilty,” he said.

Dr Ravi Mohta, owner of Shivalik Hospital, said that they received a call from ESIC hospital enquiring about the history of the patient around 9am on Friday. “She arrived here after one hour and since she required critical care and ventilator support, we asked them to take her to a higher centre (sic). We are a non-Covid hospital and do not have ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) facility. Since the patient was from Khoda and usually the administration does not take patients from Ghaziabad these days, we suggested they take her to Santosh Medical College in Ghaziabad,” he said.

In a statement, Fortis Noida said doctors advised immediate resuscitation to stabilise the patient. “Due to unavailability of room in the ICU isolation ward, she was provided oxygen and nebulization in the waiting area. The husband of the patient was counselled by doctors about the need for transfer to another hospital in an advanced cardiac life support ambulance without any delay. However, he refused resuscitation and ventilation support. He also declined strong medical advice to transfer her to another hospital in an ACLS ambulance. The patient was taken out of our hospital in an auto,” the hospital said.

A spokesperson for Jaypee Hospital said Neelam was referred to GIMS as Covid was suspected and the administration had advised hospitals to send such cases to the designated hospitals. Ajit Kumar, spokesperson for Sharda Hospital, said while the facility is a Covid hospital, all beds are occupied, which is why Neelam was sent to GIMS. “The hospital is under the district administration now,” he said.

A Max Vaishali spokesperson said as per their records, no such patient was registered in their emergency.

Brigadier Rakesh Gupta (retired), director of GIMS, said, “The patient’s attendant had come in the evening seeking admission, but did not mention the seriousness of the case. We are overflowing with cases even in emergency and suggested that the patient be taken to another hospital if it was not serious. The patient came in later, around 7pm, in a very serious condition. We immediately took her in and tried to resuscitate her, but she could not be saved. If we knew about the situation earlier, there was no chance that the doctors would refuse her.”

This is not the first time patients have found themselves being turned away by hospitals in Noida while Covid-19 protocols are in place. On May 24, a pregnant woman was allegedly denied treatment by the Sector 30 district hospital and told to go to a hospital in Ghaziabad, as she lived in Khoda, which is sealed.

In another case the next day, a newborn died after failing to get admission in an NICU for seven hours, even as his father went to at least four hospitals, including the District Hospital.

“We have asked all hospitals to not deny any patient at their emergency, which is a growing concern. Even if they are Covid suspects, they have to be treated in quarantine accordingly. The district hospital is the primary point of contact for patients from where they can be referred if required. Action will be taken against the hospitals if any reports are received regarding patients being denied treatment,” said Bhooshan.

(With inputs from Snehil Sinha)

