Pregnant woman kin in Haridwar claims govt hospital refused admission for delivery unless Covid-19 test done
2020-04-24
Haridwar: The family of a 23-year-old pregnant woman who was due for delivery has alleged that she was refused admission in the district female hospital in Haridwar whose doctors asked her to first get a Covid-19 test done and sent her to an isolation centre. 

The family members of the woman further alleged that doctors told them that Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has issued guidelines about testing of pregnant women (although this guideline is only for women who are likely to deliver in next five days and residing in containment zones or living in large migration gatherings/evacuees centres in hotspot districts).The woman’s family alleged they were refused admission even though they are not in any containment zone or part of a migratory group. They further said that even though the woman was sent to the isolation centre, there was no testing facility there. 

The woman, who is a resident of Ghosiyan Mohalla, under the jurisdiction of Jwalapur police station, was asked to reach the district female hospital for delivery on Thursday. Her husband, a daily wager, told TOI, “After reaching the hospital and completing the paper work, my wife was ready to enter the operation theatre, but suddenly doctors asked us to get a Covid-19 test done for her.”

He added, “I requested doctors to do the test in the hospital itself since my wife’s delivery was due but they refused to hear me and told me that without testing, they cannot even touch the patient. I brought my pregnant wife to the isolation centre at Rishikul Ayurvedic College — where we had been told to go for testing — but we were not allowed to enter the premises and told by staff there that there is no facility to collect samples of outsiders.”

When queried about the matter, chief medical superintendent of the district female hospital, Dr Shikha Jangpangi told TOI, “We got an order from ICMR regarding Covid-19 testing of pregnant women. Accordingly, we are referring patients to the centre at Rishikul Ayruvedic College for testing.”

Meanwhile chief medical office (CMO) of Haridwar district Dr Saroj Naithani said, “I don't know why medical staff of the hospital referred the pregnant woman to the Rishikul isolation centre without consulting with senior officers. We are providing facility to collect samples of pregnant women according to their convenience and I have asked the doctors to follow the guidelines of ICMR in this regard.”

Notably, ICMR guidelines issued on Tuesday had stipulated that asymptomatic pregnant women should be tested in the health facilities where they are expected to deliver and adequate arrangements should be made to collect and transfer samples to testing facilities.


