Pregnant woman wrongly diagnosed Covid-19 positive in Chikkamagaluru
2020-05-29
CHIKKAMAGALURU: Close on the heels of a medical officer, who was wrongly diagnosed with Covid-19 and hospitalised, a pregnant woman from Tarikere, who was also wrongly diagnosed and hospitalised, due to incorrect laboratory analysis, tested negative for the disease.

The medical officer was in hospital for four days, while the woman for eight days. Their samples were tested in Nimhans, Bengaluru, which had confirmed that they had Covid-19 on May 20. After samples of their contacts tested negative, officials in Chikkamagaluru carried out tests in the TB machine, truenat, only to find they didn’t have any infection. They later sent their samples to Shivamogga, Hassan and NIV Bengaluru labs, for testing, and the official and the woman again tested negative for the novel coronavirus.

The samples of the duo were collected while carrying out random tests in the district. Both of them had no travel history.

With the discharge of these two individuals, the total number of active cases has gone down to 14 from 16 in the district.

Chikkamagaluru deputy commissioner Bagadi Goutham said that the laboratory samples of these two individuals tested positive due to technical errors. “Now the woman is free to go home, as she has tested negative for Covid-19. The district administration will no longer consider her locality to be a containment zone,” he said. The DC however refused to give any further information on the case. After the woman tested positive, the district administration sealed her locality and checked her travel history. The health department had quarantined 10 of her relatives, and obtained her husband’s contact information. Later, all the samples of her primary contacts tested negative.

A week ago, a medical officer in Mudigere, who was declared to have Covid-19, tested negative for the disease. Nearly a 1,000 people who had come in contact with him were quarantined in Mudigere, after he was hospitalised.

Health officers said that due to an overloaded of samples in laboratories in Shivamogga and Hassan, random samples from Chikkamgaluru were sent to Nimhans in Bengaluru, and that both the wrong reports came from there.


