Prepare plan to help quarantine those on the move: HC tells Telengana
2020-04-02
HYDERABAD: The Telangana high court on Wednesday directed the state’s principal secretary of medical and health department to explain by April 6, the steps being taken by the state to take care of the people stranded at the state’s borders who have been facing hardships ever since nation-wide lockdown was announced to contain the spread of coronavirus. 


The bench of Justice MS Ramachandra Rao and Justice K Lakshman held a virtual court from the residence of Justice Rao and heard a PIL filed by advocate SSR Murthy, who brought to the notice of the court, the plight of the people that were held up in the aftermath of lockdown.

“Almost all the states, following the Centre’s lockdown decision, sealed their borders. Labourers working in various states thought it would be safe for them to go to their native places as the lockdown had rendered them jobless. They were heading towards their native places along with their families. Due to lockdown norms, they were not allowed to enter their native states. Instead of leaving them on the roads, they should be quarantined in the nearest private hospitals,” the petitioner said seeking a direction to the state to this effect.

Advocate General BS Prasad addressed the bench through videoconferencing mode from his residence and said that Telangana has set up 343 shelter homes for housing stranded people. “We have housed as many as 92,000 people in these shelter homes at the borders of the state. We are giving them medicines and food,” he said. 

The bench verified whether the authorities are ensuring proper distancing between the people at the shelter homes and sought an affidavit from the health secretary by Monday on the steps they are taking to improve the conditions at the shelters.

The petitioner also mentioned about the plight of several workmen in the city who tried to go to their native places in Andhra Pradesh following the closure of their hostels in Hyderabad. Though the Hyderabad police gave them a green signal to go to their native places, the AP authorities did not allow them into the state. The problem was resolved only after the political leadership of AP and Telangana intervened, Murthy said.


