Priest’s Covid campaign targets idlers & frustrated
2020-04-09
Kochi: “There are mangoes on that tree in your yard, why are you idly sitting around, instead of plucking them,” asks father Davis Chiramel, in his typical Thrissur lingo, as he meets people cooped up in their homes while driving through villages in Thrissur. The man, known as ‘Kidney Priest’ for his campaigns on organ donation, has now donned a new role: The role of an announcer who spreads information on fighting Covid-19. 

And he has givenhis own twist to the art of making public announcements. He uses colloquial lingo, goes around chatting with residents and generates a positive vibe, all the while telling them how they can better their lives at homes. At Kadangode in Thrissur, Chiramel is a familiar figure as he has always been active in social causes, be it organ donation drive or campaign against hartals.

 He has now got a special permission from district administration to create awareness about Covid-19. 

Chiramel doesn’t restrict his campaigning to advices on quarantine regulations but makes it a point to have casual interactions with the people he meets. “They are bored sitting at home. They are frustrated about not being able to work. The only thing that I can do now is to spread some positive energy among those who are at home. So, I try to tell them what all they can do even if they are under lockdown,” says Chiramel.

He strikes up candid conversations with whoever he meets. “I tell children to water the plants at their courtyards and parents to harvest from their kitchen garden and give them to the needy. There are hundreds of things that you can do at homes and I remind them about them,”J he says.

He points out that the lockdown period was an ideal time to change life for better. “Earlier, all of you used to rush through your lives and now you are home, so make use of it. Parents are now happy that they get to be with their children. So, instead of staring at your phones all the time, go and talk to them. Give a foot massage to your mother or father and that will be the best gift you can give them,” says Chiramel.

Chiramel’s announcements are now shared in WhatsApp groups and people who have heard just fragments of his conversations are demanding complete audio recordings of his talks. “I used to tell everyone to go out during hartals and never to stay home. But now it is time to stop the pandemic. To do so, everyone has to stay home,” the priest tells the people with a microphone in hand, and continues his journey.


