Ahmedabad: Prisoner incarcerated for last six months tests Covid-19 positive
2020-06-05
AHMEDABAD: Murder accused Manu Desai has tested Covid-19 positive inside the Sabarmati central jail, the first prisoner found to have contracted the disease while he was in jail for the past six months.

Till date, prisoners who have tested Covid-19 positive are those who had gone out either on bail or parole and returned to prison with infection.

To avoid spread of the virus in the state’s overcrowded prisons, the Gujarat high court on March 27 issued orders not to allow entry to any prisoner inside jail without ascertaining that he is Covid-19 negative. Since then, all prisoners who return from bail and parole as well as new prisoners are tested before sending them to jail. 

While other prisoners are tested for entry in jail, Desai was tested because he wanted to get out of jail on temporary bail. The HC thought his Covid-19 test necessary because he could have put his three children in risk. Desai was insisting on bail because his wife was quarantined after she came in contact with a Covid-19 positive persons and following her quarantine, there was none to look after the kids.

Earlier on May 13, when Desai urged the HC to release him on bail claiming that his wife suspected she had contracted the disease, the court ordered tests for the woman. The HC did not release Desai immediately because his house was in a containment zone and the court feared that he might return to jail with infection.

But later circumstances led the HC to order Covid-19 test for Desai also. On Thursday, the state government supplied the Civil Hospital’s report to the high court stating that Desai tested Covid-19 positive. 

Additional director general, prisons, K L N Rao confirmed that Desai’s is the first Covid-19 positive case contracted while the prisoner was inside the jail.


7 others test positive, 100 quarantined in jail

After Manu Desai was tested for Covid-19 on the instructions of the Gujarat high court and was found to have the infection, Sabarmati central jail authorities tested 40-odd prisoners who were in contact with Desai in prison. Deputy superintendent D V Rana said, “We have sent those who tested positive to Civil Hospital and have isolated 100 other prisoners who were suspected to have come in contact with those who tested positive. We started the process of tracing their contacts.” The jail administration is alarmed with the finding because so far only prisoners returning after bail had tested positive.


