Karnataka: Prisons in Dakshina Kannada, Udupi set up quarantine facilities for inmates
2020-04-30
MANGALURU: In order to safeguard the health of inmates in Dakshina Kannada and Udupi, jails in these districts have set up quarantine cells. All the new admissions, and those inmates who are admitted to hospital for medical attention, will now be strictly quarantined for two weeks. Currently, about eight undertrials are placed under quarantine in Dakshina Kannada District Prison.


“The number of admissions to jail has been reduced after the lockdown. Undertrials in small cases get released at the earliest, after obtaining bail. However, those who are charged with non-bailable offences, and inmates receiving medical treatment at a designated hospital, are strictly quarantined. This is to ensure that no other inmates or jail staff get infected by the coronavirus,” said Chandan Patel, jail superintendent, Mangaluru District Jail. The district jail currently has 310 inmates, including four women.

Patel says that new admissions are allowed into the jail, only after a thorough medical examination. Currently, the Mangaluru prison has reserved nine cells for the purpose of quarantining inmates. “Though undertrials who seek medical help at jail wards at the district hospital have less chance of getting infected by the coronaviurs, despite that, we are asking them to be quarantined. We don’t want to take any risk, even though inmates admitted to jail wards are comparatively safer than the rest of the population in terms of Covid-19,”said Patel.

Meanwhile, jails in Dakshina Kannada and Udupi have stopped allowing visitors. “The inmates can keep in touch with their lawyers and family members through the common telephone facility available at the premises,” said Patel.

Six cells reserved for quarantining inmates in Udupi

Srinivasa, jail superintendent, Udupi District Jail, said that the district health officer has appointed a doctor, exclusively for screening and testing inmates who arrive at the prison. The jail has set up six quarantine cells, and will increase the capacity whenever there is a need. “We are shifting any inmates who show symptoms of coronavirus like cough, cold or fever, to hospital, as a precautionary measure.


