Private hospitals fleeced patients and lockdown was lax after the initial phase: Maharashtra task force chief
2020-06-14
MUMBAI: The heat of the state task force on Covid-19, Sanjay Oak, said people who needed hospital beds had struggled and suffered while trying to get beds, and the dashboard plan, where citizens were supposed to get information, had flopped. 


 "It was an IT failure, and it was coupled with the obstinate approach of the hospital administrations and clinicians. It was unpardonable," Oak told TOI. He said that testing guidelines were changed repeatedly, and advisories at all levels from the World Health Organization to the level of the task force kept changing, adding to the confusion. 

 "The approach was test-centric when it should have been symptom-centric. Private hospitals fleeced patients, and the black sheep among them deserve to be punished with suspension of their health licence," he stated. 

On the non-availability of crucial medicines to fight the pandemic, Oak said, "Four medicines were made available for a select few, which was disturbing, and in spite of the task force shouting from the rooftops that the drugs should be deregulated, it has still not happened for obvious reasons." 

 He added that the lockdown was effective in the initial phase but later became lax before the actual unlocking began in the state. "India also witnessed massive migration, which could have been either avoided or properly executed. There was lack of coordination at all levels," Oak said. However, the Director of Medical Education and Research Tatyarao Lahane said that despite all the shortages, Maharashtra had been able to control the spread of the pandemic. "AIIMS had estimated that the state would have 48,000 cases by April 30, while in reality there were fewer than 26,000. AIIMS had also predicted 2.5 lakh cases by May 31, while we have had one lakh cases on June 13. We are making all-out efforts to tackle the situation," Lahane told TOI. 

 Lahane said the state's medical education and public health departments had handled things effectively. "The lockdown helped us to contain the spread. We were able to quarantine people from hotspots and containment zones," he added. Lahane said that given the experience around the world, it is expected that after 96 days, the intensity of the spread will continue for a few days and then reduce. 

"I am sure Maharashtra will witness a steady decline in the number of cases in the weeks to come," he said. 

