Kolkata: Private facilities pad up to fight coronavirus
2020-03-17
KOLKATA: Several private hospitals in Kolkata have prohibited or restricted the entry of medical representatives on their premises from Monday. They have also curtailed visiting hours and restricted the number of visitors per patient to just one to minimize the latter’s contact with outsiders. Doctors and medical staff have been asked to use protective gear like gloves and masks and stay quarantined at home if they have travelled to the affected countries or states in the last fortnight. At least one hospital has barred visitors from all their wards, allowing entry to only family members of ICU patients.


Belle Vue Clinic has barred medical representatives’ entry following a meeting with doctors. The latter felt it was advisable since their presence often leads to a crowding at the lobby area, which is also used by patients and their families. That apart, they come in close proximity to doctors who can’t avoid physical contact with patients. “There is a danger of transmission from medical representatives to patients through the doctors. Medical representatives have to be mobile and keep coming in contact with a cross-section of people. The bar will remain in force till further notice,” said Belle Vue CEO P Tandon. The hospital has put up a notice announcing the ban and has restricted the entry of visitors to just one per patient.

AMRI Hospitals, too, have prohibited the entry of medical representatives across its three units from Monday. It has also barred patients’ visitors in the morning and restricted their entry to just one hour in the evening. Doctors welcomed the decision and said it will help to prevent transmission. “Physical contact has to be reduced to the extent possible on hospital premises. Medical representatives have a roving job and need to interact with doctors. The latter must have access to patients and may end up infecting them in case they expose themselves to potential carriers of the coronavirus. The move will help to reduce the chances of infection,” said AMRI Hospital consultant Debashish Saha.

He added that while senior doctors will have little difficulty if they cut themselves off from medical representatives, junior medics may need their help. “Till the Covid-19 fear persists, seniors may help juniors with medicine names. It is indeed necessary to avoid contact with outsiders,” added Saha.

Medical representatives have also been temporarily barred from RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS). The hospital has also banned the entry of patients’ visitors across its wards, except for those admitted at the ICU and those undergoing surgery. “Only one relative is allowed along with each patient visiting the OPD. Patient relatives are requested to avoid coming to the hospital as much as possible. Screening of every individual at entry point in the OPD and in-patient area for fever is being carried out with infra-red thermometers. We are providing necessary information over the PA system as well as brochures across the hospital,” said RTIICS zonal director R Venkatesh.

Medica Superspecialty Hospital has not been allowing medical representatives on its premises since 2018. From Monday, each of its six floors has a different visiting hour for patients’ relatives. “While this will help to prevent crowding, we have also reduced the number of chairs at our ground floor lobby to discourage people from waiting inside the hospital for long,” said Medica chairperson Alok Roy.


