Private hospitals get Telangana govt nod to treat Covid-19 patients
2020-06-10
HYDERABAD: Private hospitals in Hyderabad have started treating Covid-19 patients in Hyderabad after an informal nod from the government in a move to decongest government facilities.

All suspect novel coronavirus patients who are already admitted are no longer being sent to Gandhi hospital or other state-run designated hospitals.

 



The decision to allow private facilities to treat Covid-19 patients comes after a high court order to the Telangana government asking it to allow corporate hospitals to treat novel coronavirus cases. 

While the decision might seem like a relief for many who wish to be treated in private facilities, most hospitals are already running a full house in the Covid-19 exclusive wards now.

“Among our patients who had come for various treatments, we have many suspected Covid-19 patients. Our isolation facility is completely full. While we are open to taking in patients who might want to shift from a government facility, but it is subject to availability of beds,” said an official from a private hospital city.

While the state health department had previously allowed 40 private hospitals in the state which had the required infrastructure to admit suspected Covid-19 patients, the hospitals were mandated to send all positive cases to designated government facilities only.

At least 8-10 large hospitals had set up exclusive isolation facilities and had admitted suspected cases, but kept redirecting positive cases so far.

“We are not sending positive patients to Gandhi hospital or any other government facility for the last couple of days now. We have now been asked to go ahead with their treatment. No formal orders have, however, been issued,” said a senior official from a corporate hospital in the city.

Another corporate hospital now has 12 Covid-19 patients under treatment. “We have just 60 beds available and they are running full due to patients coming to various departments with symptoms of Covid-19. If a patient tests positive, the patient still has the option to shift to Gandhi hospital, if they cannot afford treatment here,” said an official from the hospital.

In the absence of a regularised tariff structure, hospitals are charging as per their existing norms, apart from additional charges for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) kits which range from Rs 15,000- Rs 20,000.


