Private doctors want to avoid risk of virus exposure
2020-04-03
Nagpur: A majority city doctors have opened their private clinics, albeit reluctantly, after the government’s diktats but are still worrying about getting infected by coronavirus. 

TOI has earlier reported how doctors were forced to check patients in raincoats in absence of personal protection equipment (PPEs) and N-95 masks.

The doctors are facing problems not only from the administration but also from citizens who are flaying them for keeping their clinics shut.

Quoting a case of Delhi-based general practitioner working with Mohalla clinic, who tested positive for Covid-19, the doctors said that about 50 from their fraternity had contracted this highly contagious disease across India, which also included those not directly working with the positive patients in hospitals. 

In the city as well, some doctors were quarantined for unknowingly coming in contact with positive patient.

Some of these front-line warriors in fight against the coronavirus epidemic are also fear of public wrath while doing their duty for the nation. “In Indore, the public threw stones on the medical staff who went there to pick up a suspect of Covid-19. At other places, they are abused and threatened, despite the fact that doctors are risking their lives for public. You can’t rule out possibility of same things happening here, they said.

Some of them like former IMA president Sanjay Deshpande said that private doctors weren’t opposing government’s directives to open clinics, but there were genuine concerns. “We had downed the shutters, primarily to save the people from getting infected, as we have very little waiting space for them. No one can deny the fact that our dispensaries could become hotspot for transmission even if a single person who carrying the virus paid a visit,” he said.

He added that most of the medicos were ready to join the government’s fight against Covid-19 epidemic when required. “As a precautionary measure, I am checking only one patient in 30 minutes. Even patients are not coming ever since the lockdown was enforced,” Dr Deshpande said.

VNIT alumni body to donate 100 PPEs to GMCH, IGGMCH

Many organizations and individuals are coming forward to help the city’s medical fraternity which is grappling with shortage of PPEs and N-95 masks. The VNIT alumni association would be donating 100 good quality PPEs and N-95 masks for doctors and staff treating Covid-19 patients at GMCH and IGGMCH. “We would be handing over 50 PPEs each to both government hospitals from Rs25 lakh we have collected from our members,” chairman Shashikant Chaudhary and treasurer Umesh Kamat said.

Two lawyers — Akshay Samarth and Pramod Upadhyay — donated N-95 masks to GMC’s medical superintendent Dr Avinash Gawande for distributing it to nurses and support staff. Both also made an appeal to people to help the doctors. “Anyone can contact us on mobile — 9422109620, if they wish to donate these equipment for the doctors. The protective gear is must for them as nine doctors were put under quarantine for coming in contact with a positive patient,” the lawyers said.


