Coronavirus scare in Maharashtra: Private doctors to alert health officials via Zilla Parishad website
2020-03-15
PUNE: Private doctors are being roped in to help alert health administration of suspected novel coronavirus cases via a special website that would be cellphone-compliant and will be linked to the Zilla Parishad (ZP) website for proper monitoring. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

As of now, Pune has registered 10 cases of which nine are of those who travelled abroad, while one was closely interacting with the traveller, ZP CEO Ayush Prasad said. 

The administration has set up the website with the help of the Maharashtra Knowledge Corporation Limited (MKCL), he said. 

Private doctors can register themselves by giving the requisite details and a one-time password verification. The doctors can share details of suspected cases, which will be monitored by the health authorities as part of the containment plan in the coming days, Prasad said.

Many of the cases are slowly being detected from foreign-returned travellers, who are getting themselves admitted at the Naidu hospital. But, they are also getting themselves checked at the local general practitioners. “It could be just basic symptoms. But, if the private doctor is able to alert us in advance, it can help better our monitoring system,” he said.

While, the doctors who register can add details of suspected cases in the portal, there are also plans of developing a citizen registration system in cases of persons who are home quarantine, added MKCL officer Sameer Pandey whose team has developed the portal for the ZP. 

While the website for doctors registration will be attached in a day or two, the citizen registration system for helping to track home quarantine persons will be developed soon. The officials have stated that it will be done under confidentiality clause and the data will be available with the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme. Private doctors who are reporting large number of cases of cold-related symptoms have been told to take the travel history of the persons and intimate the Naidu hospital. 

“The details have to be entered only in consultation with the person and it would help the person be checked for further symptoms. As of now, only Naidu and YCM hospital are taking on suspected persons and those who have tested positive. It will be a good initiative,” a private doctor practising in the Camp area said. 

Recently, Kerala had developed a tracking system with the help of engineering students to keep an eye on home quarantined persons. With reports from Kerala, Mangalore and Hyderabad of persons fleeing quarantine, health authorities are working to develop such tracking systems to prevent the spread of the infection. 

