Private hosps add more Covid beds
2020-05-03
Kolkata: At least five private hospitals in Kolkata are ready to expand their Covid-19 units to accommodate more patients.

While the AMRI Hospital Covid unit will be functioning at its full capacity from Monday, taking in 51 patients instead of 39, which it has been treating so far, Fortis Hospital Anandapur is ready to upgrade to a new 20-bed unit from its existing eight-bed facility.

Peerless Hospital has already announced an expansion of its Covid unit to 20 beds and Medica Superspecialty has added 18 beds to its existing 10-bed Covid unit. RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS) is in the process of expanding its isolation unit to accommodate 15 more patients. Salt Lake’s AMRI Hospital, which was the first private facility to start a dedicated Covid unit, housed exclusively at its annexe building in Salt Lake, will add 12 beds that had been kept in reserve. “The unit will be functioning at its full capacity from Monday. Since patients have been coming in frequently, the waiting list had been growing. We felt more beds will help at this stage,” said a hospital source.

Fortis Hospital, which is now treating patients beyond its existing capacity of seven beds, will add a 20-bed Covid unit by next week. It will also have another 12 beds for ‘low-risk’ patients with mild symptoms in a separate section. The decks are being cleared to set up the unit with a bigger team of dedicated healthworkers. “We believe more beds are now needed and we have started working towards that. Six beds were added recently since we had Covid patients. Now, we will have a bigger unit,” said Fortis Hospital pulmonologist Raja Dhar. Two beds at the unit could be reserved for healthworkers at the hospital.

Private hospitals with Covid units said they were flooded with requests to admit of patients who are either being treated at government set-ups or have been recently diagnosed. 

Peerless Hospital has started adding facilities like a central air-conditioning system and negative suction for the unit that could be further expanded to 40 beds, according to medical superintendent Sudipto Mitra. “We are waiting for equipment like monitors to arrive from other cities. It is taking time due to the lockdown,” added Mitra.


