Madurai: Private hospitals get Covid-19 ready with isolation wards
2020-03-22
MADURAI: Private hospitals have stepped up measures to fight Covid-19 by establishing isolation wards similar to that in Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) following the government’s nod for them to treat Covid-19 cases.


Till Friday, private hospitals were only referring patients to government hospitals in case of Covid-19 suspicion. Now the hospitals themselves would be able to take in patients and treat them in their isolation wards. 

However, the testing would still be done only in approved government lab facilities, the nearest one to Madurai being at Theni Government Medical College hospital. A few of the private hospitals in the city have already set up isolation wards with eight to ten beds. 

These hospitals have also stepped up screening for possible cases among their outpatients and better restriction of number of attenders.

“For the past two days, we have been allowed to take in suspected Covid-19 cases. On Friday, we screened about 1,000 outpatients for symptoms and those with possible travel or contact history. Most corporate hospitals have already set up isolation wards. Our hospital has a 10-bedded isolation ward,” said Dr R M Raja Muthaiah, dean, Velammal Medical College Hospital and Research Institute. 

He added that doctors and medical staff have also been specifically trained and sensitised to provide care and handle Covid-19 patients.

Meenakshi Mission Hospital and Research Centre (MMHRC) is another private multi-speciality hospital with isolation wards. 

The hospital has set up an eight-bedded general isolation ward and a two-bedded intensive care unit (ICU) isolation ward. Equipment like ventilators, X-ray, multi para monitors, pulse oximeter etc., have been separately provided. 

“We also have enough protective gear for doctors and staff as of now. The hospital has around 50 ventilators of which we have for now kept two reserved separately for Covid-19 ICU,” said Dr B Kannan, medical administrator, MMHRC. 

The hospital has further established separate Pulmonology and General Medicine screening areas close to the emergency ward. Apollo Hospitals, Madurai has an eight-bedded isolation ward for handling novel coronavirus cases. According to health officials, all private hospitals in the city, as per the current protocol, will admit suspected Covid-19 patients and first inform officials from the department of public health. 

The officials are responsible for taking samples and sending them for testing. If a patient tests positive, they will continue to be given symptomatic treatment at the hospital in an isolation ward and be monitored. If a private hospital does not have an isolation ward, the patient needs to be referred to GRH immediately.


