Pilibhit: Private hospitals suspend surgeries fearing covid infection
2020-04-30
PILIBHIT: Patients across Pilibhit are alleging that private hospitals in the city, mostly owned by doctors associated with the Indian Medical Association (IMA), are operating services in a highly discriminatory manner, paying scant heed to state government orders for the lockdown period. Most hospitals, for example, have suspended surgery during this period, apprehensive that patients could be Covid-19 infected.

On March 30, the UP government issued letters to all DMs with directions to ensure that during the lockdown period, all private hospitals were operated in the common interest of patients. Chief secretary R K Tiwari issued directions for immediate legal action against hospitals that were found to violate the order.

Countering the allegations, a district-level IMA office-bearer who wanted to remain anonymous, said, “How can we admit a patient for surgery in emergency, without being certain they are not Covid-19 infected? With results of covid tests taking between 48 and 72 hours at present, not only can an infected patient admitted to hospital end up transmitting the infection to medical staff, but also to society at large.”

Responding to his fears, additional chief medical officer (ACMO) Dr Vijay Bahadur Ram said the health department was concerned about the Catch-22 situation. “We’re going to host training schedules for medical staff of private hospitals on protocols to follow while dealing with covid patients. One of these training sessions is to be held on May 2,” he said.

“Covid-related logistics support is to be ensured by the private hospitals themselves. We hope the expert training combined with safety measures will be enough to clear doubts and fears among healthcare professionals with private institutions,” he added.

Kalpna, a resident of Civil Lines North in Pilibhit city, said her son (29) had been diagnosed with stricture in urinary tract. He urgently needed urethroplasty, as the stricture obstructed his urine discharge. But urologists declined to operate upon him outright, she said, woefully.

Meanwhile, district magistrate Vaibhav Shrivastav on Wednesday launched a telemedicine network for patients to seek medical advice from doctors via mobile phones. He said as many as 52 private doctors have agreed to take part in the service. They include pathologists, ophthalmologists, urologists, cardiologists, neurologists, general physicians, general surgeons, gynecologists, pediatricians, TB and chest specialists, orthopedic surgeons, radiologists and ENT (ear, nose, throat) surgeons.

He added that cell phone numbers of these doctors have been widely circulated via newspapers and official channels. The timing for telemedicine services by these doctors has been fixed between 10am and 9pm, on the basis of 3-4 hourly shifts.

ACMO Dr Ram is the designated nodal officer for the service. The DM added Dr Ram will be compiling figures of total consultations and related problems on a daily basis, and convey the data to ADM (judicial) Devendra Pratap Mishra for monitoring and action.


