Private hospital, 2 test centres sealed; about 40 people quarantined
2020-03-31
Nagpur: Continuing the containment drive to prevent further spread of Covid-19, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) on Monday sealed the Janata Hospital at Jaripatka, Dhande’s Panorama MRI Centre at Shankar Nagar and Rainbow Medinova Diagnostic Centre at Ramdaspeth. The civic body has also directed Government Medical College and Hospital to disinfect and seal ward no. 36.One of the five positive patients of Covid-19 from the same family at Jaripatka had a paralytic attack and was admitted to the ICU at Janata Hospital. Then, he was taken for a medical test at Panorama Centre. Later, he was admitted in ward no. 36 of GMCH. The 14th positive patient, a resident of a housing society near Gandhisagar Lake, too had a test at Rainbow Medinova Centre. These developments resulted in the closure of all these places.Swab samples of around 26, which include doctors, nurses, a pathologist and others from Janata, eight GMCH doctors and four paramedical staff and a couple of staff members from the MRI centres, were taken before they were quarantined. Most of the suspects were isolated at the GMCH wards where shortage of rooms for suspects too was reported on Monday. NMC’s additional medical officer (health) Dr Praveen Gantawar said there was no patient admitted at the Janata Hospital before it was sealed. The patient who had a paralytic attack belongs to the Jaripatka family where four more members have tested positive. His 33-year-old younger brother was the first to test positive on March 28, becoming the 10th Covid-19 patient of city. On March 29, the paralysed man and the 10th patient’s 12-year-old daughter tested positive. On Monday, the ailing patient’s 44-year-old wife and 14-year-old son also tested positive. On March 30, TOI was the only paper to report about large-scale exposure at Janata Hospital and GMCH as the family had not disclosed the 33-year-old man who worked at the shop of Khamla businessman was a Covid-19 suspect at the time. He was reportedly handled without safety kits. Dr Gantawar said an ambulance was deployed outside Janata hospital for needy patients. “I will inspect GMCH general ward where the patient was initially admitted. After we informed them that his brother tested positive, the patient was shifted to GMCH’s Covid-19 ward on Saturday,” he said.The medical officer said the man was admitted at Janata from March 26 evening to 4pm on March 27. “On March 26 night, he was taken for MRI at Panorama in Shankar Nagar where it was confirmed he had brain haemeorrage. Then, he was shifted to GMCH,” said Dr Gantawar.At Janata Hospital, the man had reported to the casualty section. “After the ECG, he was shifted to ICU. The corridor too was contaminated. The nurse who attended him may have touched others,” said Dr Gantawar. On Rainbow Medinova Centre being sealed, Dr Gantawar said, “The 14th patient had visited it. We don't want to leave a single area open from where the virus can spread,” he said.NMC chief medical officer Dr Yogendra Savai and Gantawar led the NMC team in the sealing action.Before sealing, an NMC team led by deputy commissioner Dr Pradeep Dasarwar disinfected the entire Janata Hospital and the two centres.The NMC is also checking how many patients came for diagnosis at these two centres from the date when the two positive patients were brought for tests.Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar confirmed that the GMCH doctors and paramedical staff were quarantined.In the morning, NMC health officials informed that eight suspects were diverted from GMCH to IGGMCH. Officials said the suspects have to stay back due to which rooms were occupied. “Once the results come, the suspects would be shifted to MLA hostel and others brought in,” they said. 