Private establishments proactively take steps to combat virus
2020-03-27
Aurangabad: While essential services such as food, ration, medicine, fuel, internet and mobile connectivity continues to be open amidst the lockdown, some private establishments are taking steps to ensure that people do not engage in overcrowding and practice hand hygiene.

In Beed city, Agarwal medical store on Subhash Road witnessed heavy rush of patients seeking medicines and other medical supplies. However, after failing to manage the rush, the store owner decided to take a proactive measure. He drew boxes at one-metre gap in three rows for customers to stand while waiting in queue to purchase medicines.

At Dyanradha Multistate Co-operative Society’s bank in Beed, visitors are provided with water, wash basin and soap to wash their hands before entering and after leaving the bank.

In Aurangabad, all State Bank of India branches are keeping hand sanitisers at their entrance and the guard at the entrance sees to it that every visitor uses them. The Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) head office and process industries which are given exemption from lockdown are equipped with thermal screening which checks the body temperature of employees or visitors entering the building.

All petrol pumps owners in Aurangabad under the Petrol and Diesel Association have posted a printed copy of the lockdown order of state government outside their retail outlets. Aqueel Abbas, secretary of the association, said that people are being sensitised through social media and through boards put up at retail outlets that fuel supply being an essential service will not be stopped during the lockdown.

Meanwhile, on Thursday, municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey held a meeting with the district supply officer and industry representatives to discuss the unrestrained supply of essential commodities to city and their provision to the residents. Interestingly, the meeting held at his residence ‘Rayat’ saw chairs placed at one-metre gap to ensure social distancing.


