Private hosp discharges Covid-19 patient in five days, re-admits her within hours
2020-05-23
Pune: A Covid-19 positive woman from Rakshewadi in Khed taluka, who was discharged on Thursday night by a private hospital in Pune just five days after she was admitted, was brought back to the medical facility after the district health officer and Pune zilla parishad chief executive officer Ayush Prasad got wind of the matter. Prasad has ordered an enquiry. 

The woman was sent home late on Thursday night in a private car by the hospital without informing the district health department. The private hospital officials said she was discharged as per the new policy guidelines issued on May 9.

Her husband, who works in the same hospital, had tested positive first, and 11 of his contacts, including his wife and relatives, were tested later. His wife and three others had the coronavirus. 

She was admitted in the hospital where her husband works, and the three relatives were taken to Aundh Chest Hospital. 

According to Khed taluka sabhapati, Ankush Rakshe, the husband developed fever around May 15 and reported to the local doctor in Khed. When the fever did not subside, he was tested for the coronavirus locally and admitted to the hospital where he worked. 

Rakshe said, “On Thursday, we got to know from relatives and villagers that the wife was coming back. The test was conducted only once before she was admitted which was positive. After that, they did not conduct any test before her discharge, and have not followed any protocol of admission to a hospital as even the changed policy does not permit discharge in five days. We were shocked to know that the woman came in a private car to a non-containment zone.”

When the woman reached her house, Rakshe and his team, who had kept watch, raised the issue with the district health officer and Prasad. 

Prasad, in coordination with the health officials, enquired into the matter and soon the hospital authorities sent an ambulance to pick up the woman for readmission at 3am, Rakshe said. 


