Private tutors face financial crisis due to coronavirus in Bihar
2020-06-06
PATNA: Private home tutors in the state capital have a tough time owing to the prevailing uncertainty about Covid- 19 pandemic. As the parents are not willing to let them in for fear of contracting the virus, many private teachers are in deep financial crisis.

Since the lockdown from March 25, many parents stopped private tuition classes of their ward. Even though relaxations have been given under Unlock1.0, parents are apprehensive about allowing outsiders inside home.

Seema Tripathi said her daughter Ananya, a Class IX student, is already attending online classes and taking help of online teaching materials. “There is risk in allowing private tutors inside home in this situation,” she said.

Mohan Bhargava, whose son and daughter study in classes VII and XI respectively, shared similar views. “My business is not going well and I don’t know how long the situation would remain the same. Students are spending hours on mobile and laptop for online classes conducted by the schools. So what’s the use of private tuition,” Mohan said.

But the home tutors are facing financial problems as they have been without work for the last 70 days.

Mohd Saif (24) of Phulwarisharif, who is doing MA in mathematics from Magadh University, said he used to teach mathematics to 32 kids in the same locality and earned up to Rs10,000 per month. “Now, the parents are not ready to send their kids. I even suggested them for online classes, but they did not agree. How would I pay the rent and fulfil my other expenses,” he asked.

Aniket Kumar, who used to give private tuition to 12 kids in Makhaniya Kuan to pay his hostel rent and meet other expenses, said he didn’t earn a penny in April and May. “I have already exhausted my earnings,” he said.

Another home tutor, SK Pathak (42), who teaches Hindi and Sanskrit, said online classes are not a good option for him as he is not tech-savvy. “I don’t have smartphone. I don’t know when the situation would get better,” he said.


