Private hospital in Agra emerges as new hotspot of Covid-19
2020-04-10
Agra: With maximum seven new coronavirus positive cases surfacing from one place, a private hospital on National Highway 2 on Thursday emerged as a major novel coronavirus hotspot in Agra.

The hospital has been sealed and movement of people around it has been restricted. Health department teams are taking samples of all the staff, patients admitted in the hospital and the contacts of those who tested positive.

Chief medical officer (CMO) of Agra district, Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats, said, “It is a matter of concern that seven coronavirus positive cases have been reported from one place. These include two male nurses, three intensive care unit workers and a manager of the hospital. All these people had come in contact with a Covid-19 infected patient. All of them have been shifted to the isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them.”

Vats added, “We have started collecting samples of all the contacts of the infected people and patients at the hospital. Staff of the hospital and their family members are being quarantined. Dedicated teams have been tasked for time-bound action to stop the spread of the infection."

According to health department officials, a 53-year-old woman, who is a resident of Mantola locality in Agra, was admitted to the hospital for treatment of a respiratory ailment on March 25. She was also suffering from tuberculosis and diabetes. On April 3, her family shifted her to a hospital in Mathura. On April 6, she tested positive for Covid-19. On receiving the information, the Agra health team took samples of the staffers of the private hospital. And seven were confirmed positive for Covid-19. More than 100 people related to the hospital are vulnerable to the Covid-19 infection. Patients from Etah, Mainpuri, Firozabad and other nearby districts were also admitted to the hospital. All of them are being tracked. 

Some days back, another hospital, located at Namner, was sealed. The owner of the hospital and his son, both doctors, tested Covid-19 positive. They are undergoing treatment at a private hospital in Gurugram.

On April 6, the lab and operation theatre technicians of the hospital tested positive. On April 8, the wife and daughter of the lab technician also tested positive. 


