Ahmedabad private hospitals brace for COVID-19 cases
2020-03-09
AHMEDABAD: The majority of the cases of the new strain of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) that came to the Civil Hospital in the past fortnight came from private hospitals. The doctors identified primary symptoms and recorded travel histories, after which the suspected cases were referred for further screening.


City-based hospitals have started training staff to identify COVID-19 symptoms and making preparations for isolation wards. Dr Bharat Gadhavi, president of Ahmedabad Hospitals and Nursing Homes Association (AHNHA), said that currently the primary role for the hospitals is to ensure that the symptoms are recorded properly and the persons are directed for screening.

 
 
“At a short notice, about 100-plus isolation beds can be prepared in Ahmedabad. The city and state has experience of handling major viral infections in the past. It’s equally important to train nursing staff and majority of the hospitals are imparting training. Several rules have also been put in place — the first and foremost is to reduce direct touch including handshakes,” he said.

Till Sunday, Gujarat had sent 47 samples of suspected viral infections to the laboratories at National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, and BJ Medical College, Ahmedabad. “All 47 samples have tested negative including five samples which were received in the past two days - three of which had come from Ahmedabad where the persons had history of travel in COVID-19 affected countries,” said a senior state health department official, adding that about 3,700 doctors in private set-ups have been trained in the past fortnight.

The first suspected case in the city was referred to Civil Hospital from a private hospital on SG Road. The private hospital officials said that they have adequate resources in terms of masks and ventilators. “The current priority is to ensure that the suspected cases get stabilized and are sent to government-run isolation facilities,” said the director of a city-based hospital.

The health department has provided standees and posters to all major hospitals outlining symptoms related to COVID-19 infection and numbers of the state and national helplines. India so far has recorded 34 confirmed cases of the viral infection including those from Ladakh and Tamil Nadu. No deaths have been reported in India so far. 

