Proactive testing of travellers helps detect ten cases in Nagpur Rural
2020-05-31
NAGPUR: The proactive measures adopted in Nagpur Rural has helped in detection of 10 corona positive cases and containing the spread of Covid-19. Reports of many samples are awaited as special camps concluded a couple of days ago.


“A few from other parts of the state and country have started to return to their hometowns and villages. Therefore, special camps were organized in various parts of Nagpur Rural to test travellers as well as some high-risk patients,” divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar told TOI.

The team of the state’s health department and Zilla Parishad were monitoring travellers and taking swab samples of persons with some type of symptoms. On May 23, two persons from Kamptee and Dahegaon in Saoner tehsil, who were Mumbai returnees, tested positive. Swab samples of the duo was taken as a proactive measure.

On the same day, a 25-year-old man from Butibori along with his father came to AIIMS and gave swab samples. The two tested positive. The youngster had returned from Mumbai.

In a similar manner, three more persons from Kamptee, who were Pune returnees and Sonuli in Kalmeshwar tehsil, who was a Mumbai returnee, tested positive.

The team led by district civil surgeon VD Paturkar, district health officer Dr Dipak Selokar and additional district health officer Asim Inamdar conducted special camps in all 13 tehsils of Nagpur Rural in the last few days.

Two persons from Mannatkhedi, a remote village in Sawargaon Primay Health Centre Area in Narkhed tehsil, tested positive as their swab samples were collected in the camp. Reports of many are awaited.

Apart from these positive persons, a girl, who returned to Kondhali from Nagpur, had also tested positive. A car owner-cum-driver of Mahadulla near Koradi made few trips to Bihar and fell sick. He got admitted at GMCH and tested positive a day ago.

A 44-year-old man from Ghumgaon was suffering from fever and breathlessness. He went for a check up to AIIMS and tested positive on Saturday.

A 73-year-old man from Bhusawal came to his son’s residence at Hingna and was admitted at a private hospital in Dhantoli. He tested positive on Friday and died at GMCH’s Isolation ward on Saturday.

In the last month, two persons from Kamptee and Kanhan, who also came from other states, had tested positive. Overall, 15 persons tested positive from Nagpur Rural. However, the Nagpur Rural count is 24. The Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) has shifted counting of cases of SRPF personnel and policeman who were deployed at containment zones in the city, tested positive and are residents of Nagpur Rural. 

Similarly, Nagpur Rural is also taking into account a resident of Mominpura who shifted to Panchgaon near Kharbi.

