Probe Covid-19 deaths in Dakshina Kannada scientifically to combat pandemic, says MLA
2020-05-17
MANGALURU: Former health minister U T Khader demanded that the authorities carry out a scientific analysis of the five deaths that occurred due to Covid-19 in Dakshina Kannada. “The number of fatalities vis-à-vis the number of positive cases in the district is worrying, and the district administration and health department should not take the matter lightly. Lapses, if any, in dealing with the co-morbidity factors should be addressed, lest it become a major health challenge,” he warned.

Addressing reporters on Saturday, Khader, said only carrying out such types of analysis will help the health department combat the spread of the novel coronavirus in the future. “At present, the only data available with the health authorities here and in the state war room, is the number of people tested and number of positive cases,” Khader said.

“Any strategy to combat Covid-19 must be built around scientific analysis of causes of how the disease is spreading and to do so, concrete efforts must be made to find the source of the cluster at the First Neuro Hospital in Padil. A analysis of reasons that caused the deaths, will also come in handy for the authorities to prepare suitable advisories for the people, who in turn could take informed decisions,” Khader noted.

Referring to Rs 20 lakh crore package that Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced, details of which finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman is announcing in tranches, Khader said a large section of people are yet to receive direct benefit from it. Even the financial aid that chief minister B S Yediyurappa has announced is nothing new, Khader said, adding various sections of society have been left out of the aid package.

Seeking a probe into the inconvenience faced by passengers arriving at Mangaluru International Airport on May 12, Khader said that the district administration and authorities concerned must be better prepared to avoid the same, when repatriation flights land in the future. State BJP president Nalin Kumar Kateel must wield his influence to ensure that more such flights are operated to his hometown, to bring back stranded Kannadigas from the Gulf, he said. 


