Telangana: Probe against minister, top officials for lockdown flout
2020-05-15
KARIMNAGAR: Taking a serious view of alleged violation of lockdown guidelines by authorities in Karimnagar district, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has ordered a probe against civil supplies minister Gangula Kamalakar, Karimnagar district collector K Shashanka, police commissioner VB Kamalasan Reddy and municipal commissioner Valluru Kranthi. 

Based on a complaint from advocate and social worker Bethi Mahender Reddy, NHRC on Wednesday ordered the authorities to enquire into a mass gathering of over 2,000 people in Karimnagar town on May 3 to celebrate the occasion of the district reporting zero coronavirus cases. 

Apart from the minister and collector, corporators, public representatives, political leaders and officials had attended the event at a function hall.

Mahender contended that no social distancing was followed at the lunch programme and lockdown norms were flouted by the minister and officials. At the event, sanitation workers and municipal employees were feted for their untiring efforts in combating the Covid-19 pandemic.

Questioning such a large gathering at the event, NHRC sought to know how did the minister, collector and others flout the guidelines just days after the district emerged out of novel coronavirus scare. Sources said NHRC would soon issue notices to them. 

After Hyderabad, Karimnagar became a hotspot for novel coronavirus cases, giving jitters to the officials. From nine positive cases in the third week of March, the Covid-19 graph had surged to 19. Now, the district is in green zone thanks to containment measures and effective implementation of lockdown norms. “But, the minister, collector, commissioner and others violated human and fundamental rights guaranteed under articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. They had shown wilful callousness by violating the guidelines put in place by the central government,” he said and added that they should be booked under section 188 of the IPC, Disaster Management Act and Epidemic Diseases Act.


