Probe launched to find how Jamaatis entered Haridwar during lockdown
2020-04-12
Haridwar: A probe has been launched by the city police to ascertain how members of Tablighi Jamaat entered the district during nationwide lockdown.

The move comes after three Jamaat members, who came to Haridwar after lockdown, were tested coronavirus positive. Around 200 people who came in contact with them have also been quarantined.

According to health department, first coronavirus positive case in Haridwar was reported from district’s Paniyala village where a 26-year-old Jamaat member tested positive for the virus. He had returned to the district from Rajasthan on March 31. Similarly, two other Jamaat members, both from Jawalapur, were also tested positive for Covid-19. They too had returned to Haridwar during lockdown.

Haridwar SSP Senthil Avoodai Krishna Raj S told TOI, “Some Tablighi Jamaat members entered the district after lockdown and unfortunately three of them were found Covid-19 positive. We have registered a case against them under attempt to murder charges and an inquiry has also been set up to find out how they entered the limits of the district. Strict action will be taken against those found responsible.”

The police have also warned strict action against those shopkeepers who keep their shops open beyond permissible time limit. Meanwhile, the police also raided the slum areas where country-made liquor was being prepared.

“We will take strict action against shopkeepers who keep their shops open in violation of lockdown guidelines. As far as smuggling of liquor is concerned, we have recovered 9,000 litres of hooch in Pathri village and further action is being taken against the liquor mafia.”

Additionally, a group of Nepalese workers has also been quarantined in the district. Haridwar CMO Dr Saroj Naithani told TOI, “They have been quarantined for 14 days due to their travel history.”

Police had earlier told media persons that the workers had come to Haridwar from New Delhi and were trying to go back to their homes in Nepal. But now officials say that these men work in factories in SIDCUL. “The group tried to misguide police officials. They actually live in rented accommodations in the SIDCUL area. They have been isolated in their homes now,” said Poornima Garg, circle officer, Sadar.


