Gujarat professor re-purposes wild cactus fruit pill to fight Covid-19
2020-06-07
AHMEDABAD: The remedy for SARS-CoV-2 with its infamous club shaped spike protein may lie in the prickly pear fruit that grows on wild cactus, found abundantly in the arid region of Saurashtra. 


Thirty-eight-year old Sanjay Chauhan, a professor in Graduate School of Pharmacy, Gujarat Technological University (GTU), and co-founder of SPHERO Health LLP, has sourced the extract from Opuntia Vulgaris or prickly pear, a fruit of a xerophytic plant, to pack it in a pill to combat anaemia. 

He has now proposed to repurpose the pill for treating Covid-19 patients. Presently, Hempoin, the tablet developed by Chauhan is being prescribed by doctors for various patients including women for antenatal care and children.

“To establish the efficacy of the tablet we need to run clinical trials on Covid-19 patients. I have proposed to the Centre to give me permission to conduct Phase 3 clinical trials for the repurposing of the tablet for Covid-19 patients,” said Chauhan. Since the product is available in the market, the need for conducting Phase-1 and Phase-2 clinical trials does not arise in this case.

 The tablet is being marketed for anaemia patients for the past few years and a patent for the same is pending. 

Chauhan claims that the tablet can work in three different ways for Covid-19 treatment. 

As an anti-viral, it can prevent virus entry by binding to spike protein at cell surface and by inhibiting Covid-19 Protease, according to Chauhan. Also, it can work at Mast Cell Stabilization level. This includes prevention of IgE production and prevention of mast cell degranulation antioxidant. Besides, the tablet can also effectively restore the redox balance in the host, he adds. 

Chauhan’s research for Covid-19 is mainly based on the work done using computer aided drug design tool. 

The tablet has the potential to work as an immunomodulator as well as an antioxidant in Covid-19 patients, he says. Since it boosts the immunity of a person, once approved clinically, it can also be used by them as a preventive measure. 

SPHERO Health LLP, which is incubated at GTU’s innovation council and startup wing, has received financial assistance under the Startup India Policy. The professor started the research 12 years ago under the guidance of Dr N R Sheth, vice-chancellor of GTU, and carried out phytochemical and pharmacological screening of the prickly pear. 

