Promises of coronavirus cure give Tamil Nadu headache
2020-02-10
CHENNAI: Thousands of people are screened every day at airports for symptoms of novel coronavirus -- fever, cold and breathing difficulty — and hundreds are put on mandatory 28-day domiciliary quarantine to prevent its spread. But a bigger threat are posters promising cure for nCoV with traditional medicines put up by clinics across the state.

 
 

Homeopaths claim that Arsenicum album 30C — a solution prepared by diluting aqueous arsenic trioxide generally until there is little or no arsenic remaining in the solution — can prevent nCoV, and in combination with other drugs can treat symptoms in infected people. Unani and ayurveda experts also claim that a cocktail of oils and herbs can offer preventive therapy and treatment.

“The Union ministry has put out a press release stating how AYUSH can prevent and cure the viral disease,” said a Chennai-based homeopath. His clinic has posters promising prevention and cure.

Last week, another Chennai-based Siddha practitioner said that he has found a herbal cure to the virus. Some others in districts have even volunteered to help patients in China and other affected countries with traditional siddha and ayurveda medicines.

State health minister C Vijaya Baskar says none of these claims are scientifically proven. “As of now there is no known cure for the novel strain of coronavirus,” he said. It has hit more than 25,000 people and killed a little more than 2% of the affected patients.

Doctors who have been treating patients infected with the novel strain say they are using a combination of antiviral drugs used to treat HIV. “If AYUSH practitioners have curative drugs, they must approach the government. It has to be tested before it is given as treatment,” he said.

Although the state did not criticise or protest the centre’s press release, it asked the Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy to book cases against doctors making false promises and seal clinics. “We have raided at least three clinics in the last one week. We have asked AYUSH doctors’ bodies also to ensure there is no promise of cure,” said Indian medicine commissioner K Ganesan.

Meanwhile, day after issuing two press releases claiming treatment and cure, AYUSH ministry said these streams had preventive medications that boost body’s immune systems and the release was an advisory to insist on hand hygiene. However, AYUSH practitioners say the regimen could help ease symptoms such as swelling in the lungs, with fewer side effects. “As of now, there is no clinical proof that the roots of various plants or herbs can help combat the deadly disease.

“We don’t want practitioners to offer such therapy. Anyone withs travel history and symptoms should approach government hospitals,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh.

“We have also recommended that people should avoid travelling to affected countries on business or leisure,” he said.


