Promoting food security key to fighting pandemics: Experts
2020-04-18
Mangaluru: While most serious cases of Covid-19 occur in patients with underlying chronic cardiometabolic conditions, a majority of them are reversible and preventable by promoting food security. All over the world, scientists and governments have been educating people with diabetes and other cardiometabolic diseases to be extra-cautions. Diabetes patients commonly have underlying heart disease, liver disease and kidney disease and are believed to be chronic inflammatory state with dysregulated immune response with underlying immunosuppression. These patients often are prone to complications and increase traction on limited medical care capacity.

Dr Sandeep Samethadka Nayak, internal medicine physician in California, told TOI: “India is the diabetic capital of the globe with an estimated 10-16% of the population being diabetic or pre-diabetic. The good thing is these diseases are preventable and reversible by promoting scientific low carbohydrate food, proper exercise and good sleep. With reduction of diabetes prevalence, population and government will be more prepared to face pandemic without much panic.” 

“Once the country is back to normal, the government must focus on food security. Policy makers usually try to compensate for food insecurity by subsidising carbohydrate-rich food, but that does not serve the purpose in the long term. We need a long-term strategy to tackle political, economic, and cultural barriers to overcome food insecurity. Currently, most schemes of the government like mid-day meals, food supply at fair-price shops and Indira Canteens focus on supplying grains as main food. These do not have much nutritional significance. They also increase the prevalence of diabetes and other cardiometabolic diseases. Instead, the government must heavily consider providing subsidised tree nuts, seeds, greens vegetables, fish/ meat and eggs,” said Dr Nayak who is spreading awareness that diabetes is reversible. 

A few years ago, World Health Organisation (WHO) recommended adults and children to reduce their daily intake of free sugars to less than 10% of their total energy intake. 

Former minister T B Jayachandra said the government must use this period as an opportunity to put an end to malnutrition and revive food habits. Malnutrition caused 69% of deaths of children below the age of five in India, according to a Unicef report released last year. 

“Due to the lockdown, most youngsters working in cities have returned to villages. The government is distributing ration through fair-price shops. Though there is sufficient stock of foodgrains now, the government must encourage young workforce to take up agriculture. This is the right time to revive our food habits and traditional crops. The suggestions of experts including planners, medical professionals and agriculturists must be considered to put an end to malnutrition in the country. The Prime Minister must address the country on change in food habits and give a vision for reviving agriculture,” he said.


