Pros helping citizens stay fit and healthy amid lockdown
2020-05-14
Nagpur: Instructors, yoga lovers and fitness enthusiasts are making the most of online social media sites to stay fit and help others remain healthy amid the prolonged Covid lockdown. Experts have started uploading fitness videos on online fitness platforms apart from teaching proper yoga postures to help others overcome specific body problems such as back pain, weight loss etc. Such videos have become immensely popular as they help viewers practise in the confines of their home.Many fitness and yoga organizations are making the best use of Internet to spread information about usefulness of yoga in keeping oneself calm and healthy, mentally as well as physically. National School Propagation Team is conducting several such webinars through its official website Sahajyoga. Over 650 people, especially students, are attending these sessions. “The sessions are recorded by trained yoga instructors in the form of tutorials which help members to keep themselves fit and fine. Our members and participants are spread all over the country and they make use of this online portal,” said Vijaya Deoghare, member of Sahaj Yoga organization.Doctor Anuradha Punyani too is conducting a unique blend of scientific yoga and exercises to encourage people to stay indoors and stay healthy. She believes in walking out pain-free from the lockdown by following her fitness videos that she posts on her official Facebook and YouTube page. Her sessions address targeted issues such as upper back pain, diabetes, strengthening exercises, how to burn calories etc.Sachin Deshmukh is a physical education teacher who posts videos of fitness and muscle strengthening exercises on his WhatsApp group, which has a large number of participants. “Doing any exercise in the wrong way could lead to problems and hence following a professional is advisable, at least for beginners. I post videos about stretching, yoga, jumping exercises, suryanamaskar and several others targeted at specific body problems. One must follow the exercise routine alternate days initially,” he said.Giving some insights and benefits of following such online fitness routines, city’s renowned physician Shankar Khobragade said knowing one’s body is a must, especially for elders. “While doing any kind of exercises, a physician’s advise is necessary. One must get ECG, blood sugar level checked as he or she may have heart or sugar problem. Doing exercise is important but eating healthy is also equally important. Consuming oily and fatty food and doing exercises makes no sense.” he said.Doctor Sarang Kandurwar also follows and trains under a professional Amit Samarth who uploads several body weight exercises which are different every day. “As no training video is repeated, members don’t get bored. The videos, mostly 1.5-hour-long, show proper way of running, strengthening, balancing and some amount of marshal art training,” said Samarth.Kandurwar said, “I love cycling, but as I am not able to go out and also don’t want a break in the fitness routine, online professional training videos come handy. We can exercise at home under a pro without leaving the place,” he said.