Protests, vandalism in Hindpiri as team tries to move Covid cases to Rims
2020-04-15
Ranchi: Massive protests erupted in the state capital’s Hindpiri area on Monday night when a district administration team reached the Muslim-dominated locality to transfer three Covid-19 patients to Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims). The three patients were taken to Rims only around 5am on Tuesday after the team held talks with the locals and community elders.

An FIR against six named and around 500 unnamed persons has been filed various sections of IPC at Hindpiri police station on Tuesday in connection with the incident.

With all 11 positive cases (10 active, one dead) in the city reported from this locality, Hindpiri is the epicentre of the novel coronavirus in Ranchi. The first case of Covid-19 in Jharkhand was detected in this area when a 22-year-old Malaysian woman, who attended the Tablighi Jamaat markaz in Delhi, tested positive for the disease on March 31.

About 11.30pm on Monday, hours after three persons tested positive here, two teams from Kotwali police station, led by DSP Ajit Kumar Vimal and officer in-charge BrijKishore Jha, and four ambulance were dispatched to Hindpiri’s Kurban Chowk and Thana Gali to transfer them and their primary contacts to Rims.

While Jha convinced a 35-year-old male patient that moving to Rims was in everybody’s best interest, Vimal’s team faced massive protests Kurban Chowk, with hundreds blocking the road.

A policeman, who was at the spot, said, “Around 500 people armed with lathis gathered on the streets near Gwalatoli chowk, Kurban Chowk and Sarfaraz Chowk, shouting slogans against the administration to stop us from taking the patients to Rims. They said the administration was hatching a conspiracy to target Muslims and kill their families at Rims.” 

The drivers of the ambulances, which were being vandalized, said when the protests started becoming violent and targeting the ambulances, they began reversing their vehicles to return to base sadar hospital, but the police held their nerve and kept trying to pacify the crowd.

The impasse broke early morning only after senior officials, including Ranchi deputy development commissioner (DDC) Ananya Mitta and senior SP Anish Gupta, and others rushed to the spot and held several rounds of meeting with the locals and community elders.

While the locals finally relented after officials’ intervention and allowed the patients to be moved to Rims, sources in the administration said seven family members of the confirmed cases are yet to be moved to an isolation centre set up at the hospital.

Talking to TOI, Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said, “We managed to shift the patients to Rims at 5am on Tuesday. We have taken cognizance of the protests, sloganeering and the attempts to disrupt our work and will soon initiate legal action against all those who stopped us from performing our duty and violated the lockdown orders.”


