Covid-19: Protests over lack of facilities at isolation centre in Hyderabad
2020-03-20
HYDERABAD: Chaos erupted at the city’s new quarantine centre at Rajendranagar on Thursday after close to 100 passengers, shifted there from the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA), staged a protest against the poor facilities. 

The travellers – most of them from the US and Europe who reached the city via Dubai and Doha – claimed that the washrooms were dirty and the food served was unpalatable. They also complained about the centre, located within the Telangana State Institute of Rural Development (TSIRD), being infested with mosquitoes.

Infuriated, many passengers packed their luggage and crowded around the main gate of the premises, by evening, demanding that they be allowed to go home. The facility, with a capacity of 200 beds, has been turned into a quarantine centre to accommodate more people. As per protocol, all international passengers housed there have to be under quarantine for 14 days.


Coronavirus in India live updates

“Even if we test negative for coronavirus, we will certainly contract either malaria or pneumonia if we are forced to stay here,” said Najma M, who landed from the United States via Doha late on Wednesday night. “The rooms are extremely unhygienic and we are being made to share them with strangers. There are no sanitisers or hot water. The food is contaminated,” she added.

Others too had similar grievances. “It is impossible for us to stay here. If they want, we can stay in self-isolation at home. Or they should provide something that is at least clean,” said Smitha Kolan, a student who returned from Hungary through Doha. “Worse, while we were told that some doctor will attend to us and collect samples for tests, nobody has turned up so far,” she added.

Lashing out at authorities, some even claimed that were kept at the facility, despite ‘Covid-19 negative’ certificates. “Before I boarded my flight from France, I was cleared and told I tested negative for the virus. Then why are they holding me up here under such sub-standard conditions,” asked Bhanu Prakash. He alleged that one passenger among them was allowed to leave the premises, without any explanation. 

Meanwhile, addressing media on Thursday, CM K Chandrasekhar Rao said, “Some people have been wanting to go home and not stay at the facilities. Even if they are allowed to be quarantined at home, they will be under continuous watch by the health department and district authorities.”


