Protest in Rewa over shifting of Covid +ve inmates
2020-04-14
Bhopal: Following the shifting of two persons who had tested positive for Covid-19 from a jail in Satna to Rewa, protests broke out in the region.

The duo was lodged in the Satna jail after they were booked under the National Security Act (NSA) for pelting stones at police in Indore on April 7.

Senior Congress leaders were booked after they gheraoed Rewa collectorate against the shifting of the inmates to Rewa’s Sanjay Gandhi Hospital. Medical shops were also kept closed in protest. People demanded that the duo be shifted out of the Vindhya region. They were shifted to Rewa on Sunday night.

Former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath also expressed concern over shifting the NSA detainees from one district to another despite the lockdown. “It is surprising that while there is lockdown in the state, many districts are under curfew and their boundaries sealed in view of the Coronavirus scare and people not being allowed to move from one district to other, those detained under NSA in Indore were sent to Satna and they were found positive for Covid-19,” Kamal Nath had tweeted on Sunday.

Former leader of opposition Ajay Singh too attacked the state government for “importing” Covid-19 to the Vindhya region. In a tweet, he said, “Vindhya region did not have a single case of Covid-19. Is CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan trying to control Corona or spread it? People are angry and before something happens, the Covid-19 positive brought from outside should be shifted outside the Vindhya region.”

DM Satna, Ajay Katesaria told media that two NSA detainees sent from Indore had symptoms of Covid-19 after which they were tested and found positive on Sunday. Five under-trails and 12 members of the prison staff were also quarantined. Besides, the Satna central jail and residential colony was declared a containment area.

Jail authorities maintained that there is no threat to other detainees in the jail as the ones who tested positive for Covid-19 were in isolation barracks at the jail. Jail headquarters have ordered that all new arrivals in jails be kept in isolation barracks for 14 days before being shifted to regular barracks. They are also being tested for Covid-19 as well.


