Protect common man from Covid-19 infection, Madhya Pradesh CM to ministers
2020-04-23
BHOPAL: Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Wednesday discussed the situation of Corona virus in the state and the work being done to control it with the members of the cabinet in secretariat.


Chouhan said that the common man has to be protected from this infection, so monitoring of various tasks is necessary at the government level. Disease control is being reviewed every day. Disease control works are constantly being reviewed in all the districts of the state.

Chief Minister Chouhan also discussed the responsibilities entrusted upon the ministers.Ministers Narottam Mishra,Tulsi Silavat, Govind Singh Rajput, Kamal Patel and Meena Singh were present on the occasion.

Chief minister Chouhan said that the cabinet will be expanded after the lockdown. The chief minister distributed responsibilities to the ministers in the meeting, giving top priority to control over corona. Senior officers have also been attached with each minister to help them. The work and officials with the new ministers are as follows—

Narottam Mishra (Home, public health and family welfare): Mgmt, monitoring and coordination at the state level to prevent Covid-19 infection, Arrangements of medical equipment, medicine, hosp mgmt, survey, sampling, testing and treatment, communication between govt and private hosps, social workers, health organizations, discussions with the Crisis Management Groups of the districts, compliance of important decision. Mohammad Suleman, ACS Health, Sanjay Shukla, PS, medical edu and Mahesh Agarwal, PS, Ayush will help Mishra.

Tulsi Silawat (Water resources): Online classes for school, college students, monitoring of food, shelter, medicine of resident students, migrant workers of MP stuck in other states, review of cash transfer under Mukhyamantri Pravasi Mazdoor Sahayata Yojana, communication with social organizations, dignitaries, trade representative in districts, compliance of decisions in education sector. ICPKesari, ACS, commercial tax, Neeraj Mandloi, PS, higher education and Rashmi Arun Shami, PS, school education department and Deepali Rastogi PS, tribal welfare department will assist him.

Kamal Patel (Agriculture): Rabi procurement in state, payment to farmers, transport arrangement, servicing of harvester, thresher, tractor and proper arrangement of straw, ensuring availability of agri inputs, equipment, fertilizer, seeds, credit, discussing with the Crisis Management Groups of the districts, compliance of important decisions in agri sector taken in the last one month. K K Singh, Commissioner agricultural production, Ajit Kesari, PS, agriculture, Umakant Umrao, PS, cooperative department and Sheoshekhar Shukla, PS food will help him.

Govind Singh Rajput (Cooperatives, food and civil supplies): Payment of MSP to farmers on time, ration distribution and supply under public distribution system, streamline food distribution in the state, discuss with the Crisis Management Groups of the districts and review strategy, to maintain dialogue with social organizations, dignitaries. Sheoshekhar Shukla, PS, food and Umakant Umrao, PS, cooperative department to help Rajput.

Meena Singh Mandwe (Tribal welfare): Distribution of pension under all social security schemes, distribution of pension under all social security schemes, effective implementation of Sambal Yojana, to ensure welfare of sr citizens, differently-abled, weaker sections, discussing with the Crisis Management Groups of the districts, to maintain dialogue with social organizations, dignitaries, representative, tendu patta plucking and purchase of small forest produce. JN Kansotia, PS, social justice, Ashok Varnawal, PS, forest department and Ashok Shah, PS, labour to help her.

