Proud yet worried, say the families of Covid warriors
2020-04-28

A 60-year-old doctor with the Bengal health department, who had earlier tested Covid-19-positive, died on Sunday, marking the first death in the state of a health official who had the disease, on a day the condition of a 65-year-old orthopaedic surgeon - also Covid-19-positive - was stated to be critical.
A 53-year-old head constable attached to Mumbai Police protection branch died from coronavirus early on Sunday at a Navi Mumbai hospital.
Bishwabijoy.Mitra@timesgroup.com
As frontline workers - including healthcare professionals and cops - continue to put their lives at risk in the war against COVID-19, many of them are succumbing to the virus. However, there is no end to the anxieties of their families and well-wishers who can't seem to decide what worries them more - the fate of their beloved sons, daughters, husbands and wives fighting the pandemic or the brutality, stigma and public outrage displayed against them in various parts of the country. We speak to the proud families of a few Covid warriors to know how they are coping with the stress and uncertainty. Here's what they have to say… 
‘Violence against police bothers me more than coronavirus’
Nilima Das (name changed on request), wife of a sub-inspector at a south Kolkata police station
 My restlessness knows no bounds ever since my husband’s patrolling duty started. Being out on the streets makes him highly susceptible to the virus, but nothing doing. When he has a night duty, I spend the entire night reading books or surfing social media. I just cannot sleep. But more than the coronavirus, what bothers me is the violence police are being subjected to. Earlier, our neighbours and relatives would often seek help from my husband for various things. But now they have started avoiding us because he is vulnerable to infection. I don't know why they don't even call up to find out how we are doing. 
‘My husband and I have stopped sleeping in the same room’
Jayanti Nandi, social worker and wife of Dr Raja Dhar, head of pulmonology department at a private hospital
My husband and I have stopped sleeping in the same room ever since his hospital started getting COVID-19 positive cases. He also sits on a separate couch when he’s at home with us. Whenever he is on duty, I find it very difficult to keep my calm and take my mind off the latest developments on the pandemic. I’m pained to see how this has started straining relationships. Two of my domestic helps refused to continue working with us on knowing that Raja often comes in contact of corona patients. I would have anyway asked them to stop coming but it feels bad to see them avoiding us after sharing such a friendly bond. However, we want Raja to carry out his professional duties with all his dedication and honesty. This is not the time for our warriors to choose the easy way out and stay at home. The nation needs them to be on the frontline.
‘Attacks on medics on corona duty are giving me sleepless nights’ 
Priyanka Singh, mother of a doctor on COVID-19 duty at a government hospital in Kolkata
Initially, I wasn’t too apprehensive because my daughter is a doctor and knows best about how to keep herself protected. But the rampant attacks on medical professionals on corona duty in several parts of the country have given me sleepless nights. I call her ten times a day to check if she is alright. Since I am away from her in Dhanbad, voice calls are not always enough, so I request her for video calls at times. I’m facing the most terrible predicament of my life. On one hand, the mother wants her to be safe and come back home. On the other hand, I realise how crucial her job is at this point, and I don't want her to neglect it at any cost. When she had signed up for the profession, she also signed up for all these risks that come along, and I am proud of whatever she is doing today. 
‘My husband locks himself up so that our son can’t go near him’ 
Lipi Mondal, wife of a Kolkata Police traffic sergeant
I understand that being a policeman, my husband’s work demands him to face adverse situations. But this time, he is fighting an unknown, sudden enemy. If the virus wasn’t bad enough, there are some localities where people have no respect for the police. These days, I can’t stop feeling anxious when he is out there. Since he can’t take calls on duty, I end up watching news channels to make sure I’m aware of any mishaps taking place in the city. Not just that, I’ve started panicking so much about hygiene that I end up taking showers up to six times a day. I have never been so afraid in my life. For our seven-year old son, Aatrayo, his father is a superhero. He looks forward to talking to his dad for hours when he is back from duty. But ever since this pandemic was declared, my husband has stopped going close to him. He comes back, takes bath in front of the main gate, enters the house and locks himself up in his room so that Aatrayo can’t go near him. 
‘I’m a proud wife of a cop who risks his life to save others’
Mahua Chatterjee, wife of a senior traffic police officer in Howrah
Back in 2008 and 2009, my husband was posted in some of the most politically tense regions in Bengal. That used to scare me but not as much as the current situation. Ever since the lockdown started, he comes home once in three days and confines himself to his room. He is very strict about maintaining a physical distance from every member of the house. And when he is not here, all I do is panic. I can’t seem to concentrate on any household chores. Even our children are not allowed to go close to their father. But despite everything, the fact that my husband is risking his life everyday so that hundreds of people can stay safe, makes me a really proud wife.
 

