Provide right information to fight the coronavirus: Gujarat health department
2020-03-26
AHMEDABAD: Through the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) initiative, hundreds of grassroots health workers and ASHA workers are gathering information from the people of Gujarat for the past five days. Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary (health and family welfare), told mediapersons on Wednesday that a total of 1.07 crore Gujaratis were covered under the massive survey.


“The survey is quick and is often conducted over the telephone, to ascertain whether there are persons with a history of foreign travel and whether there has been a spike in symptoms associated with Covid-19 in clusters,” said Ravi.


 

“Through the system, we identified 15,468 persons with a history of travel overseas. Of these, about 15 persons had shown symptoms and were provided medical help.”

When TOI caught up with health workers in various parts of the city, who are part of the exercise, they said that the quick survey would only work when citizens wholeheartedly supported it. 

“The majority are forthcoming, but the survey depends on information provided voluntarily. We recently came across a case where a group had travelled to Uttarakhand and Delhi. One of the persons had fever and was put under quarantine. We later learned that four others had similar symptoms, but they were taking medication,” said a health worker. “We reached out to them and made them understand how dangerous this was for their families and friends.”

The workers also highlighted the issue of social ostracization by neighbours. A health worker in the western part of the city told TOI that even those in posh localities have faced a change in behaviour of their neighbours as if the condition was their fault. The application of quarantine stickers outside their residences has worked both ways, they added.

“There is a need for awareness, not for making the details of those under quarantine public,” a health worker said. “– we requested people not to circulate lists as these are the patients whose samples are sent. It could be positive or not.”

