‘Prudent’ lockdown extension leaves many jittery
2020-04-12
Pune: The state government’s decision to extend the lockdown till at least April 30 has put private firm employees as well as students in a fix, who were eagerly looking forward to resume their routine from Wednesday.

“The worry is that I am not able to work from home as my work requires close coordination and team work. The client is becoming a little jittery now. We are worried about losing the client,” said Rohit Pawar, a manager in a software firm.

A businessman from the city, Yash Jalan, said the consequences of an extension were going to be bad. "There has been no revenue generation for almost a month now but the salaries have to go out on time and so do other bills. Difficult times lie ahead and I just hope that people follow all rules and stay indoors so that we don’t have to go through another extension. A prolonged extension will have extreme repercussions on businesses and the economy as a whole," he said.

FTII students Rajarshi Majumdar said the extension would lead 2017 and 2019 batch into a studio floor clash scenario, which could lead to further delay of more than three months into course completion for one of the batches. "The 2018 batch was about to start their documentary semester, which will be delayed by one month. And admission process can be delayed up to 1-2 months or more," she said.

Durgesh Mangeshkar of IITian's Prashikshan Kendra said the extension meant that those in the education sector needed to further continue to engage students via online lectures and tests. "The　admission cycle for the next batch gets either prolonged or distorted due to this extension, which has its own financial ramifications on coaching institutes. The learning curve for students due to online classes is much slower than that in actual classroom and this may affect their preparation for competitive exams," she said.

A section of people felt that the extension was the need of the hour. "Considering the rising positive cases every day, it was a prudent decision　to extend the lockdown. Yes, it will have an adverse impact on economy, but controlling the pandemic should be the top priority now," said Colonel Vinay Dalvi (retired).

Suman Goyal, a senior citizen, said, "It is a good move as it will prevent the spread of the contagion. But there needs to be provisions of food/grocery made for senior citizens or specially challenged people staying alone. Also, the daily wage earners need to be protected by the government. The marginalised need to be identified and adequate supply must be given to them."


