PSL broadcast crew quarantined in Amritsar
2020-03-20
Panaji: An Indian broadcast crew of 29 members who worked at the Pakistan Super League (PSL) and were initially stopped from returning home at the Wagah-Attari border now find themselves quarantined in Amritsar with no knowledge when they will be allowed to leave.

The Indian authorities who had initially asked the Indian crew to take the same path home like their onward journey – via Dubai – finally allowed the Indians to cross the Wagah border just after midnight on Thursday. They were initially quarantined at a hospital in Amritsar, some 20 kms away from the border. But while most believed the quarantine would be for 24 or a maximum of 48 hours, they are now left to grope in the dark.

“This quarantine is a joke. We were initially told that we fall into the C category which is self-quarantine, but we cannot understand why we are lodged here, with six to eight people in a room. They did all the tests, found that we are fine. But we are being held captive,” a crew member told TOI on Thursday.

The Indian crew working for a Delhi-based sports production company at the Pakistan Super League (PSL) had to return home early after the league was cancelled as a foreign player developed symptoms of coronavirus.

 News in BriefExplore Briefs“We are all kept here in this quarantine place, but still no information if they will let us go or keep us here. No one here has any clue. There was a press release which said all incoming citizens would be screened and then sent home for self-quarantine, but that does not seem to be the practice here.

“They have checked us for our temperature and blood pressure, four times since morning. No other tests have been done so far. If there is a lockdown, it will be difficult for us to get back home. We can only appeal to the authorities and pray,” said the crew member.

The PSL was cancelled just before the semifinals after a foreign player developed symptoms of coronavirus. The Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) has not as yet revealed the identify of the cricketer, who, according to reports, has flown out of Pakistan. All players and broadcasters were later tested for the virus.


