PSPCL turns banker to beat lockdown blues
2020-04-14
Ludhiana: If you are worried over falling rates of interest of banks on deposits and FDs, you may consider keeping your money with the Punjab State Power Corporation Ltd (PSPCL) instead, which has announced offering double the interest on advance deposits.Staring at huge losses due to Covid-19 lockdown, resulting in non-consumption of power by industrial units in Punjab, PSPCL has come out with this offer, which could not just help fill the cash-strapped department’s coffers but also give commercial banks a tough competition. According to this scheme, PSPCL will now offer 1% monthly interest to consumers if they pay their bills in advance. The offer has been uploaded by the department on its website www.pspcl.in and is also being circulated in social media. A comparison between PSPCL’s offer and the rates offered by the banks on deposits has also been put out, which is catching the customer’s attention.According to the PSPCL notice, the “Golden opportunity to earn lucrative returns by advance payment” scheme has been issued by the chief engineer (commercial). The notice reads, “In the recent days, banks have reduced interest rates on fixed deposits (about 6% per annum) as well as on savings account (about 3.5% per annum)... In order to help consumers earn a better rate of return, PSPCL offers its consumers of all categories to make advance payment towards their estimated electricity bills up to March 2021 to the extent they can, through digital modes at http://billpayment.pspcl.in and earn interest @1% per month. Thus consumers will earn interest almost @12% per annum (double the rate of interest on fixed deposits).”This offer has certainly got some heads turning, but as of now, be it industrial or domestic consumers, they are undecided on whether to avail this offer or not. Moreover, some businessmen feel that PSPCL will not be able to continue with this scheme, while according to others, it is very risky to pay advance deposit to PSPCL.Speaking on the issue, Harish Kairpal, finance secretary of Knitwear Club, said, “No doubts the scheme introduced by PSPCL is very attractive, but right now due to lockdown businesses are totally shut and we do not have money to even meet our family expenses. How will we be able to give advance deposit to PSPCL? I think only some large industries with extra funds will be able to take benefit of this scheme.”Raj Kumar Singla, president of Fasteners Suppliers Association of Ludhiana, said, “At a time when PSPCL has already gone bankrupt and to cover up its losses and meet its expenditures it is constantly hiking rates of power in Punjab, it’s very risky to park one’s hard-earned money in the department, which is already known for slapping one charge or another on various pretexts on consumers.”Former president of United Cycle and Parts Manufacturers Association, Inderjit Singh Navyug, said, “This scheme will not be successful, as already there is huge shortage of funds with the industry. Only few domestic consumers can come forward to avail this, which will not fulfil the goal of PSPCL to collect funds in advance. I do not think any businessman is going to show interest, as no one knows what will happen when activities resume post lockdown.”Firm deposits Rs 10cr A Mandi Gobindgarh company, M/s Oasis Enterprises, has deposited Rs 10 crore as advance electricity bill to take benefit of the scheme. Chief engineer of Ludhiana central zone Daljit Inderpal Grewal said, “This is a big initiative undertaken by the PSPCL and first of its kind in the country. We have widely publicised this scheme and I contacted the owners of Oasis Enterprises and made them aware of the benefits of this scheme. They happily agreed to pay Rs 10 crore as advance bill. The company can now earn interest on their advance payments. We are working to convince more such business organization to pay and earn interest. This will improve financial position of PSPCL, especially during lockdown.”