Psychologists on call at Covid quarantine centres
2020-04-14
PRAYAGRAJ: A clinical psychologist and psychiatrist will now be available at the three quarantine centres set up in Kareli area of Prayagraj to help suspected Covid-19 cases cope up with mental health issues like anxiety and depressions while being in isolation. 


“Following orders issued by the state government on April 2, there will be clinical psychologists present at all quarantine centres to help people deal with mental health issues. In case citizens have any doubt related to the novel coronavirus pandemic, they can contact the psychiatrists at MLN Divisional Hospital,” said Prayagraj chief medical officer GS Bajpayee.

According to reports, more than 100 persons are currently staying at the quarantine facilities. 

Dr Ishanya Raj and Dr Ajay Kumar Mishra from MLN Divisional Hospital have been roped in for the job.

“The age of those who have been quarantined at these centres ranges between 70 years and 10 months. Many of them are experiencing problems like acute stress and mental exhaustion,” said Dr Ishanya Raj, a clinical psychologist posted at MLN Divisional Hospital. 

“There are schoolkids who want to know when they would be allowed to get out of the centre, so that they can go back to their regular life. Then there is a 21-year-old youth who is eager to know how his mother is managing without him as he is the only earning member of his family,” she added. 

“We have to keep people motivated, for which a helpline has been launched for those quarantined. Only 35-40% of the people meet me. There are many who are hesitant to discuss their problems in the open. I have told them that they can call me from 9am to 9pm,” she added.

Dr Ajay Kumar Mishra said that misinformation about novel coronavirus was to be blamed as well for adding to the mental stress many appear to be undergoing. 

“A few days back, a woman came to the OPD at the hospital where I work and told me that her husband, who is a primary school teacher, tried to hang himself as he suspected that he had contracted Covid-19. It later turned out it was just a case of common flu,” said Mishra, who is a psychologist in MLN Divisional Hospital. 

“One has to understand that just because you are experiencing a symptom like a fever, it doesn’t imply that you have contracted novel coronavirus. The lack of information can be a trigger for those suffering from anxiety and stress ,” added Mishra.

“I have been asking parents to be more caring, to show that they love their kids, to do away with negativity and be more mature during these times, because such trauma can have a lasting effect on kids’ mental health,” said Raj.


