Psychiatrist helps MLA Hostel travellers adjust to quarantine
2020-03-19
Nagpur: The quarantined travellers at MLA Hostel had a psychiatrist visiting them on Wednesday, apart from the health check-ups from time to time. The objective was to judge their state of mind during the stay in quarantine, said sources.

No clinical signs of mental disturbance like depression or other problems were seen. Though they were feeling restless and wanted to go home, even the loneliness was not of the type that is seen in clinical depression, said sources. They may have more visits by the psychiatrist in coming day, said officials here.

These travellers have arrived from the seven designated countries, China, Spain, France, Germany, Italy, South Korea, and Iran.

On Wednesday, 14 more persons were taken to MLA Hostel said a government press release. 

Also, five persons, including a French national who works at Dassault Reliance Aviation Limited (DRAL) at Mihan-SEZ, were released. One of them — Prajeet Gupte from Amravati — who was slated for release, opted to stay at MLA Hostel for the entire 14-day isolation period.

From Thursday morning onwards, all passengers will have to stay for the entire 14-day period and those coming from Gulf countries will also be covered.

By around 4pm on Wednesday, the persons released had begun coming out. Some of them had been inside since three days, including Robert Mate, the French national. They were made to sign an undertaking that they will remain confined to home and report if symptoms develop.

Mate, who complained about the facilities not being up to standards, was seen getting closer to others than the recommended distance of one metre at MLA Hostel, including some officials. He was driven home by a chauffeur. “I have no choice as I have been assigned to take him,” said the driver, his face covered with a handkerchief.

Earlier, there were directives that persons will be kept for 24 hours and released if no symptoms are seen. However, for some, it has also taken longer as the process took time, said an official in the district administration.

The tension could be felt among relatives too, especially parents. One of them — a career consultant, whose son has come from Germany — was seen arguing with the officials. “You should have carried out orientation sessions if the period was to be increased. We were told it’s just 24 hours and now it has been 36 hours,” said the man in his fifties.

“My son has travelled with all precautions, and don’t worry we will keep him in a separate room if he is allowed to go home and be quarantined,” insisted a college teacher, whose son has come from France.

Not long afterwards, as the son of one of them came out, the mother tried to get close to him and was immediately admonished by officials, though she refused to budge.


