Psychiatrists getting more patients amid lockdown
2020-04-19
Aurangabad: Psychiatrists have started experiencing an unprecedented surge in the flow of people facing depression, stress, anxiety and other psychological disorders amid the ongoing lockdown.

Most of the psychiatrists unanimously opined that those with no history of mental illness have started experiencing facing phobic anxiety, depression and even fear of contracting illness. Psychiatrist Vinay Chapalgaonkar said, “We have observed that the patients who were responding positively to our treatment have developed the fear of not getting medicines amid the lockdown or getting infected with Covid-19. Some even fear that the world is going to end.”

Psychiatrists informed that several businessmen, traders and even industrialists were approaching them fearing about their liabilities and what the future holds in store for them. 

Apart from prescribing medication aimed at stable mental health, some psychiatrists are also advising people to limit their exposure to social media and electronic media. 

Psychiatrist Meraj Quadri said, “People should reduce their dependency on constant sources of negative news and rumours. Any person exposed to too much to negativity is bound to experience restlessness, palpitation and insomnia.”

He further advised citizens to turn to their close friends and family members for comfort. “Sharing one’s worries with closed ones is one of the best ways of de-stressing oneself,” said Quadri. 

The restrictions imposed on the sale and supply of liquor, cigarette and other tobacco products has made this period a difficult time for addicts. This, in turn, has increased the number of addicts facing withdrawal symptoms. 

President of Indian Psychiatric Association, Aurangabad, Anand Kale said, “People with a history are showing more symptoms. There is also a surge in the number of patients suffering from anxiety. Over the next few days, people with withdrawal symptoms will only increase, due to lack of access to the substances they are addicted to.”


