Public outcry after decision to shift Covid-19 patients
2020-05-11
Karwar: The sudden spurt in the number of Covid-19 cases in Uttara Kannada district, most of which have been reported in Bhatkal taluk, has prompted the district administration and the government to act post-haste to accommodate and treat the infected patients. To this end, a sum of Rs 1. 5 crore was spent to set up a new Covid-19 ward at the Karwar Institute of Medical Sciences, while a new laboratory is also being established at the hospital. 

Owing to the limited capacity of the local hospital in Bhatkal, the district administration decided to shift infected patients to the Karwar facility. However, this move has drawn flak from public and opposition parties alike. Former MLA and Congress member Satish Sail questioned the rationale in shifting patients from Bhatkal to a facility that was more than 100km away. 

Madhav Nayak, a Karwar-based citizen activist, too voiced reservations over the move. In the past week, Bhatkal has witnessed a worrying surge in the number of infections being reported, and with seven fresh cases being reported in the taluk on Sunday, Uttara Kannada currently has 28 active cases. 

Initially, 11 patients in Bhatkal were admitted to the Patanjali Hospital of the Indian Navy. They were subsequently discharged. 

However, the hospital is no longer being used, prompting the district administration shift patients to Karwar. “What if the pandemic spreads in Karwar too? Who will be held responsible in such a scenario?” asked Anu Kalas, a social activist in Karwar. 

However, the BJP defended the move citing the lack of other viable options. “There is no option but to shift Covid-19 patients to the Karwar hospital till an alternative arrangement can be made in Bhatkal,” said Uttara Kannada BJP president Venkatesh Nayak. 

Uttara Kannada deputy commissioner Harish Kumar K said that the patients were being shifted under extremely safe conditions. “The arrangements are fool-proof, and there is no chance of the infection spreading in Karwar. Senior doctors and officials are monitoring the situation, and people need not worry,” he said. 


