Coronavirus outbreak: Public areas lack soap for handwashing
2020-02-05
COIMBATORE: At a time when medical experts are recommending frequent hand washing with soap and water to reduce risk of infection from the deadly coronavirus (2019-nCoV), most of the public spaces including bus stands, railway stations, public toilets and government-run educational institutions here lack soaps.

“Hand washing is one of the important things that need to be followed to prevent the spread of bacteria and virus. But hardly anyone pays attention to it. Even teachers who educate students about the importance of washing hands, lack proper awareness about it. That’s why most of the government schools don’t have soaps at hand wash stations,” said MA Aparna, trustee of Arc Foundation, which is promoting hand washing among school students. 

“School authorities say that they do not provide soap to students as they play with it and might injure themselves during the play. But, they are children. It is the teachers, who should explain about the importance of hand washing and inculcate discipline,” Aparna told TOI.

The school education department had directed government schools to spend 10% of the school grant to maintain cleanliness and hygiene. The initiative is a part of the Swachh Bharat mission. 

Senior specialist in Tamil Nadu Urban Sanitation Support Programme (TNUSSP) Niladri Chakraborty said that only sophisticated places like airports, shopping malls and restaurants have soap dispensers at wash areas. “Other public places lack soaps. It is mainly due to two reasons – lack of awareness and additional expenses,” he said.

Explaining the need to bring in a behavioural change, the official said that public would start washing hands out of habit if they have access to soap and water at all the places. “But making it a habit is a tough task.”

Most of the public toilets do not have separate hand washing stations, said D Jayakandhan of Clean Toilet. “Bacteria can spread from one place to another by mere touch,” he said.

The situation is same in educational institutions, Jayakandhan said. “Hand washing techniques are being taught to students in over 70% of schools. But it could not be made a habit due to lack of sustainability and negligence,” he added.

Officials of the school education department said that they conducted several sessions to teach hand washing technique to students and also displayed the steps on the walls of washing stations to create awareness.

Pointing out that 10% of the school grant would be used to maintain hygiene, an official said that school managements have been purchasing soaps using the fund.


