Vijayawada: Public shun chicken to keep coronavirus, bird flu at bay
2020-03-01
VIJAYAWADA: While the World Health Organisation has cautioned people against consuming raw or undercooked animal products as part of its list of basic protective measures against the new coronavirus, it has had a considerable impact on the diet of people of Vijayawada. While demand for chicken has crashed by almost 65%, demand for fish has skyrocketed.


Besides the fear of coronavirus, the reported outbreak of Very Virulent Newcastle Disease (VVND) in a poultry farm in the Godavari districts have further fuelled fears. 

Data revealed that cost of chicken fell by 50% in the last three weeks and there has been a simultaneous rise in the cost of mutton. Consequently, sale of fishes has risen, being the only cheaper alternative available.

Nowadays it is not out of ordinary to see long queues at fish markets. Speaking to TOI, Ramesh who runs a retail live fish unit at Patamata Lanka fish market, said “We usually see a huge demand on Sundays. But we are witnessing sales throughout the week. Buyers are showing interest in freshwater fish and we have arranged for small tanks to promote sales. Meanwhile, aquafarmers have increased their prices by Rs 40 per kilogram. Consumers are happy as they are able to buy a big fish for the cost of 1 kilo mutton.” 

Fisheries authorities have confirmed to TOI that the average consumption of fish has increased in recent times. “Aquafarmers of Kalidhindi, Kaikaluru, Gudivada are happy with the rise in demand. Domestic consumption in the district has increased by 50%. The government is encouraging farmers to cultivate fishes in a healthy atmosphere and helping them earn profits,” said SK Lal Mohammed, joint director at the fisheries department.

Meanwhile, physicians have swung into action and are trying to debunk claims that coronavirus can spread through the consumption of meat. “ Fish is a good source of protein and it is healthy for all age groups. But it should be preserved in a healthy atmosphere. There is no chance of the spread of coronavirus from meat,” said Dr Vattipalli Bhagyaraj, a city-based physician.

