Coronavirus outbreak in Delhi: Public transport goes into shutdown mode
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: Even before chief minister Arvind Kejriwal announced lockdown of the capital on Sunday evening, the city was already a ghost town since morning with Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s call for “janata curfew” receiving overwhelming support.


As a majority of Delhiites remained indoors, the roads were weirdly deserted on Sunday. While Delhi Metro Rail Corporation had earlier announced that its train services would be completely closed, other modes of transport were soon added to the list. All autorickshaw and taxi unions announced that they would not operate their vehicles in support of the call given by the PM.

Sarvodaya Drivers’ Association of Delhi, which represents drivers of app-based cabs, said that they would stay off the roads. Aggregators Ola and Uber said that while they had requested riders to stay at home, a nominal number of cabs were available to meet urgent and essential travel needs of commuters.

The only form of public transport visible on the roads were buses of Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) and cluster scheme operated by Delhi Integrated Multi-Modal Transit System. Delhi government had decided that 50% of buses would run on Sunday. “While around 80% of the fleet of both DTC and cluster scheme are deployed usually, this Sunday only 50% were on the roads,” a Delhi government official said.

There were just a few autorickshaws and cabs occasionally seen on the roads. Though the frequency of buses was more regular, not more five passengers could be seen in them. In fact, the only people seen were those waiting for public transport at bus queue shelters.

While Indian Railways suspended all train operations around noon, people could be seen at all major railway stations. The roads outside were, however, deserted.

The Interstate Bus Terminals at Kashmere Gate, Anand Vihar and Sarai Kale Khan wore a forlorn look because of lack of commuters as well as buses. “These three ISBTs together register a footfall of more than three lakh every day. Sunday witnessed a rare scene as people voluntarily cooperated in the fight against Covid-19,” the official said.


