Coronavirus scare: Public spaces in Mumbai off-limits or open for limited hours
2020-03-17
Temples close, churches truncate Lenten observance

Several leading temples in the city will close for darshan beginning Tuesday in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. Trustees of Siddhivinayak temple, Mumbadevi Mandir, Mahalakshmi, Babulnath and ISKCON took this decision following a recommendation by chief minister Uddhav Thackeray.


The shutdown will last until March 31 and a review will be undertaken thereafter. Siddhivinayak temple, Prabhadevi, receives around 30,000 worshippers every day, with the number doubling on weekends, even rising to a lakh on festival days. Aadesh Bandekar, trust chairman, said, “Our regular pujas and worship will continue inside but public entry will be barred.”


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The archdiocese of Bombay may close churches if it receives a formal word from the government. Fr Nigel Barrett, spokesman for the archdiocese, said, “We will of course comply with any government decision because it will be in public interest. We have cancelled and limited several Lenten observances and processions of our own volition already.” 

APMC to be shut 2 days a week 

Mumbai APMC market at Vashi has announced a two-day shutdown every Thursday and Sunday till March 31 to keep the market yard disinfected and sanitized.

 APMC office bearers have also appealed to consumers to place an order of their requirements so that home deliveries can be made, which will help minimize exposure to the disease. Cleanliness is stressed at the market yards. Sanjay Pansare, director of APMC, said, “The market committee and trader’s association have unanimously decided to shut both vegetable and fruit markets for two days of a week to carry out extensive cleaning and disinfecting work. Other market yards such as grain and spices will operate as usual.”

HC hearings for 2 hours a day 

Bombay high court has restricted its hearings to two hours daily from March 17 till further orders while the lower courts will work for maximum three hours. The courts will hear only urgent matters. This comes as part of measures “to avoid congestion and occasion of close contacts” in view of the Covid-19 pandemic and was taken at a meeting by Acting Chief Justice Bhushan Dharmadhikari and senior judges with representatives of bar associations. It will also apply to HC benches of Nagpur, Aurangabad and Goa. The staff of HC and lower courts will work at 50% its strength.

On Monday, despite an earlier circular directing production of undertrials over video-conferencing, several accused, including Peter Mukerjea and Sanjeev Khanna (Sheena Bora murder case), Rakesh and Sarang Wadhawan (PMC Bank fraud case) were brought for hearing to court. The Wadhawans wore masks as did their family members. 

Law firms ‘work from home’

Leading law firm Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas (CAM) has asked everyone to work from home for a week to begin with, from Tuesday. The precautionary step is taken “firm-wide,” said its managing partner Cyril Shroff. Zia Mody and Rajendra Barot, founding partners at another leading law firm AZB, also confirmed that plans were afoot to have a ‘work from home’ regime from Wednesday. Law firms ALMT had curtailed work hours from 11am to 4pm, said managing partner Sameer Tapia. Parinam law firm partner Hitesh Jain said from Tuesday the entire office will work from home. 

 No entry to National Park 

After the shutdown of Veer Mata Jijabai Bhosale Udyan and Zoo, all entry points to Sanjay Gandhi National Park will be closed for locals, said its chief conservator of forest (CCF). The announcement was made on Monday after which a notice was put up on all the entry points of the national park stating that it will be shut from March 17 to March 31. It is learnt during weekdays around 4,000 people visit the park and on holidays the number goes up to over 9,000. “Only villagers or forest officials will get an entry to the park,” said Anwar Ahmed, CCF of SGNP.

Esselworld shut for 1st time 

Amusement parks EsselWorld and Water Kingdom at Gorai, Borivli, have been closed to visitors till March 31. The step was taken upon instructions from the state government. Paresh Mishra, senior vice-president, sales and marketing, EsselWorld Leisure, said, “Esselworld has been operational since 1989 and Water Kingdom since 1998, yet we have not closed for a single day since then. But this coronavirus crisis is unprecedented, and we need to close our premises to protect our staff and guests.” 

Racing suspended

The Royal Western India Turf Club has suspended racing till further notice in view of the novel coronavirus outbreak.agencies


(Inputs by Bella Jaisinghani, B B Nayak, Rosy Sequeira, Rebecca Samervel, Swati Deshpande, Shrutika Sukhi) 

