Pune: 200 travellers now on radar of district administration for coronavirus
2020-03-15
PUNE: The district authorities will now track around 200 people, including foreign guests staying in five-star hotels and the travellers returning to Pune from international destinations in the past 15 days.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The number of travellers returning to the city from international destinations in the past one month went up to over 300 on Satur- day, the district collector’s data showed. The district authorities bifurcated this data to include only the travellers who returned to the city during the past 15 days based on the premise that Covid-19 had a 14-day incubation period and arrived at a figure of 163.

The authorities also tracked the number of international guests currently staying in hotels in the city, which took the number of people to be tracked for Covid-19 to around 200.

District collector Naval Kishore Ram told TOI that number of tour agencies sent more updates on Saturday, pushing the number of travellers returning to Pune in the past month to over 300. “When we looked at the figures of the past 15 days — from February 19 till March 14 —we arrived at the figure of 163 such travellers who now need to be tracked. With such high numbers, the most important aspect is to track travellers who have returned in the past two weeks,” said Ram, adding that these numbers were dynamic and being updated regularly.

He said when the hotels furnished data on the international guests who checked-in and checked out in the past one month, the figures of such guests added up to around 630 and odd. “Though these guests have gone back, we got an idea with this figure the degree of inflow of foreign guests into the hotels in Pune. We have accordingly framed guidelines to be followed by hotels against the backdrop of Covid-19, which are mandatory,” he said.

Ram said there were around 35-40 international guests in five-star hotels in the city till March18 and their travel history was being sought.

“Our teams have set out to contact these 200-plus travellers and guests, and reports would be prepared soon based on the teams’ contact with these people. We also had a meeting with representatives of the Osho International Meditation Resort, which too has around 50 international guests,” he said.

Ram also released a six-minute awareness video on Covid-19 on Saturday.


