Covid-19: Pune accounts for 63% patients in Southern Command cantonments
2020-06-01
PUNE: The cantonment area in Pune has accounted for 63% of the total 652 nCoV infections recorded so far in the 19 cantonments under the Southern Command.


A report prepared by the office of the Principal Director Defence Estates for periodical monitoring of the situation in the cantonments under the Southern Command, has revealed that of the 416 cases, the Pune cantonment has seen 240 patients, the most, discharged after recovery. 

Pune, along with Khadki and Dehu Road cantonments, are part of the Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR).

“This explains the high number of cases in Pune cantonment, which has 174 active cases,” an officer from the command headquarters said. 

Going by death count, Sagar cantonment in Madhya Pradesh has recorded five deaths as against two each by Pune and Khadki cantonments. A total of 11 deaths have been reported in the Southern Command area with Ahmedabad and Chennai (St Thomas Mount) recording one death each. 

Khadki and Dehu Road cantonments have three and one active cases. Khadki had recorded 32 nCoV cases and 27 patients have been discharged. 

The cantonment in Ahmednagar district has remained nCoV-free till date. Aurangabad and Deolali (Nashik) cantonments had 10 and three cases, but the patients have recovered.

Amit Kumar, Pune Cantonment Board’s chief executive officer, told TOI on Sunday, “Of the 19 cantonments, Pune is the largest and most densely populated. It has now become a part of Pune city now unlike other cantonments that are still outside the city limits. Moreover, some of our congested localities are in the vicinity of the city’s worst affected areas like Bhawani Peth and other areas.” 

Kumar said the Pune Cantonment Board is treating Covid-19 patients from the PCB as well as Pune city limits. 

“This reflects in the high number of case count. Most of our cases are from New Modikhana, Modikhana and Bhimpura, all congested localities. We have intensified door-to-door survey for identifying people with co-morbidities and are testing people in high numbers. A dedicated ICU is also coming up at our general hospital.”

A former senior defence services officer pointed out that Khadki cantonment which does not have big slum pockets managed to control nCoV cases by taking appropriate measures. 


