Pune’s first Covid-19 patients off medicines, wait for quarantine to end
2020-03-19
PUNE: Ten days after a couple and their daughter were placed in quarantine at the Naidu hospital on March 9 after they tested positive for coronavirus, they have been put off medication amid signs that they are recovering well.


All three are waiting for the mandatory quarantine period to get over so that they can get back to their normal lives. “We are feeling fit and have no health complaints,” the couple told TOI on Wednesday. 

A doctor from Naidu hospital who has been treating them said, "The couple and their daughter will be among the first to be discharged. As per the discharge policy, their throat swab samples will be tested twice within 24 hours. If they test negative in both the tests, they will be allowed to go home."

The husband said his colleagues at work were waiting for him to resume office after his discharge. All three have been undergoing treatment under the watchful eyes of the doctors at the hospital.

“Since Monday, the doctors have stopped giving us any medicines. We have completed our course which was extended for two days as a precautionary step. We were responding well and had no health complaints,” the husband said. 

The couple’s son tested negative but was also quarantined at Naidu Hospital in another building as precaution. He too will be discharged soon. 

“We have to follow the protocol so that others outside do not suffer. The doctors have been checking out blood pressure, pulse rate and other parameters which is more routine. They are happy with our progress so it is just the waiting period that we are undergoing,” the husband added. 

But the quarantine has weighed on them. They had run out of ideas for spending time at the hospital, he added. 

“How much are we going to read and watch shows on cellphones? It gets boring at times. But, there are a few other patients here who are progressing well and we often sit in the evenings and chat. That way we get to know each other and we share our thoughts,” he said. 

Many of the quarantined patients, he added, were disconnected with the outside world and had refused to read the news or forwards on social media to keep a healthy mind. 

“We speak to our friends over the phone and they tell us about what is happening but we prefer to stay disconnected,” he said.


