Pune among 5 cities for clinical trials of Ashwagandha to treat Covid-19
2020-05-11
PUNE: The city, besides Mumbai, Lucknow, Varanasi and Delhi, will participate in the AYUSH’s clinical trials on the use of ayurvedic medicines on Covid-19 patients and healthcare workers. 

Private hospitals in the five cities have come forward to conduct the trials organized by the ministry of ayurveda, yoga and naturopathy, unani, siddha and homoeopathy (AYUSH) on their health workers and patients for a period of three months. 

 

Two eminent experts from Pune, including Bhushan Patwardhan, chair of the inter-disciplinary AYUSH Research and development task force, and Arvind Chopra, chair of the clinical trial group at AYUSH ministry, are playing important roles in the clinical trial programme. 

The experts are planning to administer formulation of Ashwagandha tablets. instead of hydrocloroquine (HCQ). to healthcare workers, such as doctors, nurses and ward boys, who are in direct contact with the Covid-19 patients. In the second programme, the experts will advice formation of Guduchi and Pippali, Yashtimadhu and Ayush 64 tablets as an add-on medicine to the current treatment of the Covid-19 patients. Analysis and assessment will be conducted after three months and the success will be determined. 

AYUSH secretary Rajesh Kotecha said, “The study period for the trial will be 12 weeks. After that, an analysis will be done and the report will be ready for publication in three months from now. We will study the intervention of Ashwagandha, which has been tried in several medical cases. It is known to be a very good drug to enhance the immune system to fight all infections. For the second trial, we have selected three ayurvedic medicines as an add-on to the standard Covid-19 treatment regimen.” 

Patwardhan said, “The protocol has been drafted and the ethics committees of different hospitals will be approved. This will take about two-three days. The clearances will come by next week and the clinical trial registration shall be done. The actual trials will start by the third week of May. The task force has identified about 8-10 hospitals in the five cities. Though more hospitals are coming forward, health hubs from the five cities will be considered for the first round of trials.” 

He added, “The protocol designing took two weeks and it gives a detailed methodology of how clinical trials will be conducted. There is a need to have a safer alternative to HCQ. We think Ashwagandha is the answer to this.”

AYUSH chief clinical coordinator Arvind Chopra said, “We are conducting a random comparison between Ashwagandha and and HCQ. Ashwagandha will be given to health workers, who have not taken HCQ earlier and are actively involved in the medical management of Covid-19 patients. We also plan to scientifically pick 1,000 people, other than healthcare workers such as policemen, drivers and officials, and also monitor them for the effects of Ashwagandha.”

