Punjab: Ludhiana ACP in ICU since April 7 dies of Covid-19
2020-04-19
LUDHIANA/CHANDIGARH: Ludhiana assistant commissioner of police Anil Kohli (52), who had contracted Covid-19, died of multiple organ failure on Saturday afternoon. He is survived by his wife, who too was confirmed to have contracted the virus on Friday, and two sons.


“Anil joins the hallowed ranks of over 1,800 Punjab policemen who gave their lives for their motherland,” DGP Dinkar Gupta tweeted on Saturday afternoon.

The chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh too condoled his demise along with that of kanungo (revenue officer) Gurmel Singh, who died of Covid-19 on Friday. Amarinder announced Rs 50 lakh ex gratia to the next of kin of both the officers and said similar amount will be paid to kin of any officer who dies in the line of duty due to novel coronavirus.

“Deeply saddened to lose two of my officials to #Covid19. Have decided to pay Rs 50 lakh ex-gratia to their next to kin. While I pray such an incident shouldn’t happen, but if it does, state govt will pay Rs 50 lakh to NoK of officials who die in line of duty due to #Covid19,” he tweeted.

Kohli was directly involved in contact tracing and area containment in Ludhiana and also helped ensure so cial distancing was implemented at Ludhiana sabzi mandi after imposition of lockdown across the country.

The police officer had visited the outpatient department of SPS Hospital at 2pm on April 7, complaining of fever and breathlessness. He was admitted to its Covid-19 ICU the same day but his first test came negative. His second test confirmed that he had contracted Covid-19 on April 12. He was on ventilator since April 11. His security guard and a station house officer also tested positive for coronavirus on Friday.

OFFICER SUFFERED MULTI-ORGAN FAILURE

ACP died before plasma therapy

The Punjab government had on Friday given its permission for clinical use of convalescent plasma therapy for the police officer. The Mohali district had on Saturday morning sent a fully-recovered coronavirus patient to Ludhiana for donating plasma to treat the police officer. However, his condition deteriorated and the plan was dropped.

Giving details, senior consultant Dr Gautam Agarwal at the hospital where he was being treated said the police officer's health deteriorated on Saturday afternoon and he died due to multi-organ failure. He was on dialysis on Friday night and his BP dropped further. We gave whatever medications needed but his condition did not improve.”

Dr Gurpreet Singh of the same hospital said the officer had developed kidney dysfunction two days back. The survival of Covid-19 patients with multi-organ dysfunction and on ventilator is not that hopeful and good, he said.

“As Covid-19 is a new disease with no clear-cut treatment or an effective anti-viral drug, treatment for critically sick Covid-19 patients at present is best of supportive intensive care and trial medication.”

According to the ACP’s family, the police officer was cremated by his son with full state honours at the gas crematorium in Ludhiana. His cremation was attended by Ludhiana police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal and local MP Ravneet Singh Bittu.

SAD president Sukhbir Singh Badal too condoled his death. “Saddened to hear Ludhiana ACP Anil Kumar Kohli lost his battle to #Covid-19 just few minutes back. He served the state police for about 30 years. May Gurusahib grant peace to the departed soul. My thoughts and prayers are with the bereaved family & friends,” he tweeted.

Born in Jalandhar, Anil Kohli had joined the Punjab police as assistant sub-inspector on February 19, 1990 in Patiala district when terrorism was at its peak. In his career of over 30 years, Kohli earned many commendation certificates and was promoted as deputy superintendent of police on April 29, 2016. He served as DSP in district Khanna, Ferozepur, Patiala, Fatehgarh Sahib, SBS Nagar, Hoshiarpur and Ludhiana City.


