Coronavirus scare: Punjab cabinet urges people to defer wedding ceremonies
2020-03-17
CHANDIGARH: In the wake of a rise in coronavirus (Covid-19) cases, the Punjab cabinet on Monday urged people to either defer wedding functions or ensure not more than 50 persons were present at the event.


The cabinet also appealed to religious and dera heads to limit gatherings and educate followers about Covid-19 and its dangers. Already reeling under a shortage of doctors and paramedic staff, the council of ministers decided to give a six-month extension in service to staff members who were to retire after attaining the age of 58 years on March 31.

The state government had recently abolished the provision of granting two-year extension in service. To effectively control coronavirus, the cabinet on gave ex-post facto approval to the decision of granting extension in service to doctors and paramedic staff till September 30. Medical colleges have been kept open as a support system. 

The cabinet decided that MBBS students who were not employed should be contacted and asked by the department to stand by on voluntary basis.

Punjab chief minister Capt Amarinder Singh directed that private and state-run buses must carry hand sanitisers for the use of passengers to ensure hygiene and secure travellers.

The cabinet passed a resolution appealing people to avoid going to crowded places and mass gatherings, to maintain hand and respiratory hygiene, and to ensure cleanliness of their surroundings. People were also advised to wash hands frequently with soap and water or hand sanitisers, and they should avoid touching their face, said an official after the meeting. The CM urged people not to panic and take all precautions, while avoiding crowded places and mass gatherings.

People have been advised to avoid non-essential travel, said the resolution. It said people who are having cough, sneezing and fever should immediately contact 104 (medical helpline of the health department) or controlrooms of their respective district.

The CM asked all ministers to monitor the situation and ensure implementation of curbs in their districts, in close coordination with administration. He urged them to hold regular meetings with the local administration to maintain visibility in districts and boost the confidence of people.

