Punjab: 2,081 government schools declared quarantine centres in Patiala
2020-05-02
PATIALA: The district administration in Patiala declared all the government schools, including primary, middle and senior secondary schools as quarantine centres till further orders. The decision has been taken by the deputy commissioner to deal the Covid-19 suspects under the Epidemic Act and Disaster Management Act. The decision has come a day after a number of pilgrims from Nanded Sahib and some persons from Rajasthan have been evacuated and brought back to the districts of Punjab. 

In Patiala, around 146 persons, including 95 pilgrims, were brought by the government buses.
 

Deputy commissioner Kumar Amit revealed that there are 2,081 schools in the district including primary, high schools and senior secondary schools. He said that the step was taken as a precautionary measure so that the suspects in rural areas can be quarantined in their village school or neighbouring village if any need arises.

The district authorities had already declared number of government buildings including colleges, NIS Patiala, some inns and others as quarantine centres having capacity of more than 5,000 persons including Chiranji Ashram with a capacity of 150 quarantine beds, government college (girls) with a capacity of 450 quarantine beds, government Mohindra college with 200 beds, a government state college of education with 342 beds, NIS Patiala with 120 beds, government polytechnic college with 200 beds, Gurudwara Dukh Niwaran Sahib with 300 beds, Gurudwara Parmeshwar Dwar having 200 beds, Khalsa College with 70 beds, Laxmi Bai Dental College at Sirhind road with 250 beds and Gurudwara Bahadurgarh Rajpura road with 150 beds. However, it has now raised its capacity by announcing all the schools in the district as quarantine centres.
 

Meanwhile deputy commissioner claimed that if need arises other government buildings may also be used as quarantine centres. He said that over 2,200 buildings including government schools have now been made as quarantine centres. 


