Punjab’s worry: With 40.7 cases a day, Covid resurging in Unlock 1.0
2020-06-07
CHANDIGARH: After witnessing a drop in the number of Covid-19 cases in Lockdown 4.0, following the peak recorded during previous two lockdowns, Punjab is hit by another worrying trend — a significant jump in the number of people testing positive every day since commencement of Unlock 1.0.

In first six days of Unlock 1.0, 40.66 cases per day have been reported. In all, 244 people have tested positive in this period, accounting for about 10% of total cases. Most of these cases are contacts of positive cases or people returning to Punjab. Also, six people have succumbed to the virus during this period.

The virus has so far infected 2,515 people and claimed 50 lives. The latst surge has worsened Punjab's doubling rate, which is the number of days it takes for cases to double. After going up to 102 days on May 24, doubling rate has come down to 43.

Things were apparently under control during the first lockdown. In the 23-day period, seven cases per day on average were reported.

But, things went downhill during the next two phases of restriction as 51.57 cases per day on average were reported during the second lockdown and 58.14 cases per day in the third lockdown, which lasted for two weeks each. In all, 1,794 people were infected during the second and third lockdown. Of them, 1,129 were pilgrims who returned from Nanded in Maharashtra. In fourth lockdown, which had 14 days, the average per day number of cases fell to 22.

Health experts said the number of cases is expected to increase at pace due to lifting of restrictions and practical difficulties in keeping social distancing, especially in populated areas. Punjab health department spokesperson for Covid-19 Dr Rajesh Bhaskar said the government was focusing more on increasing testing, so infected people could be isolated at earliest.

To increase the capacity of sample collection, the government is set to start give special training to community health officers, staff nurses and pharmacists for collection and packing of swabs for RT-PCR COVID-19 testing. At present, samples are collected by medical officers. The government is also in process of setting up four more testing laboratories.


