Coronavirus: Punjab man is 4th victim, 54 cases reported in 2 days
2020-03-20
India recorded its fourth death due to Covid-19 on Thursday even as fresh cases surged in the country, with more than 50 recorded in the past two days. The country’s fourth coronavirus victim was a 70-year-old man from Punjab, who had returned from a two-week trip to Germany via Italy.


As many as 27 new cases were reported on Thursday from 14 states, taking the total number of cases recorded in India so far to 198. There has been a spike in the number of new cases in the past two days, with 54 being reported from the states. The health ministry has confirmed 173 cases so far.

The virus travelled to new territories with Gujarat and Chhattisgarh reporting their first cases on Thursday.


More on Covid-19

 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete coverage
  Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
  52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
  Helpline numbers for states and UTs
  Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
  How to stay safe
  How to quarantine yourself at home
 
The latest Covid-19 casualty, a native of Punjab’s Nawanshahr district, was a patient of hypertension and diabetes. He died on Wednesday morning. Test reports of his samples received on Thursday confirmed that he was suffering from Covid-19.

Government officials said he had gone on a two-week trip to Germany via Italy and landed at Delhi on March 6 and left for Punjab the same day. After the man’s samples confirmed the virus, authorities completely blocked his village. “We have quarantined around 56 villagers, including 18 from his family, and relatives who came in contact with him,” Nawanshahr civil surgeon Dr Rajinder Bhatia said, adding that those quarantined include the doctor, nurse and ward body who attended on him. “He reported typical symptoms of heart attack with chest pain and died in around 25 minutes,” said Bhatia.



 
The number of states reporting Covid-19 deaths has gone up to four now, the other three being Karnataka, Maharashtra and Delhi.

With Gujarat reporting two confirmed cases and Chhattisgarh one, the number of states and Union territories affected by the dreaded virus rose from 18 to 20 on Thursday.

A 32-year-old man in Rajkot and a 21-year-old woman in Surat tested positive for the virus, principal secretary, health, Jayanti Ravi said. The Rajkot man had landed in Mumbai from Mecca on March 7 along with 10 others and they reached the city by Bandra-Jamnagar Saurashtra Janta Express on March 8. Sixteen persons who were in contact with him, including his relatives, have been quarantined at a special facility set up in the city.

Rajkot district health officer Manish Bhanderi told TOI: “In all, there were 68 people in the coach. Of these, 15 were residents of Rajkot while 45 others have either returned to Mumbai or de-boarded before Rajkot. We have contacted these 60 people and they are not ill. However, five passengers are incommunicado while three had given the number of their booking agents.”

The second case in Gujarat is of a 21-year-old girl who had landed in Mumbai from London on March 13 and reached Surat on March 14. The girl, who studies in London, was admitted in the isolation ward of the New Civil Hospital on March 16 after she complained of severe cough, fever and cold.

“We have shifted eight of her close contacts, including parents, to a special quarantine facility,’’ Banchhanidhi Pani, Surat municipal commissioner, told TOI. On Thursday, prohibitory orders were imposed in Surat, banning gathering of four or more people in public places under Section 144 of CrPC.

Of the 23 fresh cases in the country on Thursday, three each were reported from Telangana and Maharashtra, two each from Delhi, Gujarat, Uttarakhand, Andhra and UP, and one each from Haryana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Karnataka, Odisha and Chhattisgarh.

Maharashtra continues to top the list with 48 cases. The three new cases reported from the state on Thursday include a 22-year-old woman with a travel history to the UK, a 49-year-old woman from Ulhasnagar who had travelled to Dubai and a 51-year-old from Ahmednagar who had been to Dubai with his wife. The wife has tested negative. State health minister Rajesh Tope said two Covid-19 patients were critical and on ventilator support while other patients were doing well.

At 28, Kerala has the second highest Covid-19 cases in the country while UP ranks third with 19 cases.

