Covid-19 scare in Bhubaneswar: Puri restricts entry of tourists, clamps Section 144 on beaches
2020-03-17
BHUBANESWAR: The Puri district administration on Monday started restricting the entry of tourists from other states and abroad to prevent the spread of coronavirus putting the pilgrim town in a state of near lockdown. 


The toll plaza at Pipili on the Bhubaneswar-Puri national highway 316, a key entry route to Puri, was virtually sealed by the district administration to prevent the entry of tourists to the town.

Sources said at least 200 Puri-bound buses and 400 cars, bearing the registration numbers of other states, were stopped at the Pipili toll plaza and asked to return with the tourists. At least 5,000 tourists were asked to return from the toll plaza, which is about 30km from Puri. 

The district administration, however, has not ordered immediate evacuation of tourists who are already in Puri so far.

“Our intention is not to create panic among tourists. For their own safety and prevention of the spread of the killer virus, our joint teams comprising officials of the road transport, police and health departments inspected the vehicles at the toll plaza. Tourists were requested to cancel their Puri tours and return home,” district collector (Puri) Balwant Singh told TOI.

The restriction angered many tourists, who had checked into hotels in Puri and gone for sightseeing in Bhubaneswar, covering a distance of only 60km. “We have put up in a hotel in Puri. Strangely, we were not being allowed to return to Puri. With great difficulty, we managed to convince the officials, who allowed us to enter our hotel. The administration should have made prior announcement before imposing such restrictions or sealing the routes,” Jayanto Dey, a tourist from Bengal’s Howrah said, said. 

Singh said, “We have asked hoteliers to keep a close watch on the tourists, especially foreigners, and their health conditions. Restrictions have already been imposed on the movement of the tourists in different destinations, including the Jagannath Temple in Puri and the Sun Temple in Konark. We seek peoples cooperation to effectively deal with the crisis situation.” 

The district administration, which had on Saturday appealed to tourists to cancel their tours to Puri for next few days, on Monday imposed prohibitory orders under Section 144 of the CrPC on the beaches in Puri and Konark. “As a precautionary measure against coronavirus, we advised tourists to stay inside the hotel and not congregate on the beaches. Police personnel have been deployed on the beaches to dissuade people from thronging the seashore,” Singh said.


