Pushcart vendors make hay while coronavirus sends people indoors
2020-04-16
Coimbatore: Business has never been dull for K Bhaskar ever since the lockdown came into force. In fact, he has been doing brisk sales, of late. And if you are wondering what works for him, that is his pushcart. 

At 11.30am on Wednesday, Bhaskar was spotted in front of a private apartment on East Periyasamy Road in RS Puram. Around his vegetable pushcart were at least four to five women and men, who were quickly picking up vegetables and filling their bags. Just as they were about to leave, another man was seen walking hurriedly towards the cart. 

Bhaskar admits there has been an increase in sales since the lockdown began. “My income has doubled to Rs 8,000 a day from Rs 4,000. Earlier, I used to work for 10 hours in RS Puram area. But today I am earning double the income from the same area in just five hours.” 

While nearly all other businesses are reporting zero or crashing revenues, the pushcart vegetable and fruit vendors have an entirely different story to say. With the state government instructing people to maintain physical distancing and not to venture out of their houses unnecessarily, they have suddenly found pushcart vendors “more convenient”. 

Janaki T, a resident of East Ramalingam Road, says, “They literally come to our doorsteps, so we don’t have to step out. This way, we are not near strangers in a closed air-conditioned space, which is scary. Since they come regularly, we don’t have to hoard and deal with spoilage. It also ensures fresh supply of vegetables and fruits.” 

Another factor that makes these pushcart vendors popular among the people is the easy access to them. They don’t have to wait in long queues like they do in front of branded outlets and return empty-handed. As a result, there is an influx of pushcarts on the streets, selling vegetables and fruits. 

Lakshmi Narayanasamy, a resident of Saibaba Colony, says, “I used to go to uzhavar sandhai, but with the number of Covid-19 cases increasing so rapidly in the district, I now prefer buying from these carts even if it costs me Rs 100 more a week. All these disinfecting and having a shower immediately after returning from market are so stressful. It’s like going to war.” 

Gnanaprakash, who sells fruits on his bike and goes to apartments and gated communities on request, says the business has been so good since the lockdown that he has convinced two of his friends to join him last week. “We sell grapes, oranges, apples and guava. We buy it from the market near Karpagoundanur and sell it to people at the gate of their apartments,” says the man, who travels all the way from Narasimanaickenpalayam to Gandhipark to sell fruits. 

Most vegetable vendors like Bhaskar buy their stock from the Anna wholesale market on Mettupalayam Road. Some vendors, however, buy directly from farmers, relieving the agriculture community in the process. 

T Palanisamy, a farmer from Periyanaickenpalayam, says, “While I find it safer to sell to a wholesaler, my usual client has not been picking up my calls. One person approached me last week and agreed to buy 50kg each of tomato, brinjal and lady’s finger. I happily agreed.” 


