Push for ordinance to exclude ‘Covid default’
2020-05-18
NEW DELHI/MUMBAI: The government is set to push for promulgation of ordinances to amend the Companies Act and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, which will allow the Centre to exclude Covid-19 related debt from the definition of “default” and prevent triggering insolvency proceeding.


The comfort to companies that are finding it tough to repay loans, as their revenues have severely depleted due to the lockdown, comes along with the suspension of insolvency proceedings for up to one year due to the pandemic.

Sources said the ministry of corporate affairs will soon decide if the exclusion of delinquencies from the default definition will include loans availed during lockdown or even some of the debt that was taken just before the government ordered the halt on all activities at the end of March.

 


The date will be decided in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as lenders will be affected by the decision taken by the government. The move, however, brought cheer as it will give borrowers breathing space, help lenders retain the value of assets and protect their balance sheets.

“These are not ordinary times and extraordinary measures are required,” said Union Bank MD & CEO Rajkiran Rai. “There are some businesses like for instance toll collections or those in shopping malls that have had no revenue because of the Covid lockdown,” he added.

“I reasonably assume that the regulators may also consider restructuring scheme and extending of the moratorium,” Rai added. In the past, the regulator has responded to the crisis by allowing lenders to extent a one-time restructuring of loan schemes. Under such schemes, the burden on the borrower is reduced by either providing a break in repayment, lowering the interest rate or even giving some relief on the loan.

The immediate impact of not classifying the borrower as a defaulter would be that the lenders will not attach assets or sell the company under the insolvency process to recover their loan. Also, as long as an account is not a non-performing asset, they can lend more money to tide over the crisis.

In addition, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman also announced fast-tracking amendments to the Companies Act to further decriminalise it and also create the regulator framework for Indian companies to directly list overseas, proposals that were in the last Companies Amendment Bill, which is awaiting parliamentary clearance.


