Put people coming from red zones in quarantine centres on state borders: Uttarakhand HC to government
2020-05-21
NAINITAL: The Uttarakhand high court (HC) on Wednesday directed the state government to establish quarantine centres at the borders of Uttarakhand and keep each migrant coming from red zones at these centres for a week. The HC further directed the state government to also test each quarantined migrant showing symptoms of novel coronavirus.

The directions came from the division bench of Justice Sudhanshu Dhulia and Justice Ravindra Maithani while hearing a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) that put forth that mere thermal screening of people entering the state is not enough since most of the Covid-19 cases are asymptomatic. 

“At each border point, the state government shall make every possible effort to establish and make functional quarantine centres. All such returnees who are coming from red zones shall be kept in these quarantine centres for a period of one week. Out of these quarantined persons, those who have necessary symptoms, as per the guidelines of ICMR, shall be tested for RT-PCR,” the court said in its order. 

The bench further directed the state government to “immediately procure the rapid testing kits and start testing people at borders.” The court also said that the ICMR-approved ELISA tests should be done across the state, adding though that both these tests should be done for surveillance purposes. 

“The rapid antibody test has not been approved by ICMR for diagnostic purposes, but since the result of this test is available in much less time, such tests can be used for surveillance purposes alone. At least it would be a better surveillance than the surveillance by thermal screening... the rapid test kit be procured immediately and testing be done by this method, on experiment basis at the border points. We have also been informed that ICMR has approved a testing kit… such tests have already been performed in district Pauri Garhwal of Uttarakhand. Let it be done for surveillance purposes in other districts as well,” the court order read. 

These directions from the HC come just a day after a division bench headed by Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan had declared the migrants’ right to return to Uttarakhand as “a fundamental right guaranteed by Article 21” and obligated both the state and Centre to “make every effort to bring each willing migrant back to the state.” 

The HC on Wednesday reiterated that the migrants have the right to come back to their native state but there must be proper screening. “We are not against the arrival of the people. They have every right to come. Our only concern is that in these difficult times, there must be proper screening at the borders.”

The court also said that the discovery of coronavirus cases in interior areas of the Himalayan state like Betal Ghat in Nainital as well as Uttarkashi, Tehri and Almora was “absolutely alarming”. 

The state government through its Advocate General (AG) has been directed to file a progress report by June 2 when the case will be heard next. 


