Puzzles are the new boredom busters in global lockdown era
2020-04-16
Jaideep.Shenoy

Mangaluru: Ingenuity is the name of the game when it comes to killing time and busting boredom during the ongoing lockdown. If one has grown an aversion for Covid-19 ‘gyaan’ on “WhatsApp University” or is bored with the OTT platforms, solving puzzles — picture-based or otherwise, is the new fad. While some are outright creative, the others also give adequate scope for mirth.

Entrepreneur Sumith Rao finds these puzzles the ideal stress buster. “It helps keep oneself occupied,” Sumith who regularly posts such puzzles in WhatsApp groups told TOI. 

The lockdown eats into one’s psyche of being forced to stay indoors, he said, adding that solving puzzles not only helps keep one’s brains sharp, but also unwittingly ensures that time flies by.

Ajitha, a home-maker who has emerged as a “puzzle champion” in her family group, however, is candid in admitting that it isn’t solo effort always. When a relative complimented her for cracking a collage of Bollywood starlets of yesteryears and getting most of the answers spot on, she replied, “I can’t take full credit for this at it was a joint effort by my husband and I!” 

On the flip side, these puzzles frequently hop groups and so do the answers for them. Lizzy, owner of a beauty salon in Bengaluru, loves to tease her classmates by posting the puzzles in their group. Even as the answers keep trickling in, she drops the “answer bombshell”, which by her own admission is something which she had beforehand. This, in turn, triggers a round of banter within the group.

What is interesting is the fact that some of them admit they took the help of their children in getting to the bottom of the puzzle. When their honesty is appreciated and a suggestion made that the child in question deserves a treat for solving some real complex ones, they are game. 

Given that WhatsApp helps people transcend times zones and geographical boundaries with ease, answers literally come in from across the globe, points Savitha Muralidhar, an IT professional who recently moved to Australia from Bengaluru. “While the picture-based puzzles are relatively easy, ones that involve mathematics does tend to scare people for whom numbers do not just add up,” says Savitha, a student.


