Private Covid-19 testing labs to double as fever clinics: Karnataka govt
2020-04-02
BENGALURU: Private laboratories conducting Covid-19 tests will act as fever clinics-cum-testing centres and follow all protocols of such clinics, the state government said on Wednesday. It also pointed out that as per Indian Council of Medical Research guidelines, the cost of testing samples must not exceed Rs 4,500.


The labs should report to a centralised system and send preliminary as well as final test results to quarantine centres, the district surveillance officer and state surveillance unit, said the government.

 


At present, 60 fever clinics are operational in the state. While screening and swab collection is free of cost at these clinics, ICMR has capped the Covid-19 test cost in private laboratories at Rs 4,500, including Rs 3,000 for the screening test and Rs 1,500 for the confirmatory one.

Neuberg Anand Diagnostic Laboratory and Cancyte Technologies Pvt Limited are the two ICMR-approved private testing labs in Bengaluru. 

As per the protocol, when a person visits a fever clinic, his/her symptoms and temperature will be checked, based on which the person will be categorised in the ‘suspected’ or ‘safe’ group. Those who fall in the safe group will be sent back home with a prescription for their illness, while those in suspected group will be taken to a swab-collection centre and later to a quarantine facility in a designated vehicle stationed at all fever clinics. 

Those suspected to have been infected will have to remain in quarantine centres until their test result is negative. Otherwise, the patient will be sent to an isolation centre in case of mild symptoms or to a Covid-19 hospital in case of moderate/severe symptoms. Each fever clinic comprises a Covid-19 Rapid Response (CRR) team of one doctor, two nurses and a healthcare worker and will be open from 9am to 5pm on all days.

Sixty urban primary health centres and 36 private hospitals have been identified for setting up fever clinics in Bengaluru. The government is working on developing an app through which appointments can be booked at the clinics. Currently, booking can be made by filling details in a Google spreadsheet available on the link https://forms.gle/54H11fCWst26i2DD9.


What ICMR says

The National Task Force recommends that the maximum cost for testing a sample not exceed Rs 4,500. This may include Rs 1,500 for a screening test for suspected cases and Rs 3,000 for confirmatory test. However, ICMR encourages free or subsidised testing given the national public health emergency.

