Kerala: Private hospitals await nod to test all patients for Covid-19
2020-04-24
KOCHI: With India deciding to adopt a tuberculosis testing device to screen for Covid-19, many private hospitals are in process of acquiring diagnostic kits in the hope that the central government will eventually allow them to test those admitted for other medical procedures. Many are also upgrading their labs to meet Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) standards.

ICMR had earlier this month approved the use of US FDA-approved GeneXpert or India’s Truenat beta- CoV test in the private sector for detection of the novel coronavirus.

The Kerala government has invited applications from private labs willing to carry out these tests. While ICMR has approved Truenat beta as a confirmatory test for Covid-19, it is not yet licensed for commercial use. Moreover, anyone testing positive on Truenat will have to get it reconfirmed through the available RT-PCR test.

“Though, at present, before all in-patient admissions and elective procedures screening is not permitted, ultimately government will have to permit it. Many hospitals are acquiring Truenat machines and Covid cartridges in anticipation that they can start testing and start routine hospital work once government clearance is received," said Indian Medical Association’s (IMA) hospital board of India chairman Dr Jayakrishnan A V.

Already a debate is raging among doctors on whether to test all patients for Covid-19. Many hospitals have stopped OP and elective surgery since Covid-19 cases were reported. During the H1N1 outbreak, testing facilities were initially only available with the government, which were then extended to private hospitals. “Covid-19 tests, just like HIV tests, will become a reality. Along with taking the travel and contact history of patients, this is needed for the safety of medical staff and other patients,” said Kerala Private Hospital Association president Hussain Koya.

At present, Truenat is available in six to seven private hospitals in Kerala, while over 10 institutes in the private sector have GeneXpert facility. About six government hospitals have GeneXpert facility.

Truenat machines cost Rs 6.5-12 lakh, depending on testing capacity. Testing time is less than 45 minutes, when compared to RT-PCR that takes minimum four hours. The state government has fixed Rs 1,500 per test for Truenat, while it’s Rs 4,500 for RT-PCR. It’s free for BPL patients with Karunya Arogya Suraksha Padhathi cards. 

Private hospital managements and doctors’ association across the country are trying to convince the central government to permit them to conduct these tests before surgery. “The world is struggling with Covid-19 pandemic and it is time that Centre changes its guidelines to include Covid testing of all patients before an elective surgery,” said Dr Girdhar Gyani, director general of the Association of Healthcare Providers India.

Meanwhile, Aster MIMS, Kozhikode, has become the first private hospital in Kerala to get ICMR approval to conduct RT-PCR tests. Currently, they are testing all patients in Kannur and Kozhikode. 

