Agra: Private hospitals to face legal action for turning away patients without Covid-19 test reports
2020-04-25
AGRA: The Agra district administration has decided to register FIRs against the managements of private hospitals, allowed to operate during lockdown, for not admitting patients. The decision has been taken following complaints that some private hospitals are turning away patients, asking them to first get a coronavirus test report.


Agra district administration is the first in Uttar Pradesh to take such a decision. It is one of the worst-hit Covid-19 districts in UP.

Health authorities said district magistrate Prabhu N Singh has appointed the chief development officer as nodal officer to coordinate with the Indian Medical Association (IMA) and ensure patients do not suffer for want of treatment. 

Talking with TOI, the DM said, “We had identified 25 hospitals for treating different types of diseases and health problems. It has surfaced that some of these hospitals have not been admitting patients. This will not be tolerated. From Saturday onwards, we will be registering an FIR against the management of any hospital for denying or delaying treatment of a patient. The licence of the centre can also be cancelled right away. 

“The hospitals should consider each patient as a carrier of coronavirus. Doctors should do the required safety gear before they come in the contact with the patient. If required, samples can be collected for testing of coronavirus. But a patient cannot be denied treatment over suspicion of Covid-19 infection,” Singh said. 

According to the DM, for denying required treatment or refusing to admit a patient, the management of the hospital concerned will be booked under IPC section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant). 

The DM has ordered private hospitals to immediately admit patients referred from SN Medical College and the district hospital. Both these centres are addressing coronavirus-related cases and are not able to provide standard services to other patients. 

According to sources, over the last six days, at least six patients have died allegedly due to lack of timely treatment. These include a retired government official residing in Sikandra who was not able to get a dialysis on time, a senior citizen of Tedi Bagiya locality and a woman patient from Trans-Yamuna locality.

On Thursday, a 30-year-old pregnant woman, who is a resident of Shashtripuram locality, was allegedly turned away by various private hospitals. Later, she was admitted to SN Medical College. Due to the delay in getting medical attention, the fetus died in the womb of the mother. 

