Hyderabad: Private lab offers Covid-19 risk test, CCMB chief sceptical
2020-05-06
HYDERABAD: If you are worried about Covid-19, then a diagnostic company now promises to provide DNA-based ‘immunity report’ — a Genomepatri — to check whether you are at risk of contracting it.


City-based personal genomics company Mapmygenome claims to have studied seven lakh markers and, based on that data, they issue the immunity reports. But experts are sceptical about the efficacy of such tests, saying it was too early for such risk assessment as scientists are still struggling to understand the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). 

It helps to know a person’s response to medications such as anti-malarial drug chloroquine and abacavir, which is part of the antiretroviral therapy for HIV/AIDS.

“This is not a diagnostic test. The good immune response is key to defeating coronavirus. Genetic factors related to immunity play a significant role in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis, and many genes have been tested for their association with infection,” Mapmygenome CEO Anu Acharya said.

“We have been doing DNA-based tests to assess genetic risk factors for an array of immune system diseases. Lifestyle diseases such as diabetes, heart disease and other comorbidities that affect overall health status and immunity are covered. It’s called Genomepatri. An individual’s genetic response to a variety of drugs, including antivirals and antifungals is revealed.” 

But Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB) director Rakesh Mishra is not ready to buy the explanation. “The claim that based on genome sequencing we can tell the resistance of persons to an infectious disease is premature,” Mishra told TOI.

 also pointed out the need for good data. “We need a lot more data to tell confidently whether a person’s immune system is strong or weak.,” Mishra added. 

However, some who got the test done expressed satisfaction. “I got DNA analysis done a few months ago since my health insurance was covering it and found the report insightful. Now, I got a Covid risk report, which was generated based on my DNA data, which they have,” M Shreehsa said.

