Coronavirus: Pvt offices, non-essential services shut in Mumbai, Pune
2020-03-21
MUMBAI: On a day the number of Covid-19 cases in Maharashtra crossed the 50 mark, CM Uddhav Thackeray ordered the shutting down of all private offices and shops and establishments that provide non-essential services in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region, Pune, Pimpri-Chinchwad and Nagpur till March 31.This shutdown came into effect from Friday midnight.


While public transport like buses and trains will still remain operational, the state has appealed to people to reduce crowds on these services. All government offices will also work with 25% attendance, down from the 50% that was being implemented from Thursday. The state government had earlier in the week asked private offices to run with 50% staff.

“I am aware many people may not like this decision, but the number of positive coronavirus cases in these cities is going up. Despite repeated appeals, crowds in local trains and buses have not reduced,” Thackeray said in a live video address on Friday. Thackeray said the government was reviewing these crowds, and if they didn’t reduce, a decision to stop trains and buses would have to be taken.

Those exempted from the lockdown are establishments providing essential services like drinking water, sewerage services, banking services, telephone and internet services, railway and transportation services, food, vegetables and groceries, hospitals, medical centres and medical stores, the media, electricity providers, ports, oil refineries, petroleum and the IT sector providing for any of these essential services. Production and manufacturing units required for the functioning of these essential services will continue to work at 50% staff strength. 

Also exempted are stock exchanges, clearing corporations, stock brokers, depositories and SEBI-registered participants operating through these institutions.

The government has empowered municipal commissioners in these areas to take a final decision in case of doubts whether a certain establishment is essential or not. If anyone violates the order, action can be initiated under Section 188 of the IPC, which provides for a six months’ jail term or a fine of Rs 1,000 or both.

The CM also appealed to employers not to cut wages of staff during the lockdown period while urging people not to venture out of their homes. “This is not a holiday. These are restrictions,” he said.

