Testing bills soar as Pune hospitals add price of protective gear
2020-06-12
PUNE: On March 17, the Indian government said the price of a Covid-19 test at a private lab or hospital should not exceed Rs 4,500.

But reports have emerged of private laboratories and hospitals in Pune charging as much as Rs 7,000 for a single test. Analyses of receipts submitted by citizens and interviews with hospital officials revealed that these private establishments have been transferring the purchase cost of protective equipment — worn by lab technicians while drawing the swabs — on to the customer. 

 

In addition to the cost of PPE kits, a few have also been including sample collection expenses and costs of gloves and N95 masks in the final Covid test bill, despite the fact that a PPE kit contains all protective gear, including specialised facial covers and gloves. 

The Pune branch of the Indian Medical Association (IMA) said it has indeed received complaints from citizens who said they were overcharged for tests at designated labs and hospitals. 

Sanjay Patil, the chairman of the Hospital Board of India, (the IMA’s hospital wing), said, “In most cases, the extra charges are because hospitals and labs are including the price of PPE kits. But the government had set the cap of Rs 4,500 after considering all such expenses, including operational and infrastructure cost. So any extra charge over Rs 4,500 amounts to an offence. The IMA has condemned this fleecing amid a pandemic.” 

The CEO of the Ruby Hall Clinic, Bomi Bhote, admitted to charging for PPE during the early phases of the Covid-19 lockdown. “But since June 1, we have stopped charging citizens for PPE,” Bhote said.

He said, “Our Covid-19 test charge has always been Rs 4,500. But during the early days of the lockdown, we had very few patients coming to the OPD and few staff. So employees had to use a new PPE for every patient while drawing a swab. That’s why we were charging extra for a Covid test initially.” 

In one instance, in June, the Jupiter hospital in Baner charged a person Rs 6,982 for a test. The hospital’s administration didn’t deny the charge when TOI produced receipts from the test. Jupiter’s medical superintendent Vikas Patil said, “I have brought up the matter with our higher authorities.” 

The Pune Municipal Corporation's health department has now urged people to register complaints if a private laboratory or hospital has charged more than Rs 4,500 for a Covid-19 test. Complaints can be registered by calling 020-25556800 or by writing to health@punecorporation.org — the health department’s email.

“Citizens should submit their complaint along with receipts,” said public health expert Ramchandra Hankare, the chief of the PMC's health department.


