Kolkata private hospitals demand ‘coronavirus-free’ certificates
2020-04-20
KOLKATA: Doors shut for a diarrhoea patient, a heart attack victim turned away, precious minutes lost for a cerebral stroke victim. Even as the entire attention of the healthcare system seems to be focused on fighting the pandemic, several Kolkatans with non-Covid-19 ailments reported that private facilities were demanding a doctor’s certificate — declaring “virus-free” status — before agreeing to admit or even treat them. 


Families of patients are having a hard time running from one hospital to another, trying to get the necessary clearances, wasting time, of-ten in emergency cases.

A senior doctor has called the practice “unethical”. 

Abhijit Chowdhury, a member of the state expert committee on Covid-19, denounced the move by a section of private hospitals. “It is unethical on the part of hospitals to refuse emergency patients during a pandemic,” he said. “They have no right to be driven by fear since it is their job to provide treatment to all, making sure that they identify the Covid-19 suspects and segregate them. Hospitals are equipped to do this and can’t shy away from their responsibility at a time like this.

This insistence by private hospitals, while ethically questionable, is probably a knee-jerk reaction to the instance of one such facility that had to shut down after a few asymptomatic patients infected several of its health workers.

Two such families TOI got in touch with said they had sought emergency admission for chronic or sudden ailments. 

Central Kolkata resident Gulzar Ahmed had a harrowing time when he tried admitting his ailing mother, Noor Jahan Began, to hospital on the night of April 14 for a sudden bout of diarrhoea.

The first hospital he went to, off EM Bypass, said they did not have any vacancy, while the second one in Salt Lake said they needed to be sure the patient wasn’t an asymptomatic carrier of Covid-19, and asked the family to get a certificate that she did not have the virus. That night, Ahmed took his mother to Beliaghata ID Hopital, but was told they could not test her.

Past midnight, he called it a day and nursed his mother at home all night. Next morning, he set off for SSKM but was again told they did not conduct the test. From there, he went to MR Bangur Hospital but was again turned down after an hour’s wait. Frustrated, he returned home and contacted a doctor on the phone to carry out her treatment at home. Luckily, her condition improved upon the medication prescribed over the phone.

“If we can’t get basic emergency healthcare despite being ready to pay for it, I wonder what will happen if someone less fortunate has an emergency,” said Ahmed. “If private hospitals are demanding Covid-19 tests before admission, why aren’t they directing patients to facilities where the tests will be expeditiously carried out and the result provided so that it isn’t too late for the patient?” 

In the other case, a 42-year-old Tollygunge resident rushed his 76-year-old father — who was having a heart attack — to a south Kolkata private hospital last Monday, only to be told that they needed to be sure that the septuagenarian was not Covid-19-positive. Several minutes were wasted in trying to organize a thermal check and a basic examination to rule out the virus before emergency treatment commenced. “We had already lost time in arranging for an ambulance, which was not easy. Then, the patient was made to lie down on a stretcher and wait for the Covid-19 checks. My father could have died,” said his son.

In yet another instance, a 25-year-old south Kolkata resident was turned away by two hospitals last week when she sought admission for her 58-year-old mother who had suffered a cerebral stroke. A doctor eventually helped her secure admission to a private hospital, which had earlier refused her. “We lost two days, during which her condition deteriorated sharply. Doctors have admitted that she would have been in a much better shape had she been admitted earlier. But everyone at the hospital said they were wary of asymptomatic patients. My mother doesn’t have any Covid-19 symptom,” said the woman.

Some private hospitals admitted in private that they were wary about non-Covid-19 patients “who appeared asymptomatic”. “We are not refusing anyone but merely putting every patient through a mandatory check. There have been cases where families have been forced to delay admission of their non-Covid-19 patients, fearing refusal. Some have even attempted to treat them at home, resulting in deaths. This week we received two such patients who had died on the way and had to be declared brought dead,” said the spokesperson of a private hospital.

A representative of AMRI Hospitals pointed out that they had instructed their staff and doctors to admit every non-Covid-19 patient once he or she has been put through a check. “The rule is simple. A patient with symptoms has to be treated as a suspect at the isolation unit. The rest should be admitted as a non-Covid-19 patient but screened,” he said. AMRI has resumed its outpatient department services. It also plans to launch a digital campaign asking patients to visit the hospital without hesitation or delay in the case of an emergency.

The spectre of asymptomatic patients spreading the virus still looms large, though. RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS) said it was “exercising a high degree of suspicion when it comes to identifying or screening Covid-19 patients”. “Testing has been scaled up over the past few weeks in government and private labs and hence we are testing patients showing any sign of suspicion. We are currently not testing non-suspected patients and will wait for guidelines on it before commencing,” said RTIICS zonal director R Venkatesh.

