Pvt hospital where Covid patient was treated sealed
2020-04-18
Aurangabad: The Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) on Friday sealed a private hospital for two weeks after it came to fore that a positive Covid-19 patient was treated there."The Central Naka-based hospital has been shut down under the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The measure has been taken to contain the spread of Covid-19. As many as 48 close contacts of the positive patient are also being screened," civic health officer Nita Padalkar said.A 65-year-old woman — a resident of Bismillah Colony — tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. She was first admitted to this private hospital and later was referred to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). The woman has been admitted to the Covid-19 ward at the GMCH. As per the Indian Council of Medical Research guidelines, she has also been tested for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. According to a doctor at GMCH, the woman is diabetic and has hypertension with kidney ailment. "Her condition is critical," the doctor said."Soon after the woman tested positive for Covid-19, the civic machinery began the process of identifying her close contacts. According to her family members, the woman does not have any travel history," Padalkar said. This pushed the AMC into intensifying their investigation as they were not able to find any instance where the woman came in contact with another Covid-19 positive patient. "The sealing of hospital is part of the cluster containment plan. The locality where the woman resides has also been sealed and door-to-door screening by health workers is underway," she added.Meanwhile, Padalkar said that a 17-year-old boy and his step-mother, who have been tested positive for Covid-19, had come to Aurangabad from Mumbai in an ambualnce."The teen’s father is not cooperating with us in giving details about how were they allowed to travel to Aurangabad during lockdown. We will have to file an FIR against him for not providing details," Padalkar said.