Coronavirus in Kolkata: Private hospitals set up isolation wards after state directive
2020-03-09
KOLKATA: Several private hospitals in Kolkata have set up isolation wards following an instruction from the health department. As many as five government hospitals across the state have now been identified as swab-collection centres for nCoV. They will also train health employees on how to collect swabs, which will then be sent for tests at NICED and SSKM Hospital.


The hospitals to serve as swab collection units include RG Kar Medical College and Hospital, Uttar Banga Medical College and Hospital, Malda Medical College and Hospital, Murshidabad Medical College and Hospital and Midnapore Medical College and Hospital. Isolation wards have also been set up at private hospitals like RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS) and AMRI Hospitals.

“AMRI Hospitals will strictly follow the health department advisory regarding setting up isolation wards at all our units along with the other guidelines suggested in the letter we received from the health department. We have already set up a waiting lounge for patients who are coming in with flu-like symptoms so that other patients at the OPD are not infected in any way,” said AMRI Hospitals CEO Rupak Barua.

“A six-bed triaging and isolation ward has been set up at RTIICS, but the majority of patients showing symptoms will be advised home isolation and conservative management at home,” said RTIICS zonal director R Venkatesh.

“If patients require ICU care, we have two beds in an isolated intensive care. The unit has dedicated ventilators and monitors apart from all necessary protective equipment. Our preparedness and planning has been led jointly by the head of internal medicine, a pulmonologist and an emergency physician,” Venkatesh added. 

AMRI has also adopted an SOP on how to handle the situation in case someone is found infected with nCoV. “We are educating our nurses and other caregivers who are directly involved in handling patients. We are also keeping an eye on their health and our infection control teams are taking stock of the situation regularly,” said Barua.

