Kolkata: Private hospitals’ bid to protect staff in non-Covid units
2020-05-08
KOLKATA: Private hospitals in Kolkata are stepping up measures to safeguard their doctors, nurses and healthcare workers treating non-Covid patients to ensure the novel coronavirus is not transmitted to them from asymptomatic people, both on their premises and elsewhere. 

After Peerless Hospital shut on Monday, other facilities are reducing working hours and some are arranging for accommodation for their staff working outside Covid units to minimize chances of infection at home. More than 10 health workers, including four doctors, at Peerless were infected in past two weeks.

AMRI Hospitals have decided to offer accommodation to doctors, nurses and lab staff working outside Covid unit. So far, the hospital had been housing only their Covid unit workers at various guesthouses and hotels and quarantining them in turns. “. We need to make sure our health staff are not exposed to even non-Covid patients who could be carriers. We will offer them accommodation to ensure they are protected from transmission at home,” said AMRI CEO Rupak Barua. “Also, we are working with a reduced workforce as the number of patients has come down,” he said.

Fortis Hospital, too, now plans to insulate its non-Covid health workers. “Insulating only Covid health workers is not enough. All need to be protected. As transmission is now peaking, there will be a rise in the number of asymptomatic patients seeking treatment for other ailments. This puts health workers at a great risk ,” said Fortis pulmonologist Raja Dhar. This week, several private hospitals have resumed surgeries, leading to a swell in the number of non-Covid patients. It has also heightened the chances of cross-infection among patients and transmission to health workers. “As the transmission rate rises, more health workers might be affected. For every infected health worker, at least a dozen more would have to be quarantined. So, this reduces the working strength of a hospital,”said Dhar. It was safer to shut down than work with a depleted strength during the pandemic, he added.

RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS), too, has chalked out a safety plan. RTIICS was being cautious about the volume of work they are exposing their staff to, said zonal director R Venkatesh. “We are taking care to screen and isolate any suspected case. Educating the staff on hygiene even outside the hospital is equally important,” said Venkatesh.

Rupali Basu, CEO of Woodlands Hospital, which has no Covid unit, said, “Some staff were given off and some are on alternate daily/ weekly roster. Another section is working from home and some are residential in the hospital. All are on rotation.” 


