Private hospitals fear Covid-19 quota, offer cheaper care
2020-06-14
AMRITSAR: With the number of Covid-19 cases rising in Punjab, private hospitals are apprehensive of the government asking them to earmark a certain percentage of their beds for Covid-19 patients on the lines of the Delhi government. They also oppose the Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) treatment rates for the Covid 19 patients, which force them to cap charges. 

Condemning Delhi government’s decision of earmarking 20% beds for Covid-19 patients in private hospitals, managing director of Hartej Hospital, Dr H S Nagpal said the decision was not in the best interest of every patient. “We are already experiencing a tough time dealing with patients’ attendants while making them to understand the importance of safety norms for coronavirus and if we admit Covid-19 patients for treatment it will be impossible to handle the situation.” 

Instead of earmarking some beds for Covid-19 patients, he said the government should have MoU’s for dedicated private Covid-19 hospitals.

Managing director, Amandeep Group of Hospitals, Dr Avtar Singh also expressed similar reservations. “This is a ridiculous decision of the Delhi government, which will not help contain the spread of the virus at all.” If Punjab government issued similar directions for private hospitals in Punjab, the virus could spread further and regular patients would be discouraged from reporting to hospitals. Saying that he had dedicated a 35-bed hospital exclusively for treatment of Covid-19 patients, Avtar said the government should come forward and convert private hospitals into dedicated Covid-19 hospitals to win the battle against the virus.

The medical fraternity is also reluctant to fix treatment cost at Rs 4,000 to Rs 7,000 per day in accordance with CHGS guidelines for private hospitals. 

“The CGHS rates are practically not viable given the treatment cost and overhead expenses incurred on patient and staff care,” said the owner of a private hospital on condition of anonymity. Recently, Punjab government had issued a notification stating that private hospitals would charge only CGHS approved treatment cost from Covid-19 patients. 


