Pvt hosps must treat critical non-Covid patients: Govt
2020-05-01
NEW DELHI: Amid complaints of private hospitals turning away patients needing critical healthcare services like dialysis, blood transfusion and chemotherapy or insisting on Covid-19 testing, the Centre has asked states to take immediate steps to resolve such grievances. 

On Thursday, health minister Harsh Vardhan wrote to all states asking them to take immediate steps to ensure uninterrupted blood donation and transfusion services for people with blood disorders such as thalassemia, haemophilia and ‘sickle cell’ anaemia.

States have been also advised to ensure that all health facilities, especially in the private sector, remain functional and provide critical services so that patients who need these services do not face any difficulty, an official said.

“States/UTs are advised that as per the guidelines issued on April 15 by the ministry of home affairs, all health services should remain functional during the lockdown period. The movement of service providers may be facilitated, especially for those working in the private sector,” health ministry joint secretary Lav Agarwal said.

The Centre also issued detailed guidelines on standard operating procedures (SOP) for dialysis on April 7 as well as guidelines for blood donation and transfusion.

Besides, it has also issued a guidance note to enable delivery of essential health services during the Covid-19 outbreak. This includes providing essential services for reproductive and child health, immunisation, communicable diseases such as tuberculosis, leprosy and vector-borne diseases, as well as non-communicable diseases such as cancer and dialysis.

States/UTs have been advised to follow the guidelines regarding Covid-19 testing issued by Indian Council of Medical Research. 

Meanwhile, many states like Delhi have also directed the private sector to open healthcare facilities and follow protocols. It said action will be taken, including cancellation of registration, if any violation is found.


