Trichy: Private elephants turn liability for owners during lockdown
2020-05-28
TRICHY: While they fetch good revenue for their owners during festival and marriage seasons, elephants in captivity have turned into a liability to their owners during lockdown. While maintaining the jumbos can cost their owners a bomb, forest department is closely monitoring if the captive elephants are being treated well.

Individuals can own private captive elephants under the Tamil Nadu captive elephant (management and maintenance) Rules 2011. There are a total six captive elephants in Trichy district owned by four persons in Samayapuram, Srirangam, Thiruvanaikaval and Woraiyur. These elephants are a prime attraction at functions like marriages, temples festivals, housewarming ceremonies, etc and have always been in demand. But the lockdown that was announced two months back has spelt trouble for the elephant owners as all major functions have been put on hold ever since.

Owning elephants for the last 40 years, Sugumar, 64, owner of two pachyderms in Samayapuram said that the Covid-19 outbreak has thrown up an unprecedented situation. With events being cancelled, the elephants have not brought in any revenue. It is challenging to maintain elephants without any major income especially when the cost of maintenance is too high, he says. He spends over Rs 2000 per day on the two elephants and has no clue of how long he will be able to bear the costs. 

Another elephant owner said that he has already exhausted all his savings to take care of his elephant and will need to borrow money to feed it further. But he would do all that is required to maintain his elephant’s health as it has been his source of income for many years now. 

Speaking to TOI, Trichy district forest officer D Sujatha said the forest department has been closely watching health condition of the elephants during this lockdown. All the elephant owners have submitted documents on alternative source of income to take care of the elepahants. While retirement age of private elephants is fixed at 60 years, owners will have to maintain the elephant even after its retirement. 

“Covid-19 has posed a post-retirement like scenario for these elephants and we will have to ensure that they are taken care of under any circumstances,” she said.


