Private hospitals in Kolkata can test OPD patients for Covid-19
2020-05-09
KOLKATA: Private hospitals in Kolkata will now be allowed to test their outpatients for Covid-19, a move that will help free up beds at isolation units, a major portion of which is now being occupied by suspects. According to a health department decision, that will soon be officially communicated to hospitals, doctors can now recommend a test to a suspect who seeks outpatient consultation. The latter can stay at home till the test result is out and will have the option to either seek admission at a designated Covid hospital or stay in home isolation abiding by the ICMR guidelines if he or she tests positive.


It has, however, been made clear that only private hospitals can recommend tests to OPD patients and it must be prescribed in writing by a doctor. Government Covid hospitals will continue to test only admitted patients and samples sent to them. “Patients can’t seek a test either at a private laboratory or hospital. Those who test positive must be isolated either at a designated hospital or at home, provided the conditions prescribed by ICMR can be adhered to,” a senior health official said.

Private hospitals greeted the decision and pointed out that along with the move to allow testing of surgery patients, it will now help to curb transmission. AMRI Hospitals said it will now recommend tests to OPD patients after screening. “This is a positive move that will help to prevent crowding at hospitals and ensure that more positive patients can be admitted. At the moment, we are being forced to admit suspects which is depriving Covid positives waiting for admission,” said AMRI CEO Rupak Barua.

Fortis Hospital is set to create a screening bay where patients seeking admission for surgery and suspects seeking OPD consultation will be tested. “We will be recommending tests to OPD patients if the symptoms warrant it. These will include surgery patients and those with mild symptoms or asymptomatic contacts of Covid positives. It makes sense to test them at the OPD for it not only frees up beds, but also protects our health workers from contacts and saves patients from spending unnecessarily,” said Fortis pulmonologist Raja Dhar.

Another private hospital off EM Bypass said it was ready to recommend tests. “It was discussed briefly at the health department convened meeting with private hospital representatives on Thursday and we welcome it. We have been told that a guideline on this will be issued soon,” said an official of the hospital.

According to the guidelines issued by the central government, a treating medical officer ‘should clinically assign the person a mild or presymptomatic case for Covid-19 infection’. “After this, it is crucial that the person should have a requisite facility in house for self-isolation of the patient as well as a quarantine facility for other family members. Now having the infection means that the person can easily transmit the virus, therefore, a caregiver should be available all day and night.”

It also mentions that similar to hospital norms, caregivers and other close contacts are asked to consume Hydroxychloroquine prophylaxis upon a doctor’s prescription as a preventative measure against the infection.

Some health experts, though, expressed concern at the fact that positive patients may now have a longer social contact. “If they are allowed to return home pending a test result, chances of transmission will rise. Also, the provision of home isolation for Covid positives with mild symptoms may not work since screening will never be fool-proof,” said a doctor.

