Pvt hospitals quake under NMC takeover plan for Covid patients
2020-04-26
Nagpur: Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe’s orders asking 12 private hospitals in Nagpur to be ready for Covid-19 treatment has shaken city’s private health care sector. 

On Saturday, Vidarbha Hospitals Association (VHA), a body of 110 private hospitals in Vidarbha issued a statement and expressed objections on handing over their requisite infrastructure, manpower, equipment, medicines, consumables and staff to handle Covid-19 patients. 

This order has also caused apprehensions and confusions among non-Covid patients taking treatment at these hospitals. 

“Where will the other patients go?,” asked Dr Ashok Arbat, VHA president. “If 4,000 to 4,500 beds in leading private hospitals in city are reserved for Covid-19 patients, where will rest of emergencies go? Many private hospitals have contractual, ethical and legal contracts with existing patients. What will happen to this?,” he further asked. 

Convener Dr Sameer Paltewar said that NMC should first utilize existing government facilities. 

“As per laws, Government is bound to initially utilize existing government facilities, private medical colleges based in government land, hospitals based in government land, charitable trust hospitals, NMC run hospitals/ isolation hospitals and then only reach out to private health care sector,” he said. 

Secretary Dr Alok Umre claimed that there is outcry among citizens based near the selected private hospitals who are objecting to having a Covid-19 treatment centre in the midst of their residential colonies. 

“Citizens are surprised at erroneous strategy of spreading positive Covid-19 patients across city. This will increase risk of cross-resulting in high mortality and morbidity as seen in Italy,” he said. 

People are even considering filing medical negligence liability on these private hospitals if they shift negative Covid-19 patients requiring urgent medical attention, he added. 

VHA had already highlighted the dire straits of private hospitals across the city. Hospitals are operating at shrunken revenues and enhanced costs after the lockdown. They don’t have enough number of PPE kits too. They have to pay salaries, utility charges, infrastructure usage charges and statutory taxation and financial obligations to creditors.


