Pvt hospitals tackle Covid-19 scare with own model, help of govt labs
2020-05-03
Nagpur: Some private hospitals in the city have come up with their own model and also taking help of government laboratories to avoid temporary closure like in case of a Jaripatka hospital and a cancer hospital on Kamptee Road, to ensure staff safety and treatment of non-Covid emergency patients. 

At the same time, few doctors feel the need for authorization to private laboratories for conducting non-elective surgeries.

A hospital at Jaripatka and cancer hospital on Kamptee road had to be closed down on a temporary basis after patients who were treated there later tested positive for Covid-19. Doctors and staff at these hospitals had to be quarantined.

In a setback to some private hospitals which were ensuring reports before surgeries, private laboratories had stopped collecting samples for Covid-19 and weren’t sending them to Mumbai for testing, following orders of the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) and collector Ravindra Thakare.

Amid such situation, two private hospitals — National Cancer Institute (NCI), Jamtha, and Neuron Brain, Spine and Critical Care Centre, Dhantoli — have prepared a system to prevent Covid-19 infection, protect their staff and provide medical services.

General secretary of NCI Shailesh Joglekar told TOI, “We cannot stop treatment to cancer patients. Around 200 patients visit the OPD daily. Therefore, we have set up fever clinic at a separate area for OPD and fever ward in IPD. Resident medical officers screen patients and relatives at the entrance gate with thermometer gun, take details and ensure filing of self-declaration form.” 

In case of any doubts, the patient is referred to fever clinic where the entire staff is equipped with PPE kit. “In case of symptoms, the patients are referred to laboratories at GMCH and IGGMCH for testing. We treat them once they come with reports for Covid-19. In case any patient develops any symptoms in IPD, we shift him/her to fever ward where all types of precautions are taken. Samples are collected and sent to IGGMCH for testing. The same is done before conducting surgeries,” he said.

Joglekar said they have submitted an application with AIIMS seeking a tie-up. “We have also kept some staff members aside so that they can take over in case existing staff is quarantined,” he said.

Dr Pramod Giri from Neuron Brain, Spine and Critical Care Centre spoke about the same system adopted at the hospital. “We are consulting the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) if Covid-19 symptoms are found in any patient. NMC team takes samples for testing in government laboratories. Our model is working out very well as we need to do surgeries on emergency basis daily,” he said.

According to surgeon Dr Mukund Thakur, they have no option but to take all precautions and perform surgery without Covid-19 test on emergency patients like bursting of tumours inside or other types. “There are some more surgeries which can be delayed for 1-3 days. In such cases we are ensuring test is done if symptoms are found. The need is to allow smooth functioning of private laboratories as their team comes to the hospital, safely collect samples and give results in desirable time,” he said.

Dr Rajkumar Rathi from Clinicare Speciality Laboratory said that they have stopped collection of samples as per collector’s orders. “Private hospitals associated with us are worried now. We have submitted an application with AIIMS for giving permission to test samples here itself. We were able to deliver reports within 24 hours though samples were sent to Mumbai,” he said.


