Pvt offices to open today, to comply with Covid-19 rules
2020-05-11
Kanpur: The district administration has allowed opening of private firms and companies in the city from Monday between 10 am and 5 pm subject to compliance of all Covid-19 rules.

Following opening of liquor shops and permission to open the transport sector, the government and semi-government offices had sought to open their offices under certain restrictions. Representatives of firms had met the district magistrate and pleaded that like liquor shops they too should be allowed to open their offices.

The DM , after considering their demand, issued an order to this effect. Following the order, around 50,000 offices in the city would open on Monday.

According to the order, the proprietors/heads of offices have to give a self-declaration and an undertaking on their letter heads or by email at gmdickpr@gmai.com.

The head of the firm In the self-declaration have to mention that the office/ firm or company premises would be sanitized daily, vehicles would be allowed to enter the premises only after sanitization, thermal scanning of each employee would be done and recorded daily and hand sanitizer and hand washing facilities would be provided in the office.

There would be one hour lunch break between two shifts, mass lunch and meetings would not be allowed, maximum four persons would be allowed to use lift at a time, consuming guthka and tobacco and spitting would be prohibited.

Similarly, visit and entry of outsiders would not be allowed to avoid infection and a list of hospitals treating Covid -19 patients would be displayed in the campus.

The copy of self-declaration would be given to the area police station and also pasted on the outside wall of the office.

The DM in his order also stated that any violation of conditions by any employer or would attract penal action.

The private sector and self-employed persons while welcoming the order said that it would help both the employers and the employees as more than forty days lockdown has stopped all financial activities. RC Bajpai, a chartered accountant said, “The order would help the system to normalize to some extent”.


