‘Quack’ tests positive for Covid-19 in Bareilly
2020-04-28
BAREILLY: A 35-year-old person, who the health department has identified as a quack, tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday. According to officials, the patient, who is asthmatic and diabetic, visited the 300-bed government hospital on Saturday complaining of respiratory distress. He was admitted to a private medical college after his samples were collected immediately.

District surveillance officer Dr Ranjan Gautam said, “The patient is a quack who practices from his home in Haziyapur area of Bareilly city. He used to run the TB-DOTS centre. His wife claimed he has no travel history and hadn’t come in contact with any known covid carrier. We will conduct resampling of the patient according to his family’s wishes. He may have come in contact while examining patients at his home. Hence, we will screen all families in a 1km-radius of his house in Haziyapur.”

Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Vineet Shukla added, “Our health team is investigating how the patient got infected and the number of people who came in contact with him. As the patient’s condition is serious, he was admitted to a private medical college.”

According to health officials, after the man was tested positive for Covid-19, the health department quarantined 30 people, including patient’s wife, three minor children and mother, and their samples were collected for test. 

Meanwhile, before the arrival of test report, the man’s wife along with her brother-in-law went to camp office of district magistrate on Monday morning. They later visited CMO’s office and the woman met CMO and demanded him to give permission to meet her husband. However, minutes after they left CMO’s office, officials learnt that the woman’s husband has been tested positive. They were later quarantined and a team of health department disinfected CMO’s office and DM’s camp office. Four staff of DM’s camp office were quarantined on Monday evening with whom the woman met or interacted in the morning.

A one-kilometre containment zone has been prepared in Haziyapur and team of health department has started house-to-house survey here. 


