Quarantined auto driver plays truant, leaves officials jittery
2020-04-14
Bengaluru: A 39-year-old autorickshaw driver quarantined for having ferried a 66-year-old man from his house to a hospital before the latter tested positive for Covid-19 has turned into officials’ nightmare as he’s throwing tantrums, physically resisting isolation and repeatedly trying to escape from the facility.

The auto driver, Mahendra L alias Mazhi of Munireddypaya, has been bringing the roof down over every small issue and has made at least three bids to escape, said BBMP health officials.

They admitted this is a test of what lies ahead for them as the ranks of primary and secondary contacts of the infected requiring isolation are swelling. Speaking to TOI from Harsha Hotel, Shivajinagar, that has been converted into a public quarantine facility, Mazhi is unapologetic. “I am healthy and need no medicine. People need to understand and value others’ lives. These people have made a public showpiece of me and my entire locality looks at me like a terrorist now,” he said. 

It all began on April 8 when Mazhi, father of a a five-year-old girl and eight-year-old boy, was at an auto stand near his house, leaning against his vehicle. A friend called him on his mobile and told him about a customer he had to drop. 

“I went to the pick-up point — a house a couple of cross roads away — and picked up a senior citizen, who said he had to be taken to a neighbourhood clinic. The man looked unwell, wore a mask and carried a suitcase. “We went to the clinic. The passenger went in and came back after a while. He told me he had to be taken to Baptist Hospital in Hebbal. He also took my contact number, saying he will get in touch with me in case of emergency. I drove all the way to the hospital and the passenger asked me to take him to the emergency ward,” Mazhi added. 

At the emergency ward, there was some commotion. “Health workers asked my passenger to sleep on a stretcher but he declined and said he’d walk,” Mazhi narrated. The auto driver later headed back home. Unknown to him, the passenger, who had come to Bengaluru from Manipur on March 12, was found to be suffering from Severe Acute Respiratory Infection and tested positive Covid-19.

“Once the first throat swab sample was positive, the Manipur patient revealed his contacts. That’s when we got to know about Mazhi and rushed to his house,” a senior BBMP health official said. 

“Mazhi was not ready to accept our explanation on why he needed to be put under public quarantine. He created a scene and declined to even step out. He pushed our doctors, threw things at us and shut the door on our face,” the official said, adding that a huge team had to be rushed there and Mazhi had to be physically whisked away to the quarantine facility.

In the facility, Mazhi has emerged as the manager’s and doctors’ biggest headache. “He is restless and complains about everything from the food to bed. We are monitoring him closely and have even changed the angles of cameras to keep a closer watch on him,” the hotel manager said.

The auto driver, however, said he’s missing his family. “I eat fish curry and eggs every day. Food here is absolutely tasteless. How can I eat upma for breakfast and dal and rice for lunch every day? These doctors will kill me by serving bad food,” he added. 


