Quarantine units control virus spread
2020-04-25
Indore: Quarantine facilities have helped control Covid-19 spread to a great extent as around 35% of the total 1029 positive patients in Indore, who were mostly primary contacts of the patients, were kept there even before their lab reports came out. 

IDA CEO and nodal officer Vivek Shotriya said laboratory reports of 379 inmates have come positive. 

“It shows that we’ve managed to identify suspects in advance and kept them in quarantine facilities till their laboratory reports came out. This way, we managed to isolate the patients from others else they could have infected more people,” he said. 

Shotriya added that so far, 962 inmates have also been released from quarantine facilities after they completed 14 days incubation period and tested negative. “On Friday, we released 66 people from different quarantine facilities,” he said. 

The administration has now started focusing on increasing immunity of the inmates and boosting their morale. 

“On Friday, three experts and volunteers from Prajapita Bramhakumari Ishwariya Vishwavidyalaya delivered motivational speeches and taught meditation to inmates of three quarantine facilities while at one of the places, doctors gave a musical performance. Some inmates also recited poems and stories and ensured their active participation,” the official said. 

He added that Chawanprash and Kada (mixture of tonics) were also distributed among the inmates. 

// Nutrition-rich food for asymptomatic patients at Covid Care Centre 

District administration will invite a tender to assign work of making nutrition-rich food for asymptomatic positive patients kept in Covid Care Centre. 

“The patients, who are positive but asymptomatic, have been kept in CCC and their number is only increasing on daily basis. The patients need nutrition-rich food for speedy recovery. So, the administration will invite tender in couple of days to assign the work,” IDA CEO and nodal officer Vivek Shotriya said. He added to have developed four CCC but as load in these centres are increasing, new facilities, out of some quarantine centres, will be created. 

// 20 new containment zones, 41 epicentres 

A day after Indore reported 84 new Covid-19 cases, the district administration on Friday declared 20 new containment zones and 41 epicentres. In most of the cases, the patients were found to be already kept in the quarantine facility or admitted to the hospital. 

Central Jail standard boys’ hostel in DRP Line, Nanda Nagar, Aerodrome police station, police line Mhow police station and Scheme 74 are some of the epicentres, where positive cases have been found. The administration has started tracing contacts of positive patients, barricading the areas and sanitizing and health screening of the locals. 

// 2 pvt Indore labs can now test Covid samples 

Two private laboratories of Indore got permission for testing Covid-19 samples. 

According to divisional commissioner Akash Tripathi, apart from giving permission to two private labs for sample testing, an automatic machine, which will be installed in MGM in a week, will help speed up the process. He mentioned that there are around 3,000 testing kits available in Indore. He said there are three CB NET machines in MRTB Hospital and they would likely to increase sample testing capacity by 100.


