Quarantined migrant workers to get counselling by psychiatrists in UP
2020-04-04
Bareilly: The state government, following the Supreme Court’s (SC) recent directions, has directed chief medical officers (CMO) in Uttar Pradesh to ask psychiatrists and clinical psychologists for counselling of migrant workers who have been living in quarantine centres. There were cases of several such workers suffering from anxiety after their arduous journey from cities during the 21-day Covid-19 lockdown.

A letter from Sunil Pandey, the state nodal officer for UP mental health, to chief medical officers and chief medical superintendent across the state said, “The Supreme Court has directed government to ensure that trained counsellors will visit the relief camps/ shelter homes and deal with any consternation that the migrants might be going through. This has to be done in all the relief camps/ shelter homes, wherever they are located in the country.”

The letter further read, “In view of the SC order, it is requested to take the service of psychiatrists, clinical psychologists and psychologist social workers under National Mental Health Programme for counselling of people kept in temporary relief camp or shelter homes for 14 days.” He added that duty of psychiatrists, clinical psychologists and psychologist social workers should be deputed considering their access and security.

“The counselling will be done according to the individual’s requirement. If any quarantined person is suffering from anxiety or depression, he or she will be counselled,” Pandey told TOI on Friday.

In Bareilly, 178 migrant workers have been quarantined for 14 days at a college in Faridpur. Chief medical officer Dr Vineet Shukla said, “We will start the counselling of migrant workers as per the direction of higher authorities.”

Health officials said a family of six people who have been tested positive for Covid-19 and are being treated at district hospital in Bareilly are undergoing counselling for anxiety. Counsellors said such patients are advised “deep breathing and meditation to deal with anxiety and negative thoughts”.

Sub-divisional magistrate of Faridpur, Vishu Raja, said, “Since March 30, 178 migrant workers have been quarantined for 14 days at a college. Routine medical examination was conducted and if any symptoms appear, their samples will be collected for Covid-19 test.”


