Wayanad: Quarantined doctors offer telemedicine
2020-04-07
KOZHIKODE: The telemedicine project launched in Wayanad to provide services of super-speciality doctors during Covid-19 lockdown has proved to be a boon with over 200 patients utilising its services within just four days.

More significantly, doctors from the district hospital at Mananthavady, who are undergoing mandatory house quarantine after undertaking duty in Covid-19 wards in the hospital, are using the facility to provide telemedicine services to their regular non-Covid-19 patients. 

The telemedicine project is being implemented in Wayanad, which lacks adequate tertiary healthcare facilities, in association with Sree Chitra Tele Health Unit (SeTHU) of the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology and the state health department. 

“Around 200 people have called the telemedicine helpline number and we have managed to connect them to their doctors in hospitals outside the district or doctors who have been treating them through the telemedicine project. Many of the patients were under treatment in super-specialty institutions like Kozhikode Government Medical College, Regional Cancer Centre (RCC), Thiruvananthapuram, Malabar Cancer Centre and other hospitals were struck after the lockdown,” said Dr K K Muhammed Aslam, nodal officer for the project.

He added that even doctors who are in home quarantine after serving in Covid-19 wards are also providing telemedicine service using the facility.

“I am currently in home quarantine after serving in Mananthavady district hospital, a designated Covid care centre. Even while on quarantine, I am providing telemedicine services to regular patients who need follow-up treatment,” said Dr Divya C K, paediatrician at Mananthavady district hospital. 

Dr Aslam said that the project was utilizing SeTHU’s two telemedicine units with video conferencing and modern diagnostic facilities.

“We have four doctors attached to the telemedicine unit and they assess the patient’s situation by interacting with them over phone and also with other doctors, including from specialty hospitals, who have been treating the patients. In most cases, the patients are given medical advice and medicines are being made available to them using the health volunteer system,” he added.

Patients who need videoconferencing with specialty doctors in hospitals outside the district will be brought to the telemedicine unit.

The doctors are attending to calls routed to them through the telemedicine helpline number in the district.

SeTHU is a collaborative effort of Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Union department of science and technology, directorate of health services, Kerala and Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, Thiruvananthapuram.

