Quarantined rly staffer waiting for Covid19 report for 8 days, hangs self; sample tests -ve later in the afternoon
2020-04-30
Agra: A 59-year-old railway employee who was quarantined and was waiting for his Covid-19 report for eight days allegedly committed suicide on Wednesday morning in Firozabad district. Sample taken from the deceased man, however, tested negative for Covid-19 later in the day. The man had also left behind a suicide note.The staffer was found hanging in the Tundla-based private hospital, which was earlier turned into a quarantine facility. He was a fourth-grade employee posted at the carriage and wagon department in Tundla and hailed from Raipur in Chhattisgarh. According to the district administration, the staffer and seven other railway employees were quarantined after a senior section engineer of the carriage and wagon department in Tundla was tested corona positive after he had come in contact with Covid-19 patients at a private hospital on NH-2 in Agra.After being informed of the suicide case, a police team and senior officials of the district administration reached the quarantine centre to investigate the matter. Firozabad district magistrate Chandra Vijay Singh said, “The reason for suicide is not clear as the victim had not mentioned any motive for taking the extreme step in his one-page suicide note. His Covid-19 sample test report was awaited as the first sample taken on April 20 was found inconclusive on April 23. Another sample was taken on April 28.”In his suicide note, he asked his elder son to take care of the family and also recover cash (Rs 67,000) which he had kept under his bed at his government accommodation and Rs 4,000 from his trouser pocket.Meanwhile, a railway official, on condition of anonymity, claimed that the situation inside the quarantine facility was poor. In the initial days, there was scarcity of drinking water and the railway employees were kept in one quarantine ward along with other civilians. The situation here improved only after we made several requests to the district administration. “The medical staff was not very helpful. Two days ago, the staffer complained of stomachache and demanded some medicine but his pleas were ignored,” president of North Central Railway Karmchari Sangh of Tundla unit S K Gupta said in press statement.Refuting the allegations, the district magistrate said, “Each railway employee was provided a separate room, doctors and other medical staff round the clock. There was no report of misbehaviour by any medical staff and necessary items, including food and water, were provided to the quarantined people.”Meanwhile, on a special request by the DM Saifai medical college conducted a test of the deceased and found his sample negative for Covid-19. At the time of filing this report, the victim’s body was sent for post-mortem and his relatives were on the way from their native place. Inspector general of police Agra range Satish Ganesh said, “The Tundla-based quarantine facility is one of the best in Firozabad. The victim was given a private room with attached bathroom and toilet and hygiene level was maintained regularly.”