Coronavirus outbreak in Mumbai: ‘Quarantine wards at Kasturba Hospital filthy, strays roam around’
2020-03-15
MUMBAI: On Twitter, one Ankit Gupta wrote: “Please Help. My friend is under observation at Ward 27 Kasturba Hospital Mumbai with 10 other patients. These bad conditions with poor sanitation, reckless staff attitude will not help contain the pandemic.” He posted four pictures of filthy wash basins, functional mattresses on rusting beds and stray animals roaming.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

A Mira Road resident, who is worried about her sister returning from Europe, currently the epicentre of the Covid-19 pandemic, said, “She won’t be able to survive in a place like Kasturba Hospital. Can’t more private facilities be opened for quarantine?” Another said these quarantine facilities give out a “jail-like” feeling.

The city’s primary quarantine facility inside Kasturba at Chinchpokli wears the look of a typical public hospital. While Ward 30, housed in a standalone building at one end of the hospital premises, previously had 28 beds, over 30 more have been added hastily in adjoining wards following the coronavirus outbreak. Commenting on Gupta’s tweet, BMC’s Dr Daksha Shah said they have instructed the housekeeping staff to look into it. “We are probing the matter,” she said. 

A doctor from Chembur said, “When we suspect people could have Covid-19 and recommend that they go to Kasturba Hospital for tests to rule out the virus, they say they would rather stay at home in isolation for weeks.” Echoing the sentiment, infectious diseases expert Dr Tanu Singhal said at this stage, the virus is circulating among the affluent who have travelled abroad. “They are sceptical about visiting Kasturba Hospital and many wouldn’t even reach there. They are worried they may catch another infection,” she said. 

On Friday, four Covid-19 “suspects” escaped quarantine from a government facility in Nagpur. Earlier, Indian students who were evacuated from Wuhan by an Air-India flight and kept in army quarantine camps in Haryana, too, spoke about poor and inadequate arrangements for a 14-day stay. One of the persons told TOI then that the facilities at the camp were much worse than the quarantine she had come from. “It is just the feeling that I am in my home country that keeps me going,’’ she said.

In 2002-03, when the SARS epidemic was on, too, people put under quarantine in Kasturba had a litany of complaints about the condition in the hospital. While public hospitals that run on tight budgets cannot be expected to have sparkling floors and walls, in Mumbai many don’t even have a functional toilet. While the health department talks of the merits of frequent handwash and sanitizers, most public hospitals don’t have these.

“But do they at least have adequate infrastructure to treat a seriously ill patient?” asked the Mira Road resident. The Kasturba isolation facility has four invasive and four non-invasive ventilators. 

On Saturday, BMC chief Pravin Pardeshi conducted a video-conference with senior ward officials to check their preparedness. Civic officials stated it is patients from poor backgrounds who usually visit civic-run hospitals, including Kasturba. But since Covid-19, the suspected patients at Kasturba are mostly foreign returned. The BMC is trying to improve the facilities at the hospital to match private hospitals. It has hired a private agency to improve the hospital’s cleanliness with hourly sweeping.

Pardeshi said, “We are revamping facilities at the hospital. It is mentally stressful to be alone in quarantine, so we are providing TV and magazines to patients to make them feel better. Two private hospitals are also helping us manage the quarantine facilities at Seven Hills Hospital (which has been opened up for quarantine).” The BMC has alerted hospital security to ensure no quarantined patient can escape.


