Quarantine now mandatory for all intl flyers reaching Nagpur
2020-03-20
Nagpur: The quarantine rules have become tougher from Thursday, with every passenger landing at Nagpur from an international flight required to remain in quarantine for at least 48 hours, extending up to 14 days. The state government also increased the checklist of countries under corona watch to 11, by including Qatar, UAE, Oman and Kuwait.

This has practically brought every other country within the ambit. The two international flights coming to Nagpur are from Sharjah in UAE, and Doha in Qatar. The planes also bring passengers from other countries, who board the connecting flights at these locations. With Qatar and UAE in the list, all passengers arriving at Nagpur from Air Arabia’s Sharjah flight and Qatar Airways’ flight from Doha are liable to be quarantined. 

Each person will now have to stay at least for 48 hours at the MLA Hostel. However, those who have to travel further out of Nagpur after landing here will have to stay put for 14 days, even if they test negative during this period.

Flyers who are co-morbid, which means they have disease like hypertension or diabetes, too will have to spend 14 days in quarantine area even if no symptoms are seen, said divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar.

If passengers alighting from international flights are detected with Covid-19 symptoms, they will be straightaway taken to Mayo Hospital from the airport, the officer told TOI.

Meanwhile, at MLA Hostel, 20 more persons were taken in on Thursday even as six were released for being home quarantined.

Two others refused to leave and preferred to stay there for the entire 14 day period, said an official. Now onwards, every person released from MLA Hostel will be taken home in a government vehicle. They will be barred from using any public transport. If symptoms develop, the person will have to call up the authorities and not use public transport to reach the hospital, an official managing the affairs said. 

TOI had on March 17 reported that some of the persons released from the hostel had gone home on their own, risking infection in the drivers.

Meanwhile, the situation has improved at MLA Hostel. The canteen workers serving food to the quarantined flyers were given personnel protection equipment. This incudes a robe, gloves, cap and goggles. TOI had also reported lack of facilities for them in its report.

“We got this two days ago and it’s safer. They should also test us. We go inside at least thrice a day. Each time the food parcel is dropped I have to ring the bell. How many persons touch that bell,” said a canteen worker, as some of the persons due to be released were standing close in the corridor.

“Tests can be conducted on the staff if symptoms are seen,” said an official at the site.

The block where people are housed has one doctor and a staff nurse on regular basis who examine them. Meanwhile, the flyers have also been asked to clean up the rooms on their own so that workers need not go inside their rooms. Leftovers and cardboard food parcels are destroyed in the manner biomedical waste is done away with, an official said.

The flyers were also provided internet dongles as they had complained of lack of connectivity.


