Quarantined migrant workers prepare over 20,000 seed bombs for World Environment Day
2020-06-04
DEHRADUN: Migrant workers, who have been put up at quarantine centres in the hill regions of Uttarakhand to prevent transmission of Covid-19, have taken up the task of preparing seed bombs that would be used for afforestation drives on June 5, World Environment Day.

Seed bombs are used to cultivate plants and the method is generally adopted before the monsoon season as rain spells provide water, humid soil, and an adequate temperature for the seeds inside the bombs to germinate. Made with compost, clay and seeds, these bombs can be dropped, tossed or shot from sling shots.

More than 20,000 seed bombs have so far been prepared by quarantined migrant workers who have returned to the state from various places, including big cities like Delhi, Mumbai, and Bengaluru.

At Government Primary School in Uttarkashi’s Dugdu, quarantined migrant workers are preparing these bombs with pumpkin seeds so that they instantly germinate and provide food for animals. “Our efforts will help in afforestation and in combating wild animal menace in hills. Rather than going into depression over job losses, we are spending our time constructively in the quarantine centre. We see hope here,” said Tika Ram, who recently returned to the state from Bengaluru.

Seed bombs also help in keeping wild animals inside forests as the seeds germinate into creepers and trees after some time and provide food to monkeys, elephants, wild boars, and others.

“We are doing our bit for afforestation and helping in controlling crop damage by wild animals. We had abandoned our villages in search of jobs but now we are realising the importance of our native land and we want to improve conditions here,” said Gajendera Rana Bhardar, a local, who returned to the state after recently losing his job in Chandigarh.

Jayendera Singh, another migrant who returned to the state from Mumbai and is quarantined at Dikholi Primary School, said he is hopeful of getting good results from seed bombing.“This move will help us in saving our villages from human-wildlife conflict.”

A social organisation “Himalayan Paryavaran Jadibooti Agro Sansthan” (JADI) had started the seed bomb initiative back in 2018 from Kamad village of Dunda block in Uttarkashi. Now, the organisation is motivating migrant workers. Dwarika Prasad Semwal, secretary of JADI, told TOI, “The returnees need jobs so that they can stay back in their own villages. This is certainly the first step towards it. We want youths to engage in such activities so that they see a positive outcome and opt to stay back in the hills.The seed bombs will be used on the upcoming World Environment Day on Friday.”


