Quarantine decision to be taken by local committees
2020-05-04
Kolhapur: The decision of home or institutional quarantining of people entering the district will be taken local committees, district guardian minister Satej Patil said, adding that the screening will take place at 20 entry points. 

The screening will be done by a village-level committee for villages and a ward-level committee for towns and cities.

For the travellers lodged in shelter homes across the city and district, the administration has asked the local authorities to ensure that their medical check-ups are done as early as possible. A total of 852 people from other states and districts are currently placed in shelters across the city and district.

The district administration has received over 10,000 applications from people seeking entry into the district.

Patil said that people arriving from other districts or states will be screened at 20 entry points in the district. He has, however, asked the local committees and police to keep a strict watch on private transport vehicles, especially the ones used for transporting essentials since many people have earlier been found travelling in such vehicles. 

District collector Daulat Desai has already directed each village administration to set up a quarantine facility that can accommodate 50 people along with providing food and sanitation facilities.

“Travellers with the passes from the other districts will be screened at these 20 entrances. The list of such persons will be provided to respective local authorities. The committees at each of the points will have to ensure that noone without a valid pass can slip through these entrances. The decision to put people in institutional quarantine or home quarantine should be taken at the village level or the ward level only,” said Patil.

So far, no district administrations have started issuing travel passes for inter-state travel. Patil also said that the district authorities have been asked to ensure that people are allowed to leave to and from in batches so that the roads are not clogged. 


