Quarantine-stamped caught on public transport in Maharashtra
2020-03-22
MUMBAI: The city witnessed many cases of people with ‘home quarantine stamps’ on hands being caught during travel at railway stations, in trains and on buses from where they were sent to hospitals or handed over to the police or BMC. At CSMT, 16 persons with a home quarantine stamp were found by railway security agencies while they were preparing to board trains to travel to their respective homes. 


“On enquiry, it was learnt they had landed from Dubai and had directly come to CSMT from the airport to go home to Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and other states,” said senior inspector Hemant Bavdhankar, CSMT GRP. Medical teams were informed and the 16 were taken away.

In another incident, Railway Protection Force personnel (RPF) at Lokmanya Tilak Terminus did not allow eight Dubai-returned people to board a train to Allahabad. They were instead sent to Andheri’s SevenHills Hospital quarantine centre. 

At Kalyan station, RPF constable S N Mundey noticed a 30-year-old man with the home quarantine stamp. He told Mundey that he had a Dubai travel history and had come to the city from Azamgarh district in Uttar Pradesh on March 17. He was sent to a nearby hospital. 

In another incident, two passengers, aged 27 and 42 years, who had arrived from Dubai, were forced to get off the Bandra-Surat intercity train at Virar station. 

On noticing their ‘home quarantine stamps, fellow passengers pulled the train chain and complained to Western Railway officials. Railway cops told the two passengers to get off the train. The two later left for their destinations in Vadodara and Jamnagar by road.

A man who had returned from Qatar a couple of days ago and had boarded a train from Mumbai to Kalaburagi in Karnataka in Udayan Express was deboarded at Daund station after passengers raised an alarm about his constant sneezing and coughing. 

A similar scene panned out in a BEST bus. A foreign national with a home quarantine stamp was found travelling in a BEST bus on route number 309 from Goregaon to Kurla on Staurday. The conductor and driver handed him over to the police near Jari Mari in Kurla.

