Quarantined complain of food and hygiene at centre
2020-04-17
BHOPAL: Pictures of how people quarantined at a centre in Gandhi Nagar are dealing with the conditions there have gone viral. The family members of three gas victims from Jehangirabad, who died of coronavirus infection over the past few days, have been lodged in the college.


Talking to TOI, family members expressed fears that if they stayed in such unhygienic conditions at the college, they would fall ill. “We were tested for the infection after the death in my family due to coronavirus. We have not been communicated the report, but I am sure, it is negative because an officer I asked for the report said the report is communicated if a person is found positive. We were observing all the norms of social distancing and hygiene at home, but here, the conditions are such that we are scared we may contract the infection from other peopl, who have been brought here,” said a family member of a victim. 

The family of another gas victim who died of coronavirus infection in the same area, had similar complaints. They had not received food till late in the evening on Wednesday after being brought to the college building in the afternoon. 

The spokesperson for the district administration, Arun Rathore, had assured that cleaning of rooms and toilets would be carried out and food packets have also been dispatched for the people at the quarantine centre. He said the sub-divisional magistrate and a team of administration and BMC are already there to bring things in order at the quarantine centre. 

The team did reach there, but the quality of food given to the inmates and concerns over hygiene (as the toilets were not properly cleaned) and mosquito menace made some of them to click pictures of the toilet, rooms and food they were given and upload them on WhatsApp groups, which soon went viral. 

“They lit mosquito coils in the room. Quality of food was ‘atrocious’, but they said it is the food they are being provided by an NGO. Mosquito coils were ineffective, there was no milk for babies and toilets are dirty,” said son of a victim on Thursday. 


