#Quarantinechallenges: College students show the way
2020-04-09
It’s the season of lockdown, but many of our college students aren’t whiling away their time. Thanks to the many online challenges for youngsters, they are keeping themselves occupied with quite a few of them, ranging from #21daypoetrychallenge to #workout challenges. Let’s get introduced to a few among them.

 

Sidharth JBA English 2nd year studentMar Ivanios College, Thiruvananthapuram

I love poetry and so, took up a #21daypoetrychallenge during the lockdown. Everyone who have their own stories during this phase can express them the best through poetry. So far, I have written about 30 poems on subjects like my feelings, life, love and more. I have also shared quite a few of them on social media. When people respond saying they can connect with my words, it feels great.



Syam KumarBA psychology second year studentMG College, Thiruvananthapuram
The first two days of quarantine was tough for me considering that I love wanderlust, cycling and the like. So, I took up a 21-day workout challenge, to help overcome my mood swings and stay healthy. I have been sharing the videos online too and I see that often people comment that they find them inspiring.

 

Athul Santhosh LalSound engineering studentKeltron Advanced Training Centre, Trivandrum
As a music aficionado who loves to play handpan and didgeridoo, guitar and keyboard, my lockdown is all about trying new compositions and putting together my own. I share them online, as part of my #AsongAday challenge. I am also working on a brand new track which I aim to finish by the end of this 21-day period.

 


Mathew ThomasArchitecture fifth year studentCollege of Architecture, Thiruvananthapuram
I have joined the #36daysoftype typography challenge, putting my own spin to it. I choose logos that represent alphabets and turn them into buildings! And so far, the challenge is doing great and I have reached the letter K.

 

Story by 
Nyshma R, Third year B A Journalism student, Mar Ivanios College, Thiruvananthapuram

 

 


