Quarantine & isolation capacity being increased
2020-05-11
Kolhapur: After its decision on compulsory quarantine/isolation of people coming from cities and districts that have been marked as red zones, the Kolhapur Municipal Corporation has stepped up efforts to develop more quarantine and isolation centres.

Currently, the KMC has the capacity to accommodate around 1,000 people in its quarantine facilities. More quarantine and isolation wards are being developed in the hostels of Shivaji University. Similarly, beds are being set up in the marriage halls and school buildings.

Civic chief Mallinath Kalshetti said, “We are going to increase the number of beds. On Sunday, I discussed the matter with the hoteliers’ association. Three hotel owners have agreed to accommodate the persons arriving from the hotspots such as Mumbai and Pune. People will have to bear the costs. They will be taken to the three covid care centres where their swabs will be taken and sent for testing. If they are positive, they will be put in isolation. If they test negative, they will be told to quarantine at home. Even those who are asymptomatic will be allowed to stay at homes.”

The persons arriving in the city will be screened at the entry points. More thermal guns to check the body temperature have been made available. Currently, only those having passes for emergency travel are allowed in. The civic chief said volunteers are being taken on board to ensure that the persons advised home quarantine do not leave their homes. 

“We are also developing an app with the help of software firms. This app will help us learn about those jumping quarantine. The volunteers will keep track of the movements of those coming from outside. Currently, we have 250 volunteers who will coordinate with our four officers,” he said adding the app will be ready by Monday.

The district administration has, meanwhile, decided to get a written undertaking or affidavit from persons coming from outside. The undertaking would state that the person is willing to strictly follow home quarantine rules for 14 days and if they do not, they will be put into institutional quarantine. The decision to put people working as drivers in the red zones in institutional quarantine facilities has also been taken by collector Daulat Desai.


