Quarantine stamping commences at Mangaluru International Airport
2020-03-20
Mangaluru: Dakshina Kannada has arranged for KSRTC buses to shift international passengers from Kerala, who are arriving at the Mangaluru International Airport (MIA), from Thursday.

A decision in this effect was taken in the wake of a Covid-19 patient travelling from MIA to Kasaragod on March 4. Dakshina Kannada deputy commissioner Sindhu B Rupesh and Kasaragod district collector D Sajith Babu have set up a protocol in this connection, with an aim to prevent the spread of the disease in both districts. Accordingly, KSRTC buses will transport international passengers hailing from Kerala from MIA, to the state’s border at Talapady, in a police convoy. Meanwhile, the Kasaragod district administration will make arrangements to shift them to either the hospital or their homes, based on their health condition, from Talapady. 

DC Sindhu B Rupesh said that the initiative has been taken since 50-60% of the passengers arriving via international flights hail from Kerala.

All international passengers are screened for Covid-19 symptoms at the airport, and stamping of patients who need to be quarantined has started. Passengers from the district are divided into three categories based on their health condition. All passengers above 65 who have blood pressure, diabetes or any other ailments and symptoms of Covid-19 will be brought under ‘A’ category. They are being shifted to Wenlock Hospital or private hospital to be kept under quarantine. Meanwhile, other passengers who are asymptomatic are identified under ‘B’ category and sent to the government facility at ESI hospital in the city for quarantine. Those who have no symptoms are classified as C category, and will be allowed home quarantine for 14 days. Those who are in home quarantine have been given a set of guidelines which they should follow strictly. The district administration’s call centre staff will be in touch with them to confirm their health condition, the DC said.

On 51 passengers from Dakshina Kannada, who travelled with a Covid-19 patient on March 4, the DC said that all of them are in home quarantine and asymptomatic. In the wake of a Covid-19 positive case reported in Kodagu, screening has been made compulsory at all entry points of Dakshina Kannada, she added.


