Quarantine ten for every patient, BMC chief orders
2020-05-20
MUMBAI: BMC chief Iqbal Singh Chahal has told his officials to make contact tracing rigorous and target a ratio of 1:10. For every Covid patient, he has said at least ten high and low-risk contacts should be identified and quarantined, particularly in slums. 

Last week, Chahal visited M-East ward, which has some of the city's most congested slums (like Baiganwadi and Lotus Colony in Shivaji Nagar), and has seen a surge in cases recently, not to mention that as of last week, at nearly 10%, it had one of the highest case fatality rates in the city.

While contact tracing is a key component of the strategy to contain viral spread, BMC documents show that the ratio varies widely among wards. A document accessed by TOI showed that most wards could trace 3-6 contacts per Covid patient, with the exceptions being wards N (Ghatkopar, Vidyavihar) and S (Vikhroli, Bhandup), where 15-16 contacts were being traced per patient.

"Blame it on the lockdown, exhaustion of grassroots health workers or the rise in cases, contact tracing has slowed down to some extent in many areas," said a ward official. A 44-year-old vegetable vendor from Labour Camp, Dharavi, who claimed that his wife and daughter had not been contacted by BMC even four days after he tested positive, shows that contact tracing could be slacking. Admitted in ESIC Hospital, Kandivli, the man told TOI, "My positive report came on Friday. My wife and 12-year-old daughter are home. They don't have symptoms, but I would be relieved if they are checked once."

A health official from one of the wards said that before the lockdown, the contact tracing ratio for most wards hovered between 1:8 and 1: 12. "But during the lockdown, that number has come down. The number of possible contacts of a patient also varies majorly between slums and high-rises. Sometimes, a family in a high-rise may have 5-6 members but mostly it's just husband, wife and child. But in slums, contacts number 5-10," he said.

Non-cooperation too is a hurdle. "Most are extremely hesitant to name neighbours or people they may have come in contact with as they fear those people will be quarantined, an experience many don't want to go through," said another ward official.


