Coronavirus in Amritsar: Quarantined, group says misbehaved with
2020-03-18
AMRITSAR: Ten Indian passengers, who have been kept in a makeshift quarantine centre in Amritsar upon arrival from Spain via Doha on Sunday midnight, have complained of poor hygiene and illtreatment by staff.


Out of the 11 travellers, one had cough and fever, and which he was shifted to the isolation ward of Guru Nanak Dev Hospital on Monday morning. After the passengers and their relatives went to the press over hygiene at the centre, the civil surgeon’s office released pictures of bathrooms to show hygiene maintained by them.

The passengers had arrived by Qatar Airways, from Doha to Amritsar, on Sunday past midnight. All of them had originated from Spain. As they landed at Amritsar’s Sri Guru Ram Das International Airport, they were frisked to the quarantine centre set up at Swami Vivekanand De-addiction & Rehabilitation Centre.

The passengers talked to journalists from across the iron gate of the centre and complained that beds were soiled, bathrooms were dirty and they were maltreated by staff. Outside the centre, their relatives threatened to block the road if they were not allowed to go since they claimed that none of them had the symptoms of coronavirus.

The administration had erected the quarantine facility for incoming travellers, including Indians, from seven countries — China, Italy, Iran, Korea, France, Spain and Germany — for 15 days.

A medical officer who didn’t wish to give his name said they would examine the patients on Tuesday and decide on whether to keep them for rest of 14 days or allow them to go. He said a person had been admitted on March 4 and was tested positive for Covid-19. He said the man was stable, while two of his relatives, who were tested negative, were still in the isolation ward along with one of the 11 passengers who had arrived on Sunday past midnight.

Amritsar deputy commissioner Shivdular Singh Dhillon said people should cooperate with the administration to check the virus’s spread as it was for everyone’s benefit. On the allegations of misbehaviour, he said, according to his reports, passengers also misbehaved with staff and kept them awake all night.


