Quarantined, they fear facility to make them sick
2020-04-11
NOIDA: The Dr Ambedkar SC/ST Hostel at Gautam Budh Nagar at Gautam Budh University in Greater Noida was turned into a quarantine facility last month. The idea was to take some pressure off of hospitals, which would deal with confirmed Covid-19 cases. Quarantine facilities, meanwhile, would house those who were suspected patients and waiting for test results. The wait, as it turns out, has been more worrying for those at the facility than the test itself.

“I have been here for three days. I think I’ll get sick here, even if I was not before,” said an inmate. “Sanitiser bottles are always empty. Bathrooms are not clean, except early in the morning or late at night. Many, including I, have stopped taking baths fearing infection. We have to wait in long queues for that and people don’t maintain social distancing. Some of us ask cops to maintain order, but nobody listens, nobody cares.”

Basic hygiene and sanitation, those at the hostel said, was missing. “We line up for meals, for bathroom with people who are evidently symptomatic. No one is around to enforce social distancing,” said another inmate. “In a residential society, even taking a walk in the park is not allowed. Here, people move in large groups, stroll in the park, walk in the common areas. No one intervenes. Because the officials are all outside the gates.”

Others complained nothing was ever cleaned. “Sheets are not washed, the garbage is piling up in an open spot. There is no one to clean up,” said an inmate. The stay is longer than it has to be. Test reports are taking up to 10 days to come back, before which no one can be allowed to leave.

“Though I feel fine, I have to stand in queue with several others who are coughing and sneezing. When I asked to be shifted to a paid quarantine facility, the request was denied since my report has not come yet. It has been five days,” she said. Earlier, she had posted about the conditions on social media. District magistrate Suhas LY said “some inmates” are being moved out and those responsible acted against. “We have already moved some inmates to other quarantine facilities. On lapses in arrangements, the doctor in charge has been given an adverse entry by the chief medical officer.”


