Quarantine order, contact tracing after airline official tests positive
2020-05-28
Ludhiana: After an Air India security official, who had travelled in a Delhi-Ludhiana flight on May 25, tested positive for Covid-19, the health department officials have started informing his co-travellers to home quarantine themselves. The health department has also written to the Delhi government for contact tracing of the official, who belongs to Mayur Vihar in the Capital.On May 25, the 50-year-old security official of Air India posted at Sahnewal Airport was among 11 passengers who had come on the first day of flight resumption. He tested positive, while other 10 passengers tested negative for Covid-19.Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said they have started measures to track and trace the persons who travelled with him. He said these passengers were being contacted by their rapid response teams and asked to be under home quarantine. “As the security official had got stuck in Delhi, we have also written to the government there to trace his contacts. After the flight landed at Sahnewal airport, he didn’t come in contact with any of the ground staff. Therefore, they were not being tested,” he added. Health department officials said the security official, who was asymptomatic, had gone directly to his accommodation in Sahnewal, so he might not have come in contact with others. Air India officials said they have asked their staff to be more vigilant. An Air India officer, on the condition of anonymity, said they held a briefing for their staff of 20 officials, wherein they were asked to wear masks, face shields and gloves, among others.“The official, who tested positive, was a security supervisor whose work area included cargo, passenger baggage, passenger safety, aircraft safety, among others. He will resume duty after 14 days’ home quarantine,” the officer added.  Air India said the passenger on Delhi-Ludhiana flight found Covid-19 positive works in the security department of Alliance Air and was travelling on a paid ticket. ‘Flights will not be hit’Airport director SK Saran said the positive report of the security official would not affect the flight operation, as the check-ins and check-outs were contact-less and the ground staff were taking precautions. Air India officials said the flight would operate as usual for four days a week, Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. 