Quarantined migrants get family planning tips in Bihar
2020-06-01
PATNA: Amid Covid-19 pandemic, the Bihar State Health Society (BSHS), a wing of health department, has come up with a unique campaign to promote family planning. It has started distributing contraceptives among migrant workers at the time of their discharge from the quarantine and isolation centres.

A BSHS official said the pilot project has already been launched in Rohtas, Gopalganj, East Champaran, Saran, Jamui, Supaul and Samastipur districts.

“At the time of discharge of people from isolation and quarantine centres, the health workers give tips to migrant workers on family planning and also provide contraceptives like condoms, pregnancy test kits and oral contraceptive pills to them,” the health official added.

He said the initiative was aimed at controlling population explosion during the lockdown period as more people are coming from other states.

Asha healthcare workers and auxiliary nurse midwives (ANMs) have also been asked to provide contraceptives to people during door-to-door survey.

Jamui civil surgeon Dr Vijyendra Satyarthy said all the officers at the block level have been asked to ensure counselling of migrants and distribution of contraceptives among them at the time of their discharge from quarantine centres. “Around 2,000 contraceptive pills and condoms have already been distributed among the migrants at quarantine centres.”

Samastipur civil surgeon Dr Rati Raman Jha said the Asha workers distribute contraceptives to the eligible couples during the door-to-door survey. “Since migrants are coming from other states, there is a threat of population explosion in the state. Hence, the family welfare officers at block level have started providing contraceptives to the migrant workers at quarantine and isolation centres,” he added.

Gopalganj civil surgeon Dr T N Singh said health camps have been set up at quarantine centres for distribution of contraceptives. “Health workers also counsel the migrant workers on family planning in the district,” he added.




