Coronavirus suspects quarantined in isolation camps stay at home in Bihar
2020-04-11
PATNA: The state administration is grappling with another problem while dealing with coronavirus suspects kept in the isolation camps, especially in remote areas of the state. There have been reports of corona suspects fleeing from isolation camps and staying with their family members at night.


Sample this. Altogether 33 people were quarantined at a government school at Kala diara under Bakhtiyarpur block in Patna district. When mediapersons visited the camp on Tuesday noon, only eight were found there. Locals said that majority of those quarantined at the camp were migrant workers who had returned home.

“While some leave the camp to harvest rabi crops in nearby villages, others prefer to stay with their families at night. They return to the camp before the medical team’s visit for mandatory test,” said a local resident on the condition of anonymity. Some of the corona suspects blamed the lack of toilets and drinking water facilities for staying away from the camp at night.

This is not an isolated case. In East Champaran, altogether 27 migrant workers kept at a village school under Jogapatti block were found missing when a medical team visited the isolation camp a couple of days ago. Similarly, some migrant workers fled from quarantine centres at Sherghati in Gaya district and Madanpur block in Auangabad district.

The problem became more complex when a group of antisocials attacked an isolation camp in Samastipur district and injured three of the 10 people quarantined there. Earlier, a group of suspects indulged in altercation with some paramedical staff in Saharsa district when the latter turned down the their plea to release them from the hospital after their test reports had been found negative.

According to a rough estimate, around 1.80 lakh migrant workers have returned to Bihar from different states like Maharashtra, Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and West Bengal. A little over 27,000 of them have been quarantined at 3,115 isolation camps set up in the government schools and panchayat buildings across the state.

When asked about some of the corona suspects staying with family members and posing a danger to others, a senior health department official said, “Monitoring of the suspects kept in the isolation camps is the job of the police and the home department officials. We have to conduct screening of the suspects and carry out required medical tests.”

He, however, admitted that the facilities at some of the quarantine centres were not up to the mark. “We are already preoccupied. Let other departments do their jobs,” he said.

ADG (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said village chaukidars have been roped in to keep a tab on those kept in the isolation camps in remote areas. In addition, local police stations have been alerted after such complaints were received from a few centres, he said.

About the ransacking of the quarantine centre in Siwan, the ADG said action had been taken against the culprits. “FIRs have been lodged and the accused will face the legal consequences after completion of their 14-day quarantine period,” he said. He, however, refuted the reports of discrimination in serving food to people belonging to minority community at those camps.

Meanwhile, the government has asked the mukhiyas and related panchayat functionaries to make arrangements for food and sanitary facilities for those quarantined at the government schools and panchayat buildings in rural areas. Even funds were released by the state government for the purpose.

“There is more to it than meets the eye,” said one Navin Kumar while summing up the scene at an isolation camp under Bhore block in Gopalganj district. 

