Quarantine: Lodges fear losing their brand image
2020-05-10
MANGALURU: Many lodges in the city are hesitating to rent their properties to the Dakshina Kannada district administration for institutional quarantine of Indians scheduled to return from foreign countries. They fear stigma and losing brand reputation, leading to financial loss, if their facilities as used as quarantine centres.

The district is expected to see the flow of stranded Indian expatriates – mostly from middle east Asian countries – from next week. They are expected to land at Mangaluru International Airport and NMPT before being sent on 14-day quarantine to hotels, service apartments and hostels of education institution.

However, about 40-50% of lodge operators are not willing to offer their facilities due to various reasons, including opposition from nearby shops, stigma and bad reputation. According to a data available with STOI, the Dakshina Kannada district administration has kept ready close to 1,000 rooms.

Asked about turning down the government’s request, Chandrahas Shetty, president of Mangaluru Hotel Association, said there are several factors. “First is stigma. For example, if there is any positive case reported from a lodging property, it will be sealed off and lead to bad brand image. Secondly, some of the lodging facilities are located near other commercial establishments and they have reportedly objected. Yet another reason is that lodge operators are not sure if all their rooms will be filled up or not. In a lodge, which has about 50 rooms, if only 10 go for quarantine facility, one cannot rent the rest to others and it is a huge loss,” he said.

Another hotelier said the district administration had said the area around the property will not be cordoned off if any covid case was reported. “Sealing off the area or making it containment zone, especially in the heart of the city, will affect other commercial establishments which provide essential services. It is better for the administration to focus on hotels and hostels outside city limits and away from residential areas,” said a hotelier.


