Quarantine facility for 1,000 soon
2020-03-26
Vadodara: A major exercise has been taken up by the state government and district administration to augment facilities for quarantining and treating any possible cases of COVID-19. 

Facilities for quarantining 1,000 persons and treating around 500 persons will be available in the city soon including those already in use. Several institutions and hospitals across the city are been roped in for creating quarantine and treatment facilities. A drive has also been started to recruit medical and paramedical staff needed for these facilities. Education secretary Vinod Rao, who has been appointed as the secretary in-charge of Vadodara city and seven districts in central Gujarat for COVID-19, said that the hostel for the training institute for the high-speed railway project will now be used for creating a quarantine facility. “The hostel has an excellent facility of 165 twin-bed rooms with attached toilets. We will be able to keep around 330 people in quarantine there,” Rao said.

The other facilities that have been identified include that for 360 persons at 180 rooms of hostels of the GMERS Medical College and Hospital, Gotri. There is availability of a capacity of 140 persons at the State Institute of Health and Family Welfare that is in use. Also, petroleum and petrochemicals giants in the city have agreed to accommodate around 200 persons in quarantine at their townships. Rao said that hotels in the city had also been identified for the purpose, but would be put under use only if needed.

For treatment of patients testing positive for COVID-19 and suspected cases with severe respiratory infections, a 50-bed capacity already exists at GMERS, Gotri. Another 100 beds are being added to this facility. The ESIS Hospital in Gotri will also be upgraded to accommodate 200 patients for treatment. The railway hospital at Pratapnagar is being equipped to handle 100 such patients.

Rao said that a capacity of over 100 beds will also be available for treating patients at private hospitals in the city. Some of these hospitals have already been notified along with the capacity there. He added that a drive to make recruitment of both medical and paramedical staff needed for COVID-19 facilities has been started.


