Quarantine facilities set up for repatriates
2020-05-10
Mangaluru: The Dakshina Kannada district administration has fixed charges for quarantine facilities starting from Rs 1,200 up to Rs 4,500, including food per day, for those being repatriated to Dakshina Kannada. The first repatriation flight to Mangaluru International Airport is expected to land on Tuesday from Dubai.

The quarantine facilities include lodges, hostels and service apartments. Rates are fixed based on four categories: basic, economy, medium and premium. The basic facilities are mainly hostels of educational institutions, and the rest are budget and star hotels, said Rahul Shinde, probationary IAS officer, who is in charge of the quarantine facilities for those being repatriated. 

The Dakshina Kannada district administration has kept close to 1,000 rooms ready for quarantining. When asked whether hotels with centralised air-conditioning are allowed or not, Rahul said there was no issue in quarantining people in such hotels. 

Sources who are making arrangements to receive those who are being repatriated, said that all the hotels which will be used as quarantine facilities, will be certified by a doctor, for its suitability. Further, the name of the hotels will not be revealed. 

Once the people land in Mangaluru, they will be given the option to choose their accommodation, according to their wishes and budget. They will then be transported to the facility. Each quarantine facility will have a doctor, who will monitor the health of inmates on a regular basis. 

Many working in the energy-rich Gulf countries, USA, UK, France, Italy and from South-East Asia, are expected to be repatriated to Dakshina Kannada. Apart from taking the air route, some of them will sail to Mangaluru. 

According to an estimate, as many as 3,000 Indians from Dakshina Kannada and Udupi are seeking to be repatriated, from the world over, and will be landing either at the Mangaluru International Airport (MIA) or at the Mangaluru Port. 


