Quarantine in this Maharashtra village means living in tents without electricity & toilets
2020-05-27
KOLHAPUR: Rajashree Bote, five months' pregnant, sits on the mud ground in a makeshift poles-and-tarpaulin tent that has been her home for the past 11 days in Bamane village of Kolhapur district. 

Rajashree had come with her family from Mumbai to Bamane, her native village, and was told to undergo institutional quarantine. But she was aghast to find she had to live ina tent, located on the outskirts of the village, with no electricity, toilets or washrooms. The authorities say institutional quarantine is usually arranged in a public school but the village doesn't have one.

"We spent Rs 28,000 to reach here in a private vehicle with eight others. We have been spending nights in fear of wild animals and the prospect of rain," she told TOI.

Rajashree and her family are among 45 people put up in tents near the temple of the village deity. Located in the hilly terrain of Bhudargad tehsil, the village is about 66km from Kolhapur city and sustains on paddy, sugarcane and groundnut cultivation.


Quarantined, in tents without power, toilets

However, over 20% of the village’s population of 1,800 works and lives in Mumbai. Now, Mumbai’s Covid-19 spread and lack of work has forced many families like Rajashree’s to return home.

Sandip Panhale, his wife Sheetal and their two toddlers returned from Kalyan in Mumbai after he lost his job. “I was living in Mumbai for 18 years. But I was sacked by the housekeeping agency for whom I worked. With the virus fear and no job, I decided to return to Bamane,” he said.

Sheetal says, “In the city, 7-day institutional quarantine is sufficient if the swab test is negative. Here, the villagers have asked us to stay in these tents for 14 days. The village is located in a bison habitat and we are scared to sleep at night,” she said.

Sachin Patil, a medical shop owner from Worli in Mumbai, returned to the village after shutting his shop in a Covid-19 hotspot. “All my staff had left. I was facing a medicine shortage. We are following social distancing here but our families are scared to meet us,” he said.

The authorities say the only school in the village was brought down in 2016 and approval to rebuild one hasn’t come yet.

Bamane sarpanch Balaso Jadhav expressed helplessness over the situation, saying lack of funds with the gram panchayat was limiting them from offering other facilities. The village doesn’t even have a primary health care facility.

ASHA worker Nanda Bote from the village said, “I have been visiting those in quarantine since the last five days, asking about their health. A sub-primary health care centre in the village could have made it easier for us to provide them with medicines and otherfacilities.”

But despite the odds, bus conductor Sunil Patil, who works with Mumbai’s BEST, is happy that he can at least see his family. “Many of my colleagues were infected and three of them died. I sent my family back to the village. I reached here ten days back. My only worry is that by the time I complete my quarantine, I will have to travel back for work,” he said.


