Quarantine facility in hotels has few takers
2020-06-13
Nagpur: Despite alleged lack of proper facilities and services at institutional quarantine centres, only 4.27% people have opted for quarantine in private hotels for the last 64 days. The Nagpur Residential Hotels Association (NRHA) had to withdraw its offer of providing the facility following very low response.

Between April 10 and June 12, 380 persons stayed at four private hotels under institutional quarantine, as per data available from the district administration. As on date, 63 people are lodged in four private hotels, with the latest four being members of a family from Shivaji Nagar.

Of the total 9,264 people quarantined so far, 8,884 were kept at 10 institutional quarantine centres set up by the district administration in association with the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) and state’s Public Works Department (PWD). Currently, 2,274 persons are in quarantine, of which 2,211 are in government-run 10 centres.

NRHA had offered paid services at 18 hotels. Tejinder Singh Renu, president of NRHA, told TOI, “We set up quarantine rooms with staff, materials and security system at a reasonable price. Initially, only six people availed the facility in April. Entire system has been lying idle since then, leading to financial loss. So, NRHA decided to withdraw and asked hotels owners to enter into agreement with administration individually,” he said.

Hotels on Wardha Road, Central Avenue, Ashok Chowk and Sitabuldi are now providing quarantine facility.

Initially, the district administration was facilitating all types of services free of cost at institutional quarantine centres before the civic body took over. Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI, “Our staff gives information about facility at private hotels if anyone is hesitant to stay at these centres. If numbers are considered, our facilities are the best and people availing it,” he said.

According to NMC officials, they are providing many facilities, including towels, bed sheets, breakfast with tiffin, lunch, tea with biscuits and dinner apart from basic requirements like soaps, toothpaste etc. “We also provide special meals and milk to children. Fruits were given to people having health issues. Sanitation, fumigation etc is done in a proper manner, while doctors and medicines are always available,” they said.

MNS activist Durgesh Sakulkar has alleged people are not following Covid distancing at quarantine centres. He wrote to BJP city president Pravin Datke, “I was quarantined along with my entire family at VNIT quarantine centre. People were following norms at homes but they have no fear of rules at quarantine centres. People are meeting each other frequently. There are five toilets on one floor where people gather at a time. This is the reason behind rise in positive cases from Naik Talao-Bangladesh,” he said.

The NMC officials regularly urge people at quarantine centres to not come out of their rooms. According to them, international flyers returning under Vande Bharat Mission are going into quarantine at private hotels as they fear contracting the infection at institutional quarantine centres.


