Tamil Nadu: Quarantined man runs out naked, bites woman, 90, to death
2020-03-29
MADURAI: The strains of isolation manifested in a bizarre manner in Theni district on Friday when a 34-year-old man on week-long home quarantine ran out of his house naked and bit a 90-year-old woman on her throat, leading to her death on Saturday. 


A textile trader from Jakkamanayanpatti in Bodi, the man had returned from Sri Lanka about ten days ago and health department officials had asked him to self-isolate at home. Late on Friday, the man ran out naked and bit Natchiammal on her throat as she was sleeping outside her home in Baktha Seva Street near his house. Hearing her cries, neighbours rushed in and overpowered the man. They tied his hands and legs and that was when they noticed the home quarantine mark on his hand.

Soon, Kana Vilakku police arrived at the spot and took him to the station. He has been booked for murder but the action would be initiated based on the recommendations of the health department, said police sources. He has been admitted to the Theni government hospital. The woman who was admitted to the same hospital succumbed to her injuries on Saturday morning.

The incident has brought up the importance of assessing the mental health of people in quarantine, says the nodal officer for Tamil Nadu’s mental health programme Dr C Ramasubramanian. Such abnormal behaviour including the recent suicide in Pudukottai by a man who was forced by relatives to self-isolate makes it important to assess the mental health of these patients before they are quarantined, he said. ``Any person kept in isolation has to be counselled and his history of medication taken into account,’’ he said. ``We have to take psychological aspects into consideration before quarantine,’’ he said. Periodical counselling must also be given during the period of quarantine.

A sudden sedentary lifestyle will result in sensory deprivation and they will start experiencing an emptiness syndrome. Hence, they should be provided avenues to help overcome it like visual media, books and video calls with family members if isolated.

Similarly, if a person was suffering from psychiatric problems, drug or alcohol addiction, the sudden unavailability of medicines, drugs or alcohol can lead to severe withdrawal symptoms. “They would first become sleepless and restless. And they would show lack of interest in food, and later become suspicious and violent. Usually, they become violent to people who are near them, this particular case is very abnormal,” he said.

