Questions raised on admin’s lapses in quarantine process
2020-04-28
RANCHI: A day after the state capital recorded its biggest spike in the number of Covid-19 cases, the district administration on Monday extended the screening and contact-tracing exercise by dividing the city into four zones. However, residents and officials have started questioning several lapses that the district administration had made and claimed that these lapses have possibly increased the rate of infection in the city.

A total of seven persons out of 13, who tested positive on Sunday in the city, were frontline workers and five of them are sent to home quarantine. However, two of the five sent to home quarantine were found working, thus increasing the risk of spreading the infection. 

Among the seven frontline workers, five were nurses of Ranchi sadar hospital and got infected through a pregnant woman from Hindpiri, the epicentre of Covid-19 outbreak in the city. While two of the nurses were sent to a quarantine centre, three of them were put in home quarantine. 

Of the other two persons, one is a driver, who was advised home quarantine and used to ferry the executive officer of the Covid-19 control and command centre at Hindpiri. The last is a daily wager, a resident from another district who was released from a quarantine centre after completing the 14-day isolation, but advised home quarantine. He, was however, hired to work at the control and command centre. Both were found working till their test reports arrived on Sunday.

A senior health department official on condition of anonymity said the spread could have been contained if the administration acted in a co-ordinated manner and quarantined all those whose samples were collected. 

He said, “Three of the nurses who tested positive were earlier sent to home quarantine after their samples were collected on April 21. They were residents of different areas, including Loadih, Chutia and Argora. Since they were in direct contact with a patient, staying at their homes increased the risk of spreading infection among people from those areas.”

Neighbours of the three nurses and the driver have also alleged negligence on part of the district administration, saying that not enough precaution was taken to isolate people on Covid-19 duty.

Kumar Prasenjit, a resident of Piska More area, said, “If the administration wants us to stay indoors to contain the virus, then they should have made protocols to ensure that those on Covid-19 duty are not allowed to go around the city but make them stay in an isolated environment. Now that people from various areas have tested positive, I think community infection may have started.”

Ishan Trivedi, a resident of Harmu housing colony, said, “I fail to understand the logic behind hiring a man, who was advised home quarantine, to work at the control and command centre. Are the officials ignorant or have they run out of resources that they have to hire people in home quarantine? Now that a frontline worker has been detected positive from Imli Chowk area, we do not know how safe we are.”

On its part, the district authorities appointed nodal officers for the four zones to expand the screening and contact-tracing exercise All four nodal officers have been provided one hospital each in their respective areas to isolate any suspected patients.

Talking to TOI, Ranchi DC Rai Mahimapat Ray said, “We have shifted all positive nurses to Rims, a Covid-19 designated hospital, and their contacts are being traced and samples are being collected for testing. Moreover, new neighbourhoods from where new positive cases have been reported are being combed and samples are being collected.”

On being asked whether those who have come in contact with infected frontline workers were quarantined, Ray said, “Family members of the official and his driver along with three nurses, who were on home quarantine before they tested positive, are now being sent to a quarantine centre and we are also collecting their samples for testing.”


