Quirky features of Covid-19 leave doctors in DK district baffled
2020-04-20
Mangaluru: World over, medical researchers are scratching their heads, as they try to come out with an effective vaccine against the novel coronavirus. 

However, in Dakshina Kannada district, it is the strange and ‘quirky’ aspects of the deadly virus that has the doctors baffled. The case of the 10-month-old infant that tested positive for Covid-19, while neither the baby’s mother nor the grandmother was found infected, left the doctors astounded, before they were confronted with yet another puzzling case: A lawyer, who had returned to the district from New Delhi, testing positive after the stipulated quarantine period had elapsed. In a third instance, medical tests confirmed that two delegates from the district who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat were infected, but 10 days after they had been with their families. 

The total number of cases in the district – two fresh cases were reported on Sunday – is now at 15. However, of these, 12 have been discharged, and directed to stay quarantined at home for a fortnight. Lack of clarity on the lifecycle of the virus has compelled doctors and government agencies to adopt the precautionary measure of keeping those patients who are discharged in quarantine at home, while their primary and secondary contacts will also be closely monitored. 

Dakshina Kannada district health and family welfare officer Dr Ramachanra Bairy said that they had observed the virus exhibiting virulent behaviour after as long as a 21-day incubation period. “The district is being utmost careful in handling the crisis, and we appeal to the people to adopt all the precautionary measures prescribed by the government. The lack of sufficient samples, and the sudden eruption of the crisis has left the scientific community with too many grey areas to explore,” Dr Bairy told TOI. 

Illustrating his point with the example of the lawyer, who had been to New Delhi to appear at the Supreme Court, Dr Bairy said, “He was quarantined on April 1, and his throat swabs sent for medical tests on the same day. The results confirmed that he was not infected, but the result of the tests on samples that were collected from him on April 13 proved otherwise. There was another incident of a patient from Karkala taluk in Udupi district, who was quarantined at ESI Hospital and initially tested negative, also tested positive later.” 

Dr Bairy added, “In the case of the ten-month-old baby that has been confirmed infected, we cannot isolate the baby from the mother since that is the treatment protocol.” 

Epidemiologist Dr Prashanth N Srinivas, of the Institute of Public Health, Bengaluru, said that several ‘false negative’ cases had been reported in Wuhan province in China and South Korea. “The viral load, when tested initially, may have been low. We can, in fact, not rule out that testing may not have been carried out properly. There have also been reports of ‘false positives’.” 


