Coronavirus scare in Gujarat: Indian Railways sets up two quarantines, isolation ward
2020-03-10
AHMEDABAD/VADODARA: The city on Monday recorded the first death due to H1N1 virus or swine flu this year, even as the state government goes on an overdrive to stall another virus—coronavirus—of which it is yet to register a single case this season. 


The new coronavirus threat , however, forced the Indian Railways to act. The Ahmedabad division of the Western Railway has designated the community centres in Sabarmati and Gandhidham as quarantines. A six-bed isolation ward has been set up at Vadodara railway hospital. The Ahmedabad division has directed its employees who are in direct contact with passengers to wear masks and gloves. “When a locomotive pilot reports for duty, he has to undergo an alcohol check,” an official said. “The railways has decided to the destroy the nozzle of the breath analyzer after the test.” 

 
 
Deepak Kumar Jha, the division railway manager, Ahmedabad, said: “Special precautionary measures against the virus are in place.” Jha said handles of doors at the Ahmedabad station are being cleaned frequently. “The Ahmedabad division has two large community centres, in Sabarmati and Gandhidham, with an adequate number of toilets,” he said. “Each centre can accommodate 75 beds. The centres have cooking areas as well. We have cancelled all bookings and stopped fresh bookings till March 31.”

Officials said that if additional accommodation is required, Diesel Training Centre and Signal Training School with 90 beds and 140 beds respectively are also available. Hence scheduled training at these institutes has also been suspended.

Masks, disposable gowns, hoods, gloves, and hand sanitizer have been ordered along with two infrared thermometer guns. “The railway board had recently directed zonal railways to identify and create quarantine facilities,” a senior official said.

Meanwhile the divisional hospital of the Vadodara railway division has started taking preventive measures. While a nodal officer has been appointed, staff has been selected for a special ward set up at the hospital. All doctors and staff have been given training for self-protection and handling of suspected patients.

“Hundred posters and 2,000 leaflets have been provided to health units and other places,” said Khemraj Meena, the public relations officer of the Vadodara railway division, adding that a list of nodal officers at all major stations has been prepared and made available at stations.

