Railway spread 1918 flu pandemic in India
2020-03-23
Kochi: Archived documents reveal that the railway was the major culprit in spreading throughout the country the influenza pandemic, aka Spanish flu, of 1918, which is believed to have been brought to India by the returning influenza-infected soldiers of World War I. The pandemic, also named the ‘greatest medical holocaust in history’ and the ‘mother of all pandemics’ killed 10–20 million people in India, the worst-hit country in the world.

The first ascertained cases of influenza in Bombay occurred on a transport which arrived in May from Mesopotamia, says a 1919 report by Major Norman White, the-then high sanitary commissioner of India. He had recorded that in June 1918, influenza was first noted in Bombay, chiefly among employees and mill workers. By end of June, it spread up to Madras.

How did the pandemic spread so fast across the nation? 

The annual report of the sanitary commissioner of 1918 gives the answer: “There is ample evidence during the first epidemic of the introduction of infection into a locality from another infected locality. The railway played a prominent part, as was inevitable. During the panic caused by the epidemic the trains were filled with emigrants from infected centres, many of them being ill. The post office also was an important agency in disseminating infection, also very largely through the railway postal service. Lucknow, Lahore, Simla and other cities are said to have been infected in this manner.”

An account given by the sanitary commissioner of Punjab was quoted in the annual report, which gives us an idea of the rapidity with which infection can be spread by infected individuals: “A recruit suffering from symptoms of influenza arrived at Narkanda and stayed a night with the Khansama of the hotel. Three days later the Khansama and his wife went down with influenza. Within a few yards of the Khansama’s house lived a blacksmith and the two used to inter-visit. A few days after the Khansama was attacked all the members of the blacksmith’s house were down with the disease. The postal peons used to frequent the Khansama’s house, with the result that they all contracted the disease and two of them died of it. The postal peons served as a disseminating agency and in a short time the Hindustan Tibet Road was thoroughly infected. Marwari traders, shopkeepers and even doctors, in fact, all who travelled by water, road or rail, were potential factors in distributing infection.”

In modern days, along with railway, airplanes also play a key role in the spread of infections. “Increased travel volumes potentially enhance the speed and spread of a future pandemic. In addition, the global shift of populations to urban centres has increased the size and population density of cities thereby favouring the spread of infectious diseases such as influenza,” says Rebecca F Grais in her article “Assessing the impact of airline travel on the geographic spread of influenza”. She and her team suggest that in their 2003 study that if the Hong Kong influenza pandemic strain of 1968-1969 had returned in 2000, it would have spread concurrently to cities in both the northern and southern hemisphere. Grais’s findings find resonance in the current Covid-19 pandemic. 


