East Central Railway initiates steps to tackle coronavirus threat
2020-03-13
PATNA: The East Central Railway (ECR) on Thursday reviewed the precautionary measures being taken to tackle coronavirus (Covid-19), following strict directives from the Railway Board-New Delhi.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The Board has asked all the zonal railways, including the ECR, to launch a massive awareness drive at all its stations to educate people about the impact of Covid-19 and the preventive measures to be taken as a large number of people are scared to travel by trains.

ECR chief public relations officer (CPRO) Rajesh Kumar said, “Posters and banners are being put up at all the railway stations, while pamphlets and handbills will be distributed among passengers. The railways will take recourse to Information, Education and Communication (IEC) method to help people adopt preventive measures.”

Besides, pamphlets and handbills will be distributed among all the patients visiting hospitals as well as in railway colonies.

“Audio and visual clips will also be shown to people about the dos and don’ts of Covid-19,” the CPRO said, adding apart from the superspecialty hospital at Karbigahiya in Patna, all the divisional railway hospitals at Danapur, Mughalsarai, Dhanbad, Sonepur and Samastipur have set up isolation wards for primary check-up of the suspects.

According to Danapur divisional railway manager (DRM) Sunil Kumar, the railways has instructed all the major stations to make announcements on public address system at short intervals about the virus’ preventive measures.

“Coaches should be cleaned properly and railway and hospital staff have been asked to protect themselves,” the DRM said.

The railways has identified 12,483 beds across the country in its 17 zonal railways, including the ECR, to quarantine coronavirus suspects.

“Though isolation wards have come up at 91 railway hospitals across the country, the ECR has created at least 10-bed isolation wards in each of its division, where separate medical kits have been kept,” the CPRO said and added the railways has geared up to provide primary treatment to about 20,000 Covid-19 suspects.

