Railways ups its guards after 2 suspected Covid-19 cases
2020-03-07
NEW DELHI: After the specialised ward at the Northern Railway Central Hospital (NRCH) in Delhi received two suspected cases of Covid-19 on Thursday, the Northern Railway has advised all passengers to take basic precautions during a train journey, especially if the duration of travel is more than a few hours. 

The railways said that in addition to the dos and don’ts posted across stations, its staff have been asked to increase the frequency of cleaning at the platforms and the waiting rooms. The Northern Railway on Friday said the final test report of the two passengers was yet to arrive.

Deepak Kumar, chief public relations officer of the Northern Railway, said all possible measures were being taken to ensure cleanliness at platforms. “Any passenger who feels he/she has Covid-19 symptoms can go for a check-up at the hospital. We have referred the two cases to RML Hospital,” said Kumar.

However, sanitisers are still not available on trains, the railway admitted. “We don’t have sanitisers on board. But we have asked our staff to wear masks and use gloves if they have any symptom while passengers are requested to take all precautions. We are also making announcements on the platform to generate awareness,” said Kumar.

A senior official said the Railway Protection Force staff had been asked to take precautions, including using masks and gloves. “Anybody who has to work amid a large number of people has been asked to opt for better hand and mouth hygiene, including use of hand sanitisers and masks,” he added. 

In a statement released on Friday, Northern Railway said, “In two cases reported to the NRCH casualty ward on March 5, there was a history of fever and cough. On account of their recent foreign travel, both were sent to RML Hospital (one of the nodal hospitals for the Covid-19 surveillance).”

As per the contentment plan of the Union health ministry, both of them have been asked to take rest at home for 14 days as a precautionary measure while their family members have been advised screening, the statement added. “Their report is still awaited. Any viral illness, including Covid-19, has not been confirmed yet,” the railways said.


