Rain spells, Covid-19 lockdown to reduce wildfires in U’khand: Experts
2020-03-29
Dehradun: The intermittent spells of rain and the lockdown imposed to combat the Covid-19 pandemic is likely to help Uttarakhand in escaping the wrath of forest fires which engulf huge swathes of green cover and claim lives (both human and animal) almost every year, say forest experts.

The wildfires usually start in the state from mid-February onwards but this year, Uttarakhand has recorded just three instances of forest fires so far. In 2019, Uttarakhand had lost 2981.55 hectares of forest cover in 2,158 instances between February and early June and had spent over Rs 55 lakh to douse the flames. 

“The state may record lesser number of wildfire incidents this year because the periodic rain spells are moisturising the forest floor and tree leaves haven’t become completely dry as yet, so they are less inflammable,” Amit Kumar Verma, a scientist at Dehradun-based Forest Research Institute (FRI), told TOI. He added that good rain spells during the last months of 2019 reduced the chances of massive wildfires this year. “Analysing the data of last 15 years, we can say that forest fire instances are usually low when precipitation during winter season is high,” Verma added.

Adding to Verma’s observation, SR Reddy, assistant silviculturist at FRI, told TOI, “Extended winters and sufficient rainfall have reduced inflammable materials in the forest. Just atmospheric temperature and wind direction alone cannot set the forests ablaze as wildfires require dry leaves as well.”

Along with good rain spells, less movement of people inside forests due to the Covid-19 lockdown has also reduced chances of massive wildfire instances. “Some of those who come to the forest carelessly flick cigarettes or beedis and matchsticks into the bushes. This often becomes the cause of a forest fire. The less movement of people in and around the forests due to the imposition of the lockdown will further reduce forest fire incidents,” BK Gangtey, chief conservator of forests and state nodal officer of Uttarakhand forest department, told TOI.

Notably, the state government had released Rs 20 crore for the forest department to douse wildfires in 2019 and that fund hasn’t been exhausted yet. “We still have some of the amount that was sanctioned to us in 2019 and that money is to be used for fighting forest fires till March- end. We will get more funds to combat wildfires by the second week of April,” added Gangtey.


