Rajasthan to adopt Centre’s norms for coronavirus screening at airports
2020-03-14
JAIPUR: The health department will adopt the Standard Operating Practice (SOP) fixed by the Union health ministry for the categorization of passengers for Covid-19 coming from China, Democratic Republic of Korea, France, Germany, Spain, Italy and Iran for the screening at various airports in the state.


Senior officials of the health department on Friday given nod to the SOP which would be followed for the categorization of the persons having symptoms of corona virus.

The passengers from these countries have been categorized into A, B and C. “Category A is kept for a high risk passenger who has fever, cough, shortness of breath with a history of travel to or residence of a country/area or territory reporting local transmission of Covid-19 during 14 days prior to the symptoms,” said Ravi Prakash, additional director, rural health.

Under the category A, the patients with acute respiratory illness and having been in contact with the Covid-19 case in the last 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms would also be covered. “In this case, this category of patients would be segregated from other patients and would be sent for isolation,” said a senior officer.

Officials added that category B is for patients with moderate risk. “Under this category, an asymptomatic passenger coming from China, Democratic Republic of Korea, France Germany, Spain, Italy, Iran and which are elderly (above 60 years) and have hypertension, diabetes and asthma are covered. These would be directly shifted place having quarantine facility and would be monitored by the government for next 14 days. In case they develop symptoms, they should be isolated,” said an officer.

The category C for an asymptomatic passenger coming from any Covid-19 affected countries including the passengers coming from China, Democratic Republic of Korea, France Germany, Spain, Italy, Iran. “These would be kept under home quarantine and will be monitored by IDSP (Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme) network.


