Rajasthan is fighting dual battle against coronavirus & locust
2020-05-22
JAIPUR: Rajasthan is fighting a dual battle. On the one hand, it is on battle mode against coronavirus which is growing day by the day, while on the other hand, the locust swarms which entered the state from the western border in April are continuing its march towards eastern and southern parts of the state.

So far, it has spread over 37,000 hectares of land in the state, while the agriculture department is bracing up to stop the advance of the insects to larger areas.

The state had reported a locust invasion in May last year after a gap of 26 years and the attack continued until February this year, damaging Rabi crop across 6,70,000 hectare in 12 districts. The state put the loss due to the locust invasion at about Rs 1,000 crore.

Chief minister Ashok Gehlot after a review meeting had directed the chief secretary to prepare an action plan to eliminate the insects. The state government had also sought the help of the Centre to fight the problem on the agriculture front.

Agriculture minister Lalchand Kataria directed the officers of the agriculture department to launch a night operation to eliminate locusts by spraying pesticides at night as a campaign. The government is also planning to spray pesticides using drone.

He said the state is ready to provide additional resources to fight the menace. Use local resources as well and seek full support of public representatives and farmers, he said.

The only consolation for the state is the Kharif season is a few months away. But it had to eliminate it before the season begins in July.

According to the agriculture department for the first time this year, on April 11, locust swarms had entered the state from Pakistan and till now about 37, 000 hectares of land in Jaisalmer, Barmer, Sriganganagar, Jodhpur, Nagaur, Ajmer, Pali, Bikaner, Sirohi and Bhilwara districts.

Kataria said the agriculture department pressed in to service 70 Boleros, 45 Bolero camper utility vehicles, 600 tractor mounted sprayer and tractors and 3,200 tractor water tankers for the control and survey of locusts.

A provision of Rs 5 crore has been made for the operation of vehicles on rent. A provision of Rs 10 crore has been made to provide plant protection chemicals to farmers as 100% grant, he said.


