Rajasthan loses Rs 41 crore a day liquor revenue due to lockdown
2020-05-02
JAIPUR: With the lockdown further extended to May 17, the state government is keen to open liquor outlets as it is losing over Rs 40 crore a day, including duty and Value Added Tax (VAT).

A senior official in the finance department said that it is hard to manage the finances of the state with tax revenues falling significantly, including royalty from petroleum, because of the historic low prices of crude oil. Niranjan Kumar Arya, additional chief secretary (Finance), said, “The state government is losing Rs 41 crore daily as the liquor outlets remain closed. This includes both excise duty and VAT. Annually, the state gets about Rs 15,000 crore from both the heads.” 

With regard to the opening of shops, he said the state will identify the areas based on the new guidelines of the Centre . Much before the Covid-19 pandemic, the government was stretched fiscally because of farm loan waivers, discoms debt burden and delayed and reduced GST share to the state.

The state government in its new excise policy for 2020-21 had raised licence fees for hotel and restaurant bars but it had to roll back those hikes to cushion the industry hit by the lockdown.

However, keeping in view the staggering revenue losses, the excise department on Wednesday raised the additional duty and licence fees for country liquor which is expected to bring in an additional Rs 800 crore cumulatively to the exchequer.

However, the additional income will not be even closer to the Rs 1,600 crore it is estimated to to have lost due to the closure of shops, said an official.

Chief minister Ashok Gehlot has already said that the state should be allowed freedom to prepare strategy to mitigate the pandemic problem which would have given the state government the power to decide on what is to be kept closed or opened. 

Many states like Karnataka and Kerala and political leaders have already spoken in favour of opening shops in manner that does not hamper the fight against coronavirus. There are already reports of a black marketing thriving. Sector experts said if these outlets remained closed any further, it would be hard to contain bootlegging and illegal sale of spurious liquor.


