Raj planning to have ‘modified’ lockdown extension
2020-04-13
Jaipur: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Sunday said Rajasthan would wait for the Prime Minister to make an announcement on extending the lockdown, but the state is exploring to have a ‘modified lockdown’ based on the Centre’s response.

Gehlot said the state had already set up two committees, including one on preparing a draft plan to revive economic activities, to suggest ways on how to withdraw the lockdown.

Talking to reporters through a video conference here, the chief minister said, “If the lockdown is extended, will it be possible for the state to go for a local version that could be known as ‘modified lockdown’? This would depend on the Centre’s response.”

Gehlot added, “Suppose the industries require interstate transport (to resume economic activities), but this won’t be possible without the Centre’s nod. So, what are the internal resources available, like labourers, that can be utilised by the state and adopt a modified lockdown.”

The CM said bringing the economy back on track would be difficult and small industries would face more problems. “We suggested to the PM in video conference (on Saturday) that migrant labourers in camps be allowed to go to their native places. We are now exploring how these labourers can be utilised. Implementing the lockdown was easy, but opening it has become a challenge. The state’s revenue generation has dropped to less than 15% of what it used to be,” Gehlot said.

The CM said Rajasthan has been tackling the spread of coronavirus effectively, but Jaipur has become a challenge for the state government. Gehlot said the city’s Ramganj area has high population density so the Bhilwara model was being modified according to the local needs. “The state would go for maximum testing as people even without symptoms are testing positive. Ten lakh testing kits have been ordered and SMS hospital’s testing facilities have been increased from 200 to 500,” he said.

The CM, however, denied that the disease has reached the ‘community spreading’ stage. The health department is focusing on developing more quarantine facilities in the city. Gehlot said 20,000 PPE kits have been acquired, while order has been placed for another 1.5 lakh of these, for the covid-19 teams. He claimed that one lakh food packets were being distributed to the poor in Jaipur alone.


