Coronavirus scare: Rajasthan tourism locks down, all monuments shut from today
2020-03-18
JAIPUR: The state has entered the complete lockdown stage and will close down all historical monuments, including Hawa Mahal, Jantar Mantar, Amber Fort and other popular spots, starting Wednesday in a bid prevent the spread of coronavirus.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) will shut all 224 protected sites across the state, including the popular Chittorgarh Fort, until March 30. Foreign and domestic tourists are now practically ‘banned’ in the state as all popular tourist destinations are closed.

 
 

The decision will hit the tourism sector, which was already struggling since the outbreak of the virus in February, hard. Jaipur is part of the golden triangle of tourism that includes Delhi and Agra.

Commenting on the move, ASI superintending archaeologist VS Badiger, Jodhpur circle, said, “It is a precautionary measure taken to strengthen the fight against coronavirus. Most of the ASI protected sites in Rajasthan receive thousands of visitors every day making them vulnerable to the virus. So, we have closed them for tourists and locals.”

Soon after the order reached site offices around noon, officials started preventing the entry of tourists.

The closure will have a huge impact on hospitality and related businesses in destinations like Jaipur, Udaipur, Jodhpur, Jaisalmer and Ajmer.

With about 8,000 to 10,000 visitors on a lean day, Amber Fort and Hawa Mahal in Jaipur are the most visited historical sites in the state. Other popular sites for tourists are Chittorgarh and Kumbhalgarh forts, which have an average footfall of 8,000 and 3,000, respectively.

Tourist places like Adhai Din ka Jhopra and Baradari in Ajmer, which are popular among devotees coming to the dargah, and Pushkar have closed down on Tuesday.

The tourism sector comprising hospitality, transport, events and handicrafts businesses is heading towards one of the worst financial crisis. 

“There will be zero occupancy in our hotel. When the news of the closure of monuments reaches customers, the remaining 10 to 20% bookings are likely to be cancelled. It will be difficult even to pay electricity bills and the salaries of employees,” said Piyush Sharma, an operations manager at a four-star hotel in Bani Park.

The existing situation has hit the events industry which is part of the tourism sector. “Most of my events have been either postponed indefinitely or cancelled due to the prevailing situation. Rajasthan is the most preferred place for corporate events due to its hospitality sector and historical sites. The cancellations will affect the entire industry,” said Samir Babel, head of an event management company.

