Coronavirus scare: Rajasthan temple closed, yet hundreds march from UP for pilgrimage
2020-03-20
AGRA: Hundreds of devotees from across UP and Haryana have embarked on a pilgrimage to Kaila Devi temple in Rajasthan despite the place of worship closing its doors until March 31 and the authorities appealing to followers not to congregate there in the wake of coronavirus threat.


An annual fair at the temple in Karauli district was also cancelled after the Rajasthan government banned gatherings exceeding 50 people. Neither the advisory nor the fact that no darshan is possible seems to have dampened the faith of hundreds. 


 

On Wednesday night, a long line of devotees on foot and vehicles could be seen on Roopvas Road in Agra as they made their way to Rajasthan for the annual pilgrimage that starts after Holi and lasts until Chaitra Navratri. 

“For more than 50 years, my family and relatives have been visiting Kaila Devi on foot. A virus cannot cannot stop us from worshipping our gods,” said Tulsiram, a resident of Mathura, who is part of a group of 60 pilgrims which is expected to reach its destination in three days. The group will cover 180 km on foot to reach the temple.

Virendra Kumar, a farmer in Etmadpur block, who is headed to the temple with his wife, added, “We know the temple is shut but we will offer our prayers from outside.”

A factory worker, Manoj Chaudhary, on his way to Kaila Devi with four friends said that Covid-19 was a “rich man’s disease” and unlikely to affect poor, hardworking people like him.

No amount of convincing could make the worshippers turn back. Mahesh Chandra Sharma, manager of Shri Kaila Devi temple trust, said that pilgrims have been requested to visit the temple once the Covid-19 threat is over.

Gram pradhans of villages on the UP-Rajasthan border, such as Davar, Jajauli, Aulenda, also tried to persuade the pilgrims to not continue their journey but in vain.

Narayan Singh, husband of gram pradhan of Jajauli village, said, “At least 20% population of our village has left to visit Kaila Devi. The local administration has failed to create awareness about Covid-19 in remote areas.” Satyendra Singh, husband of gram pradhan of Aulenda village, said, “These pilgrims will infect themselves and others by their sheer ignorance.” Dharam Singh, husband of gram pradhan of Davar village, was relieved that Rajasthan police had started forcing pilgrims to return. 

Sub-divisional magistrate of Kiraoli block (Agra), Nandkishore Kalal, told TOI, “Our team is continuously working to create awareness among villagers to stop their movement toward Kaila Devi amid the spread of Covid-19. At the moment, we have not implemented CrPc section 144, as it might anger pilgrims, however, after interacting with government staff, they are returning home.”

