Coronavirus outbreak: Rajasthan local body polls deferred by six weeks
2020-03-19
JAIPUR: The Rajasthan High Court on Wednesday deferred elections to the six newly formed municipal corporations in the state for six weeks due to the coronavirus outbreak.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The polls for councillors to 560 wards of the six new corporations of Jaipur Heritage, Jaipur Greater, Jodhpur North, Jodhpur South, Kota North and Kota South were scheduled to be held on April 5. Following the court order, the state election commission (SEC) cancelled the polls announced earlier.

As per the earlier HC order, elections to six municipal bodies were to be completed by April 18.

A division bench of justices Sangeet Lodha and Manoj Kumar Vyas deferred the same on a plea by the state government and PILs filed before the court. The court said the SEC has the liberty to approach the court if it requires further extension of the date.

Deferring the polls, the court said the corona outbreak has been declared a pandemic by WHO and the immediate priority of the Union and state governments were to contain the spread of the disease and save the life of citizens.

Appearing for the state government and SEC, advocate general Mahendra Singhvi said the process for conducting the polls to the new municipal corporations has been completed and the dates announced.

In view of WHO declaring the novel coronavirus a pandemic and the Government of India declaring it a national disaster, an advisory has been issued on March 5 directing the government to avoid mass gatherings till the disease is contained.

“Keeping in view the need to control the spread of the disease and timely treatment of patients infected by the disease, it is not feasible and advisable to conduct the elections as scheduled,” he said, asking the court to postpone the elections for a period of six weeks.

There are over 35 lakh voters in the newly formed six municipal corporations and over 15,000 personnel were to be deputed for election duty.

After requests from MLAs and district collectors to postpone the civic polls due to the coronavirus threat, the local self-government department had approached the court for postponing the elections.


