Coronavirus: Rajasthan orders partial shutdown of government offices till end of March
2020-03-20
JAIPUR: The state government on Thursday ordered a partial shutdown of its offices till March 31in view of the coronavirus threat looming large. Except for essential services, all other state government, semigovernment, autonomous bodies and corporations have been asked to allow 50% of the staff to work from home till the end of March.



Coronavirus in India live updates

All school, college exams have been postponed till further orders. The government took the decision following a review meeting on coronavirus threat held by the chief minister on Thursday.

 
 

Only during emergency situations, the staff of non-essential departments have to come to the office. But the government made it clear that it is not leave and the employees cannot leave their work stations.



CM Ashok Gehlot directs cops to enforce Section 144 strictly

Jaipur: “Except for health emergency and family necessity, employees cannot leave the city in which they are posted,” said the order.

CM Ashok Gehlot said the next two weeks were very critical in the fight against the deadly virus and all possible remedies have to be adopted. The chief minister sought the cooperation of the people. But the partial shutdown will not be applicable to officers above the rank of deputy secretary, joint secretary, deputy director, executive engineers.

At the district level, collectors’ office and district-level offices of departments will work normally. The government said the district level offices can regulate their staff on a 50:50 ratio on rotation.

The government said spas, clubs and bars would be closed and advised private businesses to encourage their staff to work from home. The labour department has been asked to check the factories for cleanliness and take all precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the virus.

The chief minister said the NREGA workers need not come to the work site till March 31 and they would be paid their wages during the shutdown period.

The government said that action would be taken against those who have been advised home isolation and are not following the direction under Section 188 of IPC. Additional chief secretary medical and health Rohit Kumar Singh said that at present 1,100 people are under home isolation, with 265 in Jaipur. The chief minister directed the police to enforce Section 144 strictly..

Essential services and departments exempted from the shutdown include medical and health, medical education, ayurveda, energy, discoms, PHED, local self-government, municipal bodies, home and police, jail, FSL, finance, food and civil supplies.

