Coronavirus: Rajasthan student returns from Italy varsity, tests negative
2020-03-06
JAIPUR: Suresh Giyad, one of the 85 Indian students who were stranded in the university town of Pavia in north Italy’s Lombardy region — which has already reported 73 coronavirus deaths over the past few days — returned to his home state Rajasthan on March 2. He was let go after he tested negative in the thermal screening at New Delhi airport.
 

Till Thursday evening, Italy had reported 107 coronavirus deaths, most of them in the Lombardy region. In Pavia, the number of positive cases stood at 83. So far, over 3,000 positive cases have been reported in Italy. 

Suresh narrated that as the situation spiralled out of control in the region, their examinations were postponed and the university classes were suspended in the last week of February. “Initially, I had not planned to come to India during this time. But as the virus started spreading rapidly in the region, I decided to book my tickets,” said Suresh, who is a resident of Jhotwara in Jaipur. “The virus started spreading in Lombardy region in the last week of February. Following this, the university issued directions that the classes will remain suspended as a precautionary measure due to the spread of the virus,” he added. 

Suresh, who is a student of electronic engineering at the University of Pavia, further said, “Visitors were not allowed in the hostels. Of the five canteens in the university town, only two were operating. Advisories were issued to stay indoors as the situation went out of control. We were informed that all the services will be provided at home on dialling the emergency number. The university dean and heads of the departments had shared their personal contact numbers and email IDs as well.” 

“I will stay here (Jaipur), maybe, till the situation is brought under control in Italy,” he added. Of the 85 Indian students at the university, at least 50 students have either returned to India or have already booked their return tickets. Students had started getting anxious after a non-teaching faculty member of the University of Pavia’s engineering department tested positive for coronavirus. Around 15 other staff members were quarantined. 


