Rajasthan reports 1st coronavirus death, 5 new cases take total to 43
2020-03-27
JAIPUR/NEW DELHI: A 73-year-old man, a resident of Sabzi Mandi area of Bhilwara, succumbed to Covid-19 on Thursday and became the first vicitm of the virus in the state. He had undergone treatment at the ICU of the private hospital, which has become the epicentre of the virus outbreak in the state after reporting 19 positive cases, including the patient who died today.


The death occurred on a day when five more persons -- two from Bhilwara, one each from Jaipur, Jodhpur and Jhunjhunu -- tested positive, taking the total number of infected cases to 43 from across the state.

 
 
Curfew has been imposed in the Ramganj area on Thursday as the person who tested positive for the virus comes from this congested area of the Walled City. “Curfew has been imposed in the one-km radius of the house where the infected person stayed. Intense tracing of those he came into contact with has started,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health.

The 35-year-old Ramganj resident had returned from Muscat in Oman. He first landed in Dubai at 10am on March 11. He reached Delhi on March 12 and took a Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation bus from Dhaula Kuan to Jaipur.

 The Ramganj resident got down from the bus at Ghat Gate in the afternoon and hired a rickshaw to his home in Ramganj.

Since there has been a gap of 14 days since his arrival, the health department is finding it difficult to identify the passengers who travelled with him and screen them. He has been found to have had direct contact with 33 people, with 22 of them being his family members and relatives. He also went to a nearby mosque for prayers.

The two persons who tested positive from Bhilwara are the son and grand daughter of the 73-year-old who died today. A 45-year-old man from Jhunjhunu also tested positive on Thursday. He had returned from Dubai and landed at Jaipur airport on March 21.

Meanwhile, the body of the Bhilwara man was consigned to flames as per the guidelines on precautions for handling bodies of Covid-19 persons. He was diagnosed with the disease on Wednesday. Though he was rushed to the district hospital on Thursday, he died while undergoing treatment.

“He had diabetes and chronic kidney disease. He also suffered a stroke and was admitted to the hospital. This is the first death due to the disease,” said health minister Raghu Sharma.

The patient was admitted to the private hospital on March 3 for treating his kidney disease and remained there till March 11. As his creatinine level was above normal, he had to undergo hemodialysis frequently. He also suffered stroke and went into a coma. Following the advise of doctors, he was brought back home on March 11.

Nine days after he was discharged from the hospital, two doctors of the same private hospital tested positive for Covid-19 on March 20. The health department officials zeroed in on the deceased man while tracking patients who had come into contact with these doctors. They went to his home and collected his sample for test two days ago. On Wednesday, he tested positive. A health department official said that they took him to the district hospital, where he died.

Health department officials said that since he already had co-morbidities such as diabetes, chronic kidney disease and had suffered a stroke, it was difficult to say that he had died of Covid-19.

Earlier, an Italian tourist, who had recovered from coronavirus, had died later from heart attack at a private hospital in Jaipur. But authorities refused to attribute the death directly to the virus infection.

