Rajkot man, Surat woman test positive for Covid-19
2020-03-20
RAJKOT/SURAT/GANDHINAGAR: Gujarat joined the list of states battling Covid-19 cases after a 32-year-old man in Rajkot and a 21-year-old woman in Surat tested positive for the virus on Thursday.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


In Surat, the 21-year-old woman had landed in Mumbai from London on March 13 and reached Surat on March
14. She was admitted in the isolation ward of the New Civil Hospital after she complained of severe cough, fever and cold on March 16. She was studying in London.

 
 
The Rajkot man had landed in Mumbai from Mecca on March 7 along with 10 others and they reached the city by Bandra-Jamnagar Saurashtra Janta Express on March 8. As many as 16 persons who were in contact with him including his relatives have been quarantined and put under observation at a special facility set up at Pathik Ashram on Jamnagar Road.

Meanwhile, top health officials confirmed that two more suspected positive cases have been reported. This includes a young girl from Ahmedabad who has returned from the US. She had quarantined herself at home but was hospitalised after she developed COVID-19 symptoms.

Senior health officials said that samples of both the cases have been sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV) for final confirmation.

The man started taking treatment from a general physician after he had high fever, uneasiness and breathing difficulty. However, on Tuesday night, he was admitted to isolation ward in Rajkot Civil Hospital as his condition deteriorated. His samples were sent to the government-designated laboratory in Jamnagar and later to National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, which confirmed on Thursday that he had been infected. 

“The man’s condition is stable. He is a tailor by profession,” official sources said. The health department is also trying to find out other passengers who travelled with this man in the same coach from Mumbai.

Rajkot district health officer Dr Manish Bhanderi told TOI, “In all, there were 68 people in the coach. Of these, 15 were residents of Rajkot while 45 others have either returned to Mumbai or deboarded before Rajkot. We have contacted these 60 people and they are not ill. However, five passengers are incommunicado while three had given the number of their booking agents.”

Municipal health officer Dr Pankaj Rathod said “We will personally visit all these persons and check their health status.” Municipal commissioner Udit Agrawal has urged people to inform on helpline numbers about people who have returned from foreign trips and assured that detail of the callers will be kept confidential.

In Surat, the 21-year-old woman had landed in Mumbai from London on March 13 and reached Surat on March 14. She was admitted in the isolation ward of the New Civil Hospital after she complained of severe cough, fever and cold on March 16. She was studying in London.

“We have shifted eight of her close contacts including parents to a special quarantine facility,’’ Banchhanidhi Pani, municipal commissioner, Surat, told TOI.

Surat police commissioner on Thursday clamped prohibitory orders banning gathering of four or more people in public places under section 144 of IPC. Surat has already shut down all educational institutions, multiplexes, malls, universities, gardens and other public places.

Authorities are already on their toes given the proximity of Surat to Mumbai, which is worst-affected by the pandemic.

“As on Thursday, we have a total 419 people are under home quarantine and their health is being closely monitored. If these people are found violating laid down norms, they will be compulsorily shifted to SMC’s quarantine facilities,’’ Pani said. 

Dr Ashish Naik, deputy municipal commissioner, health, said if any of the close contacts of the woman show symptoms of nCovid-19, their samples were sent for testing to Ahmedabad.

