Ramganj residents agree to tests, 134 quarantined
2020-04-04
JAIPUR: Ramganj residents who are scared with the increasing number of Covid-19 positive cases on Friday changed their stance and showed their willingness to cooperate with health workers. 


Following a confidence building exercise by religious leaders, local representatives and special team of police, at least 134 people from the locality were sent for quarantine isolation. Many also had an apprehension who will take care of their family members if they were quarantined. TOI on Friday visited the curfew-hit areas in Ramganj locality where health workers along with police team were on the job of screening. 

“Many of them were not cooperating. They were unwilling to share details of their family members. However, things appeared little improved as people have shared details. There are still some youths who try to deter and confuse their family members,” said a health worker at Handipura locality in Ramganj Bazaar.

After Rajasthan police on Thursday deployed a special team to facilitate Jaipur police commisssionerate, many areas were covered by the team of health workers and police. The team comprised police officers including ACP traffic Aahad Khan, additional DCP (Metro) Nazim Ali and Parvez Aalam, inspector at Jaipur range. 

“We have sent 134 people from Ramganj for quarantine who were directly or indirectly in touch with the two persons of the locality who were found Covid-19 positive initially. Gradually things are improving and people are cooperating,” said police commissioner Anand Srivastav. Those who are not opening the doors and are in the list of those to be quarantined are being contacted by police over the phone. “They have some doubts and questions. Many of them were convinced and the process of sending them for quarantine is on,” said an officer at Ramganj police station. 

However, police teams on duty have also been asked not to be give any kind of relaxation in the curfew affected areas in Walled City. “Only if there is a medical emergency or those who are into sale of food and grocery items are allowed to move,” said an officer. 

A few days ago some policemen were also attacked by a group of youths who were playing cricket amid curfew. “We have registered a case in this connection and will make arrests soon,” the officer added. 


