Ramgarh dist admin begins door-to-door survey to identify coronavirus patients
2020-04-13
Ramgarh: The district administration on Sunday began a door-to-door survey throughout Ramgarh to find out any if there are suspected cases of coronavirus. The survey will also identify those households whose family members are stranded in other states owing to the ongoing lockdown, in order to bring them back once the travel restrictions are lifted. 

Ramgarh deputy commissioner Sandeep Singh said the administration has set up 1,200 teams, with two persons in each team, which will visit every household with a dual purpose — identification of those with symptoms of Covid-19 symptoms and gathering information about the stranded family members. 

He added, “Para teachers, health sahiyas, jal sahiyas and panchayat ward members, etc., have been roped in for the survey who will visit every household on a daily basis to collect information. They will inform the medical teams if they find any person with symptoms of the virus.” 

So far, there hasn’t been any positive case of Covid-19 in the district but the deputy commissioner said the latest move is part of its precautionary measures to keep the virus at bay. 

Meanwhile, the Patratu Block Development Officer (BDO) on Sunday issued a letter to its 42 panchayat heads to gather information about people of their respective areas stranded outside Jharkhand in the ongoing lockdown. All the panchayat heads have been asked to the submit details within two days. 

Patratu BDO Shilwant Kumar Bhatt said, “We have been asked by the Ramgarh district administration to collect details. Hence, we have asked all the panchayat heads to submit the required details latest by Tuesday.” 

Recently chief minister Hemant Soren spoke to his counterparts in other states about people from Jharkhand stranded in their states and said the CMs have assured him of total support. 

However, officials at Ramgarh district administration indicated that after preparation of the database, they will be coordinating with other state’s district administration to ensure food and ration to the stranded people. Sub-Divisional Officer of Ramgarh, Anant Kumar said, “As for now, our role is to collect details to prepare a database about people stranded in other states.” 

On being asked about the future plans, Kumar said, “It will be easier for us to send the people in quarantine if necessary. This database will also help us coordinate with other states to ensure availability of food and ration for the stranded.” 


