Ramp up testing to 10,000 per day in Rajasthan: CM Ashok Gehlot
2020-04-17
JAIPUR: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Thursday said the state government plans to ramp up testing to 10,000 per day in the next few days.


He said the state had come a long way in testing for Covid-19. “Earlier, samples were sent to Delhi and Pune for tests. Now it is being in Rajasthan. Around 4,000 tests are conducted daily in the state which will be increased to 10,000 in the coming days,” he said. 

The chief minister, who was interacting with the media, said the government had roped in the private sector for conducting testing.

He said tests were the only way to stem the spread of the virus as many patients who tested positive showed no explicit symptoms. Gehlot said unless tests are conducted, we cannot be sure corona patients are in our midst. He said around 26,000 teams were working in the state for screening potential patients and they had covered a large portion of the population.

The chief minister said major relief for the state was that most of the patients who tested positive were below the age group of 60 years. “So ventilators and ICUs are not under pressure,” he added.

Gehlot said the situation Ramganj would take some time to stabilise as the area is densely populated. Besides, people resisted quarantine initially due to some misunderstanding as they thought they were being arrested. He said now people are agreeing for quarantine and once all positive cases are identified and segregated, the situation would start improving there.

He said the labourers from other states stranded here and in other states would get some relief once the lockdown relaxation kicks off from April 20.

He said the Arvind Mayaram committee report to bring the economy of the state back on track is consulting various economists and the report would come handy for the state to chart a new course for revival of the finance of the state.

The chief minister said 1,130 licenses were so far issued to mill owners for direct purchase of grains from farmers. This is in addition to the agriculture markets and cooperative societies permitted to buy Rabi crops at MSP. He expressed hope that this would ensure remunerative price to farmers for their produce. 


