Ramzan diets for diabetics, those in Covid-19 isolation
2020-04-28
CHENNAI: Ramzan has begun, and with the lockdown in effect, diabetologists as well as specialists from the Chennai Corporation suggest how those in isolation as well those with pre-existing conditions such as Type 2 diabetes can manage the fasting period better.


For those in Covid 19 isolation, the corporation suggests a diet of bread and biscuits and ‘kabasura’ water before sunrise and bananas after sunset. In an advisory sent out on how Covid 19 isolation patients can better manage the fast, it was also suggested that protein such as egg be taken after sunset. They are also advised to drink garlic milk (touted as an immunity boosting infusion of garlic pods in a milk reduction) at 10 pm. “Kabasura water is made by mixing 5 gm of the herbal concoction of kabasura in 240 ml of water and then reducing the mixture down to 60 mp for adults and 30 ml for children,” says the advisory.




Across the state over the past weeks, the government has been distributing kudineer powder as an immunity booster.

The Ramzan fasting can also be a challenge for people with diabetes, says diabetologist Dr V Mohan. “We suggest a diet of glycaemic foods. It is important to see that both at the Suhoor or start of the fast and Iftar, the end of the day’s fast, one does not go overboard with what one eats. Also a little walk after dinner will help.”

The ‘glycemic index’ (GI) of a food is defined as the inherent quality of that food to raise the blood glucose level. If the GI of the test food is less than 55 it is ‘Low GI’; if between 56 and 69 it is a ‘Medium GI’, and if higher than 70, it is a ‘High GI’. Examples of low GI foods are whole wheat, oat bran, muesli, beans, peas, legumes and lentils, fruits like apple and most non starchy vegetables. Examples of high GI foods include, polished white rice, white bread, corn flakes, potato and sweets.

Nutritionist G Muthulakshmi suggests that for Suhoor one consumes fibre-rich foods as well as protein rich foods like eggs, fruits and vegetables, whole grain foods to keep one energized throughout the day. “For Iftar, include lower glycemic foods like peanuts, whole wheat bread, wheat pasta, oatmeal, peas, and tomatoes. Adding healthy protein rich foods like cottage cheese (paneer), green peas, chickpeas (channa), chicken, and spinach will also help.”

Dr Mohan also suggests that one drinks plenty of fluids at the start of the fast. “It is summer and we tend to sweat more. One needs hydration.”


