Ramzan activities in Hyderabad will be kept low-key in wake of Covid-19
2020-04-16
HYDERABAD: With the extension of lockdown to curb the spread of coronavirus, the aura of festivity associated with Ramzan, the Muslim month of fasting, will be missed this time in Hyderabad. Ramzan will begin in India on April 25 subject to sighting of the crescent moon. Muslim scholars across various schools of thought have appealed to the community to stay off congregational prayers in mosques.

Ramzan is the period when Muslims spend a major portion of their time in mosques, offering individual and congregational prayers. It is also the time when special congregational night prayers called Taraweeh are offered. Religious leaders have urged the community to forgo Taraweeh prayers in view of the lockdown till May 3. Incidentally, Saudi Arabia has suspended all congregational prayers, including Taraweeh, at the grand mosques in Mecca and Medina, two of the three Islam’s holiest shrines, during Ramzan this year.

A meeting of Islamic scholars is scheduled for this weekend in Hyderabad where a fatwa (religious decree) will formally be issued calling upon Muslims to obey lockdown rules during Ramzan and stay away from congregations in mosques. Hyderabad MP and AIMIM president Asaduddin Owaisi is likely to preside over the meeting proposed to be held at Jamia Nizamia, the 144-year-old Islamic deemed university, here.

Moulana Syed Ghulam Samdani Ali Quadri, president of Seerat-un-Nabi Academy, told TOI that the question of offering Taraweeh would not arise. “When Muslims have forgone Friday congregational prayers and five obligatory prayers in mosques, they will also stay away from Taraweeh. Unlike Friday and five daily prayers, which are obligatory (Farz), Taraweeh prayers are Sunnah (tradition of the Prophet),” he said.

Quadri said a formal fatwa would be issued with a list of do’s and don’ts to be followed during Ramzan to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus. He said Muslim leaders would meet after May 3 when the lockdown is likely to end and issue fresh guidelines depending on the situation prevailing then. 

Moulana Khalid Rashid Firangi Mahali, chairperson of Islamic Centre of India, has also issued a ‘no congregational prayers’ advisory. He said while fasting is compulsory for healthy Muslims, Sahar (pre-dawn meal) and Iftar (post-fast meal) and prayers can be had at home. “It is a tradition to break the fast together and in view of social distancing and lockdown, congregations should be avoided,” he said.


