Ranchi-Rajdhani passengers put on alert, crew quarantined at home
2020-04-03
RANCHI: The Ranchi railway division has home quarantined the crew that operated the Ranchi Rajdhani Express that departed from New Delhi on March 16 and reached the state capital the next day. A Malaysian woman, who travelled on the train, tested positive of Covid-19 in Ranchi on Tuesday, becoming the first coronavirus case in Jharkhand. 


The Rajdhani crew, including on-board caterers, attendants, technicians and train ticket examiners, are being monitored by doctors of Ranchi divisional hospital in Hatia. So, far, no one have developed any symptoms of the novel coronavirus, railway officials said on Thursday. "Most of the crew members are from Ranchi while a few are from Kanpur. All of them have been home quarantined. Teams of doctors are keeping a watch on their health," chief public relations officer Niraj Kumar told TOI.

The Malaysian woman, who was in Ranchi as a member of Tablighi Jamaat with 16 other foreigners and five guides from Jharkhand and other states, had travelled from New Delhi in the B1 AC 3-tier coach. 

After she tested positive, the Ranchi district administration asked the railways for the list of passengers' on the coach. The division handed over a list of 60 passengers. Of them, two were identified and quarantined in Ramgarh on Wednesday. "We are still tracing the others," Ranchi sub-divisional officer Lokesh Mishra said. 

The division on Thursday also sent out messages to 75 passengers of the adjoining B2 coach to be alert and visit nearby hospitals in case they show symptoms of coronavirus. “There is a possibility that they have been infected. We cannot take any chances," a senior divisional officer said. 

Meanwhile, in a statement issued on Thursday, South Eastern Railways said all its divisions have begun manufacturing masks and hand sanitizers for its frontline staff. "The employees engaged in freight movement are in urgent need of protective material. So far, over 15,000 masks and 2,500 litres of sanitizers have been produced," the statement read. The Ranchi division, which operationalized a sanitizer plant on its yard premise in Hatia, said it has produced and distributed 600 liters of sanitizers for distribution among its staff. Women constables of RPF, who know how to stitch, have been roped in to produce masks, it said.

