Ranchi, Dhanbad MPs reach Jharkhand by road amid lockdown, face flak
2020-04-16
Ranchi: BJP parliamentarians from Ranchi and Dhanbad, Sanjay Seth and Pashupati Nath Singh, have found themselves under the scanner after the duo returned to Jharkhand from New Delhi via road on the night of March 13 amid the prevailing nationwide lockdown. 

The matter came to light late on Tuesday evening after a photograph showing Seth handing over thermal screening guns to Ranchi deputy commissioner Rai Mahimapat Ray found its way into social media. Seth’s associates confirmed that the meeting took place on Tuesday morning. 

Seth’s phone remained switched off throughout Wednesday. One of his close aides in Ranchi said: “Since public curfew was held on March 22, he was at his government residence in the national capital. On the morning of March 13, he left for Ranchi in a car with a bodyguard around 7am and reached here at 11:30 pm. Since then, he is under self-imposed home quarantine.” When asked how Seth got here amid the lockdown, the associate said: “He obtained special permission from the Union government.” Singh also returned to Dhanbad on March 13 night and was advised home quarantine by the deputy commissioner. 

Taking strong exception, Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) on Wednesday urged the Hemant Soren government to conduct a probe to find out how the two lawmakers managed to slip into the state without being screened. “It is also surprising how the Uttar Pradesh and Bihar governments allowed them to cross their borders without proper screening when inter-state travel is not allowed during the lockdown,” JMM general secretary Supriyo Bhattacharya said. 

As per sources in BJP, Seth returned to Ranchi to oversee the relief work to be undertaken across six assembly segments under Ranchi parliamentary constituency limits. Under his patronage, Seth plans to distribute 1 lakh food packets, each comprising rice (3kg), pulses (2kg), potatoes (3kg), onion (2kg), masks, sanitizers and soaps this week onwards. 

Bhattacharya also criticised the Ranchi administration for not taking Seth for screening at the dedicated Covid facility at Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences and for not shifting him to the government quarantine facility at the Mega Sports Complex in Hotwar. “All those who came in contact with Seth should be put on a 14-day quarantine as per the guidelines, even the deputy commissioner,” Bhattacharya claimed. 

Rashtriya Janata Dal – Loktantrik, a breakaway faction from Lalu’s party, on Wednesday demanded that separate FIRs be lodged against Seth and Singh. 

While the Ranchi deputy commissioner declined to comment on the matter, a senior official in the district administration said: “No government is mandated to issue passes amid the lockdown allowing inter-state and inter-district movements. The MP had travelled with a pass issued by the Delhi police. Had he not travelled with a pass, there was a ground for lodging FIR against him.” 


