Ranchi neighbourhoods go into shell after 1 tests positive for Covid-19
2020-04-03
Ranchi: After one person tested positive for covid-19 in Ranchi on Tuesday, several localities and housing societies in the capital began putting up barricades or closing entry and exit gates from Wednesday. 

On Tuesday, a 22-year-old Malaysian girl, who was living in Ranchi’s Hindpiri locality, became the first covid-19 victim in Jharkhand.

While police upped vigil and surveillance to enforce lockdown on the streets of the capital, the district administration deputed medical and sanitation teams in Hindpiri as part of the contact-tracing programme to scan more suspects for coronavirus.

Many societies, on the other hand, resorted to additional preventive measures like banning entry of visitors, taking a cue from similar steps adopted by many villages on the outskirts of Ranchi and in other parts of the state.

Virendra Singh, a resident of New Shukla Colony in Doranda, said that soon after the news flashed about the coronavirus positive case in the capital, the residents held a meeting and decided to ban entry of any outsider. He said, “We have sealed all three sides of the lanes leading to our colony with bamboos and wires and put up a banner announcing shutdown. Even, we have asked all residents to not venture out unnecessarily.”

What about exigencies? Singh said, “Those are exceptions that even the government acknowledges. But going out daily for veggies can’t be treated as an exigency. Society management teams are keeping a tab on unwanted movements.”

Md Zahid, a resident of Darji Mohalla, a minority-dominated neighbourhood in Doranda, said that all three streets in their locality are closed for inbound and outbound movement from Wednesday. He said, “Even the local mosque, too, has made an announcement asking residents to perform namaz only from their houses. While the administration is doing its best, residents, too, should cooperate to fight the crisis.”

In Kokar, all roads near Durga Mandir and Chuna Bhatti are being sealed by residents to prevent any sort of trespassing. Similarly, in Morhabadi’s Kusum Vihar, several apartments have closed their gates barring entry for all outsiders. An official of Kaveri enclave apartment in Kusum Vihar said on the condition of anonymity, “The society management has informed everyone to alert local police if any resident tries to unnecessarily venture out or allows any guest to enter the compound.”


