Random sampling in Malappuram to check Covid spread
2020-04-12
Malappuram: Concerned over reports that two persons who tested positive for coronavirus on Friday had extensively travelled across the district, authorities are planning to conduct random sampling tests on people in the locality. Both the persons had attended a religious congregation in Nizamuddin and after coming back, took part in mass gatherings, prayer meets and other programmes in several parts of the district.

The 30-year-old man, who is a native of Chungathara near Nilambur and the 48-year-old man who is resident of Valakkulam near Kozhichena were in Nizamuddin from March 7 to 10. Medical authorities have informed that both of them violated quarantine rules and continued maintaining close contact with family members, relatives and many others after their return.

The Valakkulam native who returned to Kerala on March 11 participated in a prayer meet with 100 others at a mosque in Perinthalmanna on March 12. On the same day, he participated in an anti-drug awareness programme with 30 others at Palachiramadu. The next day, he attended another awareness programme at Kozhichena and offered namaz in a mosque at Kottakal along with 300 others. Authorities estimate that he must have come into contact with more than 500 people, including his family members in various parts of the district.

The Chungathara native arrived at Kochi airport on March 12 from Nizamuddin and went to Angamali in a car with a few others. From there, he travelled to Perinthalmanna by a KSRTC bus. He stayed at mosques at Valluvambram, Vellur Alathurpadi and Chungathara till March 27. The samples of both the persons were sent for testing on April 8 and after their results tested positive, they were admitted to the Government Medical College Hospital, Manjeri on Friday.

After a Covid19 review meeting at Malappuram, higher education minister K T Jaleel said authorities are planning to collect random samples in order to address the concern of the public. “We are planning to follow the same strategy, which was adopted at Keezhattur near Perinthalmanna,” he said. At Keezhattur, a corona-suspect attended various functions, including prayer meets and 74 samples were collected from the area for random testing. The decision to conduct random testing was made after it was reported that in several parts of the country, instances of asymptomatic transmission or spreading of disease from mildly symptomatic people were more than previously thought. 


