Bihar: ‘Random tests of migrants led to spike in Covid-19 cases’
2020-05-12
PATNA: The number of Covid-19 cases in the state started increasing from May 8, the day when the state health department began testing migrant workers randomly at the quarantine centres. 

As per the information shared by health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar, the state recorded 11 Covid-19 positive cases on May 4, seven each on May 5 and 6 and eight on May 7. However, on May 8, the number went up to 29, followed by 32 on May 9 and a staggering 85 on May 10.

The state health department has expedited the process of collecting random samples of migrants with an emphasis on those coming from red zones in other states and the elderly. 

State nodal officer for Covid-19 Dr Ragini Mishra told TOI on Monday that over 95% of those tested positive in the past three days were migrant workers. “Of the 85 people who were tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, all were migrants except the Alamganj resident, who is a cancer patient with no travel history,” Dr Mishra added. 

Asked about health department’s strategy to prevent community transmission, she said all migrants were being kept at quarantine centres and not allowed to mix with locals. 

She said the health facilities have been divided into three categories in the state – Covid care centre (CCH), dedicated Covid health centre (DCHC) and dedicated Covid hospital (DCH). Hotels and guesthouses being used to house suspects fall under CCH category and primary health centres and district hospitals under DCHC category. 

Three medical college and hospitals – Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (Patna), Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College and Hospital (Bhagalpur) and Anugraha Narayan Medical College and Hospital (Gaya) are dedicated hospitals for Covid-19 where positive people and critical patients are treated. 

Dr Mishra added majority of Covid-19 positive people in Bihar are asymptomatic and they do not require critical care. “There are 2,344 beds in three DHCs and till Sunday only 59 patients were admitted there. CCHs and DCHCs can together accommodate 7,381 people and at present 547 people are housed there,” she added. 


