Goa health minister Vishwajit Rane favours testing air travellers for antibodies
2020-05-23
PANAJI: As domestic flights are set to resume on Monday, health minister Vishwajit Rane said on Friday that he was strongly in favour of antibody testing of all air passengers arriving in Goa. The state has written to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for clarity on the issue. “If no testing is done, asymptomatic patients will pass through and ultimately lead to community transmission, which is very dangerous,” Rane said.

He also said that chief minister Pramod Sawant and he are on the same page in favouring a stringent testing protocol for people entering Goa. “I have written to the ICMR and to the Union minister of civil aviation,” Rane said. “I also had a detailed discussion with the CM on the subject.” He said that in his email, he has informed the ICMR that the people will arrive in Goa from hotspots such as Mumbai, Delhi and Bengaluru. “A majority of Goa’s positive cases are from Maharashtra and Delhi,” he said. “The ICMR’s response is awaited.”

Rane said that ICMR guidelines are advisories and not directions. He also said that the ICMR has advised that antibody testing can only be done for Covid-19 hotspots. 

As of Friday evening, the Goa government was yet to formulate its standard operating procedure (SOP) for air passengers. Rane said that the state would draw up its own protocol once it receives a response from the ICMR. “This is the need of the hour to keep Goa safe,” he said. 

“I’m of the strong opinion that antibody testing has to be done for all air passengers,” Rane said. 

“The antibody test gives results in five to six minutes. It can also be replicated at railway stations, but currently, we use the TrueNat screening test there.” 

Goa airport director Gagan Malik had written to the state’s health department seeking to know whether air passengers would be subjected to testing and quarantine on landing at the airport. He said the response was awaited. 

There seems to be wide consensus that screening and testing should be done. Ports minister Michael Lobo said that he isn’t aware about what’s being planned regarding air travellers, but that he would speak to Rane and tell him that they must be screened.

Opposition leader Digambar Kamat too is in favour of testing. He said that the state should follow uniform testing guidelines on all passengers irrespective of their mode of transport.

Meanwhile, Rane said that a new machine for Covid-19 testing which was approved last week will be installed at Goa Medical College (GMC) and hospital, Bambolim, next week.

