Rapid tests for Covid-19 surveillance in slums may kick off in Dharavi
2020-05-09
MUMBAI: The stage is set for the city’s first Covid-19 surveillance using rapid blood tests in the worst-hit slums, said civic officials. Dharavi, which has witnessed 808 cases, including 26 deaths, since April 1, is likely to be the flag-off point for the study, which will be done by the BMC along with Stanford University and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. “Our surveillance in the slums will help us know the extent of population affected by Covid-19,” said a senior BMC official, adding the surveillance is likely to begin next week .

There is a possibility that an indigenous Eliza test kit (which can test 100 samples in one hour) developed by NIV will be used during the surveillance. The kit has been vetted by Kasturba Hospital and Haffkine Institute and will soon be given to a commercial organisation for mass manufacturing. 

Some rapid test kits will also be used, said the official, adding that the test kits were validated by Sion Hospital’s microbiology team. “We have done a small pilot project by using the kits to test our healthcare workers,” said Sion Hospital acting dean Dr P Ingale. Not all the slums where the surveillance will be carried out have been identified so far. 

Rapid test kits and Eliza kits are blood tests that will reveal whether the patient has antibodies to Covid-19. “At present, we only know the number of patients who have been diagnosed using a nasal swab test. Most of them had symptoms or were close contacts of positive patients,” said the official. 

“However, there may be a number of asymptomatic persons who would have developed antibodies. The rapid test as well as the Eliza kits can pick up the antibodies, proving that person was exposed to Covid,” said a doctor. The blood-based rapid tests can thus provide a good indication of how widespread the infection is. 

The surveillance can thus help civic officials better plan public health strategies. “Even decisions on lockdowns can be taken on basis of such an extensive surveillance,” said the doctor. “The testing will be done using both rapid tests which have a good specificity but may miss some cases and also the Eliza test for Covid-19 which is sensitive and specific,” said a high-ranking BMC official.

The surveillance tests were initially planned by the Indian Council for Medical Research, which procured and distributed rapid tests kits bought from China. However, the plan was called off as the kits were found to be faulty. It is now learnt that Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka have already started doing surveillance.


