Tamil Nadu: Rapid testing in southern districts to check for community spread
2020-04-21
MADURAI: Rapid anti-body testing for Covid-19 has begun in most southern districts of Tamil Nadu mainly aiming to check for possible community spread of the disease. Among the southern districts, Madurai, Dindigul and Tirunelveli districts have received among the highest number of kits considering the relative high number of Covid-19 cases there.


Health officials across districts noted that tests conducted using these rapid anti-body test kits, whose results can be checked in just 15 minutes, are not confirmatory tests. Through the test, it will be checked if antibodies against the virus had been formed in the body. Hence, they said that the major role of bringing in the kits is to check for possible community spread. 

The kits will be deployed to screen suspected contacts, vulnerable groups, health officials and police personnel mainly in containment areas on a priority basis. Even among them, priority will be for those experiencing flu-like illness.

For Tirunelveli district, which has recorded 62 Covid-19 cases so far, a total of 2200 test kits have been given. “Testing will soon begin. We have split up and distributed the kits to different areas. We are trying to cover the whole district as per guidelines given to us and screen all suspected and vulnerable persons. Though it is not confirmatory, the fast results can help us survey and assess possible community spread,” said a senior health official from the district.

Madurai and Dindigul districts actively began rapid antibody testing starting Sunday. Madurai district has received 1000 test kits while Dindigul has received 1200 kits. Dindigul tops the list of most cases in southern districts with 76 Covid-19 cases so far. The tests are being conducted by health officials and doctors in containment zones. 

“On Monday, 80 samples were tested via rapid anti-body testing and all results were negative. We have given 200 kits separately to Dindigul Government Hospital as well and so far, samples tested there too are all negative. We will be intensifying the testing prioritising vulnerable groups in containment areas,” said Dindigul district collector M Vijaya Lakshmi, speaking to TOI.

For Kanyakumari district, which has a relatively low number of Covid-19 cases at 16, only 300 rapid test kits have been given. “We are already carrying out PCR testing in containment areas and so far there is no suspicion of a possible community spread here. We have checked the test kits on Monday by carrying out sample tests. We will use these kits as and when required,” said a district health official.


