RAS officer removes beehives to make way for Rajasthan’s biggest quarantine centre
2020-05-18
JODHPUR: Desperate times call for desperate measures and 30-year-old RAS officer Ravi Shekhar Choudhary did not shy away from taking action in times of need.


He is the man who identified a private medical college building, which had been closed for the last seven years, for developing as the state’s biggest isolation centre, Boranada Covid Care Centre in Jodhpur. But, the biggest hurdle in the way was how to remove a dozen massive bee hives from the building. 

“We had been calling the experts and trying to get rid of the beehives for three days. Nothing seemed to work and nobody came forward to help. We were fast running out of time. We thought of using smoke and calling experts from rural areas who collect honey from the active bee hives. But, all refused seeing the size of beehives,” said Choudhary. When every effort appeared to be hitting a dead end, Choudhary decided to take up the cudgels without sharing his plan with anybody, neither his seniors and colleagues nor family.

Dressed in a full bodysuit and a helmet, Choudhary walked into the building. He called a fire tender at the site. Holding the heavy pipe of fire tender was painful and required caution. So, he kept his phone in communication mode with the fire tender operator outside the building directing him about switching the water supply on and off to ease hand load. 

Boranada Covid Care Centre has had 350 positive cases so far and is set to achieve a capacity of 700 beds soon. “Feels good to know I played a role in getting it started,” said Choudhary, whose sister is on duty as a gynecologist at the Ummed Hospital. 

While others were happy, his mom wasn’t. “I learnt about it later and scolded him for doing this stupid feat. It was a very dangerous thing to do. When he left with the bodysuit and helmet that day, I thought it was for Covid protection,” said his mother Ruma Choudhary.

However, Choudhary says it was all part of his duty. As a core group member of the sub division he has a very hectic schedule right from keeping watch on the migrants returning to villages in the area from other states to taking care of the arrangements at the Covid Center.

“My day begins early at about 8am but have no idea when it would end. Hardly, is there time to sit and relax through the day as the influx of migrants has increased and keeping their record and ensuring quarantine are of utmost importance,” he said.

With all these responsibilities, keeping precautions is a parallel concern for him.

“While in the field, safety gear is a must but going home is a big challenge, where you have to take subtle precautions to keep your family members safe,” he said, adding that disposal of safety gear like masks and gloves, etc., and bathing and washing clothes are the primary tasks at home. 


