Rate of positive Covid cases in Indore 5 times more than national average
2020-04-18
Indore: The rate of positive Covid cases in Indore till Friday morning was 20.75% of samples tested, which is five times more than ‘positivity rate’ across the country.This rate stood at 4.15% for 3,02,956 samples tested across the country till Thursday, as per data put up by Indian Council of Medical Research on its website.In Indore district, of 4,057 samples tested till April 16, 842 were found positive, as per records of CMHO office. The samples were tested at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Medical College in city, AIIMS in Bhopal and National Institute of Virology in New Delhi. Among these, 201 were rejected because of contamination and reports of 220 are awaited.On why high rate of samples were testing positive, MGM college dean Dr Jyoti Bindal said, “Only samples of highly-suspected persons are collected in the district. They are mainly primary or secondary contacts of positive cases already found here.” She said that these contacts were traced by rapid response team of district health department through screening of positive cases and their contacts.The tracking of primary and secondary contacts of positive cases began on March 25, immediately a day after Indore reported first four positive cases. The health department, district administration and medical college authorities formalised a strategy and began screening affected areas. This intensive screening and sample collection in containment areas led to 842 positive cases being reported in Indore till Thursday.CMHO Dr Praveen Jadia also attributed the cause for high positivity rate in the district to screening and sample collection of primary and secondary contacts of positive cases. “Initially, people hid their symptoms and health conditions and didn’t report to doctors. This led to spreading of disease in certain pockets of the city,” he said.//Changes in NHM rules hamper sampling work The pace of sample collection in city is not satisfactory. When sample collection in charge Dr Amit Malakar was asked about the reason for not adding more teams and only concentrating on containment zones, he said, “We are trying to increase the team from 12 to 30.” At present, 12 teams are engaged in sample collection work in 12 areas under supervision of SDMs and the whole city was divided in five zones, said Malakar. However, sources said continuous change in rules by National Health Mission, MP led to this problem. On April 9, NHM issued an order allowing recruitment of private practicing dental surgeons for sample collection. Within three days, the order was revoked only allowing government dental surgeons. But, there are only 144 dental surgeons in MP health department who would be responsible for the task of sample collection. // 80% doctors fail to report for duty Every four out of five doctors didn’t report for duty in Indore district till Friday. State government has ordered 102 MBBS doctors to immediately report to CMHO to help health department in screening and sampling work. However, only 20 of them joined duty by Friday. CMHO Dr Praveen Jadia said, “Despite the state government’s order, only 20 doctors have reported.” The team is already facing problem in intensifying sampling work due to lack of trained staff. Sources said the doctors haven’t been reporting in the city because of infection fear. // Backlog cleared, 863 sealed samples to be tested soonIndore: Samples of 863 Covid-19 suspects were sealed in boxes for last couple of days because of delay in testing at MGM virology lab. Of the total 5140 samples received by the lab from Indore till April 17 morning, 4,057 have been tested. Of them, 842 were tested positive, 201 were rejected and rest were negative. While results of 1,083 are awaited with 220 ones under process. Dr Sadhna Sodani, logistic and management in charge of laboratory said, “We have maintained a record of samples received and tested. It has been taking an average time of 3 days to test sample. Ideally, the report should be given within a day because if it gets delayed the purpose of testing for identification and curbing the spread fails”. But it becomes practically impossible for the lab to give report in a day because number has been increasing consistently since it started testing on March 21. The number of samples increased from 1 to 1,000 per day between March 21 and April 16. The lab is testing about 250 to 300 samples per day, she said. District collector Manish Singh said 15-day backlog of samples has been cleared. Maximum number of Covid-19 positive cases are from the lot of samples sent to Noida for tests. “The numbers will now go down and situation will improve,” he said adding number of patients in OPDs of yellow category hospitals, that caters to Covid-19 suspects, has also gone down. Singh assured the residents that the administration is equipped and prepared to deal with situation. “We have required infrastructure. New patients and suspects were already quarantined and kept in various hotels and marriage gardens. The patients will be given best medical care,” he said. CMHO Dr Praveen Jadia said, “There’s no backlog of samples in MGM virology lab after reports of sample sent to Delhi received on Thursday. These 863 samples were collected in last couple of days only and will be tested soon. The suspects are in quarantine centres”. Though in a few cases, it took almost 14 days to get the report. In a similar case, reports of eight people, who had fled quarantine facility near Choithram Hospital, were received on April 15 while their samples were collected on March 31. The lab was overburdened with number of samples and this has forced the officials to send samples to labs in Bhopal and Noida. 