Rationalise expenses to sustain Covid fight: Amarinder Singh to departments
2020-06-10
CHANDIGARH: Expressing apprehensions of prolonged impact of Covid-19, Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh on Monday directed all departments to further rationalise their expenses in order to ensure there is no shortage of funds for fighting the pandemic at all costs.

With studies and reports from around the world presenting a grim picture on the Covid outlook, the projections were not good, Amarinder said at a meeting of the empowered committee of cabinet on fiscal management via video conferencing.

He said capital expenditure in essential sectors such as health, education and infrastructure would be retained at Rs 5,000 crore, notwithstanding the economic crisis facing the state, which was expecting a shortfall of nearly 30% in the total revenue receipts (TRR) in FY 2020-21 on account of Covid-19 and lockdown.

Capt Amarinder said the focus of his government was on ensuring that salaries and pensions continue to be paid on time, along with power subsidy to PSPCL. No compromise could be made to ensure funding for all frontline departments, such as health, police and the local bodies, which were battling the disaster, he added.

“In spite of its strained finances, the state has successfully paid all grants to local bodies and PRIs, ensuring that they do not face problems in disbursement of salaries. Further, he said, up to date releases have been made for medical bills,” he said.

As per the finance department’s estimates, assuming zero nominal growth of GSDP this year from the GSDP (RE) of Rs 5,74,760 crore during FY 2019-20 and the past trends of average TRR/GSDP growth, Punjab can expect TRR of around Rs 62,246 crore during FY 2020-21, a shortfall of around Rs 25,758 crore or a 29.26% dip in TRR.

He reiterated that power subsidy to the farmers would continue and there was no question of the state government accepting the condition to replace it with direct cash transfer for availing the additional borrowing limit allowed by the Centre. This so-called power reform was violative of the country’s federal structure, he said, adding that he would write to the Prime Minister on this issue as the Central government could not put conditions on states for availing loans.

Pointing out that this, and the recent ordinance on agricultural reforms, could further pave the way for elimination of the MSP regime, Capt Amarinder said he would convey Punjab’s opposition to the Centre very strongly.


