Rats spend lockdown in stationary cars on diet of wires
2020-05-21
Visakhapatnam: Car mechanics in the city have been addressing issues of rodent infestation since the lockdown was eased. Many car owners, who initially complained of engines refusing to start during the lockdown, are now complaining of rodent tenants inside their cars!

“Last Sunday I went out in my car after a gap of 65 days. As the car hit the road, the first thing I noticed was that my headlight was on. I took the car to a mechanic and he showed me that rats have damaged the wiring system,” K Srinivasa Rao, a public sector bank employee, said. 

Engineers and car mechanics infestation of rodents is a common problem when the cars remain stationary and unused for a long time. “If the wiring system is damaged you need to go to a mechanic. But it is best to spray repellants in every nook and corner of the car and keep the doors and windows open for at least an hour. If there are rats they will go out,” said Somorendra Mohan Ghosh, an automobile engineer. 

Car mechanic Firozuddin, who runs a garage at the police control room and also repairs private vehicles besides the ones used by the city police, said many car owners have come to his garage with chewed-up wiring systems in the last few weeks.

“Frankly speaking, there is no solution if rats make your car their home. They are going to damage the wiring system. There are, however, a few home remedies which can be used to keep them away. All openings in the car must be blocked, they can keep egg shells on the dashboard, inside boot space and inside the engine compartments. Another solution is to keep sticky pads, with the sticky side downwards so that even if a rat gets inside they will get stuck and won’t be able to move,” suggested Firozuddin.

Surath Sarkar, engineer of a multinational automobile company, pointed out rats like to remain inside the vehicles and gnaw on wires and other things “We have seen that inside an engine bay rats can blow fuses. There have been cases where rats have affected the ignition system. It can lead to sparks or even fire if the owner unknowingly tries to switch the engine on,” added Sarkar.


