Reached out to 70L in MP during Covid crisis: BJP
2020-04-12
Bhopal: As part of the BJP’s ‘feed the needy’ campaign aimed at providing relief to people facing harships during the 21-day Covid-19 lockdown, the party has claimed that it has reached 70 lakh persons in 15 days.

“The BJP, with a target to reach 5 crore persons in the country, has exceeded in Madhya Pradesh by reaching up to 70 lakh people during the Covid-19 crisis. Initially, we had planned to reach at least 45 lakh in the state. But, apart from ready meal and ration, the party has also successfully set up community kitchens to help the needy. The mission will continue till crisis ends,” said BJP state president, V D Sharma.

Under the programme, the BJP has distributed ration to 7 lakh people and provided ready meals to many. The party has also taken up preparing and distribution of home made masks across the state through women self-help groups.

“So far, we have distributed 6 lakh home made masks and encouraged several self-help groups and communities to prepare and distribute the masks. Not only BJP workers, even family members of the party workers, including my wife, are contributing for the cause,” he said.

The BJP has also encouraged one lakh persons to donate in ‘PM Cares’fund, on the call given by the party’s national president J P Nadda. The BJP has also identified workers and labourers returning from Madhya Pradesh from other states and provided them food, medical facilities.

“Several workers in Panna and parts of Bundelkhand coming in from other states have been tested for Covid-19 and quarantined. We are also providing relief to workers from Madhya Pradesh staying outside the state. We helped workers in Talangana and Chennai, who were in trouble and had called up for relief,” said Sharma.

The state BJP has roped in more than 50,000 workers to serve people at various locations and district headquarters as the lockdown period is likely to be extended, and this would continue till the crisis is over, he said.


