Ready to fly, but AP's quarantine plans unclear
2020-05-26
VISAKHAPATNAM: As domestic flights to Visakhapatnam and Vijayawada airports resume in a limited manner from Tuesday, passengers travelling to the state are in a dilemma over the stringent quarantine measures issued by the state government. Further, passengers who had booked tickets for May 25 are unsure of their next steps as flights to Visakhapatnam and Vijayawada for this date were cancelled.


The state government has made seven days of institutional quarantine mandatory for passengers flying in from six states with a high prevalence of Covid-19.

Persons travelling from Chennai (Tamil Nadu), Mumbai (Maharashtra), New Delhi, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh will have to undergo mandatory institutional quarantine for seven days. They will then be tested and sent for home quarantine if the results are negative for Covid-19. Persons travelling from low incidence areas and showing no symptoms would be sent to home quarantine for 14 days after their swab samples are collected upon arrival.

The new guidelines issued by the state government do not specify quarantine measures for people coming to the state for a short period, such as for official purposes or on business, as some other states have done.

The guidelines have also drawn the ire of fliers, many of who have taken to social media to express their displeasure.

“The notification says 14 -day quarantine, but I have my tickets booked on June 7 from Bengaluru to Visakhapatnam and on June 13 from Visakhapatnam to Bengaluru. What should I do? What are the clear guidelines here for people in my situation? If there is such quarantine, why are the airlines allowing to book the return tickets?” questioned a flier, Siva.

“What about the people who have already booked tickets like me going by the previous conditions set by the Centre? Now, it is mandatory to get permission from Spandana portal. My application with Spandana is pending for the last 15 days,” said another traveller, Chakradhar, who has been stranded in Chennai for over a month. He added, “I have called the AP government helpline for more than 100 times and lost all patience with no help from them. The guidelines are very confusing and we are all in the dark. I have lost my job and am running out of money.”

Fliers and netizens have also complained of the slow response in obtaining permission through the Spandana portal. They also asked what measures will be taken for persons flying in from low-incidence states but with connecting flights in one of the states with a high number of Covid-19 cases.

