Real-time tracking for those under quarantine
2020-03-25
KOCHI: To collect details of comorbidities of people in home quarantine and other aspects, real-time tracking system has been implemented in Ernakulam. The facility envisages collecting details of comorbidities of the person, details of pregnant women, breastfeeding women and their kids in home quarantine. Details of people under quarantine have been uploaded on the Covid tracker software by health officials in each primary health centre (PHC).It will have details like age, address, ward number, panchayat, date of quarantine and the country from which the person arrived. The facility will help track the health condition of the people in quarantine and ensure that they get medicine on time.The medical team also noticed that some of the people in home quarantine show alcohol withdrawal symptoms. “They have been given counselling and medicine by the medical team at the PHC level. If they need more attention, they will be shifted to the psychiatric ward at Government Medical College, Ernakulam. Four or five people, who used to consume alcohol on daily basis, showed the symptoms,” said a health official.Agriculture minister V S Sunil Kumar said facilities have been arranged for people to buy vegetables and fruits online with the support of Horticorp and agriculture department in the district. He said the facilities at hospitals, which have been partially or completely shut down, will be used to strengthen preventive measures against the spread of Covid-19.Considering the emergency situation, the functioning of toll plazas at Kumbalam and Ponnarimangalam has been suspended till March 31.Doctors have started to address the concerns of people regarding Covid-19 via Facebook page of Ernakulam district collector. The facility will be available for the public for one hour every day.To meet the emergency situation in the district, as many as 4,482 rooms in 270 wards in both government and private hospitals are made available. A total of 8,734 beds, 1,337 ICUs, 390 ventilators and 400 ambulances are ready to meet any emergency.Minister said it has come to his notice that people are still gathering in various parts of the district. Strict action will be taken against them for violating Section 144 of the CrPc, which has come into force in Ernakulam. He added that stringent action will be initiated against those who sell essential products at exorbitant rate.District civil supplies office has constituted three teams to conduct inspection in shops to prevent merchants from selling products at excess rate.