Covid-19: Recovery rate in Bhopal 63%, says MP CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan
2020-05-25
BHOPAL: Stating that recovery rate of Covid-19 patients is constantly improving in the state, chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that in Bhopal it has crossed the 63% mark. This has been achieved by expanding testing, treatment and quarantine arrangement of Covid-19 in the state capital.

During a review of Covid-19 status in the state with officials through video conference on Sunday, Chouhan said that despite the success being achieved in the efforts to control the Corona in the state, there is a need to persevere. Collectors should keep an eye on slums of district and conduct random tests and keep the fever clinics working effectively in all the districts.

Chouhan said that it is necessary to ensure supply chain of essential commodities and undertake testing and tracing work. He obtained information on the state capital from Bhopal commissioner, collector, inspector general and DIG.

It was informed in the meeting that multidisciplinary efforts have been made for disease control in Bhopal. This has led to success in disease control. Under the ICU arrangement in Bhopal district, facility was provided to 28 patients as against 156. A total of 492 patients are admitted in AIIMS, GMC, Chirayu Medical College and Covid Care Center in Bhopal. Currently 3 patients are on ventilator. In Bhopal district, 464 people were enrolled against the provision of 1030 people for Isolation. Commissioner Bhopal said that the condition of Corona control is also improving in the division, but all are active at the level of vigilance.

Collector Bhopal Tarun Pithode informed that the district administration is getting better support from the residents and NGOs in contact tracing of suspects and providing essential items and food to the patients and those under quarantine.

Additional chief secretary, public health and family welfare Mohammad Suleman informed that till May 24, 6,665 Corona cases have come up in the state, out of which 2,967 are active cases and 3,408 recoveries. The recovery rate of the state is 51.3% while in Bhopal this is 63%. The order of doubling in the state is now coming on the 20th day, which is better than other states. Despite 294 positive cases on May 24, 141 patients were discharged. In 25 such districts in the state where more than 10 cases have been found, 41,640 people have been quarantined in their homes and 2,109 have been institutionally quarantined. No positive cases have been reported in the last 21 days in some districts of the state like Harda, Chhindwara and Alirajpur.

Chief Secretary Shri Iqbal Singh Bains and other officials were present in the video conference and the meeting.

