Recovery rate in Tamil Nadu at 44 per cent amid Covid-19 carnage
2020-05-22
CHENNAI: The number of Covid-19 cases in Tamil Nadu on Thursday touched 13,967, with 7,588 people in isolation at hospitals, care centres and homes. The recovery rate went up to 44% as 6,282 people, including 400 on Thursday, were declared cured and discharged. The recovery rate figure is four percentage points more than what it was a month ago.


During the same period, the number of active cases went up by eight times. About 5,681 of those infected, three-fourths of the total figure, are in Chennai. Many things have spurred the recovery rate, including the increase in incidence, change in testing and treatment protocols by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), point out health department officials.

A month ago, when the state had 1,596 cases, there were 398 people in Chennai. The Koyambedu market cluster and living conditions in certain zones pushed up cases in Chennai. On Thursday, even as the four state-run medical college hospitals struggled, patients trickled in from Chengalpet, which had 416 active patients, Tiruvallur (413) and Kancheepuram (106). Tirupur, Namakkal and Erode, which were hotspots last month, had no cases along with Tiruvarur. Ten other districts had cases in single digits.

A month ago, many hospitals took more than 14 days – the recommended isolation period – to discharge patients. This changed on May 10, when ICMR changed the protocol. "Until recently, we ensured all patients did the exit test on the 14th day. We did not discharge patients until two consecutive tests turn negative," said health secretary Beela Rajesh. The revised ICMR guideline now allows hospitals to discharge patients with no fever for 10 consecutive days. This reduces waiting time for patients and expedites discharge. "In addition, some people who continued to test positive even after 40 days can now be sent home if they have no symptom. They were testing positive because the debris of the virus was still in the body. But they can no longer infect others."

Hospital deans say more than 95% of patients experience mild or no symptoms. Until now mortality has been less than 1% and less than 20% of patients require support such as oxygen. "Every hospital has at least 50 doctors and nurses working in three shifts," said director of medical education Dr R Narayanababu. "We may have to ramp up beds within the hospital soon."

The state medical council has urged self-financing medical colleges and deemed universities in Chennai, Kancheepuram, Tiruvallur and Chengalpet to admit and treat Covid-19 patients. "Each of these hospitals has at least 500-600 beds," said president Dr K Senthil. 

In an epidemic, the numbers are expected to go up and it will take some time before we flatten the curve, says Greater Chennai Corporation nodal officer J Radhakrishnan. "We are screening and testing more people. We may find more cases in the coming days. But then, high recovery rates do bring smiles to our faces," he said.


