Recovered coronavirus patients face social stigma in Bihar
2020-04-10
PATNA: Covid- 19 survivors in Bihar, who have won the battle with the virus, are battling another scourge — social stigma arising out of misinformation and panic surrounding this pandemic that has the entire world in its grip. Not just the cured patients, their families, too, are facing taunts and social discrimination at every stage of the disease —pre-diagnosis, treatment, and post-cure.


Recovered patients say the streets and lanes where they live have begun to be branded as ‘Corona wali gali’, people are seen pointing fingers at their houses and talking in hushed tones, which gives out a subtle yet strong vibe of social shunning.

“Day before yesterday, a few health officials came to our apartment for a follow-up check-up, but other families did not allow them to enter the building,” says a cured patient, who lives in Digha.

The cured patient added, “We had to go out on the road for the health officials to collect the samples. There are other instances as well, but we are not blaming anyone as they may not be well aware about Covid-19. Perhaps we would also behave like them if we had not experienced it.”

Sanjay Kumar, principal secretary of health department, described such discrimination against cured patients as absurd. “People, who get cured are brave enough to fight the virus. There should not be any discrimination based on who gets infected by the virus. People need to unite and fight the prevailing situation,” Kumar said.

The state government has taken several steps to create awareness about the disease so that it does not lead to such social discrimination, yet several cured patients are facing this.

“Although I’m deemed negative by the health department, I’m still facing discrimination,” says a Phulwarisharif resident, adding, that health department should create awareness among the masses about the Covid- 19 virus.

The patient recounted, “The lane where I live is now called ‘Corona wali gali’. Only yesterday, some civic workers were spraying disinfectant in my locality and when they reached near my house they let loose a strong sprayed of sodium hypochlorite at the entrance gate which came flooding inside our house. It was clear that they were marking us out.”

Other recovered patients are also facing discrimination and now avoid going out. A cured patient from Munger said whenever his family members go outside to buy essential goods, residents keep staring and pointing fingers at them, which makes them feel unwelcome and uncomfortable.

Another from Gopalganj says, “I am worried about what will happen when the home quarantine will be over. Because of me, my family and relatives are facing a lot of problems.”

Health experts, on the other hand, suggest that people who won the fight against Covid-19 should be the ideal persons to create awareness about the virus.

A city-based physician Dr Diwakar Tejaswi said, “People should know that the cure rate in this virus is 80% while there is only 5% of mortality rate. Once the patient is cured, they become immune. Cured people won’t afflict others as they are not harbouring the virus,” he said.

He added: “A healed person is beneficial to the community because the person becomes immune. He is also beneficial to the medical fraternity because their plasma can cure critically ill positive cases.”

Dr Pramod Singh, head of psychiatric department of PMCH, said, “Only awareness can put a stop to this. There are instances when sufferers of infectious diseases are stigmatised. But only the right information passed by competent authority can change the mindset.” 

