Recreation centres suffer coronavirus blow
2020-06-05
NEW DELHI: The Delhi government has decided to temporarily stop grants to state-funded recreation centres for senior citizens in view of the Covid-19 pandemic. There are around 122 recreation centres across Delhi which get a grant in the range of Rs 1.20 lakh to Rs 2.40 lakh each every year from the government.


In a letter, the department of social welfare justified the move saying, “Considering the prevailing conditions due to Covid-19 and need for strictly observing social distancing, continuation of activities at recreation centres for senior citizens is not advisable ... Hence, the grant in aid with regard to recreation centres will be withheld until further orders.”

The Centre’s guidelines for senior citizens stipulate that those above 65 years must stay indoors as they are most vulnerable to coronavirus infection. However, the decision to stop grant to recreation centres has led to anxiety among many seniors who are struggling in isolation. While most seniors recognise the danger they face, there is a strong view that the government must recognise loneliness as a serious concern and thus bring out guidelines to stagger use of these centres with adequate precautions and social distancing norms in the weeks ahead rather than paving the way for their temporary closure by withholding grants.

When contacted, minister for social welfare Rajendra Gautam said for now the government feels that the elderly must stay indoors and not put themselves at any kind of risk. “We will resume the grant whenever things normalise,” he said.

Meanwhile, JR Gupta, chairperson of Confederation of Senior Citizens’ Association said recreation centres are a lifeline for many elderly persons, particularly those who are living in acrimonious situations caught with abusive or unsupportive children.

He cited the recreation centre in Green Park Extension. “Here senior citizens would come for physiotherapy, health consultations and avail of facilities like a library, board games and legal aid,” Gupta said. “We are not saying allow everyone to crowd in a recreation centre. Like for parks, malls and other public spaces, make strict guidelines for recreation centres instead of closing them,” he said. 

Bhushan Bali (63), who lives in Vasant Enclave, shared the challenges faced by people like her. “I live with my 82- year-old mother. I used my time doing yoga, attending lectures and visiting the recreation centre for seniors in the evening. I have been stuck in my house since March 19 and now I am feeling stressed as I am unable to meet anyone. If there is no recreation centre, I will have nowhere to go,” she said.

The government, however, feels it is not feasible to bring out any guidelines for recreation centres as it will be very difficult to monitor implementation. 

