Coronavirus scare in Maharashtra: Refund money of cancelled safaris, says tourist body
2020-03-20
NAGPUR: In the advent of coronavirus outbreak, the Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO), the national apex body of tourism industry with a membership of over 1,600, has demanded refund of money towards safari bookings made between April 1 and June 30, 2020. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


In a memorandum to state PCCF (wildlife) Nitin H Kakodkar, the IATO demanded refund of bookings done by Indian and foreign tourists for parks in Maharashtra, mostly Pench and Tadoba.

As per policy, online tickets for Tadoba can be cancelled only if booked till 15 days before the date of safari. In such cases 50% refund is granted. However, no refund is given for tickets booked between 61 to 120 days. These tickets cost between Rs4,000-8,000.

Coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by World Health Organisation (WHO) and as a precautionary measure, the India government suspended all visas issued till April 15, 2020. All Indian nationals have also been strongly advised to avoid all non-essential travel. 

IATO president Pronab Sarkar told TOI from Delhi, “Government has cancelled visas on its own and entry of foreign tourists has been banned. The ministry of tourism too has issued directives to encourage process of refunds of foreign nationals and hence the forest department of tiger-bearing states should consider releasing refunds so that we refund money to the legitimate clients.”

However, the forest departments have not yet considered refunding, barring those cancellations which will be done by default during March 18 to 31 when closure of parks was officially announced by various states.

The IATO delegation, consisting of wildlife tourism consultant Himanshu Bagde and member Capt Vijay Golchha, which met Kakodkar, said, “Owing to preventive measures at global level, it is virtually impossible for tourists now to plan their travel — be it Indians or foreigners.”

As per prevailing rules, tickets purchased for safari are non-refundable. However, Kakodkar has agreed to refund money towards bookings during March 18 to 31. IATO has urged Maharashtra to refund all money towards tickets which are cancelled for safari period between April 1 and June 30, 2020.

“We don’t know if the situation in foreign countries will be better by April 15, or it will take more time for things to settle down. There is no indication from the government if visa requests after April 15 will be considered,” says Bagde.

“As per directives from Meenakshi Sharma, director general (DG) ministry of tourism, Delhi, we have been encouraged to process refunds of foreign nationals and waive off the cancellation charges as well by rising beyond economic concerns and to set a good example of our country as a whole,” said Sarkar.

“The case with domestic tourists too is the same. With schools shut now and no indication of the summer holidays, families will find it difficult to plan safaris. All planned holidays may be cancelled,” said IATO secretary Rajesh Mudgil.

Meenal Dorlikar, manager of Royal Tiger Resort, says, “Maharashtra should consider refund request on priority and keeping the larger interest in mind. In Tadoba, money for vehicles and guides is deducted while online booking. When no guide and vehicle have been used why should money not be refunded?” 

MP parks closed

Close on the heels of Maharashtra shutting its parks owing to Covid-19 crisis, MP PCCF (wildlife) Rajesh Shrivastava on Thursday issued orders to close all the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries in Madhya Pradesh. Most popular parks Pench and Kanha will also remain closed from March 20 till March 31.

