‘Regulate coronavirus cases, ensure other patients don’t suffer’
2020-04-21
VARANASI: In a bid to properly regulate the treatment of coronavirus cases while ensuring that non-Covid patients are also not neglected or exposed to infection, Varanasi district magistrate has asked all hospitals and nursing homes to provide treatment to patients suffering from other ailments by taking necessary precautions.


A day after Banaras Hindu University barred entry of people in its hospitals terming them infected zone, the district administration asked it to restrict all Covid-19 treatment and tests to super specialty wing only in order to normalise services for other patients in SSL hospital, trauma centre and other wings.

DM Kaushal Raj Sharma on Monday issued a letter to Institute of Medical Science BHU, medical superintendent of SSL hospital, chief medical officer, DDU district hospital, government women hospital, LBS government hospital Ramnagar, ESI hospital, Indian Medical Association and nursing homes’ association in this regard.

Sharma said no patient should be denied treatment on reaching a hospital and instructed them to keep all equipment like ventilators, diagnostic machines, ambulances and ICUs operational by sanitising them daily.

“All Covid-19 symptomatic patients should be referred to DDU district hospital and ESI hospital immediately. In case, the case is confirmed by test, operations should be stopped till all doctors, nursing, paramedical and other staff is tested,” he said.

All private hospitals and nursing homes have been told to ensure proper training of staff, provide personal protection kits, N90 masks and gloves. DM said nursing homes can pool patients by identifying one hospital in each area for corona cases to avoid risk of infection.

Reacting to the directives, BHU spokesman Rajesh Singh said entry restrictions were for common people and patients not needing immediate treatment since its hospitals are of level-3 category.

Services in cancer hospital, trauma centre, emergency OPD are on and operation theatres, labour rooms and paediatric wing are also operational, he added.

Opening general OPDs can lead to crowding due to which maintaining social distancing will become difficult hence normal services are being avoided.


