Rehmani community worst-hit by virus
2020-04-18
Jaipur: An eerie silence grips the Rehmani community dominated mohallas at the heart of pandemic-hit Ramganj. The close knit community of 12,000 people found themselves in the middle of an outbreak with its 138 members tested Covid-19 positive. Besides, 250 people are in isolation at government facilities and over 500 quarantined in their places.

The epicentre in this hotspot is a building at Badi Rehmani Masjid whose all 78 members have been affected, including 21 positive. The rest have been put under quarantine either at government facilities or at their portion of the building.

“It is true that the community is worst-affected by the virus and almost every person has a close relative infected. All positive cases are relatives of each other which show how living close to each other backfired,” said Quyum Akhtar, former Waqf and housing board member who belongs to the community.

It all started with a person who returned from Oman testing positive in Walled City. He happened to be from the community. He went meeting his relatives and spent considerable time in the community mosque.

The community dominated areas such as Chote and Bade Rahemani, Mohalla Bisayatian, Mehro Ka Rasta and Under Mahadev, Cheetavalan, Jaganshah Khura, Mohalla Pakan are among those being closely monitored by the local administration. They are artisans dealing in shoe making, handicrafts and jewellery business.

The high rate of infection among the community is paying the price of showing resistance for screening for almost a week, said a doctor, who was part of the screening team which scanned people in area until a week ago.

“The community which lives close to each other has even hide their members and moved them from one terrace to another when health workers went for screening,” said a doctor, who warned still the sense of fear is preventing its members to come for screening.

The community leaders are also finding if very difficult to convince their members. “The irrational thinking added with illiteracy has made them blind to see that government is trying to save their lives not victimizing or stigmizing them,” said Akhter.


