Relatives serving food to poor test Covid-19 positive
2020-04-10
Mohali: After meeting a Covid-19 positive member of the Tablighi Jamaat, a resident of Jawaharpur village became instrumental in spreading the pandemic in the area. Till Thursday, 22 Covid-19 positive cases were detected in the village. All the patients are relatives who caught the infection while cooking and serving food to the poor, civil surgeon Dr Manjit Singh said.A panch of the village met a foreman from Delhi who attended the Tablighi Jamaat event. The man stayed in the village for a few days before leaving for Delhi. The panch, 42, owns a tenthouse which employs five to six labourers. He was the first to catch the infection from the foreman. Thereafter, he and his family members started distributing food in three villages of Jawaharpur, Mahmadpur and Devigarh. Engaged in the social cause, they did not foresee the aftermath of the exercise and ended up getting infected. Now, emergency has been declared in the village, which is yet to be declared a hot spot, deputy commissioner Girish Dayalan said.“Each and every house in Jawahrapur village has been sealed and extensive sampling is being conducted. Health teams are identifying symptomatic and asymptomatic persons from each house. Orders have been issued to make a list of those who participated in the distribution of langar with this family and also those who consumed the langar.”BOX— The first person to be infected was a 42-year-old panch of Jawaharpur village who came in contact with a patient and Tabilghi Jamaat member —Three family members of the panch tested positive for Covid-19—Family members of the panch who tested positive are his father, aged 67, brother (38) and wife (43).—Family of a woman sarpanch took part in serving food to poor and came in indirect contact. They are woman sarpanch, 39, her husband, 42, daughter, 19 and son, 12.—Family members who tested positive include a 61-year-old woman, her 35-year-old daughter-in-law and 16-year-old grandson. They were also involved in serving food — Other relatives include paternal and maternal cousins aged 56, 53, 61 and 56 All of them have been admitted to Gian Sagar Hospital in Banur