Relatives keep Chennai-returnee, 55, out of home fearing he has Covid-19
2020-05-25
TRICHY: Returning to his native Thanjavur was more traumatic for a 55-year-old man than staying in Chennai as he was ostracised by family members fearing that he may be a carrier of the coronavirus. Left to starve for the last three days, Pattukottai municipal authorities finally arranged free food for him from the Amma canteen and his blood sample was taken for Covid-19 test. Based on the officials’ request, he was given some space at his home.


A native of Srinivasapuram in Pattukottai, N Raju has been working in a hotel in Tambaram for the last 30 years and often used to visits his brother Ramesh’s house. After the hotel was shut down, he stayed nearby till last week when he decided to walk and hitch-hike. Finally, he arrived in Thanjavur a relieved man but his happiness was shortlived as his relatives refused to take him in. They told him he might have contracted Covid-19. Municipal sources said their relatives in the village were not willing to give him even a glass of water. 

Dejected, the man slept in an auditorium at Kasa Kulam near a taxi stand for the last four days. Some taxi drivers noticed his condition and informed the Pattukottai municipality authorities. Soon, N Ravichandran, sanitary inspector of the area, arrived there and took him to Pattukottai government hospital where blood sample was collected. When the officials brought him back to Ramesh’s house, his family members were not ready to provide either food or shelter. 

On being instructed by municipality commissioner K Subbaiah, the sanitary inspector arranged food for him from the nearby Amma canteen. “We took the man to his house and urged Ramesh and his family members to provide a small space in their backyard till the result came. Police and revenue officials also spoke to them. Finally, they relented”, Ravichandran added.

If the result is positive, the hospital authorities would take care of him. “Otherwise, we have to think about the next course of action,” the municipality authorities said. 


