Patna: ‘Relaxations fine, but people should be wary of Covid-19’
2020-06-12
PATNA: Amid spike in Covid-19 cases in the state over the past 11 days, people from a cross section of society, including teachers and doctors, said many relaxations under Unlock 1.0 were uncalled for.


Shabnam Bhowmick, academic head at a private school in the city, said many people forgot social distancing norms after the large scale relaxations came into force on June 1. “The government as well as residents should realise that shopping, eating out and worshipping at religious places can wait for some time. Though the concern over falling economy is understandable, lives of people should be given priority more than anything else,” she said.

Ajay Kumar, senior vice-president of Bihar chapter of Indian Medical Association (IMA), said the government should impose stricter rules as people are not maintaining social distancing norms voluntarily. “We cannot stay under lockdown for lifetime. Hence, giving relaxations was important, but there should have been plans. For instance, cops should stop people from roaming in groups,” he said.

DM Diwakar, a social scientist and professor of economics at A N Sinha Institute of Social Studies, said there should be a scientific basis for every action during such pandemic. “I am highly disappointed with relaxations that have been given under Unlock 1.0. When cases were few, nationwide lockdown was imposed, but when they are at peak, lockdown has been lifted. Looks like the government is doing things without proper planning,” he said. 

Dr Vinay Kumar, a senior doctor and president of Resident Doctors’ Association (RDA) at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)-Patna, said it is very important to impose stricter rules. “Keeping in mind the situation in other states, where even senior officials are not getting medical bed, I fear that a similar situation might prevail in Bihar in the coming days,” he said.

Even industry bodies, traders and working officials, who were earlier concerned about the falling economy of the state, want stricter rules. P K Agarwal, president of Bihar Chamber of Commerce and Industries (BCCI), said, “Now that the Centre has given powers to the state government, the authorities concerned should decide what should be prioritized. Economy is important, but everything must be balanced in order to have a better tomorrow.”

Maurya Lok Shopkeeper Kalyan Samiti president Rajesh Kumar Dabloo said in spite of taking risks in order to earn a livelihood, traders are not earning enough. “The unlock has hardly brought any difference. People hardly visit the shops. There’s no benefit of risking our lives when the result is next to nil. Hence, the government should either come up with stricter rules or impose lockdown,” he said.

“We can’t have a normal life during a pandemic. Instead of blaming the government, people should contribute their part in order to prevent the spread of the virus,” said Manisha Kumari (23), a resident of Das Company area in the city.

