Relaxation hope in least-affected Covid 19 areas in PMR dashes
2020-05-03
Pune: The civic administration’s plan to relax the lockdown norms in areas having limited Covid-19 cases suffered a jolt on Saturday after the state government categorically refused to allow opening of standalone shops, other than those selling essentials, in the corporation limits of Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad -- both marked as red zones.Pune municipal commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad had proposed to establish “micro clusters” in the areas reporting large number of Covid-19 positive cases. He had planned to offer relaxations for shopping and construction activities from May 4 in the areas outside such small containment zones.“The state advice is against what we had planned and hence, we need to put our plan on hold for the time being," Gaikwad told TOI, asserting that the administration would still opt for micro clusters based on the number of cases in affected areas for better management of Covid-19.Pimpri Chinchwad municipal commissioner Shravan Hardikar said, “The Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) continues to be in the red zone. So, only those activities permitted by the central and state governments in the red zone would be allowed.”Domestic helps are unlikely to be allowed to resume work for the next two weeks. “Most of them come from densely packed slums and if their area is contaminated, then they can carry the infection outside,” said Santosh Patil, the additional commissioner of the PCMC.Pune collector Naval Kishore Ram said, “I have spoken to both the municipal commissioners and they would have to come out with orders for the same. I shall try to relax the containment zones in talukas in the rural area leaving aside Haveli taluka, where there are cases.”Gaikwad said the Pune Municipal Corporation would go ahead with the formation of micro clusters as these would be helpful in making changes in the internal containment zones of the city. “We shall redefine the containment zones in the municipal area of Pune. The details about it would be discussed in a day or two,” he said.Though industrial units and IT offices in Hinjewadi, Talewade and Chakan can resume work, sources claimed that the relaxation would remain only on paper because of logistical issues. With people not being able to crisscross tiny containment zones and being forced to stick to the 7am to 7pm restrictions, it is likely to be a non-starter for the next two weeks, according to industry participants. Similarly, the Bhosari industrial unit cannot spring to life until May 17. MCCIA director-general Prashant Girbane said those residing in the red zone of PMC and PCMC limits but not in a containment zone and need to travel to industries outside the municipal areas should be granted the travel permission via a “self-declaration” on a government portal rather than another set of passes and licences. “We need ‘operational’ guidelines from the local administration and the police,” he added.