Relief in Indore after two suspects test negative for coronavirus
2020-02-04
INDORE: Of the three samples, which were sent sent to National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune for detection of coronavirus from Indore division, two tested negative on Monday, while result of one suspect is awaited. 


The two suspects- 21-year-old boy from Khargone district and 22-year-old girl from Indore district - were admitted in MY Hospital on Friday after they developed cold-like symptoms. The duo was pursuing their studies in medicine in cities of China. They had returned India on January 15 following spread of coronavirus in China. 

“Pune-based National Institute of Virology has tested blood and swab samples of two students as negative. We have received reports on Monday that the patients, who were admitted in an isolation ward, were not found infected with coronavirus,” MYH superintendent Dr P S Thakur said.

The students were discharged from the hospital on Monday evening. Lab reports of another suspected coronavirus case is awaited, Dr Thakur said.

Two more persons have approached health department after returning from China. “Two more persons have approached us after returning from China. Both of them have no cold-like symptoms, but as a precautionary measure we have put them on home isolation to monitor their health condition,” CMHO (working) Dr Purnima Gadariya said. 

Dr Gadariya said that they had received a guideline from state government with instructions to put people, who have returned from China and 20 other nearby countries after January 25, on home isolation. Field workers have been roped in for survey and screening of such cases. “On witnessing any symptom of coronavirus, samples of the patient will be sent for lab test. Besides, the patient will be provided N-95 masks and his/her family will be given three-layer masks,” she said.

“There is nothing to panic. We are just following the protocol. We have issued instructions to keep a close watch on suspected cases,” divisional commissioner Akash Tripathi said.

Appropriate arrangements have also been made at Indore airport for screening of suspected passengers coming from Dubai to Indore.

