Relief for Wayanad as 32 tribal primary contacts test coronavirus negative
2020-05-24
KOZHIKODE: The Covid-19 shadow over tribal hamlets at Thirunelly in Wayanad abated, to a large extent, after all primary contacts in four tribal colonies tested negative. 

This comes as a big relief for the district administration and health authorities as 32 tribesmen were included in the primary contact list of a Covid-positive shop owner at Panavally, who was part of the Koyambedu cluster.

District administration and health authorities had put in place unprecedented containment steps to keep the tribal belts near Panavally free from the pandemic, considering the acute vulnerabilities of the community. 

As many as 409 persons belonging to 109 households from four tribal colonies were put under 24-hour surveillance and the colonies were totally insulated with two police personnel and health workers keeping guard in each colony. 

“Having a significant number of tribesmen among the primary contacts of the patient was a worry. But, we took aggressive containment and testing in the area and also ensured that the tribal primary contacts didn’t mingle with others in the colonies. Now, all tribal primary contacts in the area tested negative,” said district medical officer Dr R Renuka.

According to health officials, as many as 62 samples taken from the Panavally area, including that of 32 primary contacts, tested negative. “However, we haven’t lowered our guard and will be continuing surveillance of tribal contacts and other residents for 14 days by continuing home and institutional quarantine,” said district surveillance officer Dr S Soumya. 

To ensure round-the-clock health monitoring of tribal population in containment zones near Panavally, around a dozen tribal youths from the colonies were roped in as volunteers apart from hamlet ASHA workers and tribal promoters. Each of them has been monitoring the health status of residents in 10 houses daily, looking for fever and other Covid-19 symptoms.

“Also, we ensured the staff paid daily visits to monitor people in high-risk category including three sickle cell anaemia patients, four pregnant women and people with other diseases and the aged people in the colonies,” said Dr Jerin S Jerod, who has been overseeing surveillance activities in the tribal colonies, adding that 17 tribal primary contacts were shifted to institutional quarantine.


