Religious places get ready to reopen today after two months of lockdown
2020-06-09
VARANASI: Religious sites in the temple town of Kashi will be reopened from Tuesday after remaining closed for over two months in view of Covid-19 lockdown.

On the eve of reopening of the religious sites, divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal, IG Varanasi range VS Mina and other senior officers held a meeting with their authorities and directed them to take all prescribed precautions before opening as the threat of Covid-19 is yet not over.

ADM (City) VK Singh said most of the prominent religious sites have started submitting forms issued to them for adopting standard operating procedure (SOP) and cross-checking of its execution will be done by the teams led by magistrates concerned. In case of overlooking of SOP, necessary action would be initiated against the site concerned, he added.

On Monday morning, the commissioner and IG convened a meeting with the authorities of religious sites, including prominent temples, mosques, gurudwaras, churches and others. During the meeting, the commissioner made it clear that following guidelines prescribed by the government for the religious sites for opening amidst threat of Covid-19 will be mandatory.

“Each devotee will enter the religious site after thermal scanning and on detection of Covid-19 symptom, the authorities concerned will immediately contact the health officials for his/her proper health check up. Number of devotees inside any site will not exceed than five at a time while others waiting outside will form queue by maintaining minimum six ft distance with others,” said the commissioner.

“If any religious site wants to keep its doors closed any further, it was free for doing so as there is no compulsion. Continuous announcement of precautions against Covid-19 through loudspeakers at the sites will be a must,” he said. 

He asked the participants to ensure that format for SOP given to them was properly filed and submitted to local police station apart from ensuring its cent percent compliance.

He said that each devotee will go inside the religious site after sanitising hands and will not touch anything including idols, bells, images, walls, holy books. He further appealed to the religious authorities to take proper care of the norms prescribed in guidelines as the menace of epidemic is still continuing.

Regarding the forms prescribed for furnishing by the religious sites, the ADM City said that it had been distributed through police stations and many sites have also submitted it. He said that cross-checking of the compliance of SOP would be started with the opening of religious sites on Tuesday. 

