Remain stress-free: Madhya Pradesh CM to Covid-19 staff
2020-04-25
BHOPAL: Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan has asked the officers and employees involved in the fight against containing Covid-19 not to be bogged down by stress. In a message to the staff during a review through video conference, Chouhan reiterated that the hard work and dedication of the officers and employees will pay off and situation in the state would soon be under control.


Chouhan also urged the officers and employees to take care of themselves while on duty and follow the protocol and use all protective gear to safeguard themselves from the coronavirus. He asked the staff to take adequate and sound sleep and remain stress- free. 

At the meeting, Chouhan expressed his displeasure over poor arrangements at the RD Gardi hospital in Ujjain and directed to ensure proper facilities to patients and warned that lapses would not be tolerated. The RD Gardi hospital in Ujjain has been notified as a Covid-19 hospital.

Reviewing the Covid-19 situation in Ujjain, chief minister Chouhan directed for strict maintenance of social distancing norms in the containment areas and its peripheries. He said carelessness and laxity on the part of people would be catastrophic.

Chouhan also directed that in suspected cases, the suspects must be advised home quarantine. Only those cases where the houses do not have proper quarantine facility must to shifted to the quarantine centres. The centres must be small with limited number of people, he said.

During the meeting, additional chief secretary, health Mohammad Suleman informed that in the 548 containment areas in the state a total of 24.97 lakh people have been screened. About 2,570 teams are involved with the survey and screening process in the state. Till date 32,974 samples have been tested of which 1851 have tested corona positive and 3,22 people are under home quarantine and 15,420 people are at various quarantine centres, he said.

Suleman said that in a bid to increase testing in Madhya Pradesh auto extraction kits are required on which Chouhan assured to take up the issue with the Union government. Chief secretary Iqbal Singh Bains and principal secretary Sanjay Shukla were also present.

Meanwhile, in a separate message to the police personnel, chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that in this hour of crisis, our police personnel are setting a new example of selfless service. They are serving the public day in and day out by risking their lives. Along with strictly enforcing the lockdown, they are also ensuring supply of essential commodities to the public and are helping them in every possible way.

