Remote pacemakers ensure doctors don’t skip a beat during lockdown
2020-04-28
CHENNAI: At a time when people are being forced to stay indoors and doctors are on the frontline fighting to save lives from Covid-19, a matchbox size pacemaker is protecting nearly 1,000 patients in the country by updating their doctors working in remote locations on the heart condition.


These pacemakers with remote monitoring technology send out alerts and predict possible emergency situation to the patients and the doctors on their smartphones and computers, and help medical experts reach out to patients when required.

Dr Ulhas Pandurangi, cardiologist and electrophysiologist, said 12 of the 15 patients, who recently got a pacemaker implanted with the remote monitoring technology, and were up for their first review during the lockdown, are now being monitored from remote location because the device sends them crucial data.

“Patients with these pacemakers are connected to the doctors or the hospital all the time. The information we get from this device is as good as the information which we get when the patient comes to our clinic,” the doctor said.

The tiny device placed under the skin carries a computer chip which is connected through multiple wires sensitive to electrical activities of the heart. The device transmits information, through a Wifi facility, on various parameters like the electrical activities, mechanical contraction and the rhythm of the heart, besides data from sensors that monitor motion, sleeping and breathing.

“This technology is in no way a treatment modality or consultation modality during an emergency. This technology cannot provide emergency service,” the doctor.

Consultant urologist and transplant surgeon Dr Sunil S Shroff said there are many devices like smartwatches, which have become useful tools for doctors to monitor certain parameters of their patients in real time and provide teleconsultation during the lockdown. He said more doctors and patients are now interacting through teleconsultation during the lockdown period than before. “I am inundated with more calls now than before,” he said.


