Renewed focus on public health helps Andhra Pradesh battle Covid-19 crisis
2020-05-25
AMARAVATI: It’s been over two decades since liberalisation when the Indian economy opened up to the private sector. The Union government and many states across the country are busy selling off remaining stakes in public sector undertakings (PSUs). In such an environment, the 45-year-old chief minister of Andhra Pradesh, who took over the reins of the state last year after a landslide victory, has decided to take the road less taken. The Andhra Pradesh chief minister, although an industrialist himself has decided to place his bet on the public sector.

 


YS Jaganmohan Reddy’s move to take the plunge and invest large amounts of money into the public sector has taken many of his peers by surprise. As the world battles the novel coronavirus, Jagan’s gamble to focus on the public sector has proved right. It is the public healthcare system in Andhra Pradesh that almost single-handedly tackled the Covid-19 containment operations over the last two months, while almost the entire of the private healthcare closed operations.

The Andhra Pradesh government has prepared mega plans to strengthen the public healthcare system through an infusion of a massive sum of Rs 17,000 crore over the next three years. All the hospitals, right from primary health centres (PHCs) to teaching hospitals are being renovated in a bid to cater to the needs of ordinary people. Around 10,000 village clinics are also in the pipeline.

In fact, many believe that the decision to set up one government medical college in every parliamentary constituency and seven government nursing colleges in the state is going to prove to be a game changer for the healthcare sector of the state.

Dr K Srinath Reddy, renowned cardiologist and honorary advisor to the state government said, “Public financing to strengthen primary and secondary healthcare systems is the need of the hour to save millions from getting pushed into poverty.” “The public healthcare system was completely neglected in the past,” added Dr Srinath Reddy, who is also associated with the Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI).

In fact, chief minister Jaganmohan Reddy has not confined his government’s efforts to strengthening just the public healthcare sector alone. He has set his government’s focus on all core sectors including education. Around 45,000 schools are being renovated in three phases. These schools are being provided drinking water facilities, toilets, fans, lights, blackboards and compound walls.

In addition to providing infrastructure, the state government has also decided to go for massive recruitment drives to fill up all vacancies in the health and education sectors.

“All successive governments have completely ignored the public sector institutions, particularly health and education. It is really heartening to see the young chief minister spend large amounts on these sectors,” said Dr LSN Prasad, a retired professor of economics. YS Jaganmohan Reddy is perhaps the only leader investing heavily on the public sector, he added.


