Coronavirus: Reporting SARI made must for all hospitals in Gujarat
2020-03-18
AHMEDABAD: On Tuesday, the state government added another layer for the identification of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases in the state. It made the reporting of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases mandatory for government and private health facilities. A few other states have already issued notifications on similar lines as the condition is identified as the definite medical proof of the viral infection.


Jayanti Ravi, the principal secretary (health & family welfare), on Tuesday said that from 2.30pm on Tuesday, all the pulmonologists, physicians, intensivists and staff of government and private hospitals and medical colleges will report all cases of SARI as a matter of precaution. “We will gather information on all such cases and initiate further action,” she said.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The symptoms associated with Covid-19 point to the presence of SARI after a few days of the onset. This sets it apart from the common flu and other respiratory diseases, said experts.

Ravi said that with the help of EMRI 108 services and the medical network system, the government is keeping an eye on the spike in symptoms of flu and respiratory illnesses in any pocket of the state to pick up early signs of infection. “There are three stages of spread — contact, cluster, and community. We have fortunately not reached the cluster or community stage yet and our efforts are focused on identifying and isolating persons coming from foreign countries,” said Ravi. “But we need to be cautious and follow instructions on hygiene and social distancing strictly.” She said that as on Tuesday, no confirmed positive case of Covid-19 has been reported in Gujarat.

The principal secretary also said that the government is encouraging the work-from-home policy for the private sector wherever possible. “We are yet to take a call for government offices,” she said. She added that the state has adequate supply of masks and personal protective equipment (PPE) kits for health workers in isolation wards. “We will procure 10,000 more PPE kits,” Ravi said.

