Covid-19: ‘Reporting gaps by states behind spurt in cases’
2020-05-06
NEW DELHI: The Centre on Tuesday said efforts to pursue gaps in reporting protocols with some states have resulted in more number of positive Covid-19 cases as well as deaths being reported. The problems had led to late clinical management and inefficient contact-tracing which had now been ironed out to a considerable extent.

As many as 3,900 new cases and 195 deaths have been reported in the last 24 hours, taking total number of confirmed cases to 46,433. The total number of fatalities reported so far were 1568. “We are dealing with an infectious disease. Therefore, timely reporting of cases and their clinical management is important. In some states, this gap (in reporting) has been noted and are now being addressed,” health ministry joint secretary Lav Agarwal said.

Responding to a question on an increase in numbers in West Bengal, where there has been a controversy over how Covid-19 deaths were being recorded, he said, “We followed up with certain states as we were not receiving reports of cases and deaths on time from them. We pursued them and issues are now being addressed. As we are now receiving reports of cases and deaths from them, there is an increase in cases reported in last 24 hours.”

The Centre also urged states to effectively implement contact-tracing, active case search and clinical management of cases. “At the level of states, it is important that based on cases reported, contact-tracing, active case search and clinical management of cases are effectively implemented,” Agarwal said. 

Reiterating that lockdown has yielded better results in terms of doubling time of positive cases improving to 12 days from 3.4 days, Agarwal said the momentum has to be sustained and reach a level where the curve flattens. However, he said efforts are channeled towards stabilising the rise in cases. 

“We need to come to a level where day-to-day increase in cases should actually be happening in geometrical progression. It should be happening in such a manner where number of cases that get added vry day are less and subsequent to a level where we can actually increase the doubling rate much higher so that cases remain stable and that is where we end up seeing a flattening of curve,” he said. So far, a total of 12,726 people have been cured. This takes our total recovery rate to 27.41%, Agarwal added. 

