Reports of 48 quarantined persons to reveal Bajeria girl’s source of infection; 3 new cases in city
2020-05-23
Nagpur: Residents of Bajeria suspect that the 16-year-old girl from the area who tested positive for Covid-19 contracted the infection at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) where she was admitted after consuming poison on May 18. 

With Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) notifying a small pocket as containment zone covering hardly 100 houses, speculations have only grown. In other cases, containment zones have covered up to 2km radius, with another 3km radius as buffer zone. 

NMC officials are tight-lipped over notifying a small area as containment zone.

On Friday, three more persons from the city tested positive for Covid-19, including two from Gaddigodam and one from Mominpura containment zone. The district’s tally has now increased to 410.

Doubts regarding the source of infection in the 16-year-old girl’s case will be cleared after reports of 48 persons, including 16 doctors and staff of IGGMCH who have been quarantined, are declared.

The girl reportedly developed fever and cough, and tested positive for Covid-19 on May 21.

IGGMCH quarantined two senior doctors, four resident doctors and 10 nurses as girl was treated as a non-Covid patient without wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) kit and other precautionary measures.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe issued a notification declaring the area and boundaries of containment zone after an NMC squad led by Dr Praveen Gantawar spoke to residents of Bajeria to know the source of infection and trace contacts. 

Sources from NMC told TOI that officials will take decision on area of containment zone after receiving reports of 32 quarantined persons, including three family members and one close friend. 

In the last 73 days, there has been no case from IGGMCH and GMCH about non-Covid patients getting infected. Only two persons who were staying with positive family members and persons in isolation wards had contracted the infection.

Some residents told TOI that the girl contracted the virus from the hospital as there have been no cases from the area before and the girl had no travel history.

With three cases in city, Mominpura’s tally increased to 220 while Gaddigodam has registered 22 cases so far.

Ten patients persons were discharged from IGGMCH and GMCH, taking the tally of discharged persons from the district to 320. Now, 83 patients are undergoing treatment.


