Delhi: Reserve 20% beds or get converted into a Covid-19 hospital, says deputy CM Manish Sisodia
2020-06-05
NEW DELHI: Private hospitals in Delhi, which are unable to reserve 20% beds for the treatment of the novel coronavirus patients, will be fully converted into Covid-19 hospitals, deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia announced on Thursday.


Addressing a digital press conference, Sisodia said that the corona cases were on the rise and the government was trying to increase the number of Covid-19 dedicated hospitals. He added that 61 private hospitals had been asked to reserve 20 per cent of their bed capacity for patients coming for Covid-19 treatment. While some agreed to keep the beds for the coronavirus patients, others had issues in adhering to the government’s directions.

“They have time till Friday to decide. Those private hospitals which are facing difficulties in following the mixed system will be completely converted into Covid-19 designated hospitals,” the deputy CM said.

Sisodia said the reason behind this order was to make sure that no hospital refused to treat patients suffering from Covid-19. He added that the government’s focus was to save lives of people by providing them with proper medical facilities without getting into any kind of data competition with other states.

“Our aim is to make sure that Covid-19 patients in Delhi do not get to suffer due to unavailability of beds in hospitals,” the deputy CM said. He, however, added that asymptomatic patients were not required to get scared and rush to hospitals. “Home isolation is a very good option for patients with no or very mild symptoms,” he said.

Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain, who accompanied Sisodia, said, there were three types of coronavirus patients — asymptomatic, moderate and severe. 

“Asymptomatic or those with slight fever and mild cough can be treated in home quarantine. Those with moderate symptoms (respiratory rate of more than 15 per minute) and severe category patients (respiratory rate of more than 30 per minute) should be hospitalised. Delhi government has taken various measures to treat patients under moderate and severe categories and help them recover fast,” Jain said.

