Research projects hobbled by lockdown
2020-04-20
“Unprecedented.” This was the succinct summary by an associate professor of a Bengaluru university. As the world comes to terms with the altered reality post Covid-19, research scholars across the state are finding it hard to cope with the uncertainty.

“Data collection in the field, essential to substantiate our argument, has been hit badly. For instance, a researcher cannot interact with people in villages, and this may delay submission of thesis,” said BH Harshitha, a PhD scholar in mass communication at Bangalore University. 

Harshitha has dispensed with dredging out scholarly articles, and compiled her literature review. “I had to speak to ASHA workers and health department personnel but that’s next to impossible now,” said Harshitha, adding that a delay of a month or two wouldn’t have too adverse an impact on research.

“Everyone across sectors is in trouble. This is a medical emergency, and we have to cope with it,” said Bangalore University registrar BK Ravi, pointing out that many PhD scholars were interacting with their guides on online portals and ensuring continuity. Citing a circular issued by the University Grants Commission, he added, “If the need arises, we’ll conduct viva-voce for scholars online, and UGC has okayed it. Researchers now have more time too. Depending on the situation and her needs, we’ll take a call on holding the viva-voce and thesis defence online.”

On problems in collecting field data, he said, “If people who need to be interviewed are in urban areas, this can be done online. Researchers can mail questionnaires or interact with them online and collect information. But if the researcher needs to visit a village or remote areas, that’s not possible. She’ll have to wait for the situation to normalise.”

Prof Kishore Selva Babu, assistant professor and coordinator for PhD and MPhil programmes at Christ (deemed to be university), Bengaluru, echoed these views: “This break may turn out to be a blessing in disguise for researchers. They will get more time to reflect on their questions and can interact more with thesis supervisors and guides.”

He added that, at Christ, MPhil scholars are allowed to take their external viva-voce online.

On the delayed submission of theses affecting prospects of research scholars, he said, “No college has held semester examinations yet. Educational institutions are unlikely to start recruitment anytime soon.”

Prof Babu’s PhD ward Fr Rinson had submitted his dissertation. “But for the lockdown, my viva would have been towards March-end or April, and I would have defended my thesis,” said Father Rinson.

Caroline CU, a final-year MPhil scholar at Christ (deemed to be university), said the uncertainty was hard to reconcile to. This lecturer at Christ PU College, Bengaluru said there’s a silver lining. “I’ve had more time to write and finetune my thesis,” said Caroline, adding that a few acquaintances who had planned to pursue higher studies abroad had been forced to put their plans on hold since getting a visa was out of the question at the moment.

On making her final presentation online, Caroline said, “I’ll definitely be a lot less nervous defending the thesis to a virtual crowd than to a packed classroom.”

(With inputs from Rashmi Srikant and BV Shivashankar)


