Coronavirus outbreak: Residents’ vigil at Kolkata complexes to identify isolation-rule flouters
2020-03-24
KOLKATA: Residents’ associations of almost all prominent housing complexes in the city have formed special vigilance groups to keep tabs on those who have recently returned from abroad to ensure they stay in home isolation. 


On Monday afternoon, residents of one such complex off EM Bypass called the health department about a family that returned from the US last week but had not been following the home quarantine protocol. Officials then took the family of three, including a doctor, to the quarantine centre in New Town for tests. Incidentally, this doctor was earlier criticized for visiting a Basirhat nursing home and conducting multiple surgeries there. The state had shut down the nursing home and asked the doctor and his family to stay in home quarantine. “The family, however, had been roaming around the complex in spite of repeated requests to stay at home. On Monday, the doctor’s wife came down to receive a food delivery after a security guard stopped him at the gate. The woman said she would lodge a complaint of harassment. That is when we called the health department,” said a member of the residents’ association.

At another housing complex near Chingrighata, the association has asked the family of a youth — who was admitted at a state hospital but tested negative for Covid-19 — to stay at home while the association leaves their daily essentials outside their apartment. “The family is very sensible. Since the youth had himself gone for the test, they have not come out of their home even once. We had been sending home-cooked food for the youth at the hospital till Monday and were shopping for the daily essentials to leave them outside their homes,”said an association member.

The police have said they have received inputs from certain high-rises and condos about people returning to Kolkata from foreign shores in the past four days. “A condo on Biren Roy Road and another in Kasba have submitted a list of all outstation trips undertaken by their residents. They have even pointed out who among them have quarantined themselves on their return and who have not,” said an official.

Officers said they have met members of these gated communities and health officials whenever there was a call. “The health department officials showed them how to sanitize the common passage and elevators. Many of them have recorded videos and sent their feedback,” said an officer.

At an apartment off Dhakuria Bridge, where several elderly residents stay, every one has been asked to disclose if they have come in touch with anyone returning from abroad. “After collection of data, we send it to the local police station and seek directions from the health department,” said the president of the association.

In a complex on James Long Sarani, the residents first offered to bring the essentials to a couple who had returned from the US so the duo could remain in quarantine. “The residents said they involved the Haridevpur police only after the couple violated the agreement,” an officer said.

