Residents form ‘Lockdown Club’ to socialise; stitch masks for poor
2020-04-14
Dehradun: To interact with people and yet maintain social distancing during the Covid-19 lockdown, residents of Ashtha Villa society in Keval Vihar area of Dehradun have chalked out a unique method. The residents here have set up a ‘Lockdown Club’ and all eight families living in this neighbourhood are part of this group. The club members come at their rooftops every evening and play games like Tambola, Antakshari, and recite devotional songs using mikes and speakers. Locals say that this arrangement has helped them in keeping their morale high during the lockdown.

Sadhna Sharma, a resident of the area, told TOI, “The lockdown has restricted our movement but we have figured out an alternative way to interact with people. We all look forward to this evening ritual. Some days, we play games and on other days, we recite devotional songs and pray for healthcare workers, police, and others who are fighting Covid-19 on the ground. On Monday, we divided men and women of the area into two teams and played Antakshari.” The residents say that the initial days of lockdown were difficult for them but the ‘Lockdown Club’ has helped them in dealing with this crisis.

Mohinder Kapoor, another resident of the area, told TOI, “Besides self-restraint, the lockdown has taught us the way to remain happy with whatever we have. Since we cannot go out to meet people or host guests at our homes, our society has become like a big family now. Every evening, we meet our neighbours at 6 pm and engage in activities for two hours. This ritual makes us forget our worries.”

The Lockdown Club is also helping the locals in channelising their inner talents. “Some people write poems and recite for all of us, others write jokes and make everyone giggle,” said Renu Ahuja, a resident of the area. Another resident, Rajesh Gujral, told TOI, “The current situation has given us the opportunity to become better individuals. We are all abiding by lockdown rules and staying indoors. Meanwhile, our evening ritual is helping us fight loneliness and distress during lockdown.” Meanwhile, to prevent the spread of coronavirus, several social groups and good samaritans are investing this lockdown time in preparing face masks for people in need. 

Yashveer Arya, a resident of Canal Road who has been stitching face masks with cotton cloth, told TOI, “Some of us have taken the task of preparing masks and handing out to needy people. So far, I have stitched more than 100 masks.”

Another local resident Nandini Sharma has roped in 10 women to stitch face masks with cotton clothes. 

“We have prepared more than 1,000 face masks and we plan to give those out to needy people, especially in slum areas. We have also been approached by some doctors for face masks”. Rajeev Gurung, a resident of district’s Johri village, has involved several women from Kalyani self-help group who are making 1,000 masks every day. Rajeev told TOI, “The lockdown has impacted livelihood of many people. So, I thought of involving some women in stitching masks and generate income for them.”

Besides some residents, a few social groups in Dehradun have also taken the responsibility of making face masks for frontline workers. One such organisation is “Guru Teg Bahadur Sahib Gurmat Kender”.

Harpal Singh Sethi, vice president of the body, told TOI, “We aim to prepare 125 face masks which can be used by people who are working on the ground. So far, we have stitched 125 masks. In a pilot project, we had distributed face masks among vegetable vendors who have given us a very encouraging feedback.”

Another group All India Women’s Conference is also preparing face mask and distributing it among people from economically weaker sections. Aruna Chawla, president of All India Women’s Conference, told TOI, “We have a target of preparing 500 masks and have already made 100 of them. Our initiative also aims at encouraging people to wear mask and be safe”.


