Coronavirus in Uttarakhand: Residents, pilgrims asked not to take part in Ganga aarti at Har-ki-Pauri
2020-03-19
HARIDWAR: In an order issued on Wednesday night, the Haridwar district administration banned participation of local residents and pilgrims in the evening Ganga aarati at the Har-ki-Pauri in view of the fact that thousands of people were continuing to gather to take part in the ritual despite a ban imposed by the state government on assembly of more than 50 people at any place in view of the Covid-19 threat. The order will come into force on Thursday and will be in effect till March 31. District magistrate C Ravishankar told TOI that “with the beginning of navaratras on March 25, live streaming of the aarti will also commence so that devotees can take part in the ritual virtually.” 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Local residents had alleged that the steps taken by the Ganga Sabha, the body which administers the Har-ki-Pauri ghat, to sanitise the place, were "inadequate and not at all convincing." 

Ganga Sabha office bearers who participated in a meeting with the district administration on Wednesday had opposed the idea of restricting the pilgrim numbers and instead proposed that about 1000 masks can be distributed at the aarti every day and the ghat can be sanitised. But the idea was shot down by the district authorities as being “practically not feasible” and instead, the ban on assembly of people has been put in place.

Ganga Sabha general secretary Tanmay Vashishth had told TOI earlier that "the aarti at the Har-ki-Pauri is an ancient tradition which cannot be stopped because of the virus threat and nor can Ganga Sabha advise people not to attend the aarti." "If the administration does not want pilgrims to gather in large numbers, it should ban their entry into the city," he further said. 

Rajesh Shivpuri, a member of the priest community as well as a senior Congress worker, said that "the bogey of coronavirus is being raised by the government in a bid to cover up its failures on most fronts and divert people's attention from key issues." "Coronavirus is no menace. Only the government is portraying it as such," he alleged. 

Akhil Bharatiya Sant Samiti spokesperson Baba Hathyogi meanwhile endorsed the government step saying that the number of pilgrims gathering for aarti should be restricted. "Faith is important, but no less important is science. We must take precautions as recommended by experts to check the spread of coronavirus," he said. 

