Mumbai: Residents pan Covid-19 centre plan for Wankhede stadium
2020-05-17
MUMBAI: Several Marine Drive residents have opposed the BMC’s move to set up a Covid-19 care centre at Wankhede Stadium in their neighbourhood. Raj Purohit, vice-president of Garware Club House, located inside Wankhede premises, wrote a strongly worded letter to BMC commissioner Iqbal Singh Chahal on Saturday to oppose the decision.


TOI reported on Saturday that the BMC has taken over Wankhede and Brabourne stadiums for Covid-19 care in preparation for a “worst-case scenario” due to a marked rise in cases. 

“I would like to bring to your notice that the Wankhede Stadium is surrounded by highly well-known destinations like the Marine Drive, Nariman Point, Churchgate, Queen’s Road, New Marine Lines, Cooperage and the Oval Maidan. The residents and the businessmen of the area have become afraid after they came to know about the starting of the coronavirus treatment centre and quarantine/isolation centres at the Wankhede Stadium, which is near their houses. Representatives of various residents and business associations approached me in large numbers to strongly oppose this move,” wrote Purohit, a former Maharashtra cabinet minister, a six-time MLA and a senior BJP leader, in his letter to the BMC. Purohit sent a copy of the letter to police commissioner Parambir Singh.

Dhruv Sayani, who resides in a building on D Road opposite the stadium, said, “There are many other open spaces in non-residential areas that the BMC can use for this purpose, including Azad Maidan and the gymkhanas ahead of Marine Drive. There is no need to make this area a ‘red zone’ by using Wankhede Stadium, which is surrounded by residential buildings with a high ratio of senior citizens.” Shailesh Shah, a 64-year-old resident of C Road, said while he supports the BMC’s Covid measures, the civic body has several open spaces that could be taken over first.

“We residents need to stop Wankhede stadium facilities from being taken over for Covid-19 care. The main reason is that Marine Drive and Churchgate are residential areas and least affected by Covid-19 for now,” said Aditya Dalmia, a resident of Vishnu Mahal located opposite the stadium. “All buildings in our area are old and a majority of the residents are retired senior citizens. It is extremely wrong to make a Covid-19 quarantine facility in the middle of such a zone which has the most vulnerable population,” he said,

Naresh Kapur, a member of International Human Rights Council and a resident of C Road, said, “This is against the ministry of health, government of India, guidelines which state that no quarantine centre can be set up in a residential area.”

