Residents of Nainital village use lockdown period to rebuild road
2020-04-27
NAINITAL: Cooped up inside houses during the lockdown, while some have learnt new recipes, others new language skills and yet others are hooked to movies on streaming platforms, people of a village in Uttarakhand used the time to rebuild a road in their village.


According to villagers of Kharki, which is home to around 40 families, a 3-km-long stretch had been built by the government to connect their village to Shilauti in Nainital district at a cost of Rs 6 lakh nearly a decade ago. Villagers said they used the road for some time but eventually it fell into disrepair. Debris from landslides started piling up and shrubs grew all over. As authorities looked the other way, villagers were forced to use a different road.

“The track was barely a-meter-and-a-half wide. We used it for some time but because of the carelessness of those responsible for its maintenance, it was soon covered in shrubs and boulders,” said Durgadatt Paladiya, a resident of Kharki village.

Villagers said their repeated requests to repair the road had fallen on deaf ears. However, with the lockdown offering them ample time, they hit upon the idea of rebuilding it themselves.

“We gathered around 25 people from the village and decided to work in small teams to clear different stretches,” said Vinod Kumar Arya, another villager.

 

Nainital district magistrate Savin Bansal said, “We will help the villagers with the road. Right now we are focused on containing the pandemic. We will use the administration’s discretionary funds or state funds for the project.”

The residents said they would take turns to cook meals for everyone who worked on the road. Most people used regular household tools to restore the road. There were challenges, including lack of proper equipment and the danger of working in a forest frequented by wild animals including leopards and tigers, but they persevered.

Finally, in about a month, the road had been made at least 2 meters wide, completely cleared and flattened. A track which was hardly fit for walking before, could now accommodate a motorcycle. “For the very first time, a two-wheeler reached our village. For generations, we had to trudge up the three kilometres, but now that the road has been widened, people can easily ride motorcycles,” Paladiya said.

The villagers added they observed all lockdown restrictions while working on the road by maintaining social distancing and working from 7am to 1pm, the hours during which the lockdown was relaxed.


