Residential societies in Nashik take steps to curb spread of coronavirus
2020-06-06
NASHIK: Residential complexes have upped their guard as Nashik city emerges as a Covid-19 hotspot in the district. The measures are evident in big residential complexes, which have more than 100, 200 flats.


The office-bearers of the housing societies have also put up measures and assistance for people, who are returning to Nashik from Pune and Mumbai. 

“During the initial phase of the lockdown, a lot of awareness activities were done on Covid19 infection spread. People realized the gravity of the situation. They started WhatsApp group, brainstormed on things that could be done at their level to prevent coronavirus spreading. This was seen in many residential complexes done by us,” said Amarsingh Patil, a realtor.

“Hand sanitizers have been kept at the entrances of residential complexes, watchmen have been instructed to strictly ensure that no person or a family from outside the premises come to stay without showing relevant medical certificates and permission from the authorities regarding travel. Over the past two months, quite a few family members of our residents came from places like Mumbai, Pune, Thane and other places. We ensured that they all had the government passes apart from medical certificates from government hospitals. They were also told to get themselves checked for Covid-19 at the local government facility as well,” said Mohan Bidkar, a committee member of Shree Gajanan Park residential complex in Nashik Road which has over 300 flats.

Meanwhile at Vini Park, which is a complex of over 100 row bungalows in Deolali Camp, the residents have kept a thermal scanner at the entrance, apart from hand sanitizers and compulsion of face mask. A member there said that many of the residents in our complex are from Mumbai and Pune, who have started trickling in from May onwards. While entry is strictly only after checking the relevant documents, we also support them in 14-day self-quarantine at their homes, by helping them get all the things they need from outside at their doorsteps.

Rajendra Tryambake, NMC Health Officer said, “There is huge awareness among people across the city. People are extremely cautious and are not taking it lightly if someone in their vicinity or in their building premises has just returned home. For the past two months, we have been getting at least 100 calls from residents that someone in their neighbourhood has come from outside the district, which is a very good sign.”


