Covid-19 in Kochi: Restaurants change work hours as people keep away
2020-03-19
KOCHI: With people cutting down on eating out, as a precaution against the Covid-19 outbreak, small hotels and restaurants in the district have been severely hit with some reporting even up to a 80% drop in customers. 

“Hotels are going through a tough phase. There is hardly any business. We have advised member hotels and restaurants to reduce their working hours as a measure to manage the crisis,” said G Jayapal, general secretary, Kerala hotels and restaurants association of India, which has around 3,500 members in Ernakulam district alone. But the campaign that a shutdown is imminent is not correct, KHRA said in a statement issued on Wednesday.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Jayapal himself has rescheduled the working hours of his hotel at Perumbavoor. “We used to open at 6am and close at 10pm. This is now 6am to 6pm. Member hotels have been asked to limit working hours to 12 since this would help them avoid a second shift,” said Jayapal. In places where there are multiple hotels in one location, KHRA has advised them to consider opening on alternate days. 

“Even if the business is down, they will have to pay their employees, remit their GST and the building rent,” said Jayapal. Many are keeping the restaurants open because the employees would be rendered jobless. 

Union ministry of health and family welfare (MoHFW), in an advisory, asked restaurants to ensure physical distancing of a minimum of one metre between tables and encourage open air seating but KHRA said this does not seem to be practical. “Most of the small restaurants have 100 to 150 sqft area and it would not be possible to follow this. It would be better to close them," said Jayapal. 

Restaurants are also moving away from serving chicken dishes because of customer aversion due to bird flu cases reported from northern Kerala. “The government should without delay declare a stimulus package, grant time to pay GST and also announce a moratorium on payment of bank loans,” Jayapal said.

