Ghaziabad: Retired cop with Covid-19 dies from kidney ailment
2020-05-27
GHAZIABAD: Two Ghaziabad residents with comorbid conditions who had also tested positive for Covid-19, died on Tuesday at hospitals in Delhi. Chief medical officer, Dr NK Gupta, however, said the health department is yet to receive information about the deaths and have not added them to the district tally.


One of the deceased was a retired policeman in his sixties who lived in Pratap Vihar, Vijay Nagar. He was undergoing treatment for kidney-related ailment at LNJP Hospital in Delhi. On May 3, he tested positive for coronavirus infection and was being treated for the same. He died on Monday night and his last rites were performed at a crematorium in Delhi following safety procedures. 

The other patient who passed away in a hospital in Delhi was a woman from Nehru Nagar. Besides these two deaths, a 45-year-old cancer patient from Delhi’s Patparganj, who had also contracted Covid, was brought to District Combined Hospital on Monday. But given her serious condition, she was not admitted and was referred to LLRM Medical College in Meerut where she later died. Confusion over her residency prevailed throughout Tuesday since the address mentioned during admission to the Meerut hospital was that of her relatives’ who live in Indirapuram, while a statement issued by the hospital referred to her as a Ghaziabad resident. 

According to Dr TVS Arya, who is the in-charge of the Covid-19 ward at the medical college, the woman was brought to the hospital on Monday afternoon. “She was admitted to the isolation ward in a very serious condition. Later, her condition worsened and she was shifted to Covid-19 ICU. She died at around 12.30am on Tuesday, despite the constant efforts of doctors,” said a press statement issued by Arya. Four persons, including an elderly couple, tested positive for Covid-19 in the district on Tuesday. As per the health department, a 61-year-old man and his 58-year-old wife from Vaishali have contracted the disease and undergoing treatment at a Delhi hospital. Also, an employee of a shelter home in Muradnagar and a GTB Hospital staffer who lives in Loni have tested positive.

Officially, the district tally is at 235 now. 

