Return of TN migrants poses fresh challenge, 52 quarantined in Trichy
2020-05-02
Trichy: As Trichy district moved to the orange zone due to absence of any new positive case since April 22 as well as other factors, the district administration was faced with the fresh challenge of quarantining migrant labourers who have started returning.

“We have home-quarantined 52 migrant labourers who reached Trichy today. None of them had symptoms, yet we have lifted samples from 12 of them randomly,” collector S Sivarasu told TOI. The labourers, residents of rural Trichy, have returned from Chennai, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Delhi by trucks and cars, and more are expected in the coming days. 

There have been no new cases in the city from April 17 and in rural Trichy from April 22. However, the district administration as well as health officials were apprehensive about these labourers testing positive in the coming days because of their travel history. The district has four active cases being treated at Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital (MGMGH) as of Friday while 47 have been discharged. 

After testing close and family contacts of the patients, the district administration has taken samples from 928 pregnant women, people with severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) in the 25 containment zones. 

Trichy city police also took proactive steps to keep up the morale of their police officers and personnel by taking the swabs of policemen on frontline duty at the isolation ward at MGMGH and the nine containment zones in Trichy city. 

Samples were lifted from 60 police personnel, though they did not show any symptoms, and they were subjected to Covid-19 test at MGMGH. As the results of 40 of them were out, all of them tested negative. The results of 20 more samples were awaited. 

“We have arranged for the tests for our people on frontline duties as a pre-emptive measure to ensure the safety and health of the officers and policemen. It will boost the confidence level of those guarding the containment zones and isolation wards,” city police commissioner of V Varadharaju told TOI.


