Covid-19: Telangana pays for train, gets back migrant workers from Bihar
2020-05-09
HYDERABAD: Even as the Bihar government is working to bring back its migrant labourers stranded across the country due to the extended lockdown, a group of 225 workers from that state landed in Telangana on Friday. The workers took the train that reached Patna from Telangana on Thursday. They will be working in various rice mills in the state where paddy harvesting is at its peak now.


The workers from Khagaria in Munger division got down at Lingampalli railway station. “This is only a beginning. We are working towards bringing back thousands of migrant workers who had left since the lockdown was announced in March,” Palla Rajeshwar Reddy, chairman, Telangana Rashtra Samanvaya Samithi (TRSS), told TOI.

The workers will be sent to Nalgonda, Miryalaguda, Karimnagar, Kamareddy, Jagtial, Peddapalli, Sultanabad, Mancherial and Siddipet. The workers had arrived by a special Shramik Express with the state government bearing their travel expenditure, Rajeshwar said. On their arrival, they were welcomed with a rose flower each by civil supplies minister Gangula Kamalakar.

Sources said the Khagaria workers were willing to return as they were paid Rs 1,200 a day in Telangana, which is much higher than what a worker earns (about Rs 300 per day) in Bihar.

Bihar deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi had said these labourers had come during Holi and could not go back because of escalation in Covid-19 cases. In the meantime, the Telangana government has been contacting the Bihar authorities to facilitate the workers’ return, sources said.

The idea of bringing back the Bihar workers came from rice millers, sources said. Because of the bumper harvest, rice millers rely heavily on them for harvesting. The millers had even said if the government permitted they would organise buses to bring them back from Bihar. 

“The workers who arrived on Friday have worked in rice mills before. They have the skill of packing, loading and unloading rice bags into lorries and other vehicles,” a rice miller said.

Rice mill owners said they would take care of the migrant workers. Apart from providing dry ration, the government gave Rs 500 to each worker during the lockdown period.

The state government, however, said it would continue to operate special trains to ferry migrant workers willing to go to their native states.

