Reverse quarantine in Alappuzha to cover 40,000 families
2020-06-13
ALAPPUZHA: A local body in Alappuzha is planning to start a reverse quarantine project to protect those who are over 70 years and those with underlying medical conditions in about 40,000 families. The ‘Ardramee Aryad’ project would cover the vulnerable sections in 80 wards of Aryad, Mannancherry, Mararikulam South and Muhamma grama panchayats, under the Aryad block panchayat.

The project, which is the brainchild of finance minister T M Thomas Isaac, involves delivering essential services, including tele-medicine consultations, to elderly people, pregnant women, children under the age of five and people suffering from cancer and kidney diseases.

A training programme for an army of doctors and health volunteers has been progressing under a 25-member team led by the vice-principal of Government Medical College Hospital, Alappuzha, Dr Sairu Philip, which will end on June 13. The project would be inaugurated by Thomas Isaac next week.

Sheena Sanalkumar, president of Aryad block panchayat, said over 160 health volunteers would be deployed for the project which would be executed under the supervision of community and primary health centres in the block panchayat.

“The health volunteers would be provided with smart phones and android tablets. They would have details of the vulnerable sections and as they are discouraged to come out of their homes, all services they need will be delivered at their door steps,” she said.

“People in the reverse quarantine can call them if they need any help. Tele-medicine consultations would be offered to them. They can make video calls to doctors and once they prescribe the medicines, the health volunteers will bring medicines for them. If they do not have money for buying the medicines, they would be provided free of cost. The health volunteers will also make arrangements for taking them to hospitals if the situation demands. Food and other essential items will also be provided at the door steps of the people if they don’t have any members in their families to buy them for them,” said C B Shajikumar, a people’s representative.

The health volunteers would also create awareness among the family members for taking safety measures like wearing masks, washing of hands and keeping social distancing when they go outside. 

The block panchayat has also decided to make it mandatory for all households in the block panchayat to place hand sanitizers or soaps and a bucket of water in front of the houses.


