Lockdown heroes: Rajiv Gandhi International Airport cargo staff work 48-hour stretches for medicines delivery
2020-05-20
HYDERABAD: At a time when majority of the city’s workforce is attending to their duties from the comfort of their homes, there are some who are braving the pandemic every day. Their only objective: facilitating timely deliver of medicines and essential commodities to people across the globe. 

These are men and women at the cargo terminal of the city’s Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) who are tirelessly working beyond their usual duty hours — some times up to 48 hours at a stretch — so that emergency supplies, particularly pharmaceutical products, reach their destination on time. 

The fear of contracting novel coronavirus, given their daily exposure to tonnes of parcels being transported in and out of the city to countries around the world, doesn’t seem to bother them. 

“If it wasn’t Coronavirus, there would be some other challenge for us to tackle. So, shirking responsibility in such times of emergency is not what I wanted to do or teach my 12-year-old boy at home. I wanted him to learn that, no matter what the situation or difficulty, if you are given a job, you have to get it done,” said 40-year-old Mala Pramod, who is responsible for physically screening every single piece of cargo landing at the facility from across the globe. 

Ever since the lockdown, she has volunteered to work even when sick. 

“I would have stayed home, if I wasn’t dealing with emergency services...But people’s lives depend on what we do,” the cargo screener said, explaining how the shipments include vital medicines that could spell the difference between life and death. 

That is something even Ravi Chandra T understands completely. 

And perhaps that explains why he hasn’t taken a day off ever since the Covid-19 outbreak disrupted normal life. Though, on paper, the load of work is lesser considering Ravi only handles up to three flights a day now, as opposed to 150 to 180 during usual times, the process is much more cumbersome. 

“Round the clock we have to coordinate with airlines to ensure the cargo is loaded and unloaded properly — every operator has different rules — and released on time. This means working two shifts, of 12 hours each, back-to-back,” the duty manager (operations) said. Do his parents fear for his safety? “Yes, they do. But then, they also know I wouldn’t stop doing this,” Ravi added. 


