Rims director says patient suspected of being Covid-19 positive died due to negligence
2020-04-06
RANCHI: A day after a dead patient’s kin alleged negligence by the doctors at Rims, the director of the hospital, Dr D K Singh, conceded that the incident happened because of the lack of coordination between the Covid-19 task force and the on-duty doctors in various blocks. 


Further, the son of the deceased patient, Raj Kumar Sahu, was reportedly told that his father’s body will be handed over to him on Sunday after the test results for Covid-19 arrive. However, even after lying in the mortuary for nearly 40 hours till the time of filing this report, the body was yet to be released. 

On the delay, Singh said, “The samples were sent for testing on Friday and the results should have arrived by Saturday, but it got delayed due to lack of coordination among the task force and the microbiology department.” He added, “The samples have been sent for testing as we speak and after we get the results, appropriate steps will be taken.”

Asked about the allegations levelled by the patient’s son that the hospital staff misled him about the whereabouts of his father, Singh said, “It has come to my notice that the hospital staff had shifted the patient from the isolation to the emergency ward without informing the patient’s kin and did not even inform the hospital administration. I have demanded an explanation from the doctor concerned and appropriate action will be taken.”

As the patient died at the emergency ward during treatment on Saturday morning around 5am, TOI spoke to the emergency in-charge and assistant professor of the surgery department Dr Nishith Ekka and enquired why was the hospital administration not apprised about the development. Ekka said, “I look after the logistics and supplies at the emergency ward and patient care is completely handled by the unit charge under which a patient is admitted.”

Taking cognizance, Singh divided the teams into various committees who will take care of both clinical as well as non-clinical works during Covid-19 so that such an incident is not repeated in the future.

Singh added, “I had called an urgent meeting to address the issue wherein members of the Covid-19 task force as well as senior doctors from the medicine and other departments were called in to discuss the lapses. After finding out that there was a lack of coordination and a communication gap among doctors, I appointed two senior professors Dr R K Pandey and Dr D K Sinha to co-ordinate the work of the task force so that such incidents can be avoided in the future.”

Meanwhile Raj continued to wait near Rims’ trauma centre on Sunday to receive his father’s body. “After spending six hours searching for my father in the entire hospital, I found out his body has been kept in the mortuary. The authorities have assured me that I will get my father’s body today (Sunday), but I am yet to receive it,” Raj said, who was seen waiting since morning.


