Rims junior doctor on Covid-19 duty alleges rape bid by senior resident
2020-05-30
RANCHI: A junior doctor on Covid-19 duty at the state-run Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences’ (Rims) accused a senior resident doctor of the hospital of molestation and trying to rape her on Wednesday night. The accused is absconding and police have been booked him under various sections of the IPC.

In a written complaint to the hospital management on Thursday evening, the girl had demanded an FIR be lodged against the accused, identified as Dr Arun Kumar Maurya. The hospital authorities forwarded the complaint to station-in-charge of Bariatu police station where an FIR was lodged on Friday. 

Rims director D K Singh said, “It is a very unfortunate incident and the management will not hesitate to take strict action against the accused. The girl, along with her head of department (anaesthesia) had met me on Thursday evening to hand over the complaint. I forwarded it to the station-in-charge of Bariatu police station for legal action, as per her request.” 

Asked if the hospital administration will conduct an internal inquiry into the incident, Singh said, “If she asks for an internal inquiry, we will hand over the case to the women’s cell at Rims to investigate the matter at their level.” 

The accused, Dr Maurya, worked at the critical care unit, and the girl was at the isolation ward when the incident happened. According to sources at Rims, the complainant and the accused were on Covid-19 duty at the new trauma centre from May 21 to May 27. While Dr Maurya used to head home after his duty hours, the girl was putting up on the fourth floor at the Rims paying ward. On Wednesday night, the accused had allegedly chosen to stay back after his shift was over, the sources added.

A group of junior residents assembled at Bariatu police station on Friday and demanded immediate arrest of the accused and cancellation of his medical license. A few of the protesters alleged that police downplayed the matter because the accused is a relative of a noted city-based nephrologist. “Police have failed to discharge their duties as they have not been able to arrest the accused yet. We have assembled here with a request to arrest him at the earliest,” a junior doctor said on anonymity.

Officer-in-charge of Bariatu police station, Sapan Mahta, said, “We have raided several places to nab the accused but he is absconding.” Mahta said the accused was booked under sections 376 (rape) and 511 (attempt to commit an offence) of the IPC.

He added,“We have written to the Rims management, requesting it to get the girl tested for Covid-19 after her quarantine period ends, so that we can produce her before a judicial magistrate to record her statement.”


