#RIP Twitter trends as users upset over company testing 'vanishing tweets' feature
2020-03-05
NEW DELHI: Taking questions from Snapchat and Facebook, Twitter has rolled out its own version of Stories. The micro-blogging website has announced that it has started testing its a format called ‘Fleets’ which enables users to post content that disappears in 24 hours. 

Unlike, the normal tweets, Fleets will not receive Replies, Likes to Retweets. Also, they will disappear after 24 hours. Presently, the company is testing this feature in Brazil. 

Fleets will not appear in the regular Twitter timeline of the users. A user has to visit the public Twitter profile and then tap on their Fleets to view it. Moreover, users will also not be able to circulate the Fleets on the Twitter network and they will also not show up in search or Moments. Also, users will not be able to embed them on an external website. 

However, it seems that this new vanishing tweet feature of Twitter is not going down well with the users. Many of the Twitter users are not liking the feature and as a result the hashtag #RIPTwitter is trending. 

Twitter users feel that this feature will make the microblogging website similar to other social media platforms. Here are the reactions of some users on the Fleets feature:

 
When you see that Twitter is slowly becoming another Instagram #RIPTwitter https://t.co/dLpLIdmA9t— Umbreon&Sylveon Pokeganda (not with GameFreak) (@GamerHysteric) 1583381185000 

 
we moved to twitter bcz we were tired of this shit of adding hundreds of stories daily and now Twitter adding stori… https://t.co/PcUtySy3kI— Hamza Kaleem (@hamzabutt61) 1583384900000 
 
For people who want an edit button on Twitter, just look in a youtube comment section #RIPTwitter https://t.co/tsO1S0EKf5— Sentinel (@SentinelMuffins) 1583380808000 

Recently, Twitter asked its 5,000 global employees to work from home due to the concern over the spread of deadly coronavirus.

The company made this announcement via its official blog post. The company said that its aim is to keep the probability of the spread of the virus low. In the post, Twitter said, “We are working to make sure internal meetings, all hands, and other important tasks are optimized for remote participation."

