Rise in coronavirus cases in slums worries PCMC
2020-06-10
Pimpri Chinchwad: The steady rise in the number of Covid-19 patients from the slum areas is turning out to be a major worry for the civic officials.

Over 300 Covid-19 cases have so far been reported from different slum pockets within the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) limits.

Officials said the narrow lanes, dense population and disregard for the social distancing and hygiene norms were leading to the fresh coronavirus cases from Anandnagar, Rupinagar, Bhat Nagar, and other slum pockets.

PCMC commissioner Shravan Hardikar said there were around 76 slum pockets in the civic limits, of which at least 15 have reported Covid-19 cases so far. “Containment zone is the only option to restrict people’s movement to and from such areas. It is also necessary to break the infection chain. Considering the coming rainsy season, the citizens must exercise extra precautions and strictly adhere to the personal hygiene and social distancing norms,” he said.

PCMC additional commissioner Santosh Patil said, “If citizens take precautionary steps, it will be quite easier to curb the spread of the contagion for the administration as well.” 

Over 50% of Covid-19 patients in the PCMC limits are in the age group of 13-39 years. Real-time data shared on the PCMC’s website on Monday revealed that 322 cases were in the age group of 22-39, while 97 cases were in the 13-21 years group.

The data revealed that 92 cases were in the 0-12 years group, while there were 184 cases in the category of 40-59 years. Health department officials said 92 patients were in the senior citizen category.

The officials said the senior citizens, especially those with comorbidities, needed to take extra care of themselves, while children aged below five needed to be looked after.

Health department records revealed that around 472 patients have recovered from the contagion in the PCMC limits till Monday.

Of the current active cases, 161 were asymptomatic and 108 symptomatic. Twenty patients were in a critical condition.


