Bihar: Rise in cases of domestic violence, sexual harassment after Unlock 1.0
2020-06-15
PATNA: There has been steep rise in the number of domestic violence and sexual harassment cases since the Unlock 1.0, if the figures of women felicitation-cum-counselling centres dealing in such issues are to be believed. Women in the state had faced domestic violence after the lockdown imposed across the country in March.

According to the Bihar State Women Commission (BSWC) figures, altogether 1,384 cases of domestic violence have been reported in state till June 12. Of which, 815 cases are from Patna, followed by 47 in Muzaffarpur, 45 in Bhojpur, 44 in Nalanda, 40 each in Buxar and Rohtas and 39 Samastipur districts.

BSWC chairperson Dilmani Mishra told this newspaper on Saturday that most of the domestic violence cases and complaints received on toll-free number or by letters and mails were related to financial issues, extramarital affairs, dowry harassment and sexual conflicts.

“The number of cases increased from April after the lockdown. When men and wives are spending more time together, there can be only two things -- their relationship becomes stronger or falls apart due to conflicts. Ironically, most of the cases were from the urban areas and the reason was financial,” she said.

“In June, around 244 complaints were registered at BSWC. On an average, we received 12-15 cases per day,” she added.

The commission has now decided to organise camps in each district from next month and the chairperson would talk to the victims face-to-face. “We have already chalked out plans to meet the victims of domestic violence personally by organising camps from July and counsel both the parties,” said BSWC officials.

Dr Binda Singh, a clinical psychologist, said most of the domestic violence cases were due to ego clash, frustration of work, monetary issues and intolerance. Citing the recent cases, Dr Binda said a woman from a posh area in Patna contacted her for moral support. “The woman and her mother-in-law always had a tiff over some issue or the other. Due to family tension, her husband always fought with her. The woman complained that her husband did not give her moral support whereas the man said she disrespected his mother,” she said.

She also talked about other cases like wife spending more time on social media (chatting with other men) when husband didn’t show much affection towards her. “On an average, I received 5-6 cases per day. I tried to sort out the issue by counselling them over the phone. The other problem is that women who faced violence could not take shelter elsewhere,” Dr Binda said.

Rajni, who runs an NGO to help women from domestic violence, also shared similar thought. “We basically work at the grassroots level. The complaints that we received were mainly due to financial, sexual and mental harassment issues,” she said and added: “Due to lockdown, work pressure for working women had increased and this often led to conflict with their hubbies.”


