Rising Covid cases in Jamalpur big challenge for Munger administration
2020-04-28
PATNA: The rising number of coronavirus cases in Jamalpur subdivision is posing a big challenge for the Munger district administration. The highest number of Covid-19 positive cases in the state have been so far been reported from Munger.


On Monday itself, 22 fresh cases were reported, taking the district tally to 103. However, one of them died earlier and 11 others recovered. Majority of the positive cases in Sadar Bazar area got infected from a 60-year-old man who had returned home after attending a religious congregation at Biharsharif in Nalanda district.

That apart, it’s a double shocker for majority of the residents of Sadar Bazar, which is a stone’s throw from Jamalpur railway junction. “Earlier we bore the brunt of the ganglords and now the coronavirus,” said a retired railway employee, Vijoy Anand.

Sadar Bazar used to hum with activities as a large number of people worked in the railway workshop at Jamalpur, hardly 8km from Munger district headquarters town. Markets remained open till late evening. It had become a centre of attraction for people belonging to affluent Marwari community.

“But that was in late 90s. Poor law and order situation and spurt in criminal activities forced many affluent families either to shift their businesses to other states or sell of their properties due to fear of being eliminated,” recalled Dev Jyoti, who owns a medical store.

He said almost a similar situation is prevailing in the locality these days. “We have virtually been pushed to the brink of starvation due to prolonged lockdown to check the Covid spread,” said Ganga Prasad, a cloth merchant.

The rising number of positive cases has put the senior police and administrative officers into a tizzy. DIG (Munger range) Manu Maharaaj said, “We have intensified screening of Covid suspects in the areas falling under Jamalpur Nagar Parishad.”

The DIG attributed the rise in the positive cases to intensive door-to-door screening by the health department personnel. “The chain links have been ascertained and the localities identified. We hope we will succeed in containing it,” he said over phone.

On Sunday, police personnel also staged a flag march in the sensitive localities. 

