‘Rising Covid-19 numbers show good testing, tracing of contacts’
2020-05-08
The mounting number of Covid-19 cases in Tamil Nadu was expected, but the recent spike is a cause for concern as it exposes the gap in implementation of physical distancing norms. The state has to use its strong public health network to track contacts of those tested positive, ramp up testing and isolate infected people, including those asymptomatic, to flatten the curve, say Dr Prahdeep Kaur and Dr P Manickam, deputy directors at ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology in Chennai. In an interview with TOI, the experts say Covid-19 is the most challenging pandemic after the Spanish flu in the early 1900s. They stress on the need for unprecedented action from governments and the community with rapid escalation of resources.


Why are the cases in Tamil Nadu going up suddenly? Will we be seeing more numbers in the next few days?

After the Indian Council of Medical Research expanded testing to include those with influenza-like illness and all contacts of people testing positive, the number of samples tested in the state steadily increased. Now, the state tests more than 10,000 samples a day. The total number of samples TN has tested is the second highest in the country. Due to extensive testing, new clusters are being identified which has led to increase in the number of cases. This is what happens in a pandemic. The numbers will rise, sometimes rapidly. There will also be waves where there is a rise and fall of cases.


Are the rising numbers a cause for concern? Does it mean we are in stage 3 or 4 of ?

No. On the contrary, rising numbers reflect good testing and contact tracing strategies. It tells us we are on the right path. At one point, when we are at the peak, the numbers will decline even as we continue to aggressively test people. No one must not stop or reduce testing or relax isolation and social distancing norms. These are important to break the chain. As epidemiologists, we can say testing enables us to map the spread of infection and thereby provides an opportunity for containment. It will tell us where to look for during a crisis.

 



What should be avoided? 

There is a need for stricter implementation of physical distancing measures during the lockdown period. We saw crowding at market places, as a result we have cluster of cases from the market areas now. 

In which area, has the state been doing better?

TN has done well in ramping up testing capacities. The state has a large network of labs, both private and government spread across the state. The district officials don’t wait for samples to be transported from one district to another. The state also has a wider contact tracing network that has helped us track, test and isolate people. This has to be expanded further to cope with the rising number of cases.


Since you are saying cases are likely to increase, so when the viral load increases will it delay recovery or push mortality rates?

There is no published evidence on the relationship of viral load and mortality due to Covid-19. This virus is new and is still under study. As of now we don’t see this as a problem.


India seems to record a Covid strain where infected people are asymptomatic, with fewer people with distress conditions. Is that good or bad?

When there are asymptomatic cases diagnosis may be tough. TN has been able to track them through its wide network of contact tracing. There is no scientific evidence to say if this is good or bad. As of now, fatality due to Covid-19 has been significantly low in Tamil Nadu.


We have been under lock down for nearly two months now? When do you think it should be lifted? Will TN be able to flatten the curve if relaxations are allowed?

Flattening the curve will depend on a combination of factors such as implementation of surveillance, testing, contact tracing and isolation/quarantine and strict adherence to physical distancing by the people. It is not just the job of the government. There are multiple stakeholders. Government has to look for a staggered exit handholding all its stakeholders. Going back to normal will take a long time, but it is not impossible. As for when and how relaxations should be done depends on the status of each district. Districts have to monitor the situation and take a decision accordingly. This means there could be multiple lockdowns, brief or long, when there is an outbreak.

