Rising Covid waste raises hackles of GHMC officials
2020-05-31
Hyderabad: As if the ongoing battle against Covid-19 wasn’t enough, municipal authorities have a bigger problem on their heads now. Households are not only generating around 40 tonnes of Covid-19 waste per day, but also mixing it with the regular household waste, which is worrying the GHMC officials. The waste includes masks, gloves, safety gear and bio-medical waste.

A closer verification by GHMC has revealed that the Covid-19 waste is not being disposed of scientifically by residents. Officials said they treat Covid waste in incinerators. “We are treating the Covid-19 waste in incinerators. The onus is on people to segregate and hand over the waste to our staffers. It is not possible to segregate the waste after it is mixed with daily garbage,” said GHMC commissioner DS Lokesh Kumar. 

Experts said the waste from quarantined households should be disposed of only by incineration. In case incineration facilities are not available, the waste may be buried in a deep pit so that it cannot contaminate any other surface.

For the households where residents are under quarantine, the urban local bodies (ULBs) have been told to provide them with specially-marked yellow garbage bags for disposing of the waste. Waste from such quarantined households should be treated as a bio-medical waste, an advisory issued by the ministry of housing and urban affairs (MoHUA) said.

“We did not receive any yellow bags. The Covid waste is being disposed with regular household waste,” said a resident of Meenakshi Sky Lounge, Hitex Road. 

MoHUA has also told ULBs that safety gear like masks or gloves, etc, from non-quarantined households should be treated as a domestic hazardous waste. “The Covid waste is being disposed of in the same garbage vehicle in our locality,” said V Ridhima, a resident of Road No. 5, Banjara Hills.

 Officials said waste generated in the city dipped from 6,000 metric tonnes to 4,500 MTs during lockdown. This includes bio-hazardous waste.


