Rising number of cops testing Covid positive in Malegaon sparks concern
2020-05-01
Nashik: The high percentage of police personnel testing positive for Covid-19 in the densely-populated town of Malegaon has raised questions about the safety of the men in khaki who are on the frontline of the battle against the pandemic.

As many as 19 cops tested positive for Covid-19 in the powerloom town — a hotbed of the virus — on Wednesday night, taking the total count to 37 so far. Of these, 23 jawans are from the SRPF, 13 from Nashik rural police and one from Jalgaon.

Pankaj Ashiya, the special monitoring officer and in-charge of Malegaon emergency operations, said police personnel run the risk of getting infected due to various reasons. 

“The police jawans are engaged in dealing with the locals to enforce lockdown in Malegaon. And since they move in groups, if one of the jawans gets infected, the others too run the risk of getting infected,” he said. 

The officer added that apart from police personnel, two government health workers in Malegaon have been infected with coronavirus so far. 

The Nashik District Disaster Management Authority had appointed Ashiya, a young IAS officer, to deal with the rising number of Covid 19 cases in Malegaon. 

Superintendent of police Arti Singh ((Nashik rural) told TOI, “They were asymptomatic but their throat swab tested positive. All of them are undergoing treatment at the Nashik Municipal Corporation’s Zakir Hussain Hospital in the city. Their condition is said to be stable.”

State home minister Anil Deshmukh, during a review meeting on Wednesday, lauded the efforts of the Nashik rural police in ensuring lockdown in Malegaon.

Police officers said that the task of keeping residents indoors is a big challenge, given the demography of Malegaon. 

“While the state’s population density is about 465 per square km, in Malegaon, it is about 19,000 per square km. With such dense population and large families staying in small dwellings, it becomes difficult to manage crowd. But, we have done it successfully so far. There has been no major untoward incident in Malegaon,” said police officers. 

Arti Singh herself has been camping in Malegaon ever since the lockdown was imposed. She has been overseeing and monitoring the deployment of over 1,700 police personnel across the town on a daily basis. 

“We have lodged cases against 1,000 people so far for violation of the lockdown rules and have seized 179 two-wheelers. We cannot afford to lower our guards in enforcing lockdown in Malegaon,” she added.


