Rising sugar levels in Lucknow diabetics up Covid-19 risk
2020-05-12
LUCKNOW: The blood sugar levels among diabetics in Lucknow has gone up marginally in the first quarter of the 2020, according to the recently released India Diabetes Care index report.

The assessment was based on Hb1AC measure of patients enrolled in different cities of India, including Lucknow. The report showed that the average Hb1AC levels among Lucknowites went up from 8.21 to 8.28%.

 HbA1c test indicates the average blood glucose level over three months and is considered as one of the best indicators of long-term blood glucose control. The average age of 63% male and 37% female in the city was 55 years.

Stating that the rise in HbA1C level comes at a time when medical studies are pointing towards an increased risk for severe complications arising from Covid-19 in people living with diabetes, the report said, “older adults and people with pre-existing medical conditions like hypertension, heart disease, pulmonary disorders and obesity related conditions are also at a higher risk of experiencing serious complications due to Covid-19.”

Experts in endocrinology expressed concern over the findings as diabetes has emerged as a risk factor among Covid-19 patients. “Diabetics are at the risk of developing severe complications from Covid-19 and it can lead to more fatalities in people with diabetes. Therefore, people with diabetes should be vigilant about their health and well-being especially because of the lockdown,” said Dr Sharad Kumar, senior consulting endocrinologist here.

Health officials have been pointing out that co-morbid conditions such as diabetes and hypertension added to the complications caused by novel coronavirus. “The pandemic virus doesn’t kill. It aggravates pre-existing medical conditions which often turns fatal,” said Dr Vikasendu Agarwal, state surveillance officer, UP.

He also stated that even a number of elderly in UP have recovered from Covid-19. “Delay in identifying warning signs has been a contributory factory in a number of deaths in the state,” he said. Doctors recommend monitoring of diabetic condition. “Controlled blood sugar helps in keeping diabetic complications away. In fact, a one percent reduction in HbA1c reduces the risk of diabetes-related complications,” said Dr Sunil Verma, general physician.


