Bihar: RJD questions Nitish Kumar government’s preparedness to tackle Covid-19
2020-03-23
PATNA: Leader of the Opposition Tejashwi Prasad Yadav on Sunday questioned Nitish Kumar government’s preparedness to tackle Covid-19 pandemic. 


Coronavirus in India live updates

In a series of tweets on Sunday morning, the RJD neta raised concerns on state government’s approach and availability of resources with regard to conducting tests for corona virus. “There is no Corona testing Centre in Bihar, only sample collections, then samples are sent to Kolkata that takes 12 hours. These samples if tested after 6hours doesn’t show the real result. That's why many results are showing negative. Why Central & state governments are not coordinating? (sic),” Tejashwi stated in a tweet.

In another tweet he said: “With one testing centre, which is actually a sample collection center for 12 crore population of Bihar, #COVID19 will wreak havoc. Either fight it hard now or face a massive epidemic. Testing and Testing alone can mitigate the eventual outbreak. Buy testing kits, setup labs! (sic).”

Apart from testing centres, Tejashwi also expressed concern over shortage of several other essential medical equipment. “The third most populous state, Bihar, needs to build its capacity manifolds to fight #Corona. Few testing kits, few personal protective equipment (PPE), not enough ventilators, not enough ICU beds, not enough ECMOs. Ramp up procurement of these or else exponential outbreak is looming (sic),” he tweeted.

Meanwhile, health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar told a news channel on Sunday evening that the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has approved sample collection kits to be provided to the Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS), Patna, as well.

“As of now, we have connected all government hospitals in all 38 districts to nine medical college and hospitals for collecting samples. The samples are being tested at Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences (RMRI), Patna and Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital (DMCH). But I have been told this evening that ICMR has given its nod to conduct the test at IGIMS as well. Thus, we now have three testing centres,” he said.

A senior official in health department, however, said it will take around 10 days for commencement of the process of tests for Covid-19 at DMCH and IGIMS owing to some technical issues.

Health experts also claimed that though samples, including throat swab, remain effective for tests for more than 12 hours, the government needs to open more testing centres.

“The tests for Covid-19 and many other viruses require Real-Time Polymerase Chain (RTPCR) reaction kits and machines. Given the reports of positive cases coming in Bihar from Sunday and a large number of migratory population and the the high population density, it is needed that RTPCR machines be made available in different districts or at least divisions and the testings be decentralized,” Patna-based physician Dr Diwakar Tejashwi said.


