RKC teacher alleges harassment by principal over following Covid norms
2020-06-05
RAJKOT: Sumen Ray Chaudhari, a senior teacher with the Rajkumar College (RKC) in Rajkot has accused the principal of the prestigious educational institute of harassment for seeking adherence to coronavirus guidelines issued by the government.

He has further alleged that he was suspended without a show cause notice or hearing for raising his voice against the school principal S S Adhikari. Chaudhari, a history teacher, has submitted a written complaint to the Rajkot district education officer (DEO) and demanded inquiry into the matter. 

However, Adhikari maintained that Chaudhari was suspended for his alleged misbehaviour and misconduct and refuted all allegations levelled against him by the senior teacher. Chaudhari has been teaching at RKC for last 12 years.

RKC is a CBSE affiliated institute where children of royal families used to studying before the independence. 

According to Chaudhuri, after CBSE postponed the board exams and suspended evaluation work, the school principal asked teachers to report to duty from 9am to 1pm. Chaudhri raised concerns over the attendance of teachers though the SMS and over online teaching method adopted by the school.

“On March 19 principal (Adhikari) called a meeting in which 200 people participated, including teaching and administrative staff, which was against government directives prohibiting assembly of more than four people,” Chaudhri told TOI.

“During the meeting Adhikari made mockery of concerns raised by me without taking my name and said that if those who don’t want to attend the school should find some other job,” he said adding that when he went to clarify his point, the principal shooed him away and later suspended him on March 20 without giving show cause notice or opportunity to be heard.

When contacted RKC principal S S Adhikari said “Chaudhari’s allegations are baseless. I did not take any arbitrary decision. A committee will be formed as per rules to inquire in his allegation and the truth will come out.” 

DEO R S Upadhyay denied having received Chaudhari’s letter. 


