Rlys disowns circular on Covid-19 ‘preventive med’
2020-03-15
Trichy: While the world reels under the onslaught of the novel coronavirus attack in the absence of a preventive medicine, railway officials here created a flutter by asking employees to take a homeopathic medicine to prevent the infection. With employees flocking to the homoeopathy ward of the hospital on Ponmalai railway workshop (GOC) premises, the medicine ran out of stock in no time prompting the railways to disown its circular in this regard.

The circular was issued from the personnel branch of GOC on Friday informing railway employees that “Coronavirus preventive medicine is available in our Homeopathy Clinic in GOC. All the employees are requested to avail the facility and prevent the Coronavirus attack”. It mentioned the room at the homeo clinic where it is available and the timing when it would remain open.

As soon as the circular was displayed, several employees, particularly of group C and D, trooped to the clinic to get the medicine on Friday. However, on Saturday, the doors were closed around 11.30 am itself as the medicine ran out of stock. When asked whether homeopathy medicine would prevent coronavirus attack, medical officer (Homeopathy) of railway hospital Dr R Maragatham told TOI that they were distributing medicine to employees coming with symptoms of common respiratory diseases. “Homeopathy complex medicine is used as an immune modulator. The medicine would first stimulate the immune system and curing any particular disease is the next stage. So, we are giving such drugs to employees who wish to have them”, she added. However, on sensing the gravity of the matter, the railway authorities quickly issued a clarification.

It said it had come to notice that some letter was in circulation claiming the availability of “Corona virus preventive medicine” at the homeopathy clinic of the railway hospital. “In this regard, it is clarified that the message/letter is misleading and incorrect. Such claims have no veracity,” the clarification added.


