RNA extraction kits in short supply in Covid-19 testing labs
2020-04-26
Bhopal: In war against the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, lab technicians are armed with sufficient real time PCR kits, but the RNA extraction kits are in short supply in the laboratories across the state. Officer on special duty at Madhya Pradesh Public Health Services Corporation Limited, S Dhanaraju, said: “As of now, just 6000 RNA extraction kits are available.”Covid-19 samples once collected are placed for RNA extraction but the automated RNA extraction kits are in short supply. After the RNA is extracted, the Covid-19 test is run for RT PCR. “Across MP, the demand for RNA extraction kits is being managed on a day-to-day basis although we have sufficient buffer of RT PCR kits,” said Dhanaraju.These two kits are separate from rapid test kits, of which MP has a holdover stock of 30,000. These kits would only be used after authorisation from ICMR. On Saturday, Indian Medical Association, greater Bhopal chapter representatives, had a video conference with CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan. They urged the CM on the need to augment purchase of rapid test kits. “We need to increase testing to detect those at risk of this infection and also increase screening and epidemiological assessment,” said IMA representative Dr Sudeep Pathak.Covid-19 tests are being conducted at 11 laboratories in MP. As on Saturday, 27866 samples were tested for Covid-19 in MP, 25921 tested negative,1945 tested positive and test report of 9021 samples was awaited. Last week, about 8000 tests were conducted on samples from across the state.Hamidia hospital official, however, said that demand for test kits was met on Saturday morning. AIIMS Bhopal official said that shortage is not hindering tests for corona infection.In real time PCR, the instrument is equipped with block design and software, whereby it can run applications below even 40 min time scale. However this may not be applicable for all types of tests/experiments run on the system. The machine should essentially be capable of extracting RNA at least 100 or more samples per hour.