Roadside eateries in Hubballi-Dharwad vanish as coronavirus scare keeps people away
2020-03-21
HUBBALLI: The scare over Covid-19 virus has started taking a toll on the popular roadside eateries in the twin cities as people have stopped consuming food prepared in unhygienic conditions. 


In the two cities, hundreds of roadside push-cart eateries are now left without customers and have completely shut down their business. This trend, however, is likely to help other regular hotels in the long run. They are hopeful that people's habit of eating from unhygienic roadside stalls may vanish even after corona is eradicated.

In the past few years, many push-cart eateries have had set up stalls in the twin cities. Despite the pleas of restaurant owners having regular license, the authorities have failed to curb roadside eateries. The irony is that consumers were also encouraging them as they were getting food at a lower price compared to regular hotels. In the process, they forgot about the quality and hygiene at such eateries.

Vinayak Kabadi, a private employee, said he had been consuming lunch from a mobile eatery on T B Road. “If we go to regular hotels, it takes 10-15 minutes extra than our eating time to get the items. However, I have shunned this habit after the Covid-19 outbreak. My parents are insisting me not to eat from here and there,” he said.

Sharada Hallur, a homemaker in Shivagiri, Dharwad, said she was going out with family members on weekends. “We used to consume gobi manchurian or such items from mobile eateries just for taste. Now, I have decided not to visit such eateries in the near future in the wake of Covid-19 outbreak. I am preparing lunch box for my husband and college-going son, who have strictly shunned consuming food from hotels,” she said.

She opined that Covid-19 has prompted her family members to take a look at hygiene in restaurants.

Krishna Marathe, owner of an eatery on Koppikar Road, said his business has been affected for the past one week. “If we dare to open the shop, we get very meagre business that is causing more loss for us. Though we put all efforts to maintain cleanliness, we cannot prevent dust which is common in all areas of the city. If people become more cautious about hygiene at such hotels, we will definitely look out for alternatives to meet our daily needs,” he said.

A hotelier at Channamma Circle hoped that the awareness caused after Covid-19 outbreak will definitely turn an advantage for the regular industry.

However, Rajendra Shetty, organising secretary, Hubballi Hotel Owners Association, differed, saying such consumers won’t come to regular hotels. 

“It’s true that the size of consumers at roadside eateries has drastically melted. But good to see that such customers are depending on home-made food. Consumers who were cautious on hygiene believe regular industry,” he said.


