Road trip for woman from Delhi ends in Covid ward in Kerala
2020-04-23
KOTTAYAM: The woman, who tested positive for Covid-19 in Idukki, had been quarantined along with her 71-year-old husband in Delhi for 14 days, before the couple embarked on a 3,500km road trip home to Pala.

The trip, however, ended at Cumbammet on Kerala-Tamil Nadu border when Kerala police personnel stopped them and directed the couple to a quarantine centre there.

On Wednesday, the 65-year-old woman tested positive, and since she hails from Kottayam, she will be shifted to the medical college here at the earliest, according to Idukki district medical officer N Priya.

Kottayam has been without Covid-19 patients for a few weeks now.

Circle inspector of Cumbammet police G Sunil Kumar said the couple from Pala had gone to Melbourne, Australia, to be with their son on March 6. They returned to Delhi on March 20, where they were quarantined in a hotel.

They opted to remain quarantined, but since the daily room rent came to Rs 6,000, they decided to drive down to Kerala, with the help of a relative working with the Delhi police.

The relative drove the car and they reached Cumbammet on April 16, the officer said. The relative, however, returned since he was not allowed to enter the state.

After being informed by police, the health department officials shifted the couple to the isolation facility at Cumbammet, and collected their swabs for testing. 

While the woman tested positive, her husband’s result was negative.

The details of the person who drove the car have been handed over to the authorities in Delhi, the Idukki district collector said.

Two doctors, one nurse test positive in Kozhikode

Meanwhile in Kozhikode, Covid-19 was detected in two house surgeons of Kozhikode Medical College and a nurse who worked at a private hospital in the district. All three were admitted to the isolation ward of MCH and their health condition is reported to be stable. 

The surgeons, who toured Delhi last month, hail from Kozhikode and Kannur respectively. They took the Hazrat Nizamuddin-Thiruvananthapuram Express and arrived in Kozhikode on March 22. 

In the coach they travelled, there was a man from Alappuzha who attended the Tablighi Jamaat prayer meet and he later tested positive for Covid-19 on April 3. 

The doctors then went on home quarantine for 28 days after they received news that both had travelled in the coach with Alappuzha patient. They remained asymptomatic and MCH conducted a test before their 28-day isolation period ended on April 20. 

The nurse who worked in the ICU wing of Iqraa Hospital contracted the disease from the patient who tested positive on April 11. The hospital had asked the nurse and other staff who treated the Edacheri resident to remain in home quarantine.

 
(With inputs from Kozhikode bureau)


