Roads to two Gultekdi slums shut after man, daughter test positive for Covid-19
2020-03-31
PUNE: The Swargate police on Monday closed the roads leading to Meenatai Thackeray and Dias Plot slums in Gultekdi after a 65-year-old man and his daughter (30) from the area tested positive for the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) on Sunday.

Senior inspector Bramhanand Naikawdi of the Swargate police said, “The father-daughter duo had returned from Dubai on March 9. After they tested positive for Covid-19, they were shifted to Naidu hospital. The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) health officials will conduct medical check-up of people in the slums with whom they came in close contact to prevent the spread of coronavirus.”

He said, “The slums were fumigated as a preventive measure. We have barricaded the slums and closed the roads between Giridhar Bhavan and City International School near Panchami hotel to dissuade the slum dwellers from coming out to roads. All Market Yard-bound goods vehicles will have to ply on alternative routes via Jedhe Chowk, Seven Loves Chowk, Golibar Maidan Chowk or Lullanagar Chowk.”

The city police have also barricaded all entry and exit points within 2km radius of Shri Chhatrapati Shivaji Gultekdi Market Yard for decongesting the wholesale market premises.

Deputy commissioner of police (zone V) Suhas Bawache said, “We have taken a slew of measures for streamlining the movement of vehicles in and around the Gultekdi market yard to maintain the social distancing norm. On an average, around 500 farmers unload produce in the wholesale market, while about 1,500 traders load the goods in their vehicles for taking them to retail markets. We have allowed vehicles to enter through gate number 4 from Bibvewadi Road and exit through gate number 1 outside the Market Yard police station.”

The police and officials from various government departments like the Agriculture Market Produce Committee have prepared a plan” for streamlining the functioning of the market.

Bawache said, “On an average, between 25,000 and 30,000 people visit the city’s main market yard every day. We have barricaded all entry and exit points, including gates of housing societies, and installed a three-tier barricading system. We have issued passes to farmers, agents, businessmen and workers involved in goods loading and unloading.”

He said, “We have given a time slot for entry and exit to all vehicles and allowing entry to only 500 big vehicles at a time. One-hour time has been given to them to complete loading and unloading. Smaller vehicles like tempos will get 15 minutes each for the purpose. Vehicles waiting at designated spots will be released in phases.”

Bawache said, “Farmers can now supply their produce alternatively — for instance, vegetables on Sundays, and onion, potatoes and fruits on Mondays. The grocery market will remain open throughout the week because the sale of vegetables and fruits by small-time vendors outside the market has been stopped.”

He said, “Markets in Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Kolhapur and Nagpur have been closed down and shifted to open places because of overcrowding. We have been fairly successful in decongesting the Gultekdi Market Yard through these measures,” he said.


