Rohilkhand varsity helpline to the rescue, as students suffer from lockdown anxiety
2020-04-15
Bareilly: A BTech student of Mahatma Jyotiba Phule (MJP) Rohilkhand University, suffering from stress and fearful of his career, after classes were suspended because of the nationwide lockdown to combat novel coronavirus, was pleasantly surprised when he followed up on advice from the university administration and called up the tele-counseling helpline set up by the university’s pharmacy department. After one session with the counselors, he found his psychological stress had suddenly reduced, and he could sleep in peace.

The helpline was set up following University Grants Commission (UGC) guidelines. Sunita Pandey, registrar, MJP Rohilkhand University, told TOI, “On the directions of UGC, we recently launched a Covid-19 helpline for students who are facing difficulties, anxiety or stress. Following the lockdown, some exams were postponed. Even the syllabus under the semester-exam format could not be completed for some subjects. It has been noticed that some fake letters have been circulated on social media to create confusion and anxiety among students. The helpline aims to ease stress among students.”

Any student enrolled in the varsity campus and seeking counseling can contact the helpline number daily from 11 am to 1 pm. In the last five days, it has received over 25 calls. Officials said they have also received some calls from students studying in colleges affiliated to the university, but they too were counseled.

Amit Verma, assistant professor, pharmacy, MJP Rohilkhand University, said, “To reach out to more students, we first created WhatsApp groups of class representatives from 21 departments. We shared videos, articles and other important documents on mental health, anxiety and stress. The class representatives later formed other WhatsApp groups with fellow students, and shared the videos and documents.”

Apart from Verma, professor K K Maheshwari of the pharmacy department is also managing the helpline. 

Verma added, “To facilitate students, we first send them a questionnaire soon that they can self check if they have anxiety or stress. Once that is done, we counsel them.”


