Roof to food: Heroes of lockdown offer all
2020-03-28
Spark of human kindness is lighting up India in these gloomy days. If there are some offering help to our frontline Covid warriors, others are making an all-out effort to see that no one goes hungry — be it a human being or an animal. 

A final-year student at Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI) in Kolkata convinced her father to give out their two flats rent-free to health workers who are being ostracised for “handling infection”. After the 26-year-old’s post on social media, two doctors and a nurse got in touch with her on Thursday.

Suchana Saha had been upset ever since she read about the humiliation and abuse that frontline health workers treating Covid-19 patients were facing. Her businessman father owns two flats in Kolkata that had been given out on rent till six months ago. She sought his permission and put out a post, which post had been shared 1.4k times .


Sharing, Not Hoarding

At a time when some people are stockpiling and hoarding essential items, there are some who are sharing what they have with strangers. Noorul Khan, a small-time caterer from Kurla, and his friends have been serving food to nearly 200 homeless or stranded people since the lockdown to check the spread of coronavirus was announced on Tuesday.

Khan says his catering business is at a standstill but the losses are not keeping him from helping the needy. He is using the rice and foodgrains that he has in stock to make food packets for the needy in Mumbai.



Feeding The Strays Too

A group of animal lovers in Kolkata have formed online groups to feed stray dogs and cats in neighbourhoods around them. With the city in lockdown and no leftovers from shops that stray animals survive on, this people have it upon themselves that no animal goes hungry. 

Fashion designer Nandita Thirani has contacted people in her apartment off Theatre Road to join her in feeding strays and asked them to put their leftovers and a little extra in boxes at specific points from where she will pick up and distribute. 



And Those in Quarantine

In Thiruvananthapuram, eight women in a Kudumbashree unit are toiling day in and out to feed around 200 people in care homes who have been kept under isolation in the city. 

