Row heats up in UK over lockdown curbs
2020-05-25
London: A moderate Sikh has been forced to quit a government taskforce set up to develop the plan for reopening places of worship in Britain as a row escalates over how and when gurdwaras should reopen when the lockdown eases. Barrister Jasvir Singh, chair of professional networking organisation City Sikhs, who was awarded an OBE in 2017, stepped down on Saturday.

Jasvir Singh made a personal decision to step down from the places of worship taskforce, a government spokesperson said. “Since his appointment, he has experienced a sustained campaign of abuse, intimidation, and threats against him and his family and we condemn this in the strongest possible terms. A replacement is being worked out.”

The Sikh Federation (UK) had issued an open statement 48 hours after Jasvir’s appointment, backed by some gurdwaras and Sikh organisations, rejecting Jasvir and the taskforce and giving the government a five day ultimatum “to properly engage with gurdwaras”. Within three days, Gurmail Singh Malhi, president of Sri Guru Singh Sabha Southall, was swiftly invited to take part in a Zoom call with the taskforce, but minutes before he backed out.

Jas Singh, advisor to the SFUK, said gurdwaras were angry that the government “put us in the same category as pubs and nightclubs,” which are tentatively scheduled to reopen on July 4. “If you are allowing people to go back to work, then you should also be allowing us back to gurdwaras.”

The Sikh Council UK has already published detailed guidance on the safe reopening of gurdwaras based on inputs from Sikh medical professionals, he pointed out. “We plan to open gurdwaras up this week to anyone wishing to undertake 'sewa'. They were never closed as gurdwaras have served one million meals throughout the pandemic. Now we want to extend it for wider use so that people can go inside, pay their respects and receive the blessings. We completely reject the advice coming from the government.”

He said gurdwaras rejected Jasvir as their representative because he was not a baptised practising Sikh and the taskforce was considering “no reciting of prayers, no kirtan (communal singing) and no blessing”. “None of that is unacceptable,” he said. “Even during Operation Blue Star, they sang hymns when the gurdwara was being bombed. Is going to the gurdwara more high risk than going to the supermarket? I don’t think so.” 

Jasvir told TOI he had been approached by the government and “told to take on the role”. “I’m not a Khalsa Sikh but I have never claimed to be. I am a practising Sikh, as I attend a gurdwara and I believe in the faith.” 

Jatinder Singh, secretary general of Sikh Council UK, who also sits on the management committee of Guru Nanak Gurdwara, Smethwick, said, “We have been providing meals, mobile langar and PPE throughout the pandemic and then when it came to finding someone from the Sikh faith on the taskforce, we were not consulted and he was imposed on us. Jasvir doesn’t have any relevant experience on how gurdwaras are managed.”


