Row over NMC’s mega quarantine centre near Kalmeshwar, media banned
2020-05-14
Nagpur: A controversy has broken out over the Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s (NMC) ambitious plan to start a mega quarantine centre on 190 acre land of a religious group near Kalmeshwar.

On Wednesday, deputy mayor Manisha Kothe, NMC standing committee chairman Pintu Zalke and health committee chairman Virendra Kukreja visited the spot. Later, district guardian minister Nitin Raut too visited the facility.

The NMC administration claims to have set up around 5,000 beds, and made it ready for use, though no suspect has yet been shifted there.

TOI too visited the venue but police deployed at the entrance said entry has been banned for media by the civic chief. This correspondent found that half of the structure — a sprawling shed stretching over 100 metres — still houses construction material and heavy lifting equipment. TOI couldn’t independently confirm the arrangements in the rest of the structure.

The claims by NMC also seem to be in contravention of the guidelines issued by ministry of family health and welfare (MoFHW). As per the norms, quarantine centres must have rooms or dormitories separated from one another, with in-house capacity of 5 or 10 beds or rooms. However, this shed is open from all sides.

After the showers on Wednesday night, NMC sources said water had entered the shed at many places. The shed may also expose inmates to intense heat as the summer temperature soars later this month. 

No thought for recreation too has been given though norms prescribe it.

Toilets, bathrooms and taps too are for common use, which may increase risk of infection spreading among suspects quarantined here.

In a press release, NMC refuted the claims that arrangements made at the upcoming centre were not in place, though it didn’t issue any fresh photographs or allow media to visit the premises. 

After his visit in the afternoon, NMC standing committee chairman Vijay Zalke said he has made several suggestions as per central government guidelines. “On coming back, I held a meeting with NMC chief medical officer (health) Dr Yogendra Savai and engineers. I told them to follow central government guidelines and they assured me that the instructions would be complied with,” Zalke said.

Zalke said the arrangements seemed to be satisfactory but needed some improvements. Some of the suggestions Zalke made are in line with SOPs set out by MoFHW.

NMC has created several blocks within the space frame structure. In one block, 200 positive persons will be kept. Zalke suggested there should be no mixing of positive persons with suspected patients. Washroom for positive patients too must be separate. 

Zalke said bedsheets and pillows, which were earlier kept on the beds have been removed. “Since there is no one there now, there is no need to leave them on,” he said.


