Goa: Rs 1,400 crore Zuari bridge hit by coronavirus
2020-03-12
PANAJI: The eight-lane, over Rs 1,400 crore Zuari bridge project is set to become an unlikely victim of the novel coronavirus.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

As work of installing pipes for cabling in the superstructure of the bridge is to begin, suppliers of the cables from China and the design experts from Shanghai and Paris, who were to arrive in Goa soon have had to put off their travel plans after the central government suspended all visas and e-visas granted to nationals of France and China due to Covid-19.

“The supplier of the cables has already written to us that they are unable to travel due to travel restrictions in place because of the coronavirus. There are no experts in the field in India,” the bridge contractor, Dilip Buildcon vice-president (constructions) Atul Joshi said.

“We were to begin installing the pipes for cabling and then begin the cabling. The new bridge project has a complex design and before starting the work, we wanted the cable suppliers and the design experts to take a look at the calculations,” he said.

The new bridge over Zuari has many unique features, which will be a first in India. It will be the widest cable-stayed bridge in the country at 54m.

French bridge specialist Erwan Vicat of Paris-based Ingerop in association with Infinite Civil Solutions has done the technical design of the bridge. Similarly, Dewei Chan of Tongji University, Shanghai, who has checked the bridge design proof, was also scheduled to arrive in Goa along with an Ingerop expert.

“We were to carry out the cabling in June-July after advice in the calculations from the design experts. We will begin the work at our end. But now it is difficult to say when the experts will be able to travel to Goa. If the situation does not ease, work will definitely be affected,” Joshi said.

The bridge work has already been delayed and it is now scheduled to open for use in December 2021. One four-lane section was expected to open for use before this date.

The bridge and the approach roads are being constructed by Bhopal-based Dilip Buildcon in a joint venture with Ukrainian company Mostobudivelnyi Zahin Ltd (MBZ).

Once completed, it will be the second largest cable bridge lengthwise in the country after Vidyasagar Setu in Kolkata.

The new eight-lane bridge will be an expressway of sorts connecting North and South Goa. 


