Rs 10 lakh relief to kin of ‘Covid-19 ‘warriors’ who lose lives to virus in Uttarakhand
2020-04-11
DEHRADUN: Replacing its previous scheme of providing Rs 4 lakh insurance cover to personnel involved in the fight against Covid-19, the Uttarakhand government has announced to give Rs 10 lakh compensation to the next of kin of officials, employees and outsourced staff, if they lost their lives while performing their duties in the fight against Covid-19. Besides, this scheme will also include mediapersons, who have been on he field covering the crisis.


The state government has also announced to provide free medical treatment to the ‘Covid-19 warriors’ if they were infected by the disease. The compensation amount as well the expense of treatment would be provided through the Chief Minister Relief Fund. The new decision doesn’t extend to doctors, nurses, technicians, ward boys, outsourced and contract employees who have already been given a Rs 50 lakh insurance cover by the central government. 

Speaking on the matter, CM Rawat said, “We respect the work and dedication shown by our warriors involved in this mission. Therefore, a decision was taken to replace insurance with assurance and we have announced to give Rs 10 lakh compensation to the next of kin of those officials, employees, outsourced workers and mediapersons, who are putting their life at risk for the state and society.” 

Urban development minister and state government spokesperspon Madan Kaushik said, “The government decided that it must do more for those warriors who were putting their life at stake. Therefore, a Rs 10 lakh compensation was announced. In addition, we will provide free medical treatment to any personnel involved in the fight, who is infected by coronavirus.” 

He added that the state government has announced to release Rs 10 crore from CM Relief Fund to state medical education department. “The amount is being released to help the department to increase the bed capacity and arrangements in the state medical colleges. The state government has also reserved a budget of Rs 60 crore for the efforts to fight coronavirus,” he said. 

Meanwhile, the donations to fight coronavirus continued on Friday with the IAS association providing a donation of Rs 5 lakh. 

IAS officer Manisha Panwar handed over a Rs 5 lakh cheque to CM Trivendra Singh Rawat.

The Food Safety Inspectors’ body also pledged a day’s salary. Food Safety Inspector Ramesh Singh said that if required, their team was willing to contribute more for the purpose. 


