Civil hospital to hire 350 paramedicos
2020-04-04
AHMEDABAD: Civil hospital authorities invited applications for temporary recruitment of medical and paramedical staff for the new Covid-19 hospital on their campus in the Asarwa area of city, but barely any candidates turned up on Friday morning. 

Many of the candidates for posts of paramedical staff said the hospital authorities were offering a meagre salary of Rs 13,000 a month and this was the reason for the low turnout.

Civil hospital authorities, through the district collector, invited applications 90 posts of specialist pulmonologists, five anaesthetists, 165 posts of medical officers (MBBS) and 700 posts of nursing staff for the Covid-19 hospital that has been set up at the 1,200 bed hospital on the Civil Hospital campus. 

On Tuesday morning, just 300 candidates turned up for nursing staff posts and there were very few applicants for the posts of specialists and medical officers. A resident of Vadaj, who has been working at a private hospital in Thaltej, said he has been a staff nurse for seven years and gets a monthly salary of Rs 18,000. 

"Here, they are offering just Rs 13,000 to work with coronavirus patients and the post is also temporary. The hospital authority should at least promise us a contract of a year,” said the candidate, the sole earning member in a family of six.

Another candidate from Vatva, who works for a private hospital on SG Road, said no one would risk their life for such meagre pay. 

“I am the only earning member of my family. Civil Hospital should at least offer more salary than private hospitals. I get Rs 20,000 per month at a private hospital. I came here with the hope that they may give me a permanent posting,” said the candidate. Superintendent of Civil Hospital, Dr Gunwant Rathod, said that he was unaware of the recruitment number of recruitment and issued a gag order on media coverage. 

Hospital authorities did not also properly manage social distancing between candidates. There was also a one-hour lunch break for interviewers, between 2pm and 3pm, leaving candidates sitting in the sun.


