Rs 13 lakh burgled, Covid-hit family accuses cops of laxity
2020-04-15
Bareilly: Police have registered an FIR against unidentified robbers, who burgled a house in Bareilly’s Subhash Nagar allegedly on Sunday night, which belongs to a family of six, all of whom had been kept under isolation elsewhere since March 29, after they all tested positive for Covid-19. The burglars managed to decamp with cash and jewelry worth Rs 13 lakh, said the 34-year-old house owner, who was discharged from hospital on Monday, after he tested negative.

So far, police have gathered CCTV footages, made a list of all history-sheeters in Subhash Nagar, and detained some suspects for questioning.

The house owner told TOI, “Nearly Rs 25,000 in cash, a laptop and jewelry worth Rs 13 lakh is missing from the locker. My parents will be in a better position to say if something else is missing, but they are still in isolation at this moment. Once we were identified, we were immediately shifted to hospital and not given much time to lock the house properly. Ideally, police should ensure security of the house of Covid-19 patients who are relocated to hospitals. After the virus affected us socially, this robbery has affected us financially.”

The incident has also raised questions over police’s vigil in the area. All 25 entry/exit points of Subhash Nagar were officially sealed by police recently, after some Covid-19 cases were found here. Police claimed they have been monitoring the entire area with drones, and carefully scanning passes of everyone entering or leaving the locality.

Subhash Nagar SHO Harishchandra Joshi told TOI, “The lock of the house was found intact on Sunday evening, but broken by Monday afternoon. It’s evident the robbery took place on Sunday night. We’ve filed an FIR under IPC sections 457 (house breaking by night) and 380 (theft in dwelling house). We will add charges of violation of lockdown guidelines, etc., after the accused is arrested. We have collected CCTV footage and identified some suspects. We’ll soon have a breakthrough in this case.”


