Rs 1L Vande flight ticket, hotel quarantine too expensive for many stuck abroad
2020-05-14
Mumbai: Even as the Indian government readies the second phase of its Air India repatriation flights, named Vande Bharat Mission, for the scores of Indians stranded abroad—thousands of students in the US and the UK who lost their part-time jobs due to Covid-19 lockdowns and can’t pay for rent and food; the jobless lot in Europe and UAE, that is—the opportunity means nothing as they cannot afford the Rs 1 lakh or so needed to fly back home and stay in 14-day hotel quarantine. 

“For many of the 6,000-8,000 Indian students in the UK, the high costs of travel and quarantine has made it difficult for them to return to India; many have lost their part-time jobs,” said Sanam Arora, chairperson of NISAU, an umbrella organisation for Indian students in the UK.

With Air India operating the patriotically named Vande Bharat Mission, scores of Indians had assumed these flights to be like those saviour mass evacuation operations carried out in the past by the national carrier wherein lakhs of Indians were flown home from war zones, free of cost. When they signed up with the Indian embassies they learnt about the rather high airfare and the mandatory 14-day paid institutional quarantine.

In March, the government had allowed returnees to do home quarantine, but the plan had failed. For the current lot, depending on the hotel, it costs Rs 4,000-7,000 per day for quarantine stay and three meals, which spikes the return cost by Rs 50,000 or more. Then again, one-way economy class air fare on AI repatriation flight costs about Rs 55,000 for a flight from London, over Rs 1 lakh for a flight from San Francisco and Rs 35,000 from Dubai.

Sydney-based Amit Sharma of Pricebeat Travel, who had handled ticketing for Delhi-Sydney Singapore Airlines repatriation flight, said: “The ticket prices are a bit higher in the repatriation flights as they fly empty one way so passengers are paying for a round trip ticket. Only single sector is used while other sectors remain empty. Also, the tickets are offered at one single price in repatriation flights. In the normal flight, the airline divides all the economy class seats at different levels offering same ticket at low as well as high price.”

But that is of little solace to passengers who had already paid for return tickets. Samarth PV, who flew to Abu Dhabi in January on a three-month visit visa to job hunt, said: “I had paid for my April 7 return ticket to Bengaluru on IndiGo, but the flight was cancelled due to lockdown. I have no money to pay for another flight and quarantine charges. I live in a shared space and I yet pay rent for the month. I can afford only one meal a day. I went to the Indian Embassy and to my surprise it was shut and a security personnel posted outside was responding to stranded Indians queries.” Hoping that the Indian government will fly back the Indians whose flights were cancelled due to lockdown, on April 12 he had tweeted: “This is my request to the government of India to repatriate its citizens from UAE at the earliest. Every single day is hard to live...”

Nerul-based Dennis D’Souza’s 60-year old wife who had travelled to London to see their daughter got stranded after her March 29 London-Mumbai Air India flight got cancelled due to lockdown. “She managed to get a two months visa extension. We had paid Rs 52,000 for the return flight, booked last year. But then had to pay Rs 27,000 paid extra to Air India for the repatriation flight.”

Then there are those who are thankful for the repatriation flights. Eighteen-year old Rahul Sondi, studying in London, boarded the AI flight to Mumbai, on the day he was evicted by his landlord. “Since the UK visa allows 20 hours per week of work, most Indian students do part-time and earn enough to pay rent. I was having meals at a community kitchen and awaiting eviction when my parents bought me the AI ticket back home,” he said. “After the UK went into lockdown in last week of March, restaurants, gyms, malls closed and part-time jobs vanished. Every week, many Indian students are being evicted from their homes. Many have been starving. It’s pitiful, most can’t afford to fly home due to the high costs.”


