Tamil Nadu: Rs 50 lakh, job for kin if frontline staff die of Covid
2020-04-23
CHENNAI: Chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami on Wednesday announced a solatium of Rs 50 lakh and a job to the kin of frontline staff who die in Covid-19 battle. This comes amid huge outrage among doctors over denial of dignity in death to healthcare professionals. The chief minister also interacted with the doctors, nurses and Covid-19 patients who were to be discharged from Rajiv Gandhi General Hospital and Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital through video conference.


In an official statement, the chief minister recalled the medical insurance cover of Rs 50 lakh announced by the Union government for health workers fighting Covid-19 in government hospitals and healthcare centres. “The families of frontline workers of departments such as health, police and local administration, and the sanitation staff, who are engaged in preventive measures against coronavirus and die due to the infection, will get a solatium of Rs 50 lakh instead of Rs 10 lakh announced earlier by me,” Palaniswami said. A family member will also be provided with a government job based on their qualification.

Stating that it was the duty of the state government to show gratitude to deceased staff, Palaniswami said the government would take action to bury the body in a safe and dignified manner. The state government will confer the highest award and certification to honour the service of private and public staff, including doctors, nurses and health workers, who lose their lives while engaged in coronavirus preventive work, he said.

If an employee of a private hospital is infected with coronavirus, all employees in the section will be screened as per the guidelines. The section will be allowed to continue to function only after complete preventive measures are taken, he said.

On Tuesday, Palaniswami and his deputy O Panneerselvam expressed anguish over the violent attack by a section of people on funeral procession of neurosurgeon Dr Simon Hercules, who died of Covid-19. “Healthcare professionals, sanitary workers and local body staff forget their families and work selflessly to prevent the spread of virus. I consider them equivalent to God,” Palaniswami said, assuring suitable action to prevent such incidents. He said the doctors and field level workers need not fear and that the government stood by them.


