Ruckus at Gandhi hospital as Covid victim’s kin attack doctor
2020-06-10
HYDERABAD: Doctors on duty at the state-run Gandhi hospital's Covid-19 wards in Hyderabad are on a dharna after a colleague was assaulted by relatives of a Covid-19 patient who died late on Tuesday.

Police rushed to the spot after the doctor was injured and since then nearly 100 junior doctors and residents are protesting and raising slogans of ‘we want justice’ till last reports. 

Witnesses said, attendants of the Covid-19 positive patient attacked a PG medico at the hospital during late evening hours, leading to protests, even as authorities said six persons died from coronavirus and 178 more tested positive on Tuesday. While the total coronavirus count now stands at 3,920, the death toll stood at 148 with the latest casualties.

The incident happened after a 55-year-old male patient succumbed at the ward.

“The patient had diabetes and hypertension and the poor prognosis was explained to the attendants. The patient was asked not to leave the bed but the patient went to the toilet where he collapsed and succumbed,” said Dr G Srinivas, president Resident Doctors Association (RDA).

“The attendant got information about the death and hit the duty doctor first with a plastic stool and later with an iron stool which hit the doctor on the hip. There was not a single cop present in the 65-bed ward,” said Dr Srinivas.

He said that to decrease the workload on doctors, it was necessary to decentralise treatment of patients from Gandhi hospital to other hospitals such as Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), Niloufer Hospital and Osmania General Hospital.

The junior and resident doctors have demanded immediate posting of special protection forces at every Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and all floors of the hospital.

“Decentralise Covid-19 cases from Gandhi as it is unable to handle the immense caseload. Also, an FIR should be filed against the culprits,” demanded Telangana Junior Doctor Association (TJUDA).

Hyderabad police commissioner Anjani Kumar said that the accused has been arrested. “On hearing the commotion, our men stationed outside the ward swung into action and prevented further damage and the accused was arrested. We will be initiating stern legal action against the accused. We have 120 cops posted round the clock at the hospital. Anynone who disrupts medical services will be not be spared,” he said.


