Delhi: Lockdown rules to ease, but night check likely
2020-05-17
NEW DELHI: While curbs are likely to be eased from Monday onwards, movement of all individuals for non-essential activities from 9pm to 5am may be strictly prohibited in the city. 

Elderly people, those with comorbidities, pregnant women and children below 10 years of age may have to stay at home, except for meeting essential requirements and health purposes. Violations will invite penal action. All these are part of the recommendations on lockdown post May 17 submitted to the Centre by Delhi government.

Meanwhile, standard operating procedures (SOPs) for running markets, public transport and other economic activities are being prepared by different departments to ensure that the markets, malls, shopping complexes, construction sites and public transport do not turn into coronavirus spreader if they are allowed to open.

An official said that the purpose behind 9pm to 5am curbs is that enforcement of various norms like social distancing and people sticking to the public transport SOPs becomes challenging at night. “The presence of police at night is less,” the official added.

In Delhi, all private offices may be allowed to work with 50% of their staff. Earlier, the limit was restricted to 33%. Frequent sanitisation of the offices, apart from other precautionary measures, may be made mandatory.

In a letter to the Prime Minister, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal has stated that the relaxations may cause some increase in Covid-19 cases, but the government has made arrangements for hospitals, oxygen, ventilators, ambulances, ICU, etc, to deal with the situation.

Batra Hospital and Research Centre (50 isolation beds) in Tughlaqabad industrial area and Cygnus Orthocare Hospital (40 isolation beds) in Safdarjung development area were on Saturday declared as a Covid hospital for admitting confirmed and suspected cases of the novel coronavirus.

The Chamber of Trade and Industries has arranged for 100 machines for sanitisation in various markets. “The traders are committed to seeking a balance between resuming economic activities and making sure that the coronavirus does not spread,” said AAP trade wing chief Brijesh Goyal. No relaxation is expected in containment zones.


