Rumours of coronavirus patients in city, Doon Hosp says no such case
2020-03-06
DEHRADUN/UTTARKASHI: After rumours of coronavirus patients being admitted in Dehradun’s Government District Medical College Hospital (GDMC) went viral on social media, the hospital authorities on Thursday clarified that no such patient was being treated in their hospital or any of the private hospitals in the city.


The clarification came a day after a letter, allegedly written by the head of GDMCH’s forensic medicine department, claimed that more masks and sanitisers were needed as some patients of coronavirus were admitted in a private hospital in the city.

“We have received one patient from a private hospital earlier this week, but he wasn’t suffering from coronavirus. We had sought an explanation from our forensic science department and their explanation proved that the alleged letter was fake. People are advised not to take every information from social media seriously,” said the principal of GDMC, Dr Ashutosh Sayana.

He added, “We do have N-95 masks, but those masks are only meant to be worn when we come in contact with someone affected with the virus. Otherwise, surgical masks are enough for routine use.”

The news of an Afghan national suffering from coronavirus and admitted in a city-based hospital was also widely circulated on social media which, too, was termed fake by the health department. The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) through an advisory issued on Wednesday, has also allowed the students giving board examinations to carry masks as well as sanitisers with them while appearing for the examinations. 

Meanwhile, trekking tour operators and hoteliers in Uttarkashi said tourists from Italy, America and Japan have cancelled their bookings in bulk due to the virus scare.

“Nearly one dozen foreign tourist groups from America, Japan, Italy, Korea and France have cancelled their bookings due to coronavirus. All of them were scheduled to visit Uttarkashi for mountaineering and trekking activities in the first week of April,” Jayendra Rana, president of Himalayan Mountaineering and Trekking Association, Uttarkashi, told TOI.


