Covid-19 in Delhi: Rumours galore, experts urge people not to panic, stay alert
2020-03-15
NEW DELHI: Mihir Sen, a marketing executive based in Delhi, has taken a month off from work without pay to keep the novel coronavirus at bay. He plans to stay in Rishikesh for a while, until Covid-19 cases come down.

Suruchi Verma says she is scared to let her children go to the park or even take them outdoors for a while. “Every person who enters my house is being told to first use hand sanitiser,” she says.

Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, has been declared a global pandemic by WHO. It has no treatment and there is no preventive vaccine available for the disease either. Therefore, some amount of fear and anxiety among people is understandable. Problem arises when fear and anxiety lead to discrimination.

 
 
Verma says rumours are flying on her society’s WhatsApp group about certain neighbour’s kids studying in a school which had been closed recently because one of the parents had tested positive for Covid-19 or another family had just returned from Europe. “While nobody can confirm any of the rumours, everyone is steering clear of each other and acting suspicious,” she says.


Coronavirus outbreak live coverage

TOI had reported on Friday how people were skipping appointments for surgery and consultation for the fear of contracting Covid-19 at hospitals. “Some patients are upfront in stating their scare of getting infected in the hospital while the others request postponing the surgery on some pretext or another,” Dr Sushil Sharma, a senior orthopaedic and joint replacement surgeon at Kailash Super Specialty Hospital, told TOI.

Panic buying of masks, which are not required to be used by healthy people, is another example of anxiety and fear leading to extraordinary measures for protection. “Recently, there have been reports of people buying masks and surgical gloves in large quantities to save themselves from coronavirus infection. It doesn’t serve any purpose. Hand washing with simple soap and water and following respiratory etiquettes are good enough,” said an ICMR expert.

Nonetheless, the fear persists. It prevails not just in India, but also across countries that have been affected by the novel coronavirus.

The department of mental health of WHO has, therefore, come up with an advisory for support for psychological wellbeing during the outbreak. It suggests people shouldn’t associate the disease with any ethnicity or nationality. “Those with the disease have not done anything wrong,” the advisory says, adding that Covid-19 patients should be referred to as “people who have Covid-19,” “people who are being treated for Covid-19,” or “people who are recovering from Covid-19.”

The global health body stresses on avoiding watching, reading or listening to news that cause distress or anxiety. Instead, WHO suggests seeking factual information to take practical steps to protect loved ones.

“A near-constant stream of news reports about an outbreak can cause anyone to feel anxious or distressed,” WHO’s advisory states.

The advisory says that if someone is isolated or quarantined, he or she can stay connected with family, friends through digital methods. “If you have an underlying health condition, make sure to have access to any medications that you are currently using,” it adds.


