Coronavirus scare in Delhi: Rumours make people rush for bulk buying
2020-03-20
NEW DELHI: Kusum Sehgal reached her local supermarket in Malviya Nagar, south Delhi, early in the morning. Usually, she replenishes her stock of groceries and other stuff at the beginning of the month, but on Thursday, she decided not to wait for another 10 days. “We have bought some extra pulses, aata, biscuits, vegetables, non-perishables and noodles. You never know when the shops will run out of these items and a lockdown is announced,” she explained.


The coronavirus scare had led to panic buying in the past few days but on Thursday local markets across the capital witnessed a rare frenzy. Anxious people were propelled by rumours of markets closing down and the spectre of shortages crowded grocery shops and pharmacies. Ignoring clarifications by the Government and traders’ associations that there was no shortage, they bought stuff in bulk.


TimesViewTaking precautions at a time like this is understandable. But there is a thin line that separates being cautious from succumbing to panic. Hoarding essentials because you believe they might not be available tomorrow is certainly on the dangerous side of that line, as the PM pointed out in his address to the nation. It only adds another chaotic element to an already grim situation. There is absolutely no reason to believe that we are running out of supplies of goods of daily consumption and hence no cause for panic buying. Remember, your hoarding up for a month could well make it impossible for someone who needs rice, wheat or dal for next week to find them. 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his address later in the evening, assured citizens that there won’t be any shortage of supplies and appealed to them not to hoard. “Please don’t race to hoard these things. Just buy like you normally do. Panic buying is wrong,” he added.

Shivam Singh, a resident of Munirka, said he was out to replenish his stock of insulin. “The government will not close chemist shops but it is better to keep your own stock as others may start hoarding leading to a shortage. You don’t know what may happen tomorrow,” he added.

Defence Colony residents reported panic buying across grocery stores. “Home deliveries have been stopped by most shops as they don't have enough staff to meet the demand. Defence Store, Le Marche, Modern Bazaar etc have long queues as everyone fears a lockdown from tomorrow,” one of the residents said. Bhavreen Kadhari, a resident, she couldn’t find any milk. “I got a call from my niece who needed milk and it wasn’t available. There were long queues outside Krishna Super Marche,” she said.

Harjinder Saroha of Vasant Kunj RWA said a lot of hoarding was being reported from grocery shops. “Whatsapp messages and rumours floating in social media have led people to believe that a shutdown will be announced. We are holding awareness sessions with our staff and maids,” he added. Kapil Kakkar from Jangpura Extension and Rajiv Kakria from GK-I acknowledged that people were stocking up. “Some vegetable vendors spread the scare that Azadpur Mandi may be closed down but a video from the mandi chairman cleared the air,” he added.

Sanhita Mandal of C R Park said prices of some veggies had been arbitrarily hiked. Pinaki Das, who had gone out to buy some stuff at one of the local markets in the area said there was such a rush, with people scurrying around wearing masks, that he returned home.

Many marts and bigger outlets reported that they were facing a shortage from wholesale vendors. Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) clarified that so far no trade association has taken any decision to close markets. “However, if the government takes any such decision, traders will comply,” said Praveen Khandelwal, general secretary of CAIT said.

Many people who reached the shops late and couldn’t get the items they were seeking tried to order on online platforms with mixed results.


