Coronavirus in Delhi: Rumours send people rushing for groceries
2020-03-19
NEW DELHI: The mad rush to buy a huge quantity of groceries and vegetables accelerated on Wednesday following rumours that the government was going to close down all wholesale markets and retail shops in the capital to prevent novel coronavirus from spreading.


Coronavirus in India live updates

While social media was abuzz with such messages advising people to stock groceries, non-perishable vegetables and other essentials, hawkers selling veggies in various residential colonies also urged people to buy in large quantities as wholesale markets may close down soon.

“In Delhi, all shops in Sadar Bazar, Old Delhi, Gandhi Nagar, Karol Bagh, Kamla Nagar and all major wholsale markets etc will be closed from tomorrow till April 15. May be Reliance marts, Big Bazaar etc will be closed as well for a month. Same might be applicable in Maharashtra and other states as well. Notice has been issued today to all stores (sic),” said the message that was circulating on WhatsApp on Wednesday.

Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT), an apex body of business community, however, clarified that such messages were only rumours. “So far no trade association has taken any decision to close the markets,” CAIT national president BC Bhartia and secretary general Praveen Khandelwal said in a joint statement.

The CAIT, however, added that the traders will comply with the government’s decision if it decided to close any market.

At Azadpur, Asia’s biggest agricultural produce market, traders said there was absolutely no plan to shut down the wholesale market. Azadpur Agricultural Market Produce Committee (APMC) chairman Adil Ahmad Khan said in view of rumours he issued a video statement and posted on twitter as well as all WhatsApp groups of traders and other people advising them to be careful of such false messages.

“Some anti-social elements are spreading rumours that wholesale markets like Azadpur and others are being closed down in wake of novel coronavirus. This is absolutely false,” Khan said.

Vegetable Traders’ Association general secretary Anil Malhotra said, “There is absolutely no shortfall of any vegetable or fruit.” He, however, added that the government had made no arrangement to prevent spread of novel coronavirus in wholesale markets. 


