Covid-19 in Chandigarh: Rumour mill churns chaos at Sector 26 mandi
2020-03-20
CHANDIGARH: While UT adviser Manoj Parida was announcing a slew of measures to control the spread of coronavirus, there was panic buying of groceries and vegetables at Sector 26 vegetable and grain market on Thursday. 


Residents were seen stocking ration and vegetables after rumours of city lockdown went viral on social media. To control the mad rush at Sector 26 market, SHO of Sector 26 police station Narinder Patial was forced to make a public announcement, stating there was no proposal of the UT administration to close down the mandi, grocery and chemist shops. 

The panic buying even led to huge traffic jams at all entry points of the Sector 26 market. 

Earlier in the day, Parida addressed a press conference after the city’s first coronavirus positive case was reported. He ordered closure of all sports complexes, government and private sports academies till March 31. Besides, the UT administration identified two more quarantine facilities in the city, including Parkview Hotel in Sector 24 and Panchayat Bhawan in Sector 18. The administration has already made Infosys Sarai in PGI a quarantine facility. 

The UT adviser also clarified that the administration would not close down any market or weekly apni mandis and that more space would be made for wholesalers in Sector 26 mandi by using the truck parking lot. There would be no retail selling at the Sector 26 grain market, the adviser added. 

On public transport, the UT adviser said there was no ban on movement of inter-state buses of Chandigarh Transport Undertaking (CTU) as of now. The instructions have been given for keeping adequate distance between passengers and sanitisation of buses was on, he added. 

Govt, pvt offices open: Adviser 

Manoj Parida said there would be no closure of government and private offices. The UT would prepare a list of essential and non-essential services, and accordingly take a decision, he added. 

TASK MANAGERS

The overall responsibility for contact tracing and offering further advice of home quarantine will be of Anil Garg, additional commissioner, municipal corporation, Chandigarh. He can associate any municipal corporation employee with him for this purpose. A police team will also be provided for enforcing home quarantine. The contact list will be provided by the director, health services, after accessing the patient and family. A stamp, similar to what is being done at the Mumbai International Airport, will be marked on the back of right palm, mentioning the 14 days’ quarantine period.

Two to five employees of each department trained as master trainers with the help of medical experts will be provided by director, health services. Director, school and higher education, Rubinderjit Singh Brar will be the overall in-charge for co-ordinating the training to master trainers and their training the employees of the respective departments.

The overall strategy in ensuring food supply in case of extreme crisis will be of director, sports, Tejdeep Saini. He will interact with the deputy commissioner to prepare the strategy and act accordingly.

Rakesh Kumar Popli, additional excise and taxation commissioner, will interact with the deputy commissioner for essential goods and supplies to the hospitals like masks, sanitisers and personal protective equipment.

Uma Shankar Gupta, director, transport, will be in-charge of quarantine facilities to be created in lnfosys Sarai, Parkview Hotel (on payment basis) and Panchayat Bhawan or any other facility decided to be created. 


