Covid-19 scare in Aurangabad: Rumours circulating in social media kill region’s poultry business
2020-03-14
AURANGABAD: The outbreak of coronavirus in the country has taken a toll on the business of poultry farmers in Marathwada, especially for those who recently switched to this trade after facing mounting debts and losses due to the frequent agrarian crisis resulting from successive droughts in the region. 


With rumours and false messages claiming that coronavirus is resulting from consuming chicken making rounds in social media, the demand for poultry among traders and consumers has nosedived in an unprecedented manner, forcing the region’s poultry farmers to bury thousands of ‘ready-to-be-sold’ hens alive. Those in the business say that the situation is no different for poultry farmers elsewhere in the state as well as across the country.

Before the rumours started spreading on social media, a kg of poultry chicken was selling for somewhere between Rs 150 and Rs 200 in the market. Now, the price of poultry at farm-gate level has notched down to a record low of anything between Rs 10 and Rs 20 per kilogram. 

Those in the poultry business claim that in each of the eight districts, farmers have incurred an average loss of over Rs 100 crore due to the circulation of rumours and false messages on social media. Feroz Khan from Jalna, the region’s leading veterinary associated with the poultry business, said, “In a district like Jalna, about 300 poultry farmers have sustained a loss of around Rs 50 lakh each. Collectively, their losses stand at about Rs 150 crore.” 

A couple of days ago, poultry farmer Subhash Nirgude from Aundha Nagnath in Hingoli district buried 20,000 hens alive. “The poultry that we readied at a cost of about Rs 100 is now being purchased for Rs 10/kg because of the rumours. If the fully grown poultry is not purchased immediately by the traders, feeding the hens everyday starts punching deep holes in our pockets,” said Nirgude.

Echoing concerns of those rearing poultry, farmer activists said that marginal farmers with little or no land holdings from the drought-prone region had recently switched to poultry farming. “The circulation of rumours has ruined the poultry businesses to such an extent that farmers have no option but to commit suicide,” said Vijay Patil, a poultry farmer.

Taking cognizance of the circulation of false messages causing damage to the chicken, mutton and seafood industries, chairperson (CAC and CEO) of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) S S Ayangar said last week, “There is a misconception that coronavirus will spread through chicken, mutton and seafood. There is nothing like that. It is scientifically not proven. I am a scientist. I will not buy this argument.”

Despite this statement coming from the country’s FSSAI chief, rumours are still afloat in social media platforms, taking a toll on the poultry, seafood and mutton industries.

With no union or association of poultry farmers in the region, small groups of farmers have started coming together for making representations to the respective district administrations while demanding compensation and relief packages.

Agitated farmers are even demanding registration of offences against those circulating and forwarding false messages on social media. “Offences should be registered against those spreading false rumours and creating panic among people, which in turn is eating into our businesses,” said Yashwant Jadhav, a farmer from Parbhani district. 


