Runaway man stuck during lockdown returns home
2020-04-13
NASHIK: A 26-year-old Dhule man who had left his home in a fit of rage and got stranded in Jain Bhavan in Nashik Road during lockdown finally returned home with the help of his parents on Sunday. 


Suraj Bijali, senior PI of Nashik Road police station said, “Girish Kunwar was among the people who got stranded in the Nashik Road area after the lockdown was announced on March 24. We had picked up approximately 70 people from the Nashik Road and Upnagar areas and had arranged for their lodging and boarding facility at the Jain Bhavan in Nashik Road.”

Subsequently, Kunwar got in touch with his parents. After getting the necessary police permission, his parents travelled to Nashik Road and took him home. 

In a video released by the police, Kunwar spoke about how he left his house and came to Nashik Road. He also narrated how he lingered on the streets for two days before he was spotted by the police and taken to Jain Bhavan. 

Suraj Bijali said that there were many people who were left on the streets after the lockdown was announced. There were no buses and autorickshaws. “We came across 70 people who were stranded on the streets of Nashik Road,” Bijali said.

“They were taken to the Jain Bhavan in Nashik Road. About 60 people are still in the facility. Kunwar, who was kept in the facility, contacted his parents and informed them about his whereabouts. His parents meanwhile had registered a missing complaint with the Dhule police,” he said.

Meanwhile Kunwar’s mother Chhaya could not hold back her tears while thanking the police for taking care of her son at a time when the entire country was in lockdown.

Senior police officials of the Nashik Road police station said that many people were left stranded during the lockdown. Police said that they also picked up beggars and kept them at a different facility in the city where they were provided with food, new clothes and health check-ups from time to time.

Sham Gohad, co-ordinator of Nashik Road Suraksha Group formed on backdrop of Covid-19 lockdown said, Kunwar had forgotten his cellphone at his residence. Thus, there was no chance that his parents could contact him. After we came to know about his case, we counselled him after which he contacted his parents on Saturday. His parents, who are both teachers, dashed to Nashik Road and took Kunwar home.”


