Runaway Bihar teen unites with family after lockdown in Surat
2020-06-07
SURAT: After almost three months, Subhash Sah (15) met his father Pankaj at a children’s home in the city on Saturday. The misadventure to run away from home has put Subhash in crisis due to the coronavirus-induced nationwide lockdown. Subhash, a resident of Hariharpur in Bihar, was speechless after crying for few moments when he met his father after a long gap.

“I have nothing to say. I want to go back home now,” Subhash told TOI. Subhash told his father that he ran away from home in anger after being scolded. “He ran away on being scolded by family members. But we all were worried about him and we are lucky that we have found him,” said Pankaj. 

Employed in an industry at Vareli in Surat district for 22 years, Pankaj returned to his native around 10 years ago. He believes that Subhash must have come to Surat since he heard many things about the city from him. He left home out of anger after being scolded by his mother and fight with siblings in March. 

He reached Ahmedabad in train and then came to the city in a truck for vegetables. He was found by a woman in Palanpur Jakatnaka area, who took her to his home on March 23. She took his care during the first lockdown but she asked Subhash to leave when the second lockdown was announced. 

Later, Subhash was spotted by Manu Jain, volunteer of Friends For Women and Child (FFWC), on the footpath on April 16. She took her to police and then the boy was admitted in the children’s home. FFWC volunteer Piyush Shah and Jain collected details of Subhash’ native and they contacted the local police in Bihar. They also contacted his father Pankaj and informed him about the rescue. FFWC is an initiative of the women’s cell of CID Crime started by Anil Pratham, additional director general of police. 

“The father came to the city today and he was happy to find his son. Subhash is lucky that he could unite with his family despite adverse situations like lockdown,” said Shah. 

