Runners pace themselves for some lockdown workout
2020-04-13
CHENNAI: In February, when Pan Shancu, a therapist at Hangzhou in China, ran 50km inside his apartment following a coronavirus-triggered lockdown, little did he know he was setting a trend. Weeks later, posts of a couple completing a full marathon (42.2 km) on their 20-metre-long Dubai balcony went viral.


In India, since the 21-day lockdown began on March 24 and many began to work from home, the running community came up with ways to keep running.




Chennai resident Dr Anand is using his terrace and even living room for his daily runs. “I am usually up by 4am and run 5km to 10km. On weekends, the distances tend to get longer. But now, my terrace and living rooms are the only places where I can run,” says the 52-year-old dermatologist, who is part of the Dream Runners.

All members of the community stay in touch with each other and motivate others over WhatsApp groups, sharing their daily running details. “For many runners, the distances they clock have understandably become lesser due to space constraints. But the runners do know it is important to continue with the routine to stay fit,” says Anand.

For Logidhas Rajasekaran, running in a confined space has its challenges. “When you run on a road or at the beach, you have the luxury of varying your speeds. But that’s not the case at the moment as you have to run slow and steady. Also, when you run inside the house, the amount of oxygen is lesser compared to what you get outside,” says the 46-year-old businessman.

He has already completed a few half-marathons (21.1km) in his living room. “With nothing to do the whole day, running keeps me physically active and seeing many of my running partners follow their routines brings an air of positivity.”

Anand feels it takes great character and willpower to be running in such a crisis. “If you can sustain your routines in such a testing time, then you can conquer any distance.”

For many like master athlete and yoga instructor Sundarambal, the lockdown has meant that the distances she clocked in a week have come down. “I run about 3 times a week and do yoga daily in order to remain fit,” says the Canara Bank employee.

Bengaluru-based fitness coach Ranjini Gupta believes runners can use the current period to get their basics right. “I feel running in space constraints can put a lot of stress on your body and can lead to injuries. It is the correct time for runners to make sure they work on their mobility and build strength as they are the basics for any sport.”


