Rural kids leave their mark on Covid-19 awareness drive
2020-04-25
TRICHY: It was a dream-coming-true moment of sorts for class II student K Jiya, as she donned the role of a doctor and spread awareness on how to effectively prevent the Covid-19 outbreak that is terrorising the world now.

The 7-year-old girl of Perambalur district, who aspires to be a doctor, was one among others actively taking part in the initiative by district welfare department to create awareness about measures against the pandemic in Trichy and Perambalur areas.

Carrying stethoscope on her shoulder, the girl from rural Perambalur went on to speak in English in detail on how people should value the service of the doctors and nurses who are at the forefront in the fight against Covid-19. “Self-isolation is the best defence. Maintain social distance and protect yourself and others,” she said.

A small boy dressed as policeman spoke on the struggles of the police in the battle against the pandemic. With folded hands, the boy requested the public not to venture out without valid reason even as the police were also running round the clock for them. “Stay alert for us. Distance yourself for the country. Stay home for tomorrow,” he said in his video.

In another video, R Jovin Marutharaj, 7, of Perambalur district, introduced himself as a social worker and talked at length about the role of the doctors, nurses and sanitary workers in protecting the people from Covid-19. “All should abide by the instructions of the government to drive away the viral disease,” he said.

Besides taking children on board, social welfare department also roped in people in rural areas to talk in the visualised awareness message about the need for being at home. They have recorded their speech and circulated on the social media with a view to achieve the maximum reach.

While awareness message about prevention against Covid-19 was spread through the government officials only, district social welfare department officer A Thamimmunisha has found a novel way by involving children in the endeavour. “It is an effort to make an inclusive programme. Children will have more impact on society,” said Thamimmunisha


