Rural Indore To Breathe Easy In Lockdown 4.0
2020-05-19
Indore: District administration on Monday came out with a separate plan for Lockdown 4.0 by dividing city into three zones – Sensitive zone, Village zone and City zone while giving relaxation for 29 villages of Indore. 

Collector Manish Singh said that they have come with this ‘zone wise’ plan for better enforcement of Lockdown 4.0 that came into effect on Monday. The collector said that they have given liberty in Village Zone by allowing operations of small industrial or commercial activities such as grocery stores, convenience stores, Sanchi points, medical shops, mobile shops, repair shops, laundry that are located in limits of 29 villages from Monday. 

“These establishments will have to operate in closed or covered premises and would not need any special permission for operations and would be allowed to operate between 11.00am and 5.00pm,” said the collector. 

Singh said the lockdown norms for urban areas of city would however continue to be in place and there would not be any changes. 

“We are devising a phase wise strategy to continue with lockdown and give relaxations in the three zones accordingly,” he said adding that working on the same is on. 

He said that ‘sensitive zone’ includes most of the core areas of east parts of city including markets starting from Regal Square to railway station, Sarwate bus stand, Juni Indore, Collectorate, Gangwal bus stand, Bada Ganpati, Subhash Marg, Rajkumar Bridge. 

Village zone has 29 villages including that were included in municipal limits in 2014, and remaining areas of city have been kept under City zone, he said.

The collector said that there would not be any relaxation in sensitive and city zones, and citizens will have to comply with all lockdown restrictions and norms. 

“The city’s centre starting from Regal to Bada Ganpati has maximum number of containment zones and most of the Covid-19 cases were also reported from these areas,” he said adding that on basis of the same they have been kept under Sensitive zone. 

He said that remaining areas have been kept under city zone. “We would soon come out with a separate plan for these two zones,” he said. 

The collector also held a meeting with excise department officials to discuss about measures required for opening liquor outlets of village areas of city.

“Since we have already allowed most of the activities in rural areas and are considering opening of liquor outlets in rural areas from revenue point of view,” said Singh. 


