Rushed from Agra for heart treatment, two-month-old dies of Covid 19 in Jaipur
2020-05-15
JAIPUR: Braving strict lockdown, a family of Agra of UP managed to reach Jaipur’s Sawai Man Singh (SMS) hospital with two-month-old ailing infant but all their efforts went in vain.


The two-month-old boy died after being diagnosed with Covid-19 on Thursday. Infant’s family was advised at their hometown for immediate treatment of the congenital health diseasetosavehis life.They rushed to Jaipur for the treatment and reached on May 13 where JK Lon hospital doctors admitted for his treatment.

Clinically examining the infant, the doctors diagnosed that the infant was suffering from total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC), a congenital heart defect in which the pulmonary veins are not connected to the left atrium, a chamber of the heart through which blood enters the ventricles of the heart.

The doctors took it as an emergency because it is a condition in whichthe veinsbringing blood back from the lungs do not connect to the left atrium like in normal persons. Due to the defect of the veins leading from the lungs to the heart, oxygenatedbloodentersor leaksinto the wrong chamber.

“It is the defect, which needs to be surgically repaired early. The boy was brought to the hospital with difficulty in breathing on May13. Before we could start his treatment, he was tested positive for Covid-19,” said Dr Ashok Gupta, medical superintendent, JK Lon Hospital.

The doctors, preparing for the surgery to repair the defect, followed the Covid-19 protocol and took his samples for Covid-19 test. The boy was tested positive and he was immediately admitted to the Covid-19 ward for his treatment.

He was undergoing treatment at the ICU, but he died on Thursday morning. It was not the youngest Covid-19 death in the state. Seven days ago, a 20-day-old infant boy had died of Covid-19, who was brought to government-run JK Lon hospital in Jaipur in serious condition. The hospital claimed that it is the youngest death happened not only in the state. He died within five hours of his admission to the hospital.

