Covid-19 scare: Rush at Patna stores for essential items
2020-03-20
PATNA: Spooked by the Covid-19 scare, people are stocking up on essential commodities such as rice, flour, cooking oils and spices in the city. Wholesalers, supermarkets and small shop-owners claimed that demand for groceries and packaged food has gone up sharply.

“Masks, handwash and sanitizers are among the top selling items at our store. Grocery items, including wheat flour, pulses, sugar, salt and spices, too are in high demand. Paper towels and packaged food are being sold in large quantities too,” said Vishwakarma, a senior employee at a supermarket near Kurji.

He added: “We have closed the sale of other items, including clothes, in order to limit the crowd. It is only opened for grocery and essential items now.”



Coronavirus in India live updates


Customer care executives at an Exhibition Road supermarket reported a sudden rise in number of customers after the state government ordered closure of malls and public spaces. “We had to reorder several food items twice as the stocks were totally empty. Customers are buying more than they usually do,” said Pramod, a sales executive.

Sales persons at another city supermarket said, “Huge number of customers are visiting to buy groceries items like salt, sugar, salt, rice, flour, pulses, cooking oils as well as ready-to-cook meals and packaged food items like poha and upma.”

He added, “There are no limits set by the store on sale of grocery items as of now. So, residents are buying more than they need with some customers buying food items for two-three months.”

Citing an example of how some customers are emptying the shelves, he said: “A family on Thursday afternoon bought 30kg of rice, 15kg of pulses and 50 packets of biscuits.”

Wholesalers too said they are witnessing a huge rush. “We normally sell items worth Rs 30,000-35,000 a day. But now we are selling items worth Rs80,000-90,000 in a day,” said Bipin Rai, owner of a grocery store in Kadamkuan.

Residents said they are worried about the fact that there might be a lockdown in the coming days. “I have stocked up my kitchen with grocery items for the next three months because of the global outbreak of Covid-19. I have also bought other items like toothpaste, soaps, shampoos, floor cleaner and hand washes,” said Veena Sharan, a resident of Ashiana-Digha Road.


