RWAs impose restrictions on residents to fight virus
2020-03-25
Jaipur: Along with the district administration, many residents’ welfare associations (RWAs) in the city have started enforcing a set of rules to fight the spread of coronavirus. 

As a precautionary measure, many apartments have banned the entry of maids and drivers in the premises. To break the human contact chain, Rangoli Gardens Owner Welfare Society has prohibited the entry of all outside visitors including daily vendors. Bhawani Singh, a resident of the society said, “Since March 21, there has been a ban on the entry of maids, cooks, car cleaners in the premises. Only milk suppliers and newspaper hawkers are allowed. However, their access is till the ground floor of the blocks. Every society needs to take stringent measures likes ours to prevent the virus from spreading.” 

Though, many residents’ associations have not imposed restrictions on the movement of people, they have stopped allowing any doorstep delivery personnel inside the complexes and have asked the residents to either come to the reception and pick the order by themselves or to collect it later from the security personnel. 

However, there are many residential buildings where it is expected that the residents are intelligent enough to follow social distancing because of which no restrictions have been put in place. Anand Jain of Girnar Apartment said, “We have not imposed restrictions on people as they are educated and well-informed. Most of them have isolated themselves on their own, but there are a few elderly members in our society who cannot work without domestic help. It will be unfair to them if we make them do so.” 

Also, there are many apartments where the residents can be seen walking inside the premises without even wearing masks. A resident of Mahima apartment in Jagatpura on the condition of anonymity said, “Many elderly people are walking freely. They are the most vulnerable and restrictions should be imposed on them for their good.” 

While the RWAs have restricted entry of support staff in few areas, the domestic helps are also refraining from coming to work. Sunita Devi, who works as a domestic help in Chitrakoot area said, “It is difficult to travel as all public transport has been stopped. I used to take the bus but it is worrisome to do so with so much news about the virus. Even if I do not get paid, I’d rather not take the risk.” 


