RWAs pull a clean sweep to battle Covid-19
2020-06-08
Hyderabad: As the number of Covid-19 cases continue to surge across the city, resident welfare associations (RWA) have taken it upon themselves to help the society members with procuring essentials and keeping the residential areas sanitised. They were also often seen to be lending help to those who had tested positive. 

While members of Lumbini SLM Springs in Gachibowli rented two trucks to deliver them with essentials and vegetables, Jayabheri Pine Valley (Gachibowli) residents involved their children in community cleaning. 

“Association members of our housing society have ensured that two trucks, one stocked with vegetables and another with essentials, reach our society once a week. The trucks are parked outside the gated community. Most of the residents stock up on their supply from these trucks. These trucks turned to be our saviours, especially during lockdown,” said Swarnalatha, a resident of Lumbini SLN Springs (Gachibowli).

Residents also said that they have utilised the lockdown to teach their children the principle of dignity of labour. “We paid salaries to our housekeeping staff even though they were not allowed inside. We taught our children that the sanitation staffers’ efforts to must always be valued. Residents participated in community cleaning and involved children too. Our aim was to ensure that children understand the concept of dignity of labour,” said Uday Chava, president of Jayabheri Pine Valley. 

“We cleaned common areas, including yards. After the outbreak of Covid-19, elders as well as children have developed immense respect towards domestic workers, especially housekeeping staff and sweepers,” said a resident from the same society. 

Sunil Jain, general secretary of Whisper Valley in Film Nagar, said that his society is ready to serve the resident and stands with the people who are battling Covid-19. “Our society members wish speedy recovery of people who were affected by coronavirus. For safety of our residents, we are conducting fever test and sanitisation,” said Jain. 

KR Rao from Ramky Towers (Mindspace Road) said that residents of their housing society turned into Covid-19 warriors by ensuring social distancing is followed and co-operating with society members during temperature checks.


