Covid-19 lockdown in Delhi: RWAs hesitant to take call on domestic helps
2020-05-04
NEW DELHI: A day after the Centre left it to residents’ welfare associations to decide on allowing domestic helps in their colonies, some initiatives have been started by them after consulting each other. This includes basic health check-up for maids and drivers, thermal scanners to test their temperature and providing them masks.

However, RWAs in Greater Kailash I and II accused the government of passing the buck. They said the government knows the gravity of the situation, but was still making announcements that would lead to arguments and confusion. They are planning to allow domestic helps only in case of emergency or for senior citizens.

Ruby Makhija, a member of Navjivan Vihar RWA, said at least 25 associations jointly pursued Delhi government on Saturday to get clarity on the matter. “We can’t force a decision on residents unless there is a clear-cut order. The announcement by the Centre is like passing the buck. How can we find out if these workers are infected and stop them from visiting houses?” she asked.

The Jangpura Extension RWA has requested residents to avoid calling maids and servants for another week. Kapil Kakkar, RWA president, said, “We are making arrangements for checking flu and respiratory symptoms of maids. There were plans of conducting basic tests, but that didn’t materialise. We want to ensure that those visiting multiple places don’t become carriers of infection. The local police should help implement these directions.”

The president of GK S-Block RWA, MK Gupta, said, “There are around 400 maids who come to the area daily. Most of them visit multiple houses. It will be difficult to check them regularly. Senior citizens and the unwell can call the maids, but only from gate 2 where mask will be given, thermal screening will be done and their hands will be sanitised. Residents will have to ensure that maids don’t roam around and sit in parks and leave the colony immediately after doing the work.”

Many RWAs argued that they can’t force residents to accept their decision, especially when they are non-members. “In case something goes wrong, we will be blamed. If the government makes the situation conducive and ensures zero movement from containment zones, then restrictions can be eased. It’s better to wait till May 10,” said Rajeev Kakria of E-Block RWA, GK-I.

