S Kolkata now has more high-risk Covid zones than north & central
2020-05-19
Kolkata: Vast areas between Tiljala and Patuli — off EM Bypass in south Kolkata — are throwing up fresh challenges for Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) and Kolkata Police. The sudden spurt in cases in these parts of Kolkata, coupled with several fresh cases reported from Bhowanipore-Tollygunge and Naktala, have now raised the total number of containment zones in the south to 151. This is the first time that south Kolkata (84 wards) has reported more containment zones than north and central Kolkata (60 wards), which now have 131 zones. 

Two wards — 108 and 109 — that cover areas of Uttar Panchanna Gram (Martin Para-Gulshan Colony), Chowbaga, Bantala, Nonadanga and East Calcutta Township (Ruby-Anandapur-Nazirabad-Urbana-Hussainpur-Madurdaha), Nayabad, Mukundapur and parts of Kalikapur, Panchasayar and Ajoy Nagar now have more micro-containment zones than the entire Park Circus-Tiljala-Topsia region (ward 65-66). The latter had recorded up to 13 containment zones. In contrast, only two wards (108 & 109), which initially had three containment zones, now have as many as 13 containment zones.

Of the Bypass neighbourhoods, Mukundapur throws a stiff challenge for the civic officials and the cops. The challenge at Mukundapur, said a senior police officer, lay in the fact that almost every section of residents has been affected — while it is an apartment like Purbalok, standalone buildings at Ajoy Nagar or a slum like Shahid Smriti Colony. According to a KMC health department official, the civic workers find it an uphill task to continue anti-Covid activities in areas across the ward, which is the largest along Bypass. 

“The entire area the ward covers is huge. We have positive cases from as deep as Mukundapur and also from Shahid Smriti Colony. Our health workers are finding it really difficult to cover the entire length and breadhth of the ward,” said a civic official.

Police said that compared to other areas, the flow between the slums and affected apartments could not be stopped effectively. “We had virtually shut Shahid Smriti Colony in, but a section of dwellers eventually took unfair advantage of certain relaxations provided. At Aholla Nagar, people removed barricades and kept moving in and out of the locality,” said the officer.

The cops are also keeping a vigil on “certain zones on Panditya Road and Bhowanipore (Bishop Lefroy Road and Lee Road) that had managed to turn into non-Covid zones are back in the red again,” said a KMC official.

But there is some good news too. When compared to central and north, where merely one ward presently has no active Covid cases, there are 18 such wards in Tollygunge, Jadavpur and Behala West that have not a single active case. Four more wards — one in Parnasree, which had reported initial cases of Covid in southwest Kolkata — is now Covid-free.


