Safety of frontline Covid-19 workers a concern in Madurai
2020-05-10
MADURAI: After a 28-year-old doctor from a private hospital, who was working in the isolation ward, tested positive for Covid-19 in Madurai on Friday, the safety of those working in such wards has become a concern. Despite strict protocols in place for safety at all Covid-19 wards in both government and private hospitals, doctors said that there is always a high risk working here and it is possible for the virus to spread.


In Madurai district alone, before Friday’s case, five staff at Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH), including two sanitary workers, two staff nurses and a sanitary supervisor, who were all working at the Covid-19 isolation ward, have tested positive with coronavirus, so far. GRH dean Dr J Sangumani has repeatedly asserted that the hospital was following all safety protocols including proper use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) and following proper schedule for quarantining and testing. 

However, even despite strict safety measures as mandated by the health ministry being taken, there is always a chance for frontline workers to get infected by accident, doctors said. “No one should ideally work more than 6-8 hours in the Covid-19 ward. This is because the viral load is more by then. SARS (nCoV) 2, which causes Covid-19 is highly virulent as compared to say H1N1 virus, which causes Swine Flu. Every single time a Covid-19 patient coughs and sneezes during treatment, for sure viral particles are expelled in the air via aerosol,” explained Dr P Prem Ananth, a consultant interventional pulmonologist.

Further, for doctors it is not easy to work in PPEs continuously for hours. Doctors have complained of finding it difficult to deal with sweating while dressed in PPEs. “Even the simplest mishap due to perhaps fatigue while donning and removing PPEs can result in infection,” added Dr Ananth. Doctors and staff who are prone to having lower immunity have been asked to stay off duty in Covid-19 wards, including those above 60 years of age and those with conditions like diabetes or hypertension.


