Safety measures help men in khaki to keep Covid-19 at bay in Nashik
2020-05-22
NASHIK: At a time when around 1,300 policemen from across the state have been infected with Covid-19 and some have even succumbed to the infection, not a single personnel from the Nashik city police have contracted the viral infection. 

Commissioner of police Vishwas Nangare Patil told TOI that he had adopted a three-pronged strategy to safeguard 3,300 police personnel and 290 officers from the infection. 

“So far, my plans have yielded positive results as no one from the Nashik police has got infected. Since the virus is here to stay, I have told my entire team to continue taking precautions. We cannot be lax by ignoring the precautions that we have been taking so far,” said Nangare Patil.

So far, as many as 51 Covid-19 cases have been reported from the city. Many policemen accompanied the health workers while tracing the hogh-risk contacts of Covid-19 patients. Many were also deployed in containment zones to ensure people did not venture out of their homes needlessly. 

Despite the huge pressure of enforcing the lockdown in the city, the police commissioner ensured that no one worked beyond eight hours. 

“We planned our deployment in a proper manner during lockdown so that policemen could go home after eight hours of duty and get adequate rest. We also distributed homeopathy and Vitamic C tablets among the entire police force to boost their immunity,” said Nangare Patil. 

He also used about Rs 13 lakh from the police welfare fund to provide new thermos flasks to the entire team so that they could have lukewarm water to quench their thirst while on duty.

Of the latest measures taken to ensure the safety of the personnel, the policemen were provided with special wrist watches which provided information about their body temperature, blood pressure, etc that was connected through a server to a dashboard at the police head office which was monitored by senior police officers. 

Nangare Patil said that the safety of his entire team would continue to be one of his top priorities amid the pandemic. 


