Bihar: Businessman loses Rs 25,000, gets it back due to coronavirus scare
2020-05-01
MADHEPURA: If a Rs 100 note falls out of your pocket while walking on the streets, chances are you will never see it again. And, if it’s Rs 25,000, you can just forget about it.


But the scare around coronavirus is such that even a thick wad of notes lying on a road found no takers for fear of contracting the disease. Ask Gajendra Sah, a businessman from Saharsa district, for whom the virus scare came as a boon.

“I had stopped my bike near a village under Uda-Kishunganj police station in Madhepura district and took out something from my pocket when the Rs 25,000 bundle fell on the road,” said Gajendra, a resident of Kopa village near Sonbersa Raj, adding, “I found it back because no one dared to touch it fearing the virus and police was called to take the money for safe keeping.”

He added, “I had kept the Rs25,000 in the pocket of my trouser and had gone to buy some metal sheets from the neighbouring Mahua Bazar on my bike. Though the Bazar falls in Saharsa, people have to take a Madhepura road to reach the market.”

Gajendra learnt about the missing money when he was about to pay the metal sheet supplier at the market. “I suddenly recalled where I may have dropped the money and rushed to the spot where I asked people who told me that police collected the money as no one wanted to touch it.”

Police said people gathered around the cash but none dared to pick it up fearing Covid-19 infection. They informed the local police and a team from Uda-Kishunganj police station rushed to the spot and collected the scattered cash from the road.

Gajendra later arrived at the police station and narrated the incident before station house officer (SHO) Shashi Bhushan Singh. Following proper verification, the SHO handed over the cash to Gajendra, who thanked the police profusely. 

“Locals informed that someone has dropped money on the road probably with the intention of spreading of Covid-19 virus. We went to the spot and lifted the money carefully. Later, Gajendra came to the police station and claimed it and we gave it back after verification,” Uda-Kishunganj SHO Shashi Bhushan Singh said. 

