Sailor is sixth Covid-19 positive case in Goa
2020-04-04
PANAJI: Goa’s tally of Covid-19 cases increased to six on Friday after a 53-year-old Goan with travel history tested positive for the virus. The man, a sailor by profession, had arrived in Goa by a domestic flight on March 19.

Health minister Vishwajit Rane said he had a travel history to Mozambique and Kenya and was admitted in the isolation ward of Goa Medical College since March 30.

“He is being shifted to ESI hospital in Margao,” said Jose D’Sa, director of health services. A health official said he had stayed at a hotel at Porvorim after returning to Goa and did not visit even his parents in another village in North Goa.

North Goa district collector R Menaka has directed the hotel management at Porvorim to immediately close the hotel for 14 days. The closure order was issued after it was discovered the person detected as Covid-19 positive on Friday had stayed in the hotel, an official said. 

The hotel management and all the staff have also been directed to be in home quarantine for 14 days.

Chief minister Pramod Sawant said the sailor had come in contact with five persons and all of them have also been quarantined.

“The tests will be conducted on Saturday on all five persons, who have come in contact with the new patient,” he said. Sawant said of the six Covid-19 positive patients, five have travel history and one is the brother of a Covid-19 patient. 

“All five coronavirus patients have come from foreign country, four from ship and one from the US and the sixth patient is the brother of one of the patients,” he said.

A 19-year-old boy, who tested positive, is the brother of a traveller who had tested positive last week and was under home quarantine. 

A health official said the boy and his mother were asked to be under home quarantine in the island village. “The village is being watched closely after two persons from one family contracted coronavirus,” he said.

Sawant said at least 1,000 people have been home quarantined, of which some people have completed the required number of days under quarantine. “Those who have not completed the home quarantine period should not come out of their homes,” Sawant said.

He also tried to allay fears over foreigners and said there is misconception that coronavirus is spread from foreigners and people should not unnecessarily harass them. 

He also said that 173 people have been quarantined institutionally. “If their test comes negative, then they would be kept under home quarantine,” he said.

Sawant said only three persons have been kept under isolation at GMC.

Since last week, four suspects of coronavirus have died but all later tested negative for the virus.

A 62-year-old British tourist was the latest to die. He was admitted in the isolation ward of GMC for coronavirus symptoms. But he died of pneumonia on Friday and has tested negative for Covid-19, a GMC doctor said.

