With stadiums closed during lockdown, Sakshi Malik trains at a desi akhara
2020-05-28
The Sports Authority of India may have given the green signal to gradually start sports activities and training, but athletes are not yet celebrating. The coronavirus pandemic and the lockdown have meant cancellation of sports meets and postponement of events like the Olympics. For sportspersons like wrestler Sakshi Malik, who are at the peak of their abilities physically, this has been a big blow. The Olympic medallist says, "It is frustrating since I had prepared well and the Olympics qualifications were round the corner. Now, there’s so much uncertainty that we don’t know what to train for. And I know I won’t get this time back. But it’s not in my hands."
However, Sakshi believes the key to maintaining sanity is to look at the bigger picture. She elaborates, "The consolation is that I’m not the only one facing this. After I had my knee surgery, I was out for a month and even that felt long, because I’d see my opponents winning and making progress. Now, we are all home."

 

In the absence of training facilities, Sakshi has resorted to training in a 
desi akhara at her in-laws' place in Haryana. "I've never wrestled in mud, and its taking time getting used to it. The speed, technique, everything is different. But I'm training to stay fit and connected to wrestling," says Sakshi. This has also helped her spend time with her husband, wrestler Satyawart Kadian. She says, "He has experience in wrestling in the mud. He's been a Bharat Kesari and he gives me a few tips. I like that since we get to spend some time together."

Off the mat – or rather off the mud – Sakshi has been honing her culinary skills during the lockdown, something she had never done before. “I learnt a little bit of cooking during this time," says Sakshi, laughing, "We don't eat fast food and there are no restaurants open anyway, so I tried some new recipes. Not the desi 
khana though. Instead, I tried things like cheese omelette and various kinds of sandwiches and snacks."

 News in BriefExplore BriefsAnd she did catch up on some much-pending TV viewing in the form of the iconic show 'Mahabharat', which had been recommended to her years ago. "My parents used to tell me it was a good show ever since I was little but I never had the time. During the quarantine, finally I got to watch 'Mahabharat' and I did not miss a single episode," says Sakshi.



