Covid-19 scare: Sales down as residents prefer to stay home even at weekend
2020-03-16
PATNA: With cinema halls, parks and zoo closed, most residents were confined to their homes this weekend. Vehicular traffic was quite less on the streets. People also avoided going to restaurants and eateries owing to rumours over outside food following the instruction and advisories issued by the state government on Friday.

Hangouts in the city, including malls, restaurants, roadside eateries, market places, hotels, shops, gymnasium, Ganga riverfront and parks, which usually buzz with activities on Sundays, wore a deserted look this time. Residents have stopped ordering food from restaurant through mobile applications.

Vikash Kumar, a sales executive in a mall at Fraser Road, said the government advisory asking people to avoid crowded places has also played a role in people avoiding markets. “The sales have gone down by almost 75% in the last couple of days. We have even come up with several offers on dresses and apparels to entice the buyers, but to no avail,” he said.

Anjani, who works for a restaurant near Bandar Bagicha, said the Covid-19 scare has adversely affected their business. “We are normally jam-packed even on weekdays as food lovers queue up to book tables. However, only a handful of people have been coming to our restaurant for the past few days,” he said.

Rupa Sinha, who owns a restaurant near Dak Bungalow crossing, said the sales have reduced almost by 80% due to the Covid- 19 scare. “I expect this to continue for the next few weeks. The online bookings have also gone down,” she said.

Shobhna, a medical aspirant and hosteller, who lives in Makhania Kuan, said, “I wanted to go out with my friends to a nearby eatery, but my parents have strictly told me to stay at the hostel. The days have become lazy, as I neither have classes to attend nor places to hang out.”

Kirti Sinha of Exhibition Road said she has been avoiding eateries. “I’m scared. It is better to stay indoors and safe than taking any risk,” she said.

Even the small markets and roadside shops are bearing the loss due to low turnout of customers. Residents are also avoiding places like Gandhi Maidan and Ganga riverfront. “There is no place to hang out after the state government shut cinema halls, parks and zoo. My kids are also getting anxious to go out after the schools were closed. They watched cartoon shows all day,” said Mrityunjay Gupta of Langar Toli.

Shweta of Bhattacharyya Road said, “I celebrated my 24th birthday at home with small gathering of friends. We had earlier decided to watch a movie and dine out, but our mother did not allow us.”


