Hyderabad: Sale of homes drops 50%, experts say coronavirus a reason for slowdown
2020-03-27
HYDERABAD: The city witnessed at 50% drop in sale of homes between January and March in 2020, with only 2,680 residential properties sold during this period. In 2019, the first quarter sales stood at 5,400 units, show data compiled by Anarock Property Consultants. Among other factors, experts attributed this slowdown to the Covid-19 outbreak and the subsequent lockdown, which, they said, has led to a drop in site visits, impacted the sentiment of buyers and pushed them into a “cash conservation mode”.


“Given the ongoing global healthcare calamity, housing sales and new project launches across India’s top seven cities decreased both on yearly and quarterly basis. As expected, monthly data trends reveal that March –when most advisories and lockdown were imposed - saw a decline in both new launches and housing sales against the preceding two months,” said Anuj Puri, chairman, Anarock, adding, “The government has taken an inarguably necessary hard-line stance to curtail the spread of the virus. The lockdowns have stalled construction activity and will lead to project delays in the future.””


 
As per the report, new launches in Hyderabad dipped by 11% during the first three months of 2020. The city saw 3,380 (approx.) launches during this period. “While Ugadi is a usually the time for new project launches, this year many builders refrained from it. But, I still think it is too soon to gauge the impact of Covid-19 on the realty sector. It has only been a week since work has stopped,” said R Suresh Kumar, senior vice president (business operations), Prestige Group. He added, “There were other factors, including logistical issues, that led to a slowdown of the sector. It isn’t the health crisis alone.”

Stating that the situation would be clearer only by the end of April, industry insiders said that the commercial sector too would be affected, with companies being more cautious with finances.

