Salons in the state mask up to combat deadly #COVID19
2020-03-18
As we try to combat the deadly virus that’s spreading fast, unprecedented lifestyle changes all around us seem to be the norm. In a span of a few weeks, everyone has learnt new hashtags that are going to stay with us for lives —- #COVID19, #CoronaVirus, and #SocialDistancing. The last hashtag has emerged as the best bet to beat the virus, as people withdraw into their homes, and mass congregation places like malls, theatres, parks, etc have been locked down upon government order.

But what happens to those things that we all, till now, used to do without a second thought? Like going to the salon for a haircut or facial? These are close contact places and hotbeds for spreading the virus. But salon owners in the state aver they’re ready and all prepped to deal with this, though some moan the dip in business.


SANITISING IS PRIORITY“I have made it mandatory to disinfect all our salons either after every use, or on an hourly basis,” says Sam Paul of the Toni and Guy chain of salons. “We wipe down chairs, countertops and the entrance door after every hour/every use with disinfectants. Every person in the salon has to wear a mask and gloves when servicing customers and we’ve also begun handing out free masks and sanitisers to our customers.” 

“All the implements used are electronically sanitised — this is a standard procedure at our place, but now, we have intensified monitoring this process. We are trying to get temperature screens installed across all our salons at the earliest,” adds Sam. 

Muthu Kumar, hairstylist from B Blunt Nungambakkam, adds, “We’re much more cautious when we work with clients now. We anyway use hand sanitiser when men and women come for haircuts, but now, we’ve made it mandatory for the clients to wash their hands, and use sanitiser. Scissors, combs and other hair cutting instruments are usually washed and sterilised after every service, but now, we are ultra-careful about not leaving them lying outside.” 

Celebrity makeup artiste, Ibrahim, says that working with gloves on gets uncomfortable. “But I will wear a mask. We generally wash our hands before and after every service and carry a hand sanitiser. We do a shampoo of the brushes immediately after every use, and sponges, powder pads, lashes, etc., are use and throw.”

Veena Kumaravel of Naturals tells us how her chain of parlours are being cleaned thoroughly and the equipment, chairs, and floors are being disinfected periodically. “We’ve been sterilising the instruments right in front of the customers for the last one week. We’ve stopped threading service since there is a risk of the beautician breathing into the face of the customer. We’re ensuring that our staff is not put at risk, too. We’ve been screening them for the last one week for symptoms. We have advised our staff to be extra cautious with customers who have returned from abroad. The staff are asked to wear gloves and masks for pedicures and manicures,” she adds. 

Manoj Samuel from Vurve Signature Salon, says, “We’re taking every step to ensure staff and customers stay safe. We’ve told the staff to take a day off and consult a doctor if they aren’t feeling okay. We’ve asked them to avoid eating outside/ ordering food from outside. Salon kits are cleaned with alcohol swabs after each use and put in a UV box. We’ve moved from fragrance-based solutions to disinfectants for cleaning the floors and we’ve told our valets to wear gloves and masks since they handle cars of different customers.”


Travel Woes of Celebrity makeup artistes For Ibrahim, travelling is a big worry. “I have a wedding makeup booked for March 21 & 22 in Tirupur and Erode, respectively. This was booked some time ago, and I can’t cancel; the client, too, checked with me as to whether I would be able to make it. So, I will be driving down. Actually, for makeup artistes, travelling via flight is anyway an exhausting procedure. The number of products and implements we carry usually requires multiple security checks. Since both the weddings are in Tamil Nadu, I will be taking my car and I don’t risk catching the virus,” he adds. Manoj Samuel, who owns salons, tells us they’ve been making discreet inquiries about whether the customer has travelled abroad. “When they call to fix appointments, we tell them in a friendly way that they can reschedule if they are feeling unwell. It’s a bit sensitive but important to let them know,” says Manoj.


Beauty Business is downFreelancer Abhirami, who does salon services at clients’ homes, says that she wants to do a self-quarantine of sorts and reduce the number of clients she takes on till this COVID-19 threat is over. “Since I do all services, including threading and waxing, I come in close contact with the customer. I use gloves and masks to be on the safe side now, but I try not to take too many clients at the moment, as it’s not safe,” she says. “Not as much as I had predicted, but there has been a 25-30% dip in business,” says Sam. Muthu, however, says “Clients keep coming in as usual,” while Veena says, “The parlours at the malls are closed, and the footfall at the standalone ones has come down.” Manoj says that there’s certainly a dip in the number of clients walking in for the last one week. “Even as the best hygienic practices are followed, between the two cities — Bangalore and Chennai — where we have our salons, we’ve seen a steep dip in Bangalore so far. We presume it's because people have been working from home since last week there. We’ve to see how things turn out in Chennai, now,” he adds.


It’s better to do beauty treatments at homeI’m letting my hair grow; the rest of the things can be easily taken care of at home for us, men. I told my wife to get her beauty things from the cosmetics shop and do them at home — anyway both of us are grounded as the MNCs we have been working for has asked us to work from home. So time pass ke liye achcha hai — she can put on a face mask and still do Tally

—Rupesh Shah, an IT professional from OMR

I’m going for a clean-shaven lookMaintaining a beard is a task and frequent salon visits are a must. I now think a clean-shaven look is the best to avoid going to a salon for a while. I know I am going to look a bit unrecognisable once I shave off the beard – I’ve kept one for a long while, now. But I’ll blame it on #Coronascare. No matter how careful you are, you never know how hygienic the salon equipment are when customers keep walking in.

- Ashish Kumar, a youngster from Kotturpuram

Try homemade remediesI went to a parlour on Harrington Road yesterday, and the lady refused to thread my eyebrows and upper lips. They’ve begun to use an epilator, now. The parlour girls usually hold one end of the thread in their mouth, and I immediately cursed myself for not figuring this out myself. So, spreading the word for other women — do not go for threading to the parlours, even if they haven’t stopped it by themselves. Try tweezing at home — ditto for other beauty treatments. Try homemade remedies

- Ramya Sivamani, a housewife from Chetpet

