Salt Lake civic body kicks off coronavirus awareness campaign
2020-03-21
KOLKATA: With many people returning from abroad in the last few days, several localities in Salt Lake are reeling under corona scare. The Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation’s officials have started a mass awareness campaign to tackle the situation, urging residents not to panic. 


Coronavirus in India latest updates

Till now, the civic body listed about 73 people who have recently returned to Salt Lake from abroad. Officials are visiting their houses to find whether any of them is suffering from fever, cough and cold. They are also urging those residents to maintain self isolation for some time.

Many of the market areas inside the crowded blocks wear a deserted look now with many preferring to stay indoors. Councillors of various wards in Salt Lake are holding meetings with block committees and housing complex representatives to get information about those coming back from abroad.

 “We are requesting them to stay in isolation for at least next 14 days and go in for tests,” said a civic health department official. 

“I am visiting various houses in my ward, where people have come back from abroad recently. We are seeking cooperation from everyone to prevent coronavirus,” said Anindya Chattopadhaya, councillor of ward No. 41. 

A resident of AC block who had returned from London only a few days back was sent to Beliaghata ID for tests, said a civic official. 

Tulsi Sinha Roy, councillor of ward No. 40 has already held a meeting with the Laboni Abason housing committee in this regard. “We will also hold meetings with block committees on the issue. We are asking everybody not to panic and stay alert in their respective localities and inform us,” she said. 

There are also a number of guest houses in Salt Lake, where some foreigners live. Civic officials are inspecting the guest houses to check whether they have the Covid-19 symptoms and are taking necessary sanitizing measures. 

“We are taking all precautionary measures following the health department’s guidelines,” said Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation MMIC (Health), Pranay Roy. 


