Kolkata: Salt Lake man shows Covid-19 signs, locality sealed off
2020-05-08
KOLKATA: Another locality in Salt Lake — a stone’s throw from City Centre and close to the three liquor shops that have been attracting the largest crowd in the past four days — was sealed off on Thursday after a CD Block resident was hospitalized with Covid-like symptoms. 

With its inclusion, 17 areas in the township have now become containment zones. Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation now plans to start conducting special community swab sampling and testing among residents, especially those who stay in and around the residences of medical professionals and healthcare workers.

According to sources from the civic body, the patient from CD Block, in his 60s, has been hospitalized with Covid-19 symptoms and barricades were set up to cordon off the stretch in front of his house.

“We have heard he was suffering from fever for the past few days. We thoroughly sanitized the locality on Thursday morning. We will provide all necessary help to the residents of the closed-off stretch,” said local councillor Tulsi Sinha Roy.

The civic officials, meanwhile, have started sanitizing BD Market, which is the closest market to CD Block, after news spread that family members of the patient had visited the market in the past two days.

“We are very tense. My elderly mother stays very close to the patient’s house. Her house is now inside the containment zone and she has become very worried,” said Julee Mullick, a resident of CF Block. 

Bidhannagar health department officials said they were conducting a door-to-door survey in several places and, from this weekend, they will start conducting community sampling and testing.

The civic body is also sending around 10 to 12 healthcare workers to a government hospital for training before they are engaged in the swab-collection job. 

Meanwhile, more restrictions were put in place in New Town and Kestopur markets, shortening their operation hours. “We mustn’t forget our area falls in the red zone,” said an officer.


