Sample of calf sent for Covid-19 test, four other jumbos isolated in Rajaji
2020-04-20
Dehradun: Following an illness prolonging for nearly a month now, sample of “Sultan”, a 3.5-year-old captive baby elephant in Rajaji Tiger Reserve (RTR), was sent to Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) in Bareilly for Covid-19 test. 

The move comes after the condition of the calf, reportedly suffering from elephant pox, worsened in a past few days. “Sultan is suffering from elephant pox but as a precautionary measure, we have sent its sample for Covid-19 test. We are confident that the baby jumbo isn’t infected with novel coronavirus,” said Amit Verma, the newly-appointed RTR director. Sultan first showed symptoms of an illness on March 22. A TOI source disclosed that there are ulcers in Sultan’s mouth and its eyelids have swollen while adding that these symptoms are not usual.

Meanwhile, another 5-year-old captive elephant Rani, who was earlier kept with Sultan, also started showing symptoms of an illness on March 23. However, Rani’s condition is told to be stable now. As a precautionary measure, Sultan and Rani have been kept intact at Chila but to ensure distancing they are now placed in enclosure 1 and 6 of the facility. The health of both young elephants is being constantly monitored.

The reserve presently has six captive elephants, including Sultan and Rani. The other four captive elephants, which were also kept with Sultan in March, have now been kept in isolation in distant forests. Two among them have been shifted to Mithiberi and the other two have been sent to Mundhawal. This has been done to ensure that they don’t catch any infection from Sultan or Rani. Notably, this is the first case of elephant pox in RTR's recent history and this is also the first case in Uttarakhand in which animals have been isolated for fear of spread of infection.

“Elephant pox is basically a virus strain which is found in cows. Elephants catch this ailment mostly due to rodents. Besides Sultan, Rani was also showing similar symptoms in March. Thankfully, after being given medicines, Rani’s condition is fine now,” said Dr Aditi Sharma, RTR's veterinarian who is closely monitoring Sultan’s health since the day it first showed symptoms.

On Saturday, a health team of Haridwar district rushed to RTR after getting information about the sickness of Sultan and sanitised the entire area according to the health protocols for areas with suspected Covid-19 cases. A health inspection of all RTR staff members, who work in areas where six captive elephants were kept, was also conducted by the team.


