Sample testing intensified at Rajapalayam
2020-04-16
Madurai: Samples from 183 people of Rajapalayam municipality in Virudhunagar district, which has been entirely designated a containment area, were taken in the past two days and sent for testing. All the 46 wards in the municipality were brought under containment zone on Monday after four people, who were contacts of a 60-year-old man infected by the novel coronavirus and was discharged, also tested positive. 

A health department official told TOI that these four people included a doctor, lab technician and hospital worker at a clinic where the 60-year-old man, the first to test positive in Rajapalayam, visited. The fourth positive person had visited the man’s house.

Following instructions from district collector R Kannan, health department and municipality employees started a door-to-door survey to cover all the 45,000 houses in Rajapalayam from Tuesday. The employees would visit each house and collect details about the number of people and those with symptoms. A total of 371 employees and 12 medical teams have been deputed to carry out the work which will be completed on Thursday.

“On Tuesday, samples were taken from 155 people who include 22 family members of these four positive people and 60 who visited the clinic at Rajapalayam between March 22 and 25. Besides, sample were taken from others with symptoms such as respiratory problem, fever, cold and cough. The samples of 28 people were taken from Rajapalayam on Wednesday,” the official said adding they have been sent to the government Rajaji hospital in Madurai for testing. 

In Kanyakumari district, one more person tested positive in Nagercoil taking the positive cases in the district to 16 on Tuesday. He is one of the 149 contacts of a positive person who was working at the Chennai airport who came to Nagercoil in the third week of March for a relative’s engagement.

District collector Prashant M Wadnere said the man had 149 close contacts in two days before the lockdown was announced. 

He also picked up a quarrel with a man at the engagement and also went to a few others places due to which the number of contacts is high. While his wife and kin tested negative, his five positive contacts include the man with whom he quarrelled.


