Samples flood Mayo Covid-19 lab in Jamaat fallout
2020-04-03
NAGPUR: The only Covid-19 testing facility of Central India at Indira Gandhi Government Medical College (IGGMCH) received more than 200 samples for testing from across Vidarbha on Thursday. This sudden flood of samples is the fallout of Tablighi Jamaat meet, as every district in Vidarbha has people who either participated in this religious congregation held at Nizamuddin, or travelled to New Delhi during the same period.

The state government gave a list of all such travellers to the respective district administrations earlier this week. By Wednesday, most of the people in these lists were identified and quarantined in respective districts. Swab samples of most of these quarantined persons were collected in last two days and they reached IGGMCH Lab on Thursday.

Sources said that the lab can test at the most 120 samples per day in three batches. This lab serves not only Vidarbha and Chhattisgarh but most parts of Madhya Pradesh too. Samples do come here from Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.

After latest guidelines of ICMR, every viral pneumonia patient too needs to be screened for Covid-19. So, many private hospitals also send swab samples here for testing. With limited manpower and resources, it was a tough time for this lab on Thursday to test all the samples. 

IGGMCH dean Dr Ajay Keolia said the lab is working in full three shifts. “There is no shortage of reagent or kits. We get all necessary supply from NVI Pune regularly. Results of some cases may take time due to technical issues,” he said. 

Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar made it clear that it may take two or three days to complete all these tests.

“The lab is working at full capacity. Till date, it was giving all results on time. The sudden spurt in number of samples may delay results of some samples for up to two days. But, that is not the cause of concern,” said Kumar, adding that the suspects are in quarantine, which is a major relief for the administration.

As per the official figures given by district collector, this lab tested 101 samples on March 30 and 99 samples on March 31. Since the first sample of city was tested on March 5, it has tested total 897 samples till March 31. Figures of April 1 and 2 were not available but they are definitely more than 100 looking at the number of persons quarantined in government facilities in these two days.


