Samples of tested doubles in a week, with Miraj lab gets functional more samples of coronavirus suspects will be tested in little time
2020-04-04
Kolhapur: The rate of testing samples of coronavirus suspects at the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune has doubled in the last one week, much to the relief of the health administration which is struggling to attend to the people put in institutional quarantine with inadequate staff.

After two positive cases were reported from the city and one from the rural part of the district, the health administration has engaged itself in the herculean task of tracing the contacts of the affected persons and bringing them under institutional quarantine. Moreover, after people who were advised home-quaratine were found roaming in the open, the administration has been forced to put them under institutional quarantine. 

A senior health official said, “The positive cases has forced us to get more people tested. Currently, the high-risk persons are being tested. It takes one to two days to get the reports of the swab samples from NIV, Pune. We are discharging the people whose reports turn out negative. They have been strictly asked to remain in home-quarantine.”

Of the 830 people put under institutional quarantine in the last one week, 21 people have been discharged. So far, tests of 270 suspects have been done and their results are awaited. 

The state government directives and even the advisories of the Central government suggest focusing on the positive and high-risk patients to minimise work load. Currently, the number of positive and high-risk patients, who have been put in isolation, are comparatively less. Therefore, doctors can attend to these patients with the personal protective kits that has been provided to them. The increase in the number of positive and high-risk patients will require more isolation beds, ventilators and a large number of protective kits.

The testing laboratory in Miraj Government Medical College in Sangli district has been made functional. The samples of the suspected cases from Kolhapur, Sangli, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg and Satara districts can be tested at this laboratory.

However, the lab administration has made it clear that the local health authorities should first send the samples of only those patients who have had a travel history or are showing visible symtoms. The reports of the samples sent to the lab in Miraj hospital will arrive in eight to ten hours. 


