Samples test negative; bodies of suspected Covid-19 patients released
2020-04-07
Ranchi/Hazaribag: Samples of two persons, one in Ranchi and the other in Hazaribag, who died in hospitals and were suspected have been infected with the novel coronavirus, turned out to be negative. 

The body of Mahaveer Sahu, who died at the emergency ward of Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims) in Ranchi on Saturday, was handed over to his relatives on Monday, almost 55 hours after his death. Talking to TOI, Rims director Dr D K Singh said: “Soon after we received the test results, we informed his son and handed over his body. The patient had a history of liver disease and he did not die of Covid-19.”

The son of the deceased, Raj Kumar Sahu, said hospital authorities co-operated with him on Monday and he did not face any difficulty. However, he said had they shown the same promptness when his father was admitted at the isolation ward on Friday, he might still have been alive. “I saw a complete change in the attitude of the hospital staff after samples of my father tested negative for Covid-19. I wish they were more prompt during the course of his treatment,” Raj said. 

Meanwhile, the 36-year-old man, who died at the Covid-19 ward at Hazaribag Medical College and Hospital (HMCH) on Saturday night, also tested negative for coronavirus, Hazaribag DC Bhuvanesh Pratap Singh said on Monday. The deceased, a labourer, had recently returned to Hazaribag from Delhi. 

Singh said, “Samples of the deceased tested negative for Covid-19 and his body was handed over to his family for cremation. He hailed from Saliya village in Barkatha. Samples of five family members of the man also tested negative.”

Singh added that the condition of a 52-year-old from Bishnugarh, who was admitted at HMCH after testing positive for Covid-19 last week, was improving. The man had returned to Hazaribag from Asansol in West Bengal on March 29.

Singh said, “He is doing fine. Samples of a few of his relatives and family members that were sent to Rims tested negative. There is no cause for alarm. We have begun contact tracing to identify others who might have come in contact with the patient.”


