Sangli man’s swab tests negative for coronavirus
2020-02-06
KOLHAPUR: The swab sample of the person from Sangli, who was suspected to be infected with coronavirus, tested negative.

The Sangli health department authorities heaved a sigh of relief on Wednesday morning as the samples sent to the National Institute of Virology, Pune, earlier this week, came in negative.

Sangli district civil surgeon Sanjay Salunkhe told TOI that they have already arranged for a four-bed isolation ward for the suspected patients. The tracing is also active for them and so far, no new cases have been identified. 

“The screening of the suspected patients is underway across major airports in the country, hence we will get an idea of the suspected patient beforehand,” he said.

Meanwhile, the Kolhapur health department authorities said that they are planning extensive awareness campaigns across the district and few emergency meetings have been called. 

Yogesh Sale, the district health officer of Kolhapur zilla parishad, said that they are waiting for the swab sample of the suspected patient from Kolhapur. However, there is nothing to worry as he seems fine and the sample was collected as a precautionary measure, said Sale

He said that he has called in a meeting of the primary health centre (PHC) and sub-centre officials on Friday, February 7 to execute the awareness campaign ideas

“We want to use every medium, every resource to spread information about coronavirus in school to gram panchayats. Even if there are remote chances of the infection in our region, we do not want any misleading information among the residents,” he said.

“The handbills, posters, and other information will be prepared in the coming week and will be placed in the prominent areas of the city, towns, villages, and schools,” he said.

Experts say that Novel coronavirus (nCoV) is a large family of viruses including SARS, MERS that causes illnesses ranging from the common cold to acute respiratory syndromes. The virus has emerged from a seafood and animal market in China’s Wuhan.


