Coronavirus outbreak in Delhi: Sanitise premises, govt tells schools
2020-03-19
NEW DELHI: Delhi government has sent a circular to its schools asking them to place hand sanitisers at all prominent places and restrict entry of outsiders to their offices and premises. The government had earlier asked all private and unaided schools to sanitise and disinfect their buses.


Coronavirus in India live updates

In the circular, Directorate of Education (DoE) also asked schools to adjourn for the next few days and avoid sending files and documents to other offices to the extent possible.

“Ensure proper cleaning and frequent sanitisation of rooms, branches, and other places, particularly frequently touched surfaces. Ensure regular supply of hand sanitisers, soap, liquid soap and running water,” the circular added.

DoE also asked the schools to keep a lookout for respiratory symptoms/fever of its administration members. “Employees at higher risk, like the elderly, pregnant and those with underlying medical conditions, should take extra precautions. Authorities are advised to sanction leave whenever any request is made for self-quarantine as a precautionary measure,” it added.

Many private schools are already complying with the suggestions made by the government. Exam centres are taking extra care to sanitise classrooms by following CBSE guidelines.

Tania Joshi of The Indian School said hand sanitisers have been placed at the gate and the reception. She added that since her school is an exam centre visited by students from KR Mangalam World School and Kendriya Vidyalaya, they are providing masks to the examinees.

The schools are also complying with the CBSE directions and seating students at a minimum distance of one metre during exams. CBSE had also advised assistant superintendents to cover their nose and mouth with masks or handkerchiefs during invigilation duty. Teachers have been directed to carry their own hand sanitisers to exam halls.

As per preventive measures given by CBSE, examinees who are coughing or sneezing are to be seated separately. The centres have also been advised to maintain utmost hygiene by regularly disposing garbage bags and keeping toilets clean.

Suman Sharma, principal of Bluebells School, said, “We are following the CBSE guidelines and have only 12 students in a classroom. We are giving masks to the invigilators too.”


