Coronavirus scare: Sanitisation operations start on war footing in Hyderabad
2020-03-04
HYDERABAD: Health authorities on Tuesday began surveillance of a three kilometre radius around Mahendra Hills, where the first Covid-19 positive patient resides. The area has been designated as the epicentre of a possible cluster for the virus’ outbreak by health department officials and a sanitation drive by health workers in Mahendra Hills began early on Tuesday.


The Union ministry’s containment plan for Covid-19 will be initiated in the area. “Active surveillance, including door-to-door checks will begin tonight (Tuesday). This has not been made known to the locals so far but the process has begun in the area falling with a three kilometre radius of the patient’s residence,” said a senior official from the state health department.

 
 

The plan specifies that action needs to be taken for containing a cluster, an area where one or more cases have been reported. The objective of cluster containment is to stop transmission, morbidity and mortality due to Covid-19 while the plan also has a provision to implement a 5-kms containment zone if the number of positive cases go up. In such a scenario, clear entry and exit points to the area will be established and might be restricted if an outbreak is reported.

Meanwhile, the 24-year-old software engineer who had tested positive for the virus and had developed a lung infection is showing signs of improvement according to health department officials. 

Initially, 45 out of the 88 persons identified as having had contact with the patient were taken to Gandhi Hospital on Tuesday. This includes three family members of the patient. Their samples have been collected for testing. Of them, 36 have been kept at the hospital for further tests.

“The cluster containment strategy would be to contain the disease within a defined geographic area by early detection, breaking the chain of transmission and thus preventing its spread,” reads the containment plan by Centre, a copy of which is with TOI.

