Coronavirus scare: Sanitisers, paper tissues replace finger bowls, napkins at eateries
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: Don’t be surprised if the waiter offers you a shaft of paper instead of a sparkling white napkin the next time you dine out. Dining etiquette is changing fast in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. Hand sanitizers and paper tissues have started replacing finger bowls and cloth napkins. This apart, restaurants are also increasing the gap between two tables to at least 1.5m as a precautionary measure.


Coronavirus in India live updates

There’s more. If you are walking in at your favourite joint anytime soon, be prepared for the mandatory temperature screening. You are allowed in only if the infrared thermometer reads normal. The Hotel and Restaurant Association of Eastern India (HRAEI) has convened a meeting and came up with the dos and don’ts, along with a host of other measures to keep customers and staffers safe.

“No one — patrons or staff — will be allowed inside the property if the thermometer indicates that they have high temperature,” HRAEI president Pranav Singh said on Tuesday. “We have had a meeting with our members on safety against the coronavirus spread and decided to take a whole lot of measures,” he said.

The restaurants have adopted stringent policies on maintaining health and hygiene. Tables, door handles and knobs will be periodically sanitized. “Guests will be asked to use hand sanitizers instead of finger bowls. And paper tissues will replace the cloth napkins,” Singh said. 

Even before the guidelines were issued, certain restaurants were already on a hyper-hygiene mode. “We at Chowman, Oudh 1590, Chapter 2 and Master Dimsum have been taking steps to keep the virus at bay. Our delivery persons are wearing masks and frequently using hand sanitizers,” said Shiladitya Chaudhury, partner of the chain of restaurant. Co-partner Debaditya Chaudhury said business has remained steady but noticeably lighter ever since the outbreak. “The inherent anxiety is there, but what has remained the same is people’s enthusiasm. If there’s a 10 % decline in walk-in-and-dine-in ratio, our orders through delivery have gone up considerably,” he said.

On Monday, Saz on Camac Street made a hard decision to close the restaurant “with an end goal to limit the danger of Covid-19 at our restaurant as much as could be expected, we are closing down.”


