Sanitization, fumigation at West Bengal Covid-19 victim’s locality
2020-03-24
KOLKATA: The death of Bengal’s first Covid-19 patient, a 57-year-old south Dum Dum resident, on Monday prompted the municipality to fumigate his house, as well as the local doctor’s chamber which he visited after complaining of cough and cold. A sense of fear has gripped the neighbourhood with various local housing complexes closing their gates for all outsiders. 


Local councillor Keya Das said, “We have fumigated the area around the victim’s house. His family and others who had come in contact with him have been kept in isolation. Even the health centre where the victim was treated was sanitized.”

A local said there is palpable tension in the neighbourhood after the news broke on Monday afternoon. “We knew he was critical, but the news of death came as a shocker. The implications of someone who stayed close dying of Covid-19 is very scary. What’s worse is the fear that he may have unknowingly come in contact with many others,” a neighbour said. 

“We have identified the rickshawpuller who took him to hospital, but we have been unable to trace the vegetable vendor and the maid. We assume that both live in thickly populated slums and that poses a greater risk in terms of community transmission,” said Kallol Datta, the victim’s acquaintance. 

“His next-door neighbours, an elderly couple, had come to visit him. They are more vulnerable due to their age. We have asked them to stay in home quarantine,” said Arijit Deb, a neighbour. On Sunday night, locals procured necessary medicine for the couple and left them at their doorstep. “The aftermath of the lockdown needs to be handled at the micro level by community-specific organizations, like clubs,” he said. 

Tracing who else has come in touch with the family in the past couple of days has become the biggest challenge for locals. “So far, we have found 11 persons who have come in contact with them,” the councillor said.

Das said another person who complained of sickness after returning from abroad was admitted to Beliaghata ID Hospital. She said the complex where this youth stayed has been shut since Sunday evening and they are not allowing any outsiders. “Several housing complexes in the area have gone for complete shutdown. I checked their arrangement on Monday and found it to be satisfactory,” she added.

Renu Das who stays in Nilambar Vihar near Nagerbazar, said they were not allowing any outsiders into the complex. South Dum Dum Municipality councillor Amit Poddar said, “In one complex, we organized the check-up of some people who returned from UK. Fortunately, they tested negative.” 

