Sanitation worker of SNMC tests +ve for Covid-19, Agra dist tally now 770
2020-05-12
Agra: At least seven new Covid-19 cases were reported in Agra on Monday evening, taking the district tally to 770. The number of cases doubled in 15 days. On an average, one positive case was reported every hour in the past one week. So far, 25 deaths have been reported in the district. 

The cases which surfaced on Monday include a sanitation worker of medicine department of SN Medical College (SNMC), a printing press employee, student of 11th standard, and a 60-year-old woman of Mathura district who was under treatment at a private hospital in Agra. 

The localities in which Covid-19 positive cases were reported include Vjay Nagar colony, Noori Darwaza, Gokul Pura, Gudari Mansoor Khan, Nagla Padi and Badobara village in Shamshabad block. 

Chief medical officer RC Pandey said, “All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

According to health department, out of the 770 cases reported in Agra, at least 85 active ones are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts, while 80 are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway-2. Another 22 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. 

Besides, 55 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts. These include a senior resident doctor and four junior doctors of SN Medical College. So far, 30 vegetable sellers have also been tested positive in Agra. 

The CMO added, “Till now, 345 people have recovered and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. We are doing massive sampling in hotspot areas to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine.”

ReplyReply allForward


