Delhi: Sanitation supervisor at AIIMS dies of Covid-19
2020-05-26
NEW DELHI: A 58-year-old sanitation supervisor at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), who had tested positive for novel coronavirus, has died, sources said.


He was on ventilator and succumbed on Sunday at 7.30pm. He was a permanent employee of AIIMS and was posted at the outdoor patient department, the sources said.

“Another corona warrior sacrifices his life in service of the country,” Dr Srinivas Rajkumar T, general secretary, AIIMS Resident Doctors’ Association, tweeted with the hashtag ‘IndiaFightsCOVID19’. “AIIMS has lost its proud warrior. The virus is dangerous, very communicable and doesn’t spare anyone,” he said.

Kuldeep Dhigan, general secretary, AIIMS, SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association, said that the supervisor developed fever and mild respiratory discomfort, following which he got himself examined at AIIMS on May 16.

“As his case did not fulfil the criteria for testing, he was not tested for Covid-19. He underwent routine blood tests, was counselled and briefed about the precautions to be taken and sent back home,” Dhigan alleged.

Due to sudden worsening of symptoms, the supervisor was taken to the emergency on May 19, Dhigan said. “He had breathing difficulties and was hospitalised. He was then tested for Covid-19 and the results came out to be positive,” he added.

“All frontline workers like us who have high risk of exposure due to handling of hazardous biomedical waste during the cleaning process should be tested even at slightest suspicion,” Dhigan said.

Srinivas also said that the threshold for testing should be further lowered for individuals working in high-risk locations like hospitals and those who may suffer inadvertent exposure to the virus despite taking adequate precautions like surveillance staff and police personnel. 

“We are going to have a high-level meeting with the director on Tuesday, to discuss issues pertaining to the safety of healthcare workers at the institute,” he said. 

