Sarola forest being robbed during lockdown
2020-04-21
Aurangabad: The ongoing lockdown has led to poor vigilance at the Sarola forest area, which has aided in rampant illegal tree-felling. A major section of the forest has also been reduced to ashes, allegedly by some villagers who triggered a forest-fire to create space for illegal farming activities.

A spot visit on Monday revealed many trees — including rare indigenous species — were chopped down, possibly for firewood. A portion of hill range in the forest, towards the Kankhura village, was found to be destroyed in what appeared to be the effects of a controlled fire.

Botanical expert Milind Giridhari said the trees that have found cut at Sarola also include some rare and endangered species. “Warang, kalakuda, sonsawar, ran-pangara, bija and kala shisham are among the uncommon trees that have chopped here. It is a huge loss to the local biodiversity,” he said.

Located around 20km from Aurangabad, Sarola is considered a unique eco-habitat with the mixed presence of grassland, scrubland, cropland, deciduous forest, hills and water bodies. The biodiversity hotspot is home to over 160 bird species alone besides other flora and fauna.

Environmentalist Kishor Pathak said trees that are getting cut illegally provide shelter as well as food to many birds and creatures.

“The trees are cut for two purposes. One is for firewood, which can be used as fuel, and the other is to flatten the land for agriculture. Both these activities are illegal in the forest area. The forest department has failed to provide a proper vigil during the lockdown,” he said.

Conservationists said it could take a few decades to replenish the biomass that has been destructed.

When contacted, chief conservator of forests (territorial) P K Mahajan said he would increase the vigil in the Sarola area. “We will take necessary action. Tree cutting is a punishable offence. We appeal to the locals to join hands with the forest department for conservation of local biodiversity,” he said.


