Sarpanches in Odisha to get collectors’ power for effective Covid-19 management
2020-04-20
BHUBANESWAR: In a significant post lockdown strategy anticipating influx of lakhs of migrant workers, students, professionals and other stranded Odia people after end of the restrictions, the state government on Sunday made registration and 14-days quarantine mandatory for all people returning to the state from outside after May 3.


Addressing the people in a video message, chief minister Naveen Patnaik said his government will facilitate smooth return of the stranded Odia people from different states after lifting of the lockdown restrictions.

To effectively carry out the registration and quarantine exercises at the level of gram panchayats, the sarpanches are also delegated with the “collectors’ power” within their jurisdiction in accordance with the provision of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, the Epidemic Diseases Act 1897 and Odisha Covid-19 regulation. Odisha is the only state to make such provision.

Delegating collectors’ power to sarpanches means they can plan, coordinate and take steps to contain the spread of Covid-19. It is part of the community-based monitoring strategy to contain Covid-19 pandemic in the state, said official sources.

“Every gram panchayat will have registration facilities. Family members and friends of people can register for those, who want to return to the state after lockdown restrictions. They will be placed in a 14-days mandatory quarantine at the panchayat with free of cost accommodation, food and treatment. After completion of quarantine period, an incentive of Rs 2000 will be given to them by the state government,” said CM in the message.

CM said mandatory registration, streamlined movement and 14-days quarantine are very important to protect the returnees, their own families, the community and the state at-large “Compulsory registration and quarantine of all foreign returnees became a vital strategy to keep the Covid-19 situation under control in Odisha with 61 positive cases,” said the chief minister.

The CM minister also spoke on smooth arrival of stranded Odias from outside after lifting of restrictions. He said in spite of best efforts of his state and the host states, life is not normal for them what he said ”pains him.”

“My government will discuss with the Centre and other host states on smooth arrival of stranded Odia people in different states and take steps accordingly,” he underlined.

Though the state government has no concrete data on number of people including students, professionals, stranded pilgrims, patients and migrant workers stuck outside the state, unconfirmed sources said it could be more than 5 lakh.

The chief minister said his government will have a scientific technology based system to facilitate smooth arrival of migrant labourers.

“The magnitude of the exercise demands a decentralised approach and the nature of the problem demands a humane approach. 
Both these will be accomplished by community based monitoring system involving gram panchayats and urban local bodies,” said Naveen.

Official sources said the state government will involve the local elected representatives, anganwadi workers and ASHAs to ascertain the number of people (state-wise), who are expected to return after completion of lockdown restrictions.

Justifying empowerment of gram panchayats and ULBs, Naveen said it will facilitate smooth movement, track and monitor the returnees, and strengthen the fight against COVID-19

“In my view every life is precious and has to be protected in a dignified manner. The involvement of panchayati raj institutions which are peoples’ institutions at the grassroots will go a long way in this,” said Naveen.

The chief minister said the situation is under control because of the complete support sacrifice of people at all levels and hard work the dedicated machinery.

