Sasmit Patra catches up on books, helps wife in kitchen amid lockdown
2020-04-04
BHUBANESWAR: Rajya Sabha member and BJD spokesperson Sasmit Patra may be under lockdown, but it has given him the freedom to catch up with life and do all that he had been missing out on.

So from reading books on different subjects to helping his wife with household chores and working on drafting three private member’s bills for the upcoming monsoon session of the Parliament, Patra has his hands full. 

Patra, who used to teach business management before he entered politics, says he started reading books on management, law and public policy and biographies as soon as the lockdown came into force. This apart, he has been browsing through online articles and news to keep himself updated. He is also using this time to do research on governance and public policy.

“I am currently reading ‘Audacity of hope’ by Barack Obama. ‘The triple bottom line’ by Savitz and ‘How Modi won India’ by Rajdeep Sardesai and other books are on my list for the lockdown period,” he says. 

The parliamentarian also loves to cook and has been helping his wife in the kitchen. “I can make dalma, potal rasa, saga bhaja, santula, bhindi fry, badichura and many other Odia delicacies. I can also rustle up some vegetarian fare. In fact, my entire family, including my kids, love whatever I prepare,” he adds. 

Patra says of late he has also been doing household chores like vaccuum cleaning, dusting and cleaning dishes with his wife. “She feels happy if I help her with the household work. Sharing and caring is the best thing to do in such difficult times,” he adds. 

He further says the public life and party work had made it nearly impossible for him to devote enough time to his family. Returning late in the night from political debates on television to staying away from family in Delhi during the Parliament sessions and committee meetings had robbed him of the opportunity to spend time with them. But the lockdown has helped him reconnect with his large joint family in Bhubaneswar as a son, a nephew, a husband and a father. “This is a time to share and care for family. Sharing memories, experiences and observations from my personal, professional and political life with the children to listening to their aspirations and dreams, each day has presented itself with a unique opportunity and purpose,” he adds.

This lockdown also gave him a glimpse into a whole new world of PUBG gaming. His son and nephew introduced it to him and now he is addicted. “I can now understand how these games can get the youngsters hooked as I too can’t resist their pull,” he smiles. 

Patra says he has also been spending time revisiting old photos right from his parent’s wedding to the vacations they took together. “I have been telling my children stories of my school days and how I got married and they have been lapping it up with rapt attention. From the rough patches we had to the wonderful memories we made going along the way, the stories of it all has helped me bond with my family in this time of crisis,” he added.


