Sassoon’s flu unit to study Covid-19 community spread
2020-03-27
PUNE: A dedicated unit to diagnose and treat patients complaining of flu-like symptoms, including cold, cough and fever, started at Sassoon General Hospital will decode the community spread of the novel coronavirus in Pune. 


Only patients who have not travelled abroad in the past one month but have unrelenting flu symptoms will be examined at this unit. Experts at the hospitals will carry out random sampling of some patients to understand the presence of the virus in the community. 

“So far, we have screened 326 citizens with flu-like symptoms who have no history of international travel or proximity to known Covid-19 infected persons or their close contacts. Of these, we advised 32 persons to remain in home quarantined for 14 days. They are individuals who are mobile and have got exposed to maids, cab drivers and food delivery persons. Others are family members, friends and close contacts of such individuals,” the hospital’s forensic science expert Harish Tatiya told TOI.

“We took throat swabs of 10 individuals to rule out Covid-19 infection. Of the 10, five have tested negative for the contagion so far and the reports of another five are awaited. Besides, we have also taken samples of some admitted patients and their reports are awaited. So far, we have not seen a single case which is indicative of the presence of the virus in the community,” he said.

Covid-19 and the seasonal flu are similar in many ways. Both are respiratory diseases that spread through the droplets of fluid from the mouth and nose of someone who is infected. Both are contagious, produce similar symptoms and may cause severe symptoms in some.

“There has been a sudden rise in cases of viral illnesses following the drop in temperature and the wide fluctuation in mercury levels. We have been seeing many patients complaining of cough, cold and fever. Many often ask if they have Covid-19 infection. We clear their misconceptions and treat those people who have no recent history of international travel or proximity to known positive patients and their close contacts,” senior family physician Prakash Mahajan said.

The doctors said Covid-19 and seasonal influenza viruses ‘have a similar disease presentation’. Both viruses are transmitted by contact, droplets and fomites. As a result, the same public health measures, such as hand hygiene and good respiratory etiquette like coughing into your elbow or into a tissue and immediately disposing it of prevent infection.

