Pune: Sassoon hospital to treat Covid-19 patients under 1 roof from March 31
2020-03-26
PUNE: The newly constructed 11-storey building of the state-run Sassoon General Hospital will function as a dedicated facility to treat patients diagnosed with the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection from March 31. 


The 11 designated private hospitals, four identified isolation facilities, including Naidu hospital and YCM hospital, and two other health hubs in Pune district will initially admit suspected patients and get their tests done at National Institute Virology (NIV). 

The patients will then be moved to the dedicated 1,100-bed facility at Sassoon hospital, if they test positive for Covid-19, for further treatment.

“We are working round the clock to make the facility functional. We gave out the work order for fitting a gas pipeline on Monday. Once that is done, we can make the hospital operational,” said Ajay Chandanwale, spine surgeon and dean of B J Medical College-attached Sassoon General hospital.

“Once it is ready, every patient diagnosed with Covid-19, either at designated private hospitals or any other government isolation hospital in Pune, Pimpri Chinchwad and the rural areas of the district, will be shifted to the new facility for further treatment,” he told TOI.

“It is observed that many patients seeking medical care for a host of other ailments do not visit a private hospital any Covid-19 positive person is admitted there for treatment. Their fear is that they may contract the infection. Keeping all this in mind, the district administration has decided to treat all positive patients under one roof,” Chandanwale said.

The state government had in 2008-2009 decided to build a super-specialty hospital at the existing building of the Sassoon hospital. Initially, the decision was to build a six-storey hospital to provide super-specialty treatment in areas such as minimally invasive cardiac surgeries and neurosurgeries.

“The government subsequently decided to build an 11-storey building for super-specialty treatment to needy patients. The same building will now be used as a dedicated Covid-19 hospital in Pune district,” Chandanwale said.

A district administration official said, “To make this hospital functional, we require trained manpower, mainly intensivists, pulmonologists, doctors and nurses, for critical and non-critical care areas, Class IV staffers and equipment. We will need cooperation from private hospitals and, if required, their staffers need to volunteer for services." 

