Satara’s Karad city emerges as new Covid-19 hotspot
2020-04-30
Kolhapur: The Karad city in Satara district, with more than 30 positive cases in the past few weeks, has emerged as a Covid-19 hotspot. The district administration has imposed a strict curfew and various other measures to contain the infection.

Satara district collector Shekhar Singh said the fact that most of the patients are high-risk contacts of the earlier patients and that they have been traced successfully is a good sign. He urged all citizens to follow strict home-quarantine measures. He added that in many cases, it had been observed that the citizens stepped out of their houses and interacted with each other. This needs to stop, Singh warned.

“There is a pattern here and to break the chain of the infection, everyone must cooperate. At the same time, he insisted that the citizens should not outcast the ones who have been advised home-quarantine,” he said.

According to Singh, in the Karad taluka, as many as five containment zones have been formed and a total lockdown has been in order from April 23. The future of the lockdown and the restrictions on the movement will be decided after further review.

He said that citizens should not panic since the district has shown a good recovery rate. There is an 85% chance that people who contract the infection will not require any critical support. The vulnerable age groups, however, need to be looked after, which includes senior citizens and the children below 5 years.

10-year-old and 75-year-old discharged 

A 10-year-old child and a 75-year-old woman were discharged from the Krishna Medical College in Karad after their successful recovery from Covid-19 infection. They both tested negative in the two post-isolation tests done within a span of 24 hours. The staff members of the medial college cheered and showered flower petals on the recovered patients at the time of their discharge from the hospital.

2 more positive in Satara district

The Satara district saw two more Covid-19 positive cases on Wednesday, taking the total tally of positive patients to 43. Of them, 33 are active cases, while eight patients have recovered from the infection. There have been two casualties. Wednesday’s cases are being treated at the Satara district hospital and sub-district hospital in Karad.


