Satranjipura woman delivers baby in GMCH Covid-19 isolation ward
2020-05-04
Nagpur: A 23-year-old woman from Satranjipura, city’s first Covid-19 hotspot, gave birth to a baby boy at Covid-19 isolation ward of Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) at 2.20am on Sunday. It is district’s second case when a woman who tested positive for Covid-19 has delivered in isolation ward. The earlier one was from Mominpura. Baby girl of Mominpura’s 28-year-old woman has tested negative.GMCH doctors told TOI, “Woman and baby may get discharge in a day or two. It was normal delivery. Both mother and baby are healthy and doing well. Baby’s weight was 2.2kg and cried after delivery,” doctors said.The woman was tested positive for Covid-19 on April 18. Doctors at GMCH made special arrangements for her care and delivery also. “She is a asymptomatic carrier. She tested negative twice in a row on April 30 and May 1. So, we decided to keep the baby with mother for regular breastfeeding,” said a doctor from OBGY department of GMCH.The woman completed 14 days of isolation period on Sunday. If all parameters are normal, the baby and mother will be discharged in a day or two.Woman from Mominpura had given birth to girl few hours after testing positive for Covid-19 at IGGMCH on April 29 .Deputy medical superintendent of IGGMCH Dr Sagar Pandey told TOI that samples of girl were taken on first and third day, and both tested negative,” he said.On Sunday, a 48-year-old woman from Dobi Nagar near Ansar Nagar in Mominpura tested positive. She was quarantined being a contact of woman who delivered baby. The number of positive cases from this chain increased to three with a man testing positive on Saturday.Now, number of cases from Mominpura increased to 30, making this locality city’s second Covid-19 hotspot.The number of corona positive from the district reached to 151.Civil surgeon VD Paturkar cleared confusion over one positive person from May 1 and 2. “We are counting a woman from Warud, Amravati district, in cases of Nagpur district. She was admitted at GMCH and tested positive. Later, we will recommend that she be counted in Amravati district being a resident of Warud,” he said.With the latest one, cases of other districts being counted in Nagpur district increased to three with earlier two from Chandrapur.The NMC’s tally is 146, excluding two cases from Chandrapur, and one each from Warud, Kamptee and Kanhan.On Sunday night, around 20 people from Choodi Gully, Mominpura, were quarantined. 14 members of a family from this area, including 70-year-old deceased, had tested positive.On Saturday, 76 people were quarantined from Dobi Nagar. Earlier, 198 were quarantined from all areas of Mominpura.Satranjipura has reported 97 cases. Reports of many people from the list of 402 who were quarantined on April 29 are awaited.