Satranjipura has 80 +ve cases and 503 quarantined
2020-04-27
Nagpur: Three more persons from city including one-and-a-half-year boy, who now becomes district’s youngest patient so far, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday taking the total to 127.

Two of the three are connected with Satranjipura chain and the number of positive cases from this increased to 80. On Sunday, 123 more people from Satranjipura were quarantined taking the total to 503. Also, 13 people were booked in connection with Satranjipura case increasing total persons facing action to 15.

Remaining positive person is a 37-year-old woman from Mominpura.

Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) officials told TOI, “The nne-and-a-half-year old boy who tested positive on Sunday was already at GMCH. His parents had tested positive on Saturday. The couple had kept the child with them,” they said.

Another positive person from Satranjipura is a 55-year-old woman who was quarantined at MLA Hostel. She has been shifted to IGGMCH.

The couple and 55-year-old woman are neighbours of 68-year-old deceased from Satranjipura. They were among 150 people quarantined on Thursday.

The 37-year-old woman from Mominpura was also already at GMCH. Her five-year-old son had tested positive on April 24. The woman got admitted in Covid-19 Isolation Ward of GMCH with the boy. Her husband has also tested positive.

The husband is brother of 42-year-old resident of Choodi Gully, Mominpura, who had tested positive on April 18. Earlier, 12 members of the same family had tested positive. With latest woman, total number of cases from this family has increased to 13.

The 42-year-old was taking care of seven Jabalpur-based Tablighi Jamaatis who were camping at Darul Falah, Takia Deewanshah, Mominpura. They had tested positive on April 12 and 13 following which the person and his family were quarantined and tested.

Total number of cases from Mominpura are now 25.

With some among 150 Satranjipura residents quarantined on Thursday testing positive, municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe directed the officials to trace and quarantine more neighbours. Team led by assistant commissioner Vijay Humne and zonal medical officer Dr Minakshi Mane took in 123 persons from 21 families including 93 adults and 30 children between 5pm and 11pm on Sunday. Samples of all persons will be taken on Monday.

Kalamna police registered an offence against 13 persons in connection with Satranjipura. TOI on Sunday had reported Mundhe had directed police action against 10 persons hiding in a godown at Vijay Nagar, Kalamna.

An offence under Section 188 (disobedience to public servant), Sections 269, 270 (negligent and malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) of IPC and Section 3 of Epidemic Diseases Act-1897 was registered against the 13 including 10 who were hiding, two nearby residents who were helped them in hiding and owner of godown.

The 13 include women and children. They were hiding to avoid quarantine. People from Vijay Nagar noticed them and informed NMC and Kalamna police who quarantined them at MLA Hostel in the wee hours of Saturday. One of the family members was already quarantined at Wathoda.

This is second such action related to Satranjipura case with earlier a couple (Covid-19 positive) from Shanti Nagar and relatives of deceased were booked for hiding their children at Bhaldarpura. Later, one of two children had also tested positive.


