Coronavirus threat: Saudi Arabia visas nixed, Umrah pilgrims return from Dubai
2020-02-29
LUCKNOW: After Saudi Arabia suspended visas to pilgrims headed for Umrah in Mecca due to threat of coronavirus, more than 50 people from Lucknow were sent back from Dubai airport on Friday. 

Besides, scores of others on way to Saudi Arabia were stopped at Lucknow airport on Thursday itself. Many who had planned visits to Islam’s holiest site in the coming days were disheartened due to the sudden restriction. 

Intsar Mehdi, owner of a city-based travel company which sends batches for Haj and Umrah, is returning from Dubai along with fellow passengers after they were stopped on Thursday evening from proceeding to Mecca. 

“We left Lucknow for Dubai on Wednesday evening and were supposed to leave for Mecca on Thursday evening when our flight got cancelled due to suspension of tourist visa. We have around 55 pilgrims here from Lucknow and a few from adjoining areas. We were stuck for a few hours at Dubai airport and had to make arrangements to return. Now, we are flying back to Lucknow,” Intsar told TOI over the phone. 

While Haj, one of the five pillars of Islam, is performed annually, Umrah can be performed throughout the year. Roshan Begum, who was supposed to fly out on March 1, said she had arranged the money for travel after saving for three years. “This would have been my first Umrah. We have asked the operator for a refund,” said the 50-year-old.

According to city tour operators, around 3,000 bookings were made in advance by Lucknow residents. 

Each person had paid around Rs 70,000 to tour operators, which included the visa, transport and accommodation. After the sudden suspension, travel companies said they will incur huge losses.

“We had around 54 pilgrims ready to fly out on Friday. Now, airline tickets and hotel bookings have been cancelled. Umrah visas are given for a month. Those who wish to go will have to take new packages,” said Zafar Askari, a tour operator in Chowk. 


