Saudi Arabia suspends Umrah visa over coronavirus, pilgrimage plans of thousands from Hyderabad hit
2020-02-28
HYDERABAD: Hyderabad: The suspension of entry on Umrah pilgrims by Saudi Arabia will hit several Muslims from Hyderabad. The suspension, announced on Thursday, has been put in place to restrict the entry of citizens of countries where cases of Coronavirus have been reported. The Umrah is a minor pilgrimage performed any time except during the Haj season. Thousands of Muslims from Hyderabad and other parts of the state perform Umrah every year, particularly during the Islamic months of Rajab, Shaban and Ramzan.


Rajab, which set in a few days back, marks the beginning of the peak season for Umrah. The number of pilgrims for Umrah goes up manifold during Ramzan, the Muslim month of fasting. The annual Haj season is five months away and Saudi authorities have not stated if they will continue the curbs during Haj too or restrict the number of pilgrims. The Haj season this year will begin in July.

Several pilgrims who went to airport on Thursday had to return home as a result of the ban. There was confusion among pilgrims as the announcement from Saudi authorities had come at the last minute. Salahuddin Ansari, officer on special duty in Telangana state waqf board, told TOI that he and his family members were scheduled to leave for Jeddah on Friday but then their travel agent informed him about the ban on Umrah. “I had prepared for Umrah for several months. We had packed our luggage and everyone in my family was ready for the pilgrimage. Now, I have cancelled my leave and am joining duty,” Salahuddin said.

Waqf board chairman Mohammad Saleem said he too had put off his plans for Umrah in view of Coronavirus threat. “We have prepared the itinerary for mid-March. But the sudden ban on Umrah has come as a shock for us,” he told TOI. Wahiduddin Khaja of Aero Wings Travel and Cargo Agency, which processes Umrah and Haj travels, said that around 500 people from Hyderabad leave for Umrah every day. “The ban is likely to last long as there is no respite from Coronavirus. It is a huge financial loss to travel agents in the country,” he said hoping that the ban would be lifted at least during Ramzan.

According to World Health Organisation (WHO), novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) is a cousin of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), which is currently prevalent in Saudi Arabia. COVID-19, MERS and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) are caused by members of the Coronavirus family. Between December 1, 2019 and January 31, 2020, Saudi had reported 19 new cases of MERS including eight deaths. In view of the virus reaching Iran, Saudi authorities had imposed the travel ban.

Though Saudi authorities have not specified the period of ban on Indian pilgrims for Umrah, in a separate circular the Saudi ministry of health has imposed restriction on travel and cancelled leaves of employees in the Mecca health care cluster from March 15 to May 30. Imposing ban on travel for those in Mecca cluster, the health ministry said except for urgent cases, travel outside the station should not be allowed.


