Say it with flowers, the best way to beat lockdown blues
2020-04-12
Ludhiana: At a time when most residents are being made to stay at home due to the lockdown, several residents are finding solace in growing flowers. 

A random survey conducted by Dr Harpreet Singh, principal of GGN Institute of Management and Technology at Ghumar Mandi; and Prof Harjeet Kaur from GHG College of Education at Raikot found that several people found flowers as an effective means to beat depression and tension, while staying at home.

In this study, the researchers collected the statements of adults (both men and women) and children through various social media, which were eventually analysed for the results.

Most of the respondents said flowers had a positive impact on their psychology and helped in reducing stress. People surrounded by flowers appeared to be less anxious and depressed than those who had not grown flowers. The former also seemed to have derived more satisfaction from life than the latter. The study further found that people who think of flowers have better sleeping patterns, a positive impact on creativity, better focus on work, higher tolerance to pain, and even improved attention spans.

When asked if flowers elevate their mood, a majority of respondents said ‘instantly’. So, the researchers have advised people to grow more flowers in the coming season. It also appeared from the research that women’s moods were more uplifted by flowers than that of men. Most children, however, were found to be indifferent, and preferred spending their time instead with gadgets.

When asked if Covid-19 made them get closer to nature, more than half the people said ‘yes’, one third responded ‘to a great extent’, and only the remaining few (about 17%) said ‘such incidents do not change our lives’. Roses were easily the most loved flowers because of their association with romance. 

Also, working women felt more relaxed looking at flowers than housewives, for they felt flowers brought a change in their environment. One third of respondents working in offices confirmed that they had started growing flowers after the lockdown.

It was also found that working people forced to stay at home with flowers around them tend to forget their worries, were less anxious and tired, and generally in a more positive state of mind than people who do not live with flowers. Some of them also reported lower blood pressure readings. The researchers of the study concluded that flowers have a healing effect not only on those who have grown them in their homes, but also on those who simply share and receive pictures of flowers through social media. 

Thus, they advised people to spend more time with flowering plants, and extensively share pictures of home-grown flowers with their near ones to boost their morale and avoid depression during the lockdown period.


