Scared of virus, inmates begin stir for bail, parole
2020-03-25
Jodhpur: Jail inmates of Jodhpur Central Jail have begun a sit-in demanding release from jail through interim bail and parole in view of the threat of coronavirus. Alleging inadequate safety arrangements and high human density in the jail, they said that they were at high risk of infection.

In a letter addressed to the Chief Justice of India, they have cited Section 144 stating that more than four persons could not assemble at one place, while the jail has so many inmates crammed in a barrack, which was violation of social distancing protocol.

The letter said that there were no adequate medical facilities, if infection spreads in jail through the jail guards, who keep coming and going in and out of the jail.

“They bound to meet the jail inmates and there was no proper screening facility in jail for these guards. Not only this, but inmates from outside are brought into the jail premises and there was always a threat of them getting infected,” letter said.

They also termed the delay in judicial proceedings due to effect on work in courts. They have stated that due to this delay, their prospects were being affected.

With these allegations and apprehensions, they have demanded release from jail through bail, interim bail and parole by way of a designated format and warned of protest in jail from Tuesday.

Reacting to this protest, jail superintendent Kailash Trivedi said there were adequate medical facilities in jail and doctors of jail have been keeping close watch on the health conditions of the inmates.

“Even in routine, inmates’ health is properly taken care of. But these days in view of corona outbreak, we have been keeping adequate caution with regard to the health of the inmates,” he said adding that it included proper screening of every outsider.

He said that the capacity of Jodhpur Central Jail was 1475 while the present head count in the jail is 1,350, which was 175 below the strength. Recently, 15 inmates from Pali and 30 inmates from Bhinmal jail have been shifted here due to over-strength in these jails.

According to Trivedi, the demand of inmates was nothing but to get freedom from jail under the veil of corona outbreak.

He said that entire jail premises has been sanitized and fumigated and every aspect of the outbreak was being properly taken care of so that the virus did not affect jail.


