Coronavirus in Maharashtra: Scarcity of hand sanitisers, face masks hits citizens
2020-03-15
AURANGABAD: Citizens are finding it difficult to get hand sanitisers and masks despite the Government of India declaring these articles to be essential commodities in the wake of the outbreak of coronavirus in the country. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Under the Essential Commodities Act, the Government of India on Friday declared face masks and hand sanitizers as essential commodities till the end of June to prevent coronavirus from spreading further. The Act regulates production, supply and distribution of the essential commodities so that they are available to consumers at fair prices. The move came after the government’s previous directive to traders warning them against hoarding and overpricing of these items was not paid heed to. 

Commissioner of Maharashtra Food and Drugs Administration Arun Unhale admitted that there was a shortage of hand sanitizers and masks and said that the government was aware of the crisis. “In a meeting held by state FDA minister Rajendra Shingne at the Mantralaya on Saturday, manufacturers and distributors were asked to increase production and ensure regular supply. The supply should normalise within two to three days,” said Unhale. 

He said that the government was appealing to people to avoid hoarding and not create panic unnecessarily so that everyone could get access to the commodities.

According to Shailendra Rawat, secretary of the Aurangabad Chemists and Druggists Association, there is a shortage in the supply of smaller packs of hand sanitizers measuring 50ml and 100ml. “In Aurangabad city, 300 to 400 pieces of medical sanitizers, which are used by doctors in hospitals, are available in 500ml packs which costs around Rs 600. Hence, we are trying to procure disinfectant liquids which can be used for sanitising,” said Rawat. 

Meanwhile, most chemists are denying the availability of masks while some are selling it at an exorbitant price. “Doctors have advised that N-95 masks are only required by persons and doctors who are in close contact with the patients who have been infected with coronavirus. Others can simply fold their handkerchiefs and use it as a mask,” said Unhale. 


