Coronavirus in Delhi: Scared, patients give hospitals a miss
2020-03-13
NEW DELHI: Dr Sushil Sharma of Kailash Super Speciality Hospital in Noida was headed for a busy schedule this week with four joint replacement surgeries lined up over four days in addition to emergency cases. But, as the novel coronavirus scare grew, all four surgeries got cancelled. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“Some patients were upfront in stating their scare of getting infected in the hospital while the others requested for postponing the surgery on some pretext or other,” Dr Sharma, a senior orthopaedic and joint replacement surgeon, told TOI.

 
 
A doctor at Sir Ganga Ram Hospital (SGRH) said people were hesitant to come to Delhi for planned surgeries or follow-ups as they had heard about the viral cases in the city. “Last month, too, many patients postponed routine surgeries and follow-ups due to the riots. Now people don’t want to travel due to the novel coronavirus scare,” said Dr Amrendra Pathak, a senior urologist.

Dr Yash Gulati, consultant orthopaedic surgeon at Apollo Hospital, also said he had seen a nearly 20% decline in the OPD footfall. “People are mostly scared of air travel,” he added.

Cataract and gallbladder removal, and weight loss and cosmetic surgeries have been affected the most by the scare. Dr Sunil Choudhary, chief of Max Institute of Reconstructive, Aesthetic, Cleft and Craniofacial Surgery, said the demand for planned cosmetic surgeries such as rhinoplasty, commonly known as nose job, had gone down by nearly a half. “I think it is okay. Right now, our focus should be on containing the outbreak and for that people should avoid travelling for surgeries that can be postponed. But they shouldn’t neglect ill health or delay important surgeries,” he said.

Big corporate hospitals are screening patients at their entrance for any symptom of the virus. They are also providing hand sanitisers at the entrance. But the fear remains. “I used to see at least 50 patients daily. But it has dipped by nearly 40% over the past two-three days,” said Dr Anoop Misra, chairman of Fortis C-Doc. 

Even AIIMS isn’t spared. Dr A K Bisoi, senior cardio thoracic and vascular surgeon, said there was a 30-40% fall in the follow-up cases. “Surgeries haven’t gone down here but we have come up with measures to ensure there is no crowding. All patients are called only a day or two before the surgery so that the wait period isn’t long. Extra precaution is also being taken to implement hand hygiene and other safety measures,” he said. 

While routine surgeries and follow-up for chronic conditions can be postponed, many people with emergency may still need to go to the hospital. Dr A S Soin, chairman of Institute of Liver Transplantation and Regenerative Medicine, Medanta-The Medicity in Gurgaon, advised both patients and their attendants to avoid crowded areas while visiting hospitals. “They should also sanitise hands after using human touch points and and make sure that the hospital is following cleaning procedures during tests,” he said.

Dr Soin emphasised that hospitals should clean the common touch points and floors in every four to six hours and train all healthcare workers to practise hand hygiene.

