Bihar: Scattered currency notes with coronavirus message shock Saharsa residents
2020-04-13
PATNA: Residents of Saharsa town were taken by surprise when they found currency notes scattered in front of their houses on Saturday morning. Already scared of Covid-19 outbreak, nobody came forward to pick up the notes in the denomination of Rs 20, Rs 50 and Rs100.


The locals got more apprehensive as the notes carried hand-written slips in Hindi, “Mein corona lekar aaya hun. Note le lo nahin to pareshan karunga (I have come with corona. Accept it, otherwise I will harass you).” The notes were found in Hatia Ghachhi locality under the Sadar police station area of the town.

Some of the residents had spotted similar notes on Friday as well. “Initially, I did not take cognizance of it thinking it to be the handiwork of some mischievous people. But when we received similar complaints from others on Saturday again, we informed the local police,” said a resident Subhash Kumar.

The notes in the denomination of Rs 20, Rs 50 and Rs100 carried the message in similar handwriting. Savita Devi, who had found the notes on Friday evening, said that she informed her husband, a retired government employee, immediately.

On getting information, a police team led by Sadar police station SHO R K Singh, reached the spot and inquired about the matter. Singh, on being contacted on Sunday, said the notes had been seized and investigations are on. “Preliminary investigation suggested it to be the handiwork of some anti-social elements to create panic among the residents,” he said.

The SHO said that CCTV footages are being obtained from nearby shops and commercial establishments to ascertain the identity of the man, who had scattered the notes in front of the houses of some residents. 

“We are keeping a close watch on such disgruntled elements who are trying to create panic among the residents under the garb of Covid-19 pandemic. They will be dealt with sternly,” SDPO Prabhakar Tiwari said.

He, however, admitted that some women and children were shocked after spotting currency notes with handwritten slips. “Police have asked them not to worry. Such things do happen during pandemics,” he added.

