Telangana: SCB Covid-19 survey moves at snail’s pace
2020-06-07
SECUNDERABAD: A survey on primary and secondary contacts of Covid-19 positive cases in Secunderabad Cantonment is going at a snail’s pace due to lack of paramedical staff. 


Currently, a total of three medical officers and 10 ANMs (paramedical staff) are working under Telangana government’s medical and health department, covering the entire Secunderabad Cantonment, which has a population of 3.5 lakh. Though the SCB maintains the dispensaries for Cantonment residents, it does not have a network of ANMs. As a result, the SCB is depending on Telangana government’s medical and health department. 

New Covid-19 positive cases are being registered at several areas in the Cantonment after lockdown was relaxed. Immediately, paramedical staff were sent to conduct door-to-door surveys within one-kilometre radius of the location of the Covid-19 patient to identify primary and secondary contacts and people with symptoms.

“Special teams are deputed to do surveys. The teams are covering nearly 70 to 90 houses in a day and collecting data of every household. Sometimes, these teams have to skip the survey and go to other areas, from where positive cases are being reported. As a result, the survey has been running at a snail’s pace,” said a medical officer. In some instances, these special teams face problems during the survey, as members of some households refuse to reveal their whereabouts. In many instances, the houseowners do not permit the staff to speak with them due to fear of spreading the virus, said the medical officer.

“It is our duty to do thermal scanning for every household and note down the reading for record purposes. Few households are cooperating with us while others are replying that they are healthy and do not require thermal screening. But we are taking the help of local police to do our job,” a senior paramedical staff told STOI. 

Meanwhile, on Saturday, a new positive Covid-19 case was registered near Arya Samaj in old Bowenpally.


