Schools brainstorm on safe operations amid pandemic
2020-05-20
Madurai: Many private schools across the district, have started making plans to provide a safe space for their students when they reopen perhaps in July or September. According to sources in private schools, though the schools are yet to make any final plans, they have their task cut out for them.“We have to start planning now since it is clear that covid-19 is not going to be eliminated in the next few months at least. Students need to be able to return to school and holding merely online classes is not practical in the long run particularly for younger children,” said the principal of a private matriculation school in Madurai.The schools however as a first step will have to start with online classes but even that has not been a great success in some schools in the district. “The problem is that when we tried for higher classes like Class IX, it didn’t prove to be as good a success as we thought. Many private matriculation schools cater to middle-class population who still are not very used to online classes. Watching YouTube videos or reading e-books for learning is one thing but making students sit through online classes and ensure they learn is far more challenging,” said a Class X science teacher.“For some schools with smaller campuses, social distancing is difficult to achieve. There can be guidelines but there cannot be one plan for all schools even in a district. Further, the practicality of actually making students follow social distancing with each other remains a fear for us,” said the principal. However, hand washing and use of sanitisers by students could be managed.Some schools are suggesting shift-based timings or classes on alternate days for students to ensure students would get more space even in smaller campuses. However, teachers are apprehensive about how well it would go down with parents. “It would be tough for parents to manage timings, especially when both are working and if they have two children. Further, students need to be engaged, likely by online classes on days or time they are not in school which again does not seem very feasible if they are without parental supervision too,” added the principal. Schools are further looking at how transportation to and from schools would be and how they can manage crowds when schools open for the day and end for the day. School buses also require proper maintenance and sanitization.