Andhra Pradesh schools stuck with piles of eggs after closure due to coronavirus scare
2020-03-20
AMARAVATI: In the wake of schools being untimely shut down following the coronavirus scare, they have been left with a large stock of eggs meant for mid day meal. Contractors, who are already struggling with losses, have reportedly refused to take back the stocks leaving headmasters in a fix.


About 70-75 lakh eggs have been left unused in the schools. Sources said that Anganwadi centres also have stocks of nearly 5-6 lakh eggs. Sources said egg contractors usually deliver the stocks on a weekly basis, usually on Sundays, and are enough for a week’s mid day meal. In some cases, they would supply at least three-four weeks’ of stock in advance. The number of eggs would depend on the student strength and headmasters would pay the egg suppliers after the consumption of the week’s stock of eggs. In case of a high number of absentees, headmasters would place an order for fewer number of eggs.

Nearly 34 lakh children study in government and municipal schools. About 2 lakh students study in government-aided schools, which are also covered by the mid day meal programme. While small schools have a student strength of around 200-300, some of the larger schools have nearly 1,500-2,000 students. 

A school headmaster confirmed that even the smallest school usually has a stock of 1,000 eggs, while a big school has about 6,000-8,000 eggs in stock. “We are unable to take a call as to how to handle the egg stock. If we keep them in the storage room they would decay after a week,” a school headmaster told TOI on condition of anonymity.

Sources said that a few schools have requested the suppliers to take the stocks back. However, the distributors are believed to be have requested the schools not to return the stocks as they are already running huge losses. Following a query raised by the the district educational officers (DEOs), mid day meal project director and senior IAS officer Sridhar said the government is contemplating directing the schools to handover the eggs to Anganwadi centres where the workers could distribute them among the enrolled mothers and their children. However, no decision was taken till Thursday.


