Goa schools to get new advisory on coronavirus precautions
2020-03-08
PANAJI: With over 30 confirmed cases of Covid-19 in the country, schools in Goa will be issued fresh instructions on the precautionary measures to be taken for students to prevent coronavirus infections. While the directorate of education (DoE) had already issued directives on the virus in February, the new instructions are necessitated following an order to all states by the Union human resource development ministry.


“We will issue the necessary instructions to schools. Some instructions have already been issued,” said education director Vandana Rao.

Meanwhile, some city schools are already advising students to carry sanitisers with them and reviewing plans for outings like picnics, to keep students safe.

In its earlier advisory, the DoE had said that “washing hands and sneezing into elbows is the best practice” to keep infection at bay. 

The February advisory was more focused on busting myths related to Covid-19 and said that misinformation and racism are more dangerous than any virus. Students were told not to fall prey to panic over the virus, or to engage in ‘rude’ and ‘insensitive’ jokes which may be racist.

“The panic and hysteria... is fuelled by racism and xenophobia, not evidence or practicality,” stated the note issued to schools. 

Clarifying the ‘myth’ that “coronavirus is the most dangerous virus on earth”, the advisory countered it with the ‘fact’ that “common flu kills 60 times more people annually than coronavirus”.

The circular also asked schools to inform students that they should not believe everything they read online about the virus because it may not necessarily be factually correct. “Check for references and look for evidence, not ideology,” the advisory said. 

“Only 2% cases have reported deaths, and most of these deaths are associated with weaker immune systems (e.g. old age),” stated the advisory, clarifying that being diagnosed with coronavirus does not mean that death due to it is inevitable.

