Coronavirus: Schools in Delhi issue advisories to parents
2020-03-04
NEW DELHI: While two schools have been shut in Noida over fears of a coronavirus outbreak, authorities in the capital are not taking any chances either. Many Delhi schools have issued advisories to parents, requesting them to keep their wards at home if they show respiratory symptoms such as cold and cough. 


Shri Ram School, Vasant Vihar, said it will remain closed from Thursday, while its Aravali and Moulsari campuses will be shut from March 9. The report cards will be sent online, while the other events of the schools have been postponed. “The spring break has been advanced by a few days. The holidays will be utilised for sanitisation work. This is being done as a precautionary measure,” the school said.
The school has sent a detailed advisory to the parents on the precautionary measures they should take as also the steps being taken by the school itself. A note sent to the parents read: “We are doing regular handwashing in class for the children, teachers and didis, also along with our usual hand-sanitising sessions. Our washrooms are also cleaned and sanitised at frequent intervals.” The school also requested parents of the children who had recently acquired flu to submit fitness certificates from their paediatricians.

Another school has asked parents to educate their house helps and drivers about the virus. While Sardar Patel Vidyalaya urged parents not to believe in rumours, it also requested them to keep the authorities informed if their child was suffering from cold and cough. The school, in a note, stated: “Even if any other member of the family has such symptoms, please do inform the vidyalaya so that appropriate preventive measures can immediately be taken at this end.”

Apart from general guidelines, the schools have suggested that consumption of raw and undercooked meats be avoided. “Avoid crowded public places and close contact with people who are unwell or showing symptoms of illness. Practice frequent hand washing with soap and good personal hygiene. Wear a mask if you have respiratory symptoms, such as a cough or runny nose,” a note by another school stated. It also mentioned that masks neither guaranteed prevention of the spread of coronavirus nor were they an alternative to quarantine. Tania Joshi, principal of Indian School, said: “We have put up an advisory on our website. We have also sent an advisory to the parents and told the children about the precautions that need to be taken.”

Many parents, themselves, are taking no chances at their end. “It is difficult to ascertain who is affected by the virus. So, I am not letting my son go out and play. Avoiding crowded spaces is important,” said Pratima, whose child studies in a private school in east Delhi.


