Covid-19: School teacher, husband die within a day’s gap
2020-05-11
NEW DELHI: A municipal primary school teacher and her husband died of Covid-19 within a gap of a day last week. The family was informed about their test results on May 7, after their death.


The husband, a physician who ran a private clinic in Jahangirpuri, died last Sunday, while the woman died on May 4. The deceased couple, who were residents of Rohini Sector 28, is survived by two sons aged 23 and 17, who are still studying. The test results of the children are still awaited.

The elder son said his mother (45) was tasked with distributing food at the school near Adarsh Nagar metro station 2-3 times between April 17 and 22. “On April 22, she suddenly developed breathlessness, vomiting and diarrhoea, following which we took her to GB Pant Hospital,” he added. The family was allegedly not given proper information about her condition.

“My mother was discharged on May 1, but the same night her condition worsened and she was rushed to RML on May 2 where she died two days later,” the son said. The family said they were informed about her test results after the death. “On May 7, we were told that she was Covid-19 positive,” the son said, adding that his father too died of the infection.

“Since the lockdown began, my father had not been to the clinic. The entire family remained indoors and the only time he stepped out was to drop my mother at the school,” the son said.

On May 2, when the son returned home after admitting his mother to the hospital, he found his father extremely weak. “He could barely walk. We called an ambulance, but it took 6-7 hours to arrive. He was finally admitted around afternoon the next day and was not treated until late at night. He died around 10pm the same day,” he added.

Meanwhile, teachers’ unions have been demanding that they not be deployed for ration distribution. They added that the kin of the deceased teacher should be paid ex gratia of Rs 1 crore under the corona warrior scheme of Delhi government.

A North Delhi Municipal Corporation official said the teacher had last come to work on April 18. “Her next duty was on April 25, which she did not attend. It’s unfortunate that even her husband died of Covid-19 on May 3. Their home has been sanitised twice. The civic body is sending the file requesting compensation.”

