School turned into quarantine centre for BMP personnel
2020-05-21
PATNA: A government secondary high school, which is located on the Bihar Military Police (BMP) campus, has been converted to a quarantine centre for the BMP personnel who tested positive for Covid-19. 

Apart from this, the entire BMP campus spread over several acres near the Patna airport has been declared as a containment zone. Patna deputy development commissioner Richie Pandey, who is the nodal officer for enforcement of home quarantine said, “The entire campus has been declared as a containment zone on Tuesday with the entry and exit points now strictly regulated.” 

The campus houses the headquarters of BMP-14, BMP-5 and BMP-10 battalions. Officers’ quarters are also inside the campus. While the first case was that of a retired havildar, who tested positive for coronavirus on May 7, 47 other personnel who live inside the barracks also contracted the virus.

An IPS officer, preferring anonymity said, “A list of personnel engaged in essential office work at BMP DIG office, command hospital, state sports office and battalion headquarters on the campus has been prepared for providing passes for movement. No other personnel or any of their family members residing on the campus will be allowed to move out until there is any emergency.”

Meanwhile, 35 BMP personnel, who were earlier kept at Hotel Patliputra Ashoka in isolation, were shifted to BAMETI premises on Tuesday night which is nearer to the campus.

“These 35 personnel, who are asymptomatic, would now undergo treatment there. A medical team has also been deployed at BAMETI for round-the-clock monitoring of these personnel. If any of them develop any further symptom, they would be immediately shifted to Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH),” said an official.

He said three companies of Swabhiman battalion and two companies of BMP-10 were shifted out of the campus for required deployment in field before declaring it as containment zone. “While Swabhiman battalion companies are stationed at Kendra Vidyalaya campus on Bailey Road, two companies of BMP-10 were also allocated two government school premises from where they can be roped in for deployment,” the official added .


