Coronavirus scare in West Bengal: Schools form attendance module for teachers
2020-03-20
KOLKATA: Days after CM Mamata Banerjee clarified about teachers’ attendance in schools, institutes have chalked out a module to ensure minimum interaction among the faculties, who have been requested to attend office due to unavoidable duties, like invigilation and evaluation.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The decisions by CBSE and CISCE has brought a big relief to the authorities as the majority of schools have now asked the teachers to go on leave and do necessary administrative and other official works from home. “Even conducting online classes do not require teachers to come to the campus,” said a senior administration officer at a city school.


 
At Vivekananda Mission School, 50 among 250 teaching staff have been assigned to evaluate answer scripts by CISCE. Among others, several teachers were invigilating in the ongoing examinations. On Thursday, after the examinations were postponed, the authorities announced closing the school till April 15. “We will come to the office only for administrative work,” said principal Sarmistha Banerjee.

The Future Foundation School authorities have requested the teachers to attend office till Friday. Teachers will take online classes from home or from the campus, as desired by the teachers, from April 1. Both St James School and Pratt Memorial School have decided to close the institutions till March 31. “On March 31, teachers and students will get an updated notice. They will only have to report to the school if the examinations are rescheduled. Evaluation can be done from home,” said St James School principal TH Ireland.

At DPS Megacity, classes have been suspended for students. However, apart from the examiners, other teachers have been told to attend the office. “The faculty members have already developed the online content, which will be uploaded on the school portal and will also be sent to students,” said a teacher. Principal Indrani Sanyal could not be reached for comment. 


