Coronavirus scare in Ahmedabad: Schools closed, teachers ask why they can’t stay home
2020-03-19
AHMEDABAD: “So what are teachers doing in school, when there are no students? The academic year is over and reports have been given. Are we waiting to get infected?” a city based educator asked the state chief secretary on Wednesday through an email.



Coronavirus in India live updates

She has further asked whether more than 60 staff gathering in a school doesn’t amount to a public gathering given the government has appealed to citizens to avoid social gatherings, and going to malls among taking other precautionary steps. 

The mail was sent as the schools across the state have been closed since March 16 as a precautionary measure to check spread of Covid-19, but the teaching and other staff continue reporting to duty. Most of the schools have staff between 70 and 250 people. Even though the government has clearly instructed people to stay away from gatherings and quarantine themselves at home, it seems educators, and school administration are immune from Covid-19 infections.

Speaking to TOI, Gujarat government’s education secretary (primary and Secondary education) Vinod Rao said, “Covid-19 has been declared a “notified disaster” and all essential service providers will continue to provide service as before. Teachers fall in essential service providers and cannot shun their responsibility just like the army, police and doctors cannot.”

A teacher said, “We have a staff of 200 and everyone is coming to school. We are working in advance for the next academic session.” She adds, “We educators, are never on leave, whether its Covid-19 or anything else.” Pointing out that work for this academic session is almost over, another educator said, “Even if one of us is infected, we will be putting all others and their families at risk.”

SGVP principal Padma Kumar said, “From Day 1, we made it clear that if any educator is unwell, they need not report to school, and we have five people working from home.” She added, “This is the time when we upload revision tests and worksheets for students and educators are doing that from school, besides taking online classes, taking online trainings and preparing schedules for next year.”

