Schools principals want to bust coronavirus myths
2020-02-01
Nagpur: School Headmasters Charitable Association (SHCA) is planning to create awareness among students about the deadly coronavirus, so that they do not fall for rumours floating on social media. The association is planning to approach the Indian Medical Association (IMA) for help with expert speakers, who can provide medically correct information to students. 

Zafar Khan, president of SHCA, said “Due to social media, false news spreads fast and vulnerable young minds get influenced easily. Being academicians, we are against the spread of unscientific messages that have potential to create panic among citizens. Doctors are the only qualified people to speak about this issue hence we are thinking of an initiative to make kids aware of the same.”

The IMA, which has already done a couple of workshops with SHCA, is open to suggestions on how this can be taken forward. Dr Laxmi Shrikhande, chairperson of IMA’s Adolescent Health Committee, said, “The idea sounds good and we are definitely open to having such an interaction. We look forward to meeting the principals and understanding in what format we can take this forward.” 

Dilip Bose, another senior academician and office bearer of SHCA, said multiple fake news about coronavirus are spreading fast and affecting kids. “What happens is that kids panic when they hear news like mass deaths happening due to the virus and that it spreads through such and such way. And in today’s generation, what they read or see on social media is considered true by default. Recently, a WhatsApp forward said drinking cold drinks causes cancer and many took it seriously. Such myths need to be busted and with coronavirus, we need to step up our efforts,” said Bose. 

Though nothing is finalized yet, some SHCA officials are thinking that a ‘master trainer’ approach would be more feasible. The draft plan is to ask IMA to conduct a myth busting seminar on coronavirus and also talk about precautions to be taken.


