Jaipur: School stripped of affiliation for flouting norms on coronavirus
2020-03-20
JAIPUR: The recognition of Shakti Shiksha Academy Sr Sec School, Jaipur, was cancelled on Thursday by the orders of directorate of education, Bikaner, for keeping the school open in violation of guidelines issued to check spread of Covid-19. 


In a surprise inspection on Thursday, Shakti Shiksha Academy School was found conducting examination as per schedule. School education minister Govind Singh Dotasra later tweeted that no school was allowed to function, so its recognition will be cancelled. 

Due to the threat of coronavirus, the government has directed all educational institutions in the state to declare holidays but many prominent schools in the city were found to be functioning or calling the teachers to duty. A video went viral on social media in which students were seen going to Divine Public School, Jaipur. Education department officials reached the school and shut it down.

Not only were students being forced to go to schools, many private and government schools in the city were calling teachers, who were made to sit in the staff rooms though the classes were not on. When the school authorities were asked the reason for this, they said that the teachers were still getting salaries. 

A private school teacher who did not wish to be identified said, “There is no work and most of our teachers sit in the staff room. We asked the administration to allow us to work from home but they said that teachers are being paid. But this is dangerous for our safety.” 

In government schools too, teachers are made to come to work everyday though holidays have been declared. Many government schools have a teaching staff of more than 50 persons. The education authorities’ decision to call them to work violates government order about disallowing gatherings of above 50 persons.

School education minister Govind Singh Dotasra said that private schools were not under the government’s jurisdiction. “We cannot force private schools but they should understand the safety of teachers.” The minister added, “In government schools, the teachers may be given responsibility to spread awareness during the time of epidemic. We are thinking to divide teachers in different batches to be available in schools and avoid crowd gatherings. We cannot shut down the entire system as other departments are functioning as well.”

The situation was similar in city’s colleges. One private college, Bhawani Niketan College, Jaipur, has been calling teachers everyday for some work. When asked, the administration said that exams were going on and teachers were called for administering. 

Meena Rathore, principal of the college said, “All the teachers were called due to the ongoing exams. Now, the university has declared postponement of exams, and we have followed the guidelines. The notification issued by education department was just to close down classes, but nothing was specified for the working of teachers. It is wrong and teachers must also be given relaxation for their security.” 

