Coronavirus outbreak: Goa schools told to keep ‘social distance’, but assemblies stay
2020-03-14
PANAJI: Taking a cue from the Unicef advisory for schools on Covid-19, director of education Vandana Rao has come out with a diluted version for Goa to follow on Friday. The guidelines encourage students, teachers and staff who feel sick not to come to school.

Daily disinfection of frequently touched surfaces in schools should be carried out, Rao has told schools, issuing to them part of Unicef’s guidelines on prevention and control of Covid-19 in schools.

 
 

The Unicef advisory for schools has been modified by the state directorate and does not call for cancellation of morning school assemblies, like is already being implemented in many states in the country. The state circular, however, asks ‘social distancing’ to be practised.

Goa’s guidelines explain what Covid-19 is, what its symptoms are and how the virus spreads. 

“Schools should provide water, sanitation and waste management facilities and follow environmental cleaning and decontamination procedures. Schools should promote social distancing (a term applied to certain actions that are taken to slow down the spread of a highly contagious disease, including limiting large groups of people coming together),” reads the circular, made applicable to all government, aided and unaided primary schools from the primary to the higher secondary level.

Educational institutions have also been told to increase air flow and ventilation by opening windows and using air conditioning wherever available.

Hand sanitisers should be placed in classrooms, toilets, halls, near exits where possible, the circular reads.

Schools should enforce regular hand washing with safe water and soap, alcohol rub or hand sanitiser or chlorine solution, the education director said in the circular.

Students should be encouraged to wash hands frequently and thoroughly for at least 20 seconds, institutes have been told.

“Most importantly, it is to be mentioned that the protection of children and educational facilities is particularly important. Precautions are necessary to prevent the potential spread of Covid-19 in school settings; however, care must also be taken to avoid stigmatising students and staff who may have been exposed to the virus,” the guidelines state.

