Schools may get water-testing unit soon
2020-03-02
Kozhikode: All high schools and higher secondary schools in the district with chemistry labs are likely to get a water quality testing facility soon. The district development committee has decided to submit a proposal for the setting up of water testing labs in schools aiming to ensure service to the residents of the locality.

At present drinking water testing facility is available at Regional Analytical Lab at Malaparamba and at the Centre for Water Resources Development and Management (CWRDM). Not many persons are making use of the water testing facilities owing to various reasons. “Many schools in the district have high-end laboratories which are now only used for academic purpose,” said district panchayat president Babu Parassery, who is also the chairman of the district development committee. Once water testing facility is arranged at the school labs it would be of great help to the residents, including the families of the students, he said. The proposal for setting up water quality testing facility was mooted in the backdrop of increased pollution of water resources including wells. Many wells in the district are polluted with coliform and e-coli bacteria.

Besides, the presence of excessive quantity of iron and other minerals are also not good for health. The water quality testing facility will help the residents to test the quality of their well water and take necessary steps to purify the water.

Many offices, shops and schools are depending on drinking water supplied by private parties. The water quality supplied by the private parties also is a cause of concern as the examination by food safety department has been finding the presence of bacteria in bottled and canned water. The lack of knowledge regarding the source of water is also a concern.

The residents will be able to easily access the water quality testing facility if the facility is introduced in schools, said the Parassery. Students will also be able to learn the issues related to water pollution and the importance for maintaining the hygiene of water resources, he added.

The plan is to set up the water testing facility at the earliest utilizing the asset development fund of MLAs of all assemblies. Government and aided schools with Chemistry lab will be selected for the implementation of the project.


