Schools’ solution: Exams at home, virtual classes amid coronavirus scare
2020-03-14
KOCHI: Though final exams have been disrupted with holidays for students up to class VII being advanced, a few city schools are giving them a chance to write the exams at home. The institutions are sending question papers online to students and asking them to write the exam within the prescribed time and self-evaluate the answer sheets in order to keep them engaged till the official summer vacation begins. 

A few schools are also providing bridging classes, which are the sessions provided to present Class IX and XI students to familiarise them with Class X and Class XII syllabus, through online platforms. Also, some schools are giving vacation assignments to students to conduct internal evaluations till March-end.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates
“Most parents and students are unhappy having to miss the final exams despite having prepared for them. Theatres are closed, the malls cannot be visited, all gatherings have been stopped, so we felt it imperative that we as educators help and partner with parents to keep the students engaged. We will share their term-end question papers with parents. Parents can encourage the child to attempt the assignments at home. The papers will be sent as per the scheduled exam timetable. This is not an exam but more of students’ self-assessment of their own strengths. This will not be counted toward the overall grades,” said Sreekumar Kartha, principal of Global Public School.

Bhavan’s Vidya Mandir, Girinagar, is working on syllabus-based assignments for students. “Although we had to unexpectedly suspend classes earlier this week, we are keen on engaging with our pupils in a meaningful manner. Class coordinators are planning the assignments,” said principal Girija T S.

Global Public School is also offering online bridge sessions for class IX and XI students. “We have been using Google Classroom for the last four to five years for our students. On March 11, we launched virtual classes in chemistry and business studies for our senior students on a trial basis. Students can interact with teachers using software like Google Meet and Google Classroom. We will be conducting online classes as per a new schedule,” said school vice-principal Susanna Sunil.

Toc H Public School, Vyttila, is also planning similar online classes. “Students are already in vacation-mood but we advise parents to make sure that students don’t miss classes,” said principal Juby Paul.

