Coronavirus outbreak: Schools, colleges in Bihar to remain shut till March 31
2020-03-14
PATNA: Bihar government on Friday ordered closure of all schools, colleges, private coaching institutes, cinema halls, parks and several other public places till March 31 as a preventive measure against coronavirus (Covid-19). The state health department has cancelled all kinds of leave of doctors and support staff. The government also deferred its Bihar Diwas celebrations, which were scheduled from March 22 to 24.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The state government will review the situation in a couple of days and, if needed, will invoke Epidemic Act to restrict public gatherings. The decisions were taken in a meeting chaired by CM Nitish Kumar on Friday.

Briefing the media, chief secretary Deepak Kumar said no cultural and sports event will be held in the state till March 31 and all the bookings for such events will be cancelled. Even examination held by government organizations have been cancelled. The chief secretary said the state government will also ask private schools to defer their internal examinations. “The motive behind such measures is to ask people to stay indoors and limit their outdoor activities,” Deepak said. 

He also claimed that the state government was mulling to call government officials to offices on alternate days to prevent large gathering. “The general administration department will come up with a notification and office head will decide on whom to call and when,” he said.

All government medical college and hospitals, including Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) and Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS) will have additional 100 ventilators to tackle any emergency situation. Also, apart from Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences (RMRI), the only centre for Covid-19 test in Bihar at present, the facility of test will also be started at AIIMS-Patna, PMCH and IGIMS.

As on Friday, altogether 142 people were under observation for suspected symptoms and 73 had been discharged so far. No positive case has been detected in Bihar so far.

Deepak said since anganwadi centres have been closed till March 31, the corresponding amount will be transferred in the bank accounts of the beneficiaries. Same process will be adopted for the beneficiaries of midday meal scheme.

Though no decision on closure of commercial malls have been taken as of now, Deepak said it may be decided in another meeting on Monday if the Epidemic Act is invoked. He said steps were also being taken to increase the vigil and screenings at India-Nepal border. 

