Scientists bust myths about bats and Covid-19
2020-04-27
JAIPUR: The recent pandemic which has gripped the world has given a bad rap to bats with most people believing the hypothesis that this mammal is to be blamed for the fast spreading of coronavirus.

Demands to exterminate the mammal have risen across the globe, including in Rajasthan where its two types - Rousettus and Pteropus are commonly found.

After a recent study by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) found bat coronaviruses (BtCoV) in two species of Indian bats, the layman has been convinced that the mammal is the one which is the Corona Vector.

This has raised concern among the environmentalists and scientists who fear that the flying mammal, which is essential for the ecological system, might be facing near extinction as locals are out for its blood.

The theory of the virus to have originated from bats at a market in Wuhan, China, has made its presence felt in India following which conservationists from South Asian countries (68 bat biologists from six countries) have stepped forth to defend these bats.

“We debunk the myth that bats are vectors of the novel coronavirus, (SARS-CoV-2),” said biologist Dr Sumit Dookia, from the research group. The group of biologists claimed that there is no cause for panic as these BtCoVs are not the same as SARS-CoV-2 and cannot cause Covid-19.

“Collectively, the group has decided to appeal to the governments of our countries to strengthen the laws on bat conservation,” he added. Over 110 species of bats in India are unprotected in India, including the critically-endangered Kolar leaf-nosed Bat.

In Rajasthan, bats have generally been looked as a nuisance, especially by fruit growers who claim that the mammal destroys their crops. However, according to researchers, bats play a crucial role in pollination of flowers and protect farms from other pests, but have been excessively demonised in the wake of Covid-19 outbreak. Instances of citizens demanding the killing and removal of bats, smoking out colonies or sealing crevices where small bats and their pups roost are all on the rise all over the world. This will gradually damage the ecosystem service of bats, claimed experts.

