Covid-19 pandemic: South Central Railway shuts retiring room, dormitories in all railway stations
2020-03-21
HYDERABAD: Continuing with the measures against Covid-19, the South Central Railway (SCR) shut down retiring rooms and dormitories in all the railway stations from Friday. They will be closed till April 15. “We discussed the issue of shutting down the retiring rooms because a lot of passengers use them. Despite sanitising them, it is hard to make sure that they do not pose a risk to the passengers and others,” said a senior SCR official. He said the decision was meant to help minimise travel-related risks.


Meanwhile, the decision has not gone down well with passengers. “We do not have proper information as to which trains are running and which trains are cancelled. It would have been better if we had a safe and sanitised space in railway stations to sit and wait,” said V Surraiyah, a resident of Begumpet, who is travelling to Kanpur on March 22. 

Officials, however, said rush of passengers at the dormitories and retiring rooms is high and that safety of passengers cannot be compromised. All old and fresh bookings for allotment of retiring rooms and dormitories immediately were cancelled. 

Meanwhile, SCR has taken up painting and sticking floor markings at passenger reservation system offices, general ticket booking offices and counters, automatic ticket vending machines and parcel offices at major railway stations which handle heavy footfalls. 

“The step will go a long way in streamlining queue management at service utilities in busy railway stations in the zone. The brightly coloured floor marking strips will ensure segregation of waiting passengers in a queue by encouraging them to maintain a distance of one metre from each other while they wait to complete transactions,” an official release of SCR said.

Railway Protection Force personnel and railway staff have been assigned the task of educating and persuading passengers to follow the social distancing drill. 

