Coronavirus: Screening of passengers entering Kolhapur from today
2020-03-18
KOLHAPUR: The travelers coming to Kolhapur through state transport or private buses from Mumbai, Pune, Belgaum and Bangalore will be screened for symptoms of coronavirus at the six city entry points from Wednesday.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The Kolhapur Municipal Corporation has decided to conduct the screening of passengers. The step has been taken to keep a check on the spread of the disease in the city.

According to the KMC officials, they will focus on the long distance MSRTC buses and private tourist buses entering in city on National Highway 4. The passengers will be checked at at five identified spots including Shiye toll plaza, Shahu toll plaza, Shiroli, the routes from which buses enter into city via NH4 and at central bus stand and railway station.

KMC’s chief health officer Dilip Patil said, “We will not conduct screening or check-up of all the passengers from the bus nor will consider the buses travelling short distance. Our focus is to gather information about the passengers travelling from long distance centres into Kolhapur.”

Patil said they would be gathering information about the passengers with travel history to foreign countries and those who have come in contact with any person, who has recent travel history.

“The information of the particular passenger will be gathered along with the location he is planning to visit in city. The ward office and the health department in the ward will be informed about such people. The offices will conduct screening of such people and check if they have any symptoms of cough, cold and flu,” he said.

He clarified that they will not consider the passengers entering Kolhapur from nearby villages or towns or from other routes like Ratnagiri, Gaganbawada or Radhanagari.

District collector Daulat Desai said, “We have issued instructions to the civic officials as well as RTO to deploy sufficient staff to run the exercise successfully and ensure that people entering the city are safe and do not have any symptoms of the coronavirus. This is one of the step to prevent the spread of coronavirus.”


