Coronavirus scare: SDMC to roll out attendance app
2020-03-07
NEW DELHI: Amid the novel coronavirus threat and rising apprehensions among office-goers about using the biometric machines, South Delhi Municipal Corporation is soon expected to roll out an Android-based application that will enable its officials and workers to mark their attendance using phones.


Bhupender Gupta, standing committee chairperson of the civic body, said that the information technology department has been instructed to expedite the process. Marking attendance via mobile phones will check spread of any form of contamination, Gupta added.

A senior SDMC official told TOI that biometric machine attendance marking system has already been suspended. A hyperlink will soon be sent to all the senior officials to help them mark their attendance using the newly developed mobile app. “A similar app for Apple devices would be ready soon,” he added.

The app-based system records pictures and geo-coordinates to confirm the presence of the official. “The new app will also help the officials on field register their attendance,” another official said, adding that sanitation workers and engineers would be benefited by this the most.

Every official will be provided a unique ID for marking the attendance. “They will have to fill their IDs and their coordinates, and their pictures will be captured in the system. The data will automatically get uploaded on the server. It will not only save time, but also prevent any contamination,” added the official.

Officials and staff have also expressed their concerns over the past few days about the civic body moving back to the diary based system in which people have to use the pages and pens touched by others.

Delhi government has directed head of departments, autonomous bodies and municipal corporations to suspend the biometric attendance system in the wake of the novel coronavirus scare. It has over 70,000 employees, including officials, stationed in different departments at Delhi Secretariat, hospitals, educational institutions and offices in Civil Lines.

Around 1.3 lakh employees are working with three municipal corporations—50,000 with north, 33,000 with east and 50,000 with south corporation. In its missive to all the HoDs, the general administration department of Delhi government referred to a letter from the health department, which advised them to suspend the biometric attendance system till further orders.

