SDMC plans curbs to step up coronavirus fight
2020-03-16
NEW DELHI: In the wake of the novel coronavirus outbreak, swimming pools, night clubs, spa centres and discotheques in south Delhi are expected to be temporarily shut down as a precautionary measure. Space restrictions will also be imposed on the banquet halls hosting weddings in the time of an epidemic.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Soon, South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) is likely to make the announcement. A senior municipal corporation official told TOI that a notice regarding these restrictions may be released on Monday.

On Sunday, SDMC commissioner Gyanesh Bharti called a review meeting of public health department on the steps to be taken to tackle coronavirus threat. “Several measures to control highly crowded places have been discussed. We will increase the capacity of quarantine ward facility in Kalkaji hospital from 30 to 50 beds,” the official added.

Another senior municipal official said that swimming pools, discotheques and spa centres will be asked to shut down to prevent any form of contamination. These restrictions will apply till the epidemic does not come under control, he added.

About the restrictions on banquet halls, the official said that such establishments will have to ensure that each person has a minimum space of 1.5 square metres during the functions.

“This will check crowding. For instance, if a banquet hall is spread over an area of 100 square metres, the organisers will not be allowed to have more than 65-66 people in the function,” he explained.

The same space restriction will be applicable for other similar establishments and social gathering venues as well. “We will impose severe penalties and the licences may be revoked if the rules are not adhered to by the owners or the managers,” another official said.

Delhi government had recently said that a gathering of more than 200 people should not be allowed.

However, the weekly markets and vegetable as well as grocery shops will be exempted from the restrictions. “If we close them, it will lead to severe shortage of the items of daily need,” the official added.

The new regulations will severely affect the functioning of south Delhi commercial hubs, such as Hauz Khas, Mahipalpur, Rajouri Garden, Tilak Nagar, Shahpur Jat, Chhatarpur, Sainik farms, Bijwasan and Kapashera.

As many as 1,130 spa centres, 37 motels and 41 social function farmhouses function in SDMC.

