Coronavirus scare: SDMC to get 30,000 masks for its health staff
2020-03-08
NEW DELHI: The novel coronavirus scare has triggered flash purchase of masks by common people, leading to a shortage of the product in the market. To keep the supply chain intact for healthcare workers, South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) has decided to buy and supply 30,000 masks to its frontline workers, a senior official said on Saturday.


Not only the masks are not available in the open market at the government-mandated rates, but “our supplier has also said it’s not available in his inventory”, the official said. “Doctors and healthcare workers will need these masks and the Centre will have to impose regulatory control on manufacturers and suppliers to help healthcare staff,” he added.

 
 
The prices have skyrocketed even in the wholesale surgical equipment market in Bhagirath Palace near Chandni Chowk. Ordinary surgical masks, which were earlier available for Re 1 per unit, are selling at Rs 20-30. A few days ago, doctors at Safdarjung Hospital — which is one of the nodal points in Delhi for isolating patients infected by novel coronavirus — had threatened to boycott work due to non-supply of face masks. However, all doctors and healthcare staff dealing directly with the suspected/infected people have the full protection gear as recommended by the World Health Organization.

If the virus spreads , the civic bodies will be expected to start community clustering and mapping to track and identify people who may have been exposed to the infected people. “Indigenous transmission from people arriving to the local community will then have to be monitored,” an official said. 

At the community level, the civic bodies will have to scan a 2-3km cluster around an infected person and find out people displaying any sign of Covid-19 in terms of fever/lung infections/shortness of breath/cough so that they can be isolated, another official explained. 

If required, domestic breeding checkers, nurses and other field workers are expected to be roped in, who will also need protective gear such as masks and gloves, he added. 

Tagging multiple authorities, Sanjay Bhargav of the Chandni Chowk Sarv Vyapar Mandal tweeted, “Traders of surgical equipment and medicines are cheating and charging exorbitant rates for masks and sanitisers. While a mask that used to cost Rs 80 five days ago is sold for Rs 180, a bundle of ordinary masks costs Rs 1,000 instead of the usual Rs 200. Sanitisers with a price tag of Rs 220 is being sold for Rs 500. The government should intervene immediately and stop this blackmarketeering.” 


