Seafarers, kin protest against paid quarantine
2020-05-28
Quepem: Seafarers and their families from different parts of South Goa went on a chain hunger strike on Wednesday to protest the state government’s decision of compulsory paid quarantine for Goan seafarers and those coming from abroad.

Earlier, they had met deputy chief minister and Quepem MLA Chandrakant Kavalekar twice and discussed the issue with him. Kavalekar had assured them that he would discuss their demand with chief minister Pramod Sawant.

From 9am, around 25 persons from seafarers’ families from Quepem, Cuncolim, Curchorem, Sanguem and Margao sat on chain hunger strike on the footpath of the Quepem garden with placards. More than 100 seafarers were present to support the strike.

Police personnel were also deployed in the town.

Since Quepem deputy collector Rohit Kadam refused permission to the hunger strike on Monday, the protesters went on a chain hunger strike. They went to the Quepem deputy collector’s office to submit a memorandum, but the staff refused to accept it saying Kadam was not in office. 

After waiting for half-an-hour, a seafarer called up additional collector Agnelo Fernandes and sought his intervention. Later the deputy collector’s office accepted the memorandum.

The Quepem police led by PI Santosh Dessai requested the seafarers to withdraw the chain hunger strike, or else he would have to initiate action and detain all as Section 144 was in force during the lockdown. Heeding Dessai's request, seafarers withdrew it at 11am.

“We are giving the government a week’s time to reconsider its decision to make seafarers pay for being quarantined or else the chain hunger strike will restart,” seaman Sanjeev Borkar said.

Flenta Carneiro and Rien Goes, wives of seafarers, asked whether Section 144 was only meant for the common man and not for ministers and their supporters.

“No action was taken during the grade separator inauguration at Dabolim where social distancing norms weren’t followed,” vice-president of Goa Seamen’s Association Salvador Cardozo said.

QMC councillors Manuel Colaco, Filu D’Costa and Raul Pereira also joined the seafarers in the protest.


