Sealed building turned into biggest Covid-19 care centre in Jodhpur
2020-05-07
JODHPUR: With 700 beds for Covid-19 cases, Jodhpur is on the way to setting up the state’s largest facility outside any government hospital. Amid the steady escalation of the positive cases in Jodhpur, a closed building of a medical college in Boranada was acquired for the purpose and was readied within two weeks to accommodate cases.

“This is a major step with a view to reduce the burden on government hospitals with their limited bed capacities considering the spurt in cases in Jodhpur,” said SDM (Luni) Gopal Parihar.

He said the building was a private medical college, which had been shut about 7 years back and had been seized by a bank which had financed the project.“We acquired the building considering its location and the setup it housed on account of being a medical college. Within 2 weeks, we undertook necessary repairing work, arranging amenities and medical equipment along with a team of doctors,” said Parihar. Today the facility has more than 300 positive Covid-19 cases undergoing treatment and preparations are underway to scale up the bed capacity to 700. Currently, Jodhpur has 410 beds dedicated to Covid-19 cases while MDM Hospital has 500 beds. But the MDM Hospital administration is preparing to reduce them in order to accommodate other indoor patients gradually. Before this, Jodhpur had achieved a feat of developing the state’s biggest quarantine centre in Anganwa village on the city outskirts with a capacity of accommodating 2,000 suspects.

This building was built under the PM Awaas Yojna but all the 1,072 flats had been lying vacant with no facilities like electricity, water and sewage available. ADM Mahipal Bhardwaj said all facilities were arranged in a week and quarantined persons began to be shifted here. Though, some videos by the quarantined inmates went viral pointing to lack of facilities and violation of the quarantine protocol, but the administration claimed that all facilities were being made available there. 


