Seamen undergo Covid tests, three more ships awaited
2020-04-25
Panaji: The Goan seafarers who were disembarked from the Marella ship on Thursday, began receiving their Covid-19 test results at the Mumbai port where many are reported to have tested negative.

“We’re hoping all their tests come back negative,” president of the Goa Seamen Association of India, Frank Viegas said.

The seafarers were informed that they would have to spend no more than 48 hours in Mumbai once tested negative, and are now awaiting the next step from the government to bring them back to Goa.

Their accommodation was sorted out after a tumultuous night where hotels wouldn’t accept them and locals in Andheri protested the seafarers’ presence in their neighbourhood.

“The government must now bring them back in the safest way possible - bus or ship. If they are quarantined outside their homes, they should be provided with decent accommodation, unlike the pathetic rooms they were given in Mumbai once they disembarked. They should be not be asked to pay for it. They can be given an option of government or paid accommodation,” Viegas said.

Meanwhile, some seafarers questioned the need for institutional quarantine in Goa once they have tested negative, as they have been stamped in Mumbai.

Founder of the association Dixon Vaz said the government needs to have a better plan for seafarers from Karnika who will be signed off, after the Marella seafarers were exposed to the outside world without safety and concern in Mumbai.

At the state executive committee meeting on Friday, secretary ports informed that three additional ships carrying Goan crew are about to berth in Mumbai or Goa. The seafarers will be brought to Goa after testing negative and placed in paid quarantine facilities where the government is presently negotiating with room rentals, he said. 

The committee observed that the negotiated prices offered by the Travel and Tourism Association of Goa can be shared with the employer company who will be free to further negotiate for a better deal or suitable hotel. As per the cabinet decision, the employer company has to pay for the quarantine facilities, it was stated. 


