Covid-19 outbreak in West Bengal: Seats go empty, theatres may shut down for now
2020-03-14
KOLKATA: The lockdown on Delhi theatres till March 31 has made exhibitioners in Bengal wonder if a similar call needs to be taken here as well. The “sharp dip” in footfall after the global outbreak of coronavirus and paucity of big Hindi movie releases have forced many Bengal theatres to consider staying shut for a while. The final call is expected to be taken by Sunday.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Ratan Saha, the chairman of the exhibitors’ section of the Eastern India Motion Pictures’ Association, has noticed a “50% dip” in sales. “As it is, single-screen theatres don’t do good business. And now, most people are not even going to the theatres. So, what’s the point in keeping the outlets open if there are no patrons? It is better to shut down and use this time for renovation,” Saha said. 

 
 
Navin Choukhani, owner of Navina, noticed a sharp drop in footfall since Thursday. “For the first-day show of ‘Angrezi Medium’, we had less than 50 viewers whereas the capacity is 800. As the news of the global outbreak spread, people stopped coming for movies. I feel that, irrespective of a notification, it is better to shut down,” Choukhani added. In his opinion, it makes sense to be safe than sorry. “We are monitoring the situation very closely and on Sunday we shall take a final call on whether to run the shows or suspend them till the situation improves,” he said.

Suranjan Paul, owner of Minar, Bijoli and Chhabighar, said, “People are cautious about their health. At present, I have noticed a drop in sales.”

The nCoV fear has also hit the release of movies. The release of the Akshay Kumar-starrer ‘Sooryavanshi’ has been postponed. In a statement, Rohit Shetty Picturez said the film, which was supposed to release on March 24, will be back when “the time is right”. The release of ‘Sir’ — a March 20 release starring Tillotama Shome — has also been postponed keeping “public health concerns and the advisory from the health ministry” in mind. 

Arijit Dutta, the owner of Priya Cinemas, said, “One can’t run a theatre while incurring heavy losses. There is a 30% dip in sales. Additionally, getting good content will be an issue since most of the movies have been postponed. Many single screens run on laser-thin margins. But if they shut down once, I wonder if they will be able to reopen.” 
Saha is equally worried about getting content. “We can’t run our theatres only on the basis of footfalls generated by screening Bengali movies. We need good content from Bollywood. Currently, I am in Tripura where the situation is equally bad,” Saha added.

 



