SEC defers poll process to post-lockdown period
2020-05-07
Vijayawada: The State Election Commission on Wednesday issued fresh orders putting the local body elections on hold till further notice.

State election commissioner Justice V Kanagaraj said that the election process would resume once the lockdown is lifted.

The SEC would take further decision after due consultation with the state government on the prevailing situation in the state, he said in the notification.

The local body elections were put on hold by the SEC on March 15 for a period of six weeks due to coronavirus. However, the SEC kept the model code of conduct in force which was challenged by the state government in Supreme Court. The court had upheld the SEC decision but lifted the model code of conduct giving a sigh of relief to the state, which had planned a series of programmes by then.

It was after this order that the state government acted fast and brought in an ordinance reducing the term of office of the SEC from five years to three and appointed Justice Kanagaraj as the new SEC.

Even as the issue is in the high court with the former SEC Nimmagadda Ramesh Kumar and some others challenging the ordinance, the new SEC issued fresh orders in line with the high court directions.

The SEC also quoted the orders of the AP high court which prevented it from holding the local body elections and had laid condition that the paintings on the panchayat buildings are to be changed. Accordingly, the SEC said that the local body elections which were put on hold for six weeks on March 15, would continue to be on hold till further orders.

“The State Election Commission, after careful consideration of the judgments and also other relevant factors, decided to issue further orders withholding the election process of MPTCs/ZPTCs and urban local bodies until further orders as the lockdown guidelines which prohibit public gatherings remain in force and process of removal of colours on panchayat buildings is yet to be completed by the government as per the directions of the high court,” the commission said in the fresh notification. 


