Second coronavirus case in Ghaziabad, patient’s son also tests positive
2020-03-13
GHAZIABAD: A 27-year-old man, whose father had tested positive for coronavirus last week, has also been found to be infected. This is the second confirmed case of Covid-19 in Ghaziabad.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The man’s father, a 57-year-old businessman from Raj Nagar Extension, had returned from Tehran, Iran, on February 23. After the latter tested positive, the son was living with his mother in home isolation in a highrise for about 10 days, said health officials. His swab sample was collected on March 5 and the test results from National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune confirmed it to be a case of coronavirus. He has been shifted to an isolation ward of MMG District Hospital, where his condition will be monitored by a team of doctors.

Chief medical officer N K Gupta said, “Although the son and his mother were living in home isolation in the same flat, they were wearing masks and keeping distance from each other. The woman had earlier tested negative for the virus, but after his son has been found to be positive, we might have to take her samples again. We are discussing the matter with the headquarters in Lucknow.”

“Both the man and his mother are asymptomatic. The condition of the father has improved a lot. Several people, including milkmen and three employees, who had come in the chain of contact with the businessman were tested and their results were found to be negative,” the CMO added.

The businessman had first been taken to Ram Manohar Lohia hospital in Delhi and later shifted to Safdarjung hospital when his condition improved. The health department has decided to re-sanitise the residential society where the businessman’s family resides, said Gupta.

As of now, around 275 people in Ghaziabad have been screened and 70 are under surveillance, officials said. Samples of 32 people have been taken, of which 29 have been found to be negative. The report of one person is awaited.

