Kerala: Second COVID-19 patient goes home
2020-02-17
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: In further relief to Kerala, a student treated for the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) in the state was discharged on Sunday after two consecutive test results returned negative, becoming India’s second patient to recover from the infection, health authorities said.


The patient from Kasaragod, one of the three positive cases of COVID-19 detected in the country on their return from China, would, however, remain under home quarantine for 10 days, the state health department said.

 
 
“Two consecutive results of the patient came negative and was then discharged on Sunday morning. The patient will have to remain under home quarantine for 10 more days,” said a senior health official.

A total of 2,276 people are still under observation for the COVID-19 in the state, which had accounted for all three positive cases in the country. A total of 14 people are in the isolation wards of different hospitals. 

Earlier on Thursday, a student from Alappuzha was discharged after his two consecutive samples sent for testing at the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune turned out to be negative.

India’s first COVID-19 case, a woman medico from Thrissur, is awaiting test results from Pune NIV after samples screened at the Alappuzha centre of the institute had returned negative last week.

“Now, we are waiting for the test result of the student admitted to Thrissur Medical College Hospital. Once the negative result is received, we can proceed to discharge,” the official said.

Both the discharged students, studying in a university in Wuhan, the epicentre of the deadly virus that has claimed over 1,600 lives in China, had earlier tested positive for the infection and were treated in isolation wards set up in medical college hospitals in Alappuzha and Kasaragod.

Of the 415 samples sent for testing at the NIV in Pune, a total of 396 turned out to be negative and the results of the remaining were awaited, a release, quoting health minister K K Shailaja said.

Earlier, after the three students tested positive, the government had declared the COVID-19 as a state calamity, but withdrew it after effective quarantine and no fresh cases were reported. 

