Coronavirus outbreak: Section 144 in Pune until March 31, essential services exempted
2020-03-23
PUNE: District collector Naval Kishor Ram on Sunday night issued prohibitory orders under section 144 (1)(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) banning the assembly of five or more people at public places and private workplaces from 5am on Monday till March 31.


The Pune police also issued similar prohibitory orders under the same section later.

“We will be very strict about the implementation of these prohibitory directives,” Ram told TOI. He said the order excludes essential services.

The orders will apply to areas coming under municipal corporations, civic councils, nagar panchayats and industrial estates across the district.

The orders put a total restriction on the plying of vehicles carrying five or more people, the movement of five or more people on the roads, their assembly at one place and idling time on the roads. There will be no bar on people going out for essential services, but they cannot go out in a group.

On Sunday, the ‘janata curfew’ across the country from 7am to 9pm was immediately followed by a curfew imposed by the police from 9pm to 5am on Monday. This was done as a measure to prevent people from stepping out in large numbers after the ‘janata curfew’ deadline.

Section 144 until March 31; essential services exempted

Joint commissioner of Pune police Ravindra Shisve referred to the 5pm citizens’ initiative of acknowledging the work done by medical staffers in addressing the crisis. He, however, said, “We saw that many people came together to clap and beat thalis. It defeated the purpose of social distancing. Hence, we decided to issue the curfew order.”

Meanwhile, the prohibitory orders issued by the district collector will ban workshops, ceremonies of all types, cultural, religious and entertainment programmes, festivals, fairs, sports, camps, training classes and meetings which do not involve essential matters.

Public buses, railway services, all private corporates, shops and services establishments, canteens, lodges, messes, shopping complexes, malls, supermarkets, clubs, sports grounds, auditoriums, museums, art houses, video parlours, online lottery centres, paan shops, beer bars, permit rooms, schools, colleges, private coaching classes and training centres will remain closed during this time, the orders stated.

There will be restricted movement of vehicles around the isolation centres and quarantine wards.

However, the prohibitory orders will not be applicable to government, semi-government, state corporations, state establishment and post office employees. Similarly, it won't apply to hospitals, pathology labs, drug and medical stores, health care equipment manufacturers, vegetable and fruit sellers, milk vendors and grocery shops, online food delivery services, student messes, college canteens, vehicles engaged for plying officials and employees engaged in emergency services, medical and nursing colleges, and the performing of last rites in case of death, the orders said.

Also excluded are RBI banking services, ATM services, insurance, online delivery services, telephone and internet services, water, electricity, petroleum, oil, power supply, media of all types, warehouses, waste management and cleanliness services and ecommerce services, among others.

Earlier, the railway ministry announced cancellation of all local trains on the Central and Western railway, while the state imposed section 144 in all urban areas, discontinued state transport and private bus services, and metro services. Only goods trains carrying essential items will be allowed to operate.

Health minister Rajesh Tope said the state government was also considering closing of state borders as the risk of the outbreak spreading to and from the neighbouring states was also high.

Announcing the imposition of section 144 in all urban areas of the state, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray said, “We have shut all inter-state buses and now within the state buses too are being suspended. City bus services will only be used for emergency service staff.” He also said that government offices will work at 5% attendance, down from 25% announced earlier this week. The shutdowns have been announced till March 31, but if needed they may be extended.”

