Security up in Chandgad as Belagavi reports Covid case
2020-04-07
KOLHAPUR: The security in villages of Chandgad taluka has been tightened after a person from Belagavi’s Belgundi village in Karnataka tested positive for Covid-19 couple of days ago.


The village is just 10-km from Chandgad taluka and the person who tested positive had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi. 

According to sources, police are now trying to ascertain if the person had any connection with anyone in Chandgad and if anyone from the taluka had attended the same event.

Superintendent of police Abhinav Deshmukh visited Chandgad taluka on Wednesday and took review of the situation and security around the villages bordering the state of Karnataka.

Chandgad tehsildar Vinod Ranvare has issued orders to seal 11 villages that are situated on the Maharashtra-Karnataka border. 

The administration has also closed the road connecting Kudnur (Maharashtra) to Handiganur (Karnataka) as a precautionary measure.

“Local-level vigilance committees have been set up in all these villages and they have been instructed to find out if anyone recently travelled to Belgundi village or anyone from that village had come to Chandgad,” said a police officer attached with Chandgad police station . 

Those found to have come in contact with the person in Belagavi will be taken to the government hospital for screening,” said the officer.

“We are gathering information about the person who has tested positive and whether he has any local connection. We are also searching to find out if anyone from the taluka had attended the Tablighi Jamaat programme in Delhi. As per our information no one from this region had gone to Delhi, but we will continue our investigation and request people to disclose the information in the interest of the society,” he added.

High alert in Ajara

Ajara town is on high alert after a person, who had attended the Delhi event, caught cold and flu. 

The authorities concerned have taken his throat swab sample along with his son’s as he is also showing similar symptoms. The family is already under home quarantine and the civic administration is keeping a close watch on the family to ensure all is well.


