Secure your money, cybercrime cases double in Indore during lockdown
2020-05-01
INDORE: The criminal minds too have evolved during this pandemic. While there has been a significant drop in number of heinous crimes in city, cybercrime cases have spiked since lockdown. 


According to crime branch officials, at least one case of cybercrime is received by them every day. In past one month, 45 cases have been received by the special cell of crime branch of which mostly are Facebook related frauds followed by online wallet scams. 
ASP Rajesh Dandotiya said that the cases have doubled as compared to March when the lockdown had started. “After the lockdown, we had created a special cell comprising 20 officials in four different teams who look into cyber related frauds. While number of cases was normal during March last week, cases doubled in April,” said ASP crime branch Dandotiya. 

He said that during lockdown period, phishing and scamming cases have increased manifold. Messages which try to induce recipients to enter passwords or other sensitive information on websites controlled by hackers, who then use the data to take control of bank, email or other accounts, have also been on the rise. 

For this, accused are known to have created fake Facebook ids of people and asked for money from their friends. “This is the most common fraud which we have come across these days. The accused create a fake id and befriend the common friends of the victim and ask them for money citing some reasons. Highest 15 cases out of 45 were related to such frauds,” said Dandotiya. 

Apart from Facebook frauds, Paytm, Phonepay and OTP frauds are also on the rise. “We have received 7 complaints related to Phonepay fraud when people tried to purchase something online and they were duped by the accused, 4 Paytm frauds and 2 OTP fraud complaints have also been received,” he said. The department has its hands full with rumours, fake news and hate speech spread about coronavirus through social media apps. The team is also screening WhatsApp messages, Facebook, Instagram stories, Telegram posts and TikTok videos.

Meanwhile, SP cyber crime Jitendra Singh also claimed that increasing number of cases had been received in Indore cell of state cyber police with highest number of Facebook frauds and fake id creation. He said that since the lockdown, they have recorded 68 such cases under different categories. 


