Covid-19 in Pune: Self-reporting to Naidu Hospital a must for travellers with flu signs
2020-03-17
PUNE: Self-reporting to health officials or doctors at civic body-run Naidu Hospital has now been made mandatory for people with Covid-19 symptoms, in addition to history of international travel. 

With the enforcement of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, and invocation of the Epidemic Diseases Act, hiding information and not ensuring self-reporting amount to violation of both the laws and may attract punishment.

“People who have travelled abroad in the last 28 days or a month and have flu-like symptoms should report to Naidu Hospital. No one should hide information, if he or she has history of international travel. If they do not have any symptom,s then they should inform us and home quarantine themselves. If an international traveller has symptoms, then she or he must report to Naidu Hospital,” said public health expert Kalpana Baliwant, head of the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) at the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC).


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“It has been observed that citizens who have travelled abroad and landed in Mumbai, Pune, Bengaluru, Hyderabad or any other airports in the country come back to the city (Pune) either in private cabs, bus or train. Such people should self-report themselves and remain home quarantined for 14 days even if they do not have symptoms. If they have symptoms, then they must immediately report to Naidu Hospital and take necessary precautions, such as wearing masks and socially distancing themselves. The aim should be to not infect others,” Baliwant said. 

Divisional commissioner Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar on Monday appealed to people work from home, but said industrial units have been told that they should not face any loss in production. He said the industrial units should tell people who are not involved in the actual manufacturing process to work from home.

Mhaisekar said IT companies have been requested to now send their employees for now for meetings or conferences and to carry out such processes through video calls.

(With inputs from Nisha Nambiar)


