Senate member ushers students into quarantine hostel sans PPE
2020-06-12
Nagpur: A big controversy erupted over a Nagpur University senate member aiding a couple of students to enter the hostel at Law College Square which is a quarantine centre. A video grab shows two students entering the hostel and taking out their documents. Only one was wearing personal protection equipment (PPE), the other only had a mask.The NU statutory members objected to the senate colleague’s move and accused him of putting the students’ lives at risk by ushering them inside the hostel where quarantined patients are kept. Management council member Vishnu Changde and senate member Mohan Bajpayee demanded an inquiry.The ABVP has also sought an explanation from vice chancellor Murlidhar Chandekar. “Who granted them permission to move inside? Will other hostel inmates be allowed to take their documents too? The video grab clearly shows only one student was wearing PPE kit. If they have contracted the deadly disease and spread it to their family members, who will be held responsible for it,” the ABVP press note by activist Amit Patle asked the VC.A number of calls to Chandekar and registrar Neeraj Khaty by TOI went unanswered. Hostel warden Shyam Koretti too refused to talk to TOI. He was engaged in a war of words on the social media with the senate member who had allegedly taken the students inside.The warden blamed the senate member for exposing the students to the contaminated place. “They were misguided by some students’ representatives. Don’t use the students for your selfish gains, it’s very dangerous. You will be held responsible if anything happens to them,” Koretti told the member.Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) additional commissioner Ram Joshi said that he had granted permission to three students to enter the premises after receiving a call from NU registrar. “The students had said that one of them had received an interview call and wanted the documents. We had provided them three PPE kits to wear before entering the centre. All their documents were dumped in a one room after patients were brought for quarantine and they wanted to take those back,” he told TOI.When pointed out that only one student was wearing PPE kit, Joshi said that even NMC employees work there and visitors didn’t come in contact with any quarantine patients.