Sensex tanks 1710 on virus, NPA fears
2020-03-19
MUMBAI: Despite a 1,000-point rally in the Dow Jones on Tuesday night, the sensex on Wednesday crashed another 1,710 points to close at 28,870 with banking & financial stocks, along with RIL, leading the slide as fears about a coronavirus-induced global recession continued.


On the domestic front, fears about rising bad loans for banks with exposure to the telecom sector also weighed on the index, market players said. And if Wednesday’s early trades on the Wall Street are any indication -- with the Dow and S&P500 indices each down over 6% -- there could be more pain for Dalal Street on Thursday.

According to Joseph Thomas, head of research, Emkay Wealth Management, the frontline indexes were down by close to 5.5% in a market hit by the likely adverse impact of the pandemic, which came at a time when it was negotiating a critical juncture in the already existing economic sluggishness.

“Markets will continue to mirror the developments overseas till some comfort on the spread of the pandemic is received. It is too early to say when the feeling that the asset prices are lower than their intrinsic value would start coming in,” he said.

At Wednesday’s close, at about the 28,900 level, the sensex is now down almost 32% from its all-time peak of 42,274, recorded just two months back, on January 20. Indian investors have lost about 30% of their market wealth from the peak level of Rs 160 lakh crore in early January to Rs 113 lakh crore now, BSE data showed.

Interestingly, crude oil prices on NYMEX were down over 16% in mid-session Wednesday while gold prices were down more than 2%. Historically, it’s unusual for almost all the asset prices to fall so drastically. According to global analysts, Japanese yen and US government bonds are emerging to be the only safe havens for global investors.

In the domestic market, ONGC and ITC were the only two sensex stocks which closed with gains while the remaining 28 were deep in the red as across-the-board selling continued. As per the recent trend, foreign funds were net sellers again, at Rs 5,085 crore while domestic funds were net buyers, at Rs 3,636 crore, BSE data showed. Officials from the mutual fund as well as broking industries said they are witnessing new investors coming into the market.

