Pune: Sensitise people against COVID-19, experts urge govt machinery
2020-02-28
PUNE: Spreading awareness against novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infection should be the government’s mantra at the moment when quite a few neighbouring countries are scrambling to contain the contagion spread, experts said on Thursday.

“The knee-jerk reactions, we are used to, unfortunately won’t work when it comes to containing the virus when it strikes,” senior public health expert Subhash Salunke, the former director general of Maharashtra’s public health department, said.

He said though no positive case had been found in Maharashtra, the authorities should avoid any laxity. “We should make most of the current period to reach out to common people and sensitise them. Educating the masses when the virus is already in community is just like digging a well when one is thirsty,” Salunke said.

Making judicious and extensive use of mass media tools, including newspapers, radio and television, among others, can make a huge difference in creating awareness. “What a household should do when a family member is diagnosed with the infection ? How other members can remain safe? What are common dos and don’ts when the virus enters the community? People should know how basic measures like frequent washing of hands and personal hygiene practices like coughing and sneezing etiquette can help immensely in fighting the virus,” Salunke said.

Medical practitioner and health activist Abhijit More said, “The main thrust is presently on screening the travellers returning from the affected countries, following up with them, isolating those complaining of minor illness and testing them for the coronavirus infection. But the focus on disseminating information to the masses, creating awareness and educating them via media is sourly lacking. If we fail to make the most of the current time when there is no positive case, we may have to face similar havoc and chaos that ensued when swine flu had claimed country’ first victim in Pune in August 2009.”

Activist Sanjay Dabhade said, “The World Health Organisation has urged countries to “prepare for a potential pandemic” – an epidemic that spreads throughout the world. Pakistan and Nepal also detected their first cases of the contagion, days after shutting border with Iran, which has also emerged as a major coronavirus spot.”

Infectious diseases expert Sudhir Patsute, head of the Naidu Infectious Diseases Hospital that is the only designated isolation facility in Pune, said, “ China imposed extraordinary quarantine measures in several cities, locking in tens of millions of people as it sought to curb the rapid spread of the virus. Preparing citizens by sensitising them about ways to ward off infection can save us from such extreme measures.”

