Set up ventilators in each Covid-19 hospital: Uttarakhand high court to state
2020-04-22
NAINITAL: The Uttarakhand high court (HC) on Tuesday directed the state government to ensure that required number of ventilators is made available in each of the Covid-19 dedicated hospitals set up across the state within a week.


The directions came from the bench of Justice Sudhanshu Dhulia and Justice Ravindra Maithani while hearing a public interest litigation (PIL) that claimed there is serious lack of health infrastructure in the state to fight the Covid-19 pandemic. 

The petitioners said that there are several hospitals in the state that do not have adequate number of ventilators as well as Intensive Care Units (ICU) especially in the hills and therefore the state’s health infrastructure is ill equipped to fight the pandemic. Dushyant Mainali, one of the petitioners in the case, told TOI that the HC has directed the state government to ensure adequate number of ventilators is made available in each of the 15 coronavirus-dedicated hospitals in the state. "We are conscious of the fact that there is definitely a shortage of ventilators as of now, yet when these hospitals had been declared as dedicated Covid-19 hospitals and one of the principal requirements of the dedicated Covid-19 hospital is ventilator facility, we fail to understand as to why these hospitals are not having any ventilators, as yet… We, therefore, direct the state government to at least install one, possibly two ventilators in these hospitals, within a period of one week from today," the order read.

The HC added that if the state faces any practical or logistical difficulty in complying with the order, they should inform the court. "The court will now hear the case on April 29,” Mainali said. 

The HC, while hearing another PIL, also asked the advocate general if the small and marginal farmers can be paid 50% of the minimum support price (MSP) within two days. "The court has asked the advocate general if the government can make a payment of 50% of MSP to small and marginal farmers selling upto 100 quintals of wheat in the Rabi season within three days," said Ganesh Upadhyay, the petitioner in the case. The court has given the state three days’ time to respond to the petition.


