Set up ‘war rooms’ to enforce lockdown, asserts CM Gehlot
2020-03-25
Jaipur: Chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Tuesday directed the district collectors to set up ‘war rooms’ at district level to evaluate and take remedial measures on the hardship caused to the people during the lockdown period in the state. The war room should function round the clock, manned by senior district officials, the chief minister directed. 

The CM was holding a review meeting through video conference with the district collectors and SPs on the coronavirus restrictions imposed in the state on Tuesday. 

He warned that if people do not follow the restrictions imposed during lockdown, the government will be forced to impose curfew in the state. Gehlot said the best way to prevent coronavirus is by observing social distancing, and directed the officials to ensure that there will be no shortage of essential items. 

The chief minister asked the officials to set up an online system to issue permits so that common people could meet their exigencies. Gehlot said the restrictions on the movement of private vehicles be strictly enforced.

He said the only priority of the government is that nobody is deprived of food. He directed the collectors to ensure that the daily labourers’ and other marginalized sections’ needs are taken care of. He also exhorted the peoples’ representatives to come forward and provide relief to the needy people in their area. 

The chief minister said there is no time restrictions on the shops and establishments declared as ‘essential services’. He directed that they should continue to maintain their supply chain so that people will not crowd their shops.

He asked the mobile units of consumer cooperative societies to supply essential items at the doorstep. He advised the police to enforce lockdown with sensitivity and humanism. Gehlot said the police could make use of loudspeakers on vehicles to spread the message of lockdown in villages and towns. 

Health minister Raghu Sharma directed the district officials to seek the help of peoples’ representatives like sarpanchs, parshads etc to enforce lockdown. Chief secretary DB Gupta said the district administration could take effective measures according to the situation. 


