Seven Covid-19 patients die in Pune, positive cases breach 2,000 mark
2020-05-04
PUNE: Seven Covid-19 deaths were reported from the city and while the number of coronavirus positive cases crossed the 2,000 mark in the Pune Metropolitan Region (PMR) on Sunday. 


With this, the number of casualties in the region went up to 111 and the positive cases to 2,051. District administration officials said the condition of 71 patients was serious. 

The officials said the number of positive cases in the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) and Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) limits was now 1,813 and 122, respectively. The civil surgeon and cantonment boards have 73 cases, while the district heath office of zilla parishad has recorded 43 cases, the officials said

As many as 99 new Covid-19 positive cases were reported in the PMC limits on Sunday. PMC officials said all the seven fatalities reported on Sunday had comorbidity issues. The officials said 55 patients were recovered and discharged during the day.

Of the seven people whose deaths were confirmed on Sunday, five were women, including a 24-year-old woman. The two male patients were aged between 50 and 66 years. Five people lost their lives at Sassoon General Hospital and two succumbed to the virus in a private hospital.. the officials said. 

The deceased were residents of Yerawada, Parvati, Market Yard, Ghorpadi Gaon, Shivdarshan, Ganeshnagar and Padmavati. 

The officials said they were suffering from comorbidity factors such as pneumonia, respiratory diseases. Six persons died on Sunday, while one woman died on Saturday. The latter’s report came positive on Sunday. 

Maharashtra chief minister Uddhav Thackeray took review of the current status of covid-19 in Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad through a video conference, which was attended by senior officials of the district administration and the municipal corporations of the two cities. 

Pune division, which includes Pune, Satara, Sangli, Solapur and Kolhapur districts, has so far registered 2,147 cases.

In Pimpri Chinchwad, six Covid-19 positive patients — four women and two men — were found on Sunday, said Pavan Salve, additional medical officer of the healthdepartment in the civic body. 

The cases were reported from Pimple Saudagar, Chinchwad, Old Sangvi and Moshi, a PCMC official said, 


