Seven madrassa students, 19 others test Covid-19 positive
2020-04-20
KANPUR:The number of Covid-19 patients in Kanpur has jumped from 31 to 57, with 26 more people testing positive in the city since Saturday. Of the total 57, 14 were tested positive on late Saturday evening while 12 tested positive on Sunday evening.

District health department officials said that the 14 patients tested positive on Saturday evening comprise seven local residents of Quli Bazar and seven madrassa students. While 12 patients who were tested positive on Sunday evening belong to Colonelganj, Civil Lines, Jajmau and Baraf Khana areas. Following this, the administration has sealed Quli Bazar area and Machariya area of Naubasta, besides Colonelganj, Civil Lines, Jajmau and Baraf Khana areas and a massive thermal screening drive has been launched.

Among 57, one patient had attained normalcy after undergoing rigorous treatment at Ursala Horseman hospital, while one other had died during the treatment at Lala Lajpat Rai hospital.

Sources further informed that those tested positive belongs to hotspot areas and were already following quarantine procedure. Health department stated that now they will be shifted to Covid-19 hospital at LLR hospital for treatment.

Following confirmation of 26 more corona positive cases, the district administration has sealed the Quli Bazar area and Machariya area of Naubasta, besides Colonelganj, Civil Lines, Jajmau and Baraf Khana, and with the help of health officials launched a massive thermal screening and other medical tests of people in these areas to detect suspected or confirmed cases of coronavirus. The contacts of all 26 people, including their family members and relatives, have also been quarantined at various quarantine centres.

Nasal and throat swab samples of the suspected people from Quli Bazar, students of Madrassa, Colonelganj, Civil Lines, Jajmau and Baraf Khana, besides medical and para-medical staff of Naraina medical college in Panki and Lala Lajpat Rai hospital were sent to Ganesh Shankar Vidhyarthi memorial medical college Covid-19 laboratory for testing on Thursday and Friday, said chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Ashok Shukla.

"Test report, which we had received on late Saturday night confirmed 14 including seven locals of Quli Bazar and seven madrassa students, positive for coronavirus. Similarly, test report which we received on Sunday evening confirmed 12 more positive cases of coronavirus. The total number of coronavirus positive cases in the city has now rose to 57. The positive patients, who were already in quarantine, have now been shifted to Covid -19 hospital at the Lala Lajpat Rai hospital for treatment," the CMO said further.

To recall, city's first positive case was reported from NRI City on March 23.

The man, however, after rigorous treatment at the COVID 19 ward at Ursala Horseman hospital attained normalcy, and was discharged later.

However, the first corona positive death was reported on April 14 wherein a 40-year-old man died in Neuro Science Centre of COVID -19 ward at Lala Lajpat Rai hospital.


