Seventh Covid death in Agra, district tally increases to 348
2020-04-25
Agra: A 54-year-old businessman died of Covid-19 in Agra. The man's death takes the city's toll to seven on Friday. The man's lab report confirmed that he was suffering from Covid-19. Also, seven fresh cases were reported in the district on Friday, taking the tally to 348. 

Resident of Naulakha area under Sadar police station, the man’s health condition deteriorated on Tuesday evening. He passed away early on Wednesday. His family took him to SN Medical College (SNMC) where the doctors declared him as "brought dead". 

Chief medical officer (CMO) of Agra district Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “The man's family informed that he was suffering from fever and breathing difficulties. Therefore, doctors at the SNMC collected his sample for Covid-19 testing. The man was later found Covid-19 positive. We are screening all the people living near the man's house and his contacts. Samples of his family members are being sent for lab testing." 

Earlier this month, four people with Covid-19 died at SN Medical College. Two positive cases - linked to a private hospital on National Highway-2 - also passed away. 

Localities from where the new cases surfaced on Wednesday were Sikandra, Shahjadi Mandi, Karodhana Kala, Tajganj and Nagli Kali. One case is related to a hospital in Sikandra, while another case is about a resident of Mainpuri district. 

“All the new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people," the CMO added.

According to health department, out of the 335 cases which have surfaced in Agra, at least 104 are linked to those who had attended the Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts. While 95 cases are linked to a private hospital on NH-2. Another nine cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality. 

Besides, 26 cases are related to people who had returned from abroad and their contacts. Also, 43 cases are linked to healthcare workers and their contacts, with 36 cases linked to Fatehpur Sikri where a tour guide was found corona positive earlier this month.


