Seven more cases take Covid-19 count in southern Tamil Nadu to 297
2020-04-17
MADURAI: The total number of Covid-19 cases in the southern region went up to 297 on Thursday with three people each from Madurai and Ramanathapuram and one from Tirunelveli testing positive.


In Madurai, three people from Thirumangalam municipality tested positive. They included a 42-year-old man whose neighbour had attended the Tablighi congregation in New Delhi. The other two included the 17-year-old son of a man from Somasundram street who had attended the jamaat meet as well as the 65-year-old father-in-law of a man who had attended the conference. The elderly man’s son-in-law is also under treatment at the isolation ward of Government Rajaji Hospital.

Meanwhile, as Madurai has been identified as one of the 170 hotspots for the disease across the country, the district administration has decided to intensify testing in the containment zones and ensure that nobody moves out or into them for the specified period.

District collector Dr T G Vinay said that intense restrictions would be imposed in the contained zones and it would be ensured that there is zero movement in or out of it. Contacts would be screened intensely within the zone. People in the containment zone would have to get their essential commodities delivered at the doorsteps. Those who are sick in the zone and buffer zone adjoining it would be monitored regularly. With the three cases on Thursday, the total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Madurai went up to 44.

Ramanathapuram reported three cases, one a 30-year- old man from a place where four cases have already been reported. Two cases are from Anandur near R S Mangalam and Mandapam from where cases have not been reported earlier. All three men had attended the religious congregation. These areas were contained fully and screening of contacts of the two new cases was initiated. With these new cases, the total cases in Ramanathapuram went up to 10. With one new case, the number of cases in Tirunelveli went up to 58 on Thursday.

