Coronavirus: Several Mumbai schools shift studies and projects to virtual classrooms
2020-03-17
MUMBAI: Though city schools have shut following government orders, several continued to hold classes on Monday using the internet. 

At R N Podar School, Santacruz, over 150 Class XII students and teachers logged on to Google Meet. Students attended economics, business studies and life skills classes followed by a song. 

“It was a great beginning because one of the things we wanted to do is not just continue with academics and sharing of resources but also connect with the kids during this crisis. We wanted it to be a real-time experience and that was the main challenge. We want to follow the school schedule as much as possible, including the assembly,” said principal Avnita Bir.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Similarly, at Singapore International School in Dahisar, teachers attended a training session to teach remotely. “From Tuesday, the teachers will hold classes from their homes. An attendance manager will monitor students’ presence during these virtual classes,” said Sharonee Mullick, school director. The students will appear for IB exams in May.

Students from Fort’s Cathedral and John Connon School received video tutorials and work tasks for the day and a detailed schedule for the week. It has shared resources not just for academic subjects but also for physical education. “The school will share posts each day and tasks will have to be completed by the child the same day with guidance and supervision from parents,” said a mother.

 D S Marathi High School in Sion will send assignments and revision tests online. “Students are yet to appear for their annual exams so this is the time we use to revise the syllabus and hold practice tests,” said Rajendra Pradhan, president of the school. Children’s Academy group of schools is sending homework and material online. 

Meanwile, teachers who will assess SSC and HSC papers have asked the chief minister to be allowed to work from home. “Teachers continue to travel long distances for exam duties,” said Uday Nare, teacher, Hansraj Morarji Public School, Andheri.


