Ahmedabad: ‘Sewage water tests can signal Covid-19’
2020-04-19
AHMEDABAD: Can testing sewage water or wastewater for the presence of Covid-19 or novel coronavirus act as an early warning system to alert public about when and where infections may be prevalent or whether the virus is re-emerging in cities, towns or cluster of villages? 


Among a handful of independent global scientific groups, a Swedish research collaborative — KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, and Netherlands-based KWR Watercycle Research Institute which includes the Discipline of Earth Science at Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar (IIT-Gn) — will analyze and test sewage that drains from our homes into municipal treatment facilities. Researchers claim this is one way they can track infectious bacteria or viruses that are excreted through human urine or faeces, such as SARS-CoV-2 or Covid-19.



In Ahmedabad there are 11 sewage treatment plants serving different clusters of population.

"We are trying to establish the relationship between the Covid-19 spread and the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in the sewage wastewater, as one can be an effective indicator for other and so on. Moreover, the Covid-19 symptoms take at 3-14 days to appear in a human being leading to substantial delay in diagnosis of infected patients/carriers, the sewage samples can help us to early detect the extent of carrier,” says Manish Kumar, faculty at Discipline Of Earth Science, IIT-Gn.

While explaining the concept, a co-researcher, Prosun Bhattacharya, of KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, says, “Infection with Covid-19 is frequently accompanied by persistent excretion of the virus through stool, urine, human saliva, spit and cough. Covid-19 is usually transmitted via droplets or fomites, but the presence of the virus in human saliva should also be seen as a pathway of transmission through wastewater due to mouth washing practices. Recent reports have identified detection of SARS-CoV-2 in the wastewater at an early stage of a local outbreak and thus highlighted the importance of wastewater-based epidemiology.”

Kumar says that the study will understand the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from an infected person to sewage and from sewage to human again for the development of an early warning system for return of Covid-19. He stressed, “While this unprecedented fight with Covid-19 pandemic is under way, reports of SARS-CoV-2 in the wastewater opens up several probable pathways of coronavirus spread that has alerted water scientists around the globe. The foremost challenge is to forecast pandemics like Covid-19 with wastewater fingerprint to aid disaster management and mitigation.”

David Nilsson, director of the KTH Water Center says that significantly shorter detection time of virus in the wastewater will help us to get an early warning for a second virus wave. “International studies show that the virus can be tracked for weeks once defecated in the environment through excretion and hence we are hopeful to be successful in mapping the new coronavirus using wastewater,” he said.

