SGPGI orders customized N95 masks for its corona warriors
2020-04-03
Lucknow: The health professionals facing shortage of private protection equipment (PPE) and N95 masks while treating coronavirus patients can now heave a sigh of relief. Facing PPE crunch, Sanjay Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGI) has placed order for N95 masks to a Kanpur-based firm, opening avenues for more indigenous production in state.

Chief minister Yogi Aditaynath’s emphasis on boosting MSME sector has helped SGPGI which has set up a tertiary care centre in the battle against the pandemic.

SGPGI director Dr Radha Krishna Dheeman told TOI on Thursday that indigenously manufactured N95 masks would arrive soon.

UP government had placed order for PPE and N95 masks to HLL Lifecare Limited (HLL), a central government subsidiary. HLL is, however, flooded with orders. Apart from state government, SGPGI had also placed order to HLL.

When SGPGI did not get response from HLL despite repeated reminders, it decided to look for other manufacturers who could cater its demand.

Dr A K Baronia, member of logistics committee, told TOI, “We discussed the specifications of available N95 masks and decided to approach a Rajasthan factory which agreed to provide filter fabric that we got delivered to a firm in Kanpur having ultrasonic welding machine after it agreed to manufacture the masks for us.” 

“HLL gives one N95 mask for Rs 49, while Kanpur firm is providing a mask with better specifications for Rs 27 and will deliver them in a week,” he said.

The logistics committee comprising Dr A K Baraoni, Dr Aditya Kapoor, Dr Gaurav Agarwal and Dr Afzal Azim, decided the required specifications and approved sample.

Principal secretary MSME Navneet Sehgal told TOI, “Since chief minister had issued directions for giving boost to MME sector, we arranged initial amount from CSR funds of a company and coordinated with SGPGI and Kanpur firm. The firm will supply the masks soon. Some other MSME units in Noida have also started PPE production.”


