Coronavirus scare in Delhi: Shaheen Bagh women may cap number of protesters
2020-03-17
NEW DELHI: Shaheen Bagh women may cap the number of protesters at the site to minimise the coronavirus threat and to “respect” the chief minister’s statement that not more than 50 people will be allowed to assemble at a place at any given time. However, the protest will continue until the Centre listens to their demands, they say.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

According to the women, at least two meetings were held on Monday to decide the course of action. The women, who have been protesting against CAA, NRC and NPR for the last three months, put forward their suggestions to continue their “democratic civil disobedience movement,” while also taking “practical” steps to counter the global pandemic. They reached a consensus on some points, including the closure of the makeshift school until further notice.

“The decision to close the school was to ensure safety of the children. We will have more meetings to decide our plans for the future,” said Hena, one of the protesters. The protests will continue, she asserted.

Some of the ideas under consideration are to have just one entry point, which would be guarded by a volunteer equipped with a temperature gun. At least eight-ten stands with hand sanitiser bottles may be kept near the protest site. The protesters have started crowdsourcing masks and sanitisers to be distributed among the locals and the shopkeepers. “The shops along the protest site can keep the sanitisers accessible for those entering and exiting the site,” Hena said.

Several other suggestions have been made by the women protesters. “We may limit the number of performances on the stage so that locals don’t crowd the area. We have also asked the men who surround the area to move further away from the site,” said another protester.

“We may come up with 4-hour shifts so that everyone can continue being a part of this movement safely. After their shift gets over, one batch can leave and another can take over,” she said, adding that they are trying to rope in doctors who can spread awareness about the virus. “The women will listen to professionals more. So, we have appealed to the medical fraternity to come and tell us what steps we can take to stay safe. Our fight can't stop because it's for the future of this country,” said Hena.


