Coronavirus scare: Shaheen Bagh protesters keep distance, but stay put
2020-03-18
NEW DELHI: Despite Delhi government banning a gathering of more than 50 people, the women protesters at Shaheen Bagh on Tuesday laid beds at the site with two of them sitting on one to maintain a safe distance while continuing with their agitation. The women had earlier been sitting on the ground.


Fatima, a protester at Shaheen Bagh, said, “We will not get up whatever may happen. We are taking extra care with regard to cleanliness and sanitising our hands often. There are also arrangements for people to wash hands. If more people come, we will put more beds.”


Coronavirus in India live updates

Later, police and RWA members reached the protest site to interact with the women, but they refused to end their agitation.

“We have been making repeated requests to the protesters with the help of imams and maulvis. The meeting could not be held for the last two weeks. We went especially because of the coronavirus outbreak. There was no positive outcome of the meeting, but we will keep trying,” said a senior police officer.

Jamal Haider, RWA member from Jamia Nagar, who was also present in the meeting, said, “Residents are afraid that if one person gets infected, then everyone will suffer. The protest is on despite the coronavirus outbreak, which is not right.”

On Tuesday, Delhi Police, in an appeal to the public to prevent the spread of novel coronavirus, said, “(We make) a fervent appeal to the general public to remain indoors as far as possible and not come outside unnecessarily for leisure or entertainment activities, which involve close contact with more than five people.”

Anil Mittal, additional PRO, Delhi Police, said, “We also appeal to people not to assemble at any place for protest, dharna, rally or any other activity, whether in closed space or outside, till March 31. Delhi Police will not give permission for such gatherings. Also, no licence will be issued for public entertainment activities.”


