Sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in Pakistan during Ramzan
2020-04-30
ISLAMABAD: Pakistan has seen a sharp increase in number of coronavirus cases as well as fatalities caused by the disease since the government allowed mosques for congregational prayers during the Muslim holy month of Ramzan.


Failing to sustain the pressure from a group of clerics demanding reopening of mosques, the government had last week signed a 20-point accord with them that laid out conditions for mosques to observe during congregational prayers. Most of the rules agreed between the government and clerics, such as wearing facemasks, mopping floors with disinfectants before prayers, maintaining a six feet gap between worshippers and barring people over 50 years of age from joining in congregational prayers were not followed in roughly 90% of mosques across the country.

Despite a spike in local transmission of the virus, Prime Minister Imran Khan-led government has been silent over non-implementation of the agreement.

“These rules are very difficult for authorities to implement. The government was expecting from clerics to ensure its implementation in mosques. Since they have failed to do so, the government is left with the only option of using force, which it will never do considering the sensitivities attached with matters related to faith,” a senior government official responded when his opinion was sought by TOI on the issue.

Facts and figures show a daily rise in confirmed coronavirus casualties. Last week, Pakistani doctors battling the Covid-19 pandemic had called on the government and clerics to reverse the agreement that allowed congregations in mosques. They had warned about the collapse of healthcare system in the country, saying that large gatherings at mosques would lead to an explosion of coronavirus cases. Their appeal, however, has gone unheeded. Most mullahs and mosque committees seem in no mood to listen to warnings of grave consequences by the government or the medical authorities.

“Primary reason can be the spectre of losing financial funding during Ramzan. But more than that it is the prospect of forfeiting the political and societal nuisance value gained during General Zia-ul-Haq’s dictatorial regime and fortified ever since due to successive weak governments and a pliant state,” says Aamir Ghuari, the editor of The News. “At a time when Islam’s holiest mosques are closed due to the pandemic, Pakistani mullahs’ insistence to defy the state’s writ and common sense show their disconnect with the wider Islamic world too,” Ghauri added.

