Share info of patients with Covid symptoms,  hosps told
2020-04-11
Kannur: The district administration has strictly instructed private hospitals to share all details of patients coming with symptoms of Covid-19 and the treatment provided to them. This directive comes in the wake of a 71-year-old patient from Mahe testing positive, even though he has no history of having contact with anyone with Covid-19. There are also unconfirmed reports that he was sitting next to a senior citizen, who tested positive, in the fever clinic of a major hospital here. 

District collector T V Subhash, who asked the private hospitals to share the details, said there are complaints that some private hospitals are not willing to share details of patients who approached them with symptoms of Covid-19.

As part of this, everyday the hospitals should hand over details of in-patients and outpatients via a prescribed Google Form and also email the details, said the collector.

Moreover, the patients coming with symptoms of Covid should be admitted only after collecting a signed affidavit regarding their travel. Also, these details and the information of shifting them to another hospital should be communicated to the nearest PHC or the Covid control room. Further, if anyone in home isolation or those who have come back from abroad approaches the private hospitals for treatment, it should also be communicated to the district medical officer.

If demanded, these hospitals should be ready to hand over details, including the CCTV footage from the hospital, too.

Recently, there was some miscommunication regarding such patients from a major hospital. Health officials traced the possible sources of the infection of the elderly patient from Mahe, and tracked the hospitals he visited before testing positive. They also got indication that another patient, also an elederly who tested positive through contact, was at the fever clinic of a major hospital at the same time. However, it has not been officially confirmed, said DMO K Narayana Nayak.

“We took a statement from that hospital, but they have denied the claim. They said that there is no possibility of this patient getting infected from there, but we are investigating the possibility,” he said. Health authorities expect private hospitals to be more responsible now, especially in the efforts to prevent any community spread, said the DMO.


