Shelter homes turn away the homeless in Chennai citing coronavirus contraction fears
2020-03-21
CHENNAI: The scare surrounding coronavirus has hit the rescue of homeless people in the city and night shelters are no longer admitting them. Shelter coordinators said they want to avoid overcrowding and cannot take in any new homeless person as it may risk the safety and health of existing inmates.


“We are now wary of people, especially those coming from North Chennai because many people there often travel to the northern parts of the country. We don’t know what infection they might carry,” said D Jagadeesh, coordinator at a men’s shelter in Thiruvottiyur. The shelter has the capacity to accommodate 50 but it currently has around 24 inmates. “We have to ensure that these people are safe and we cannot take any risk,” he said.

To prevent the spread of Covid-19, all the 50 shelters are taking precautionary measures, such as insisting on washing hands, using sanitisers and masks, and avoiding crowding.

“We admitted five new people last week because the police referred them to us. But now we have stopped,” said K Palani, coordinator of a shelter for elderly men and women run by ICWO in Pattalam.

“But what about us? Aren’t we equally vulnerable to contract the virus?” asked D Rajalakshmi, a daily wager who with her two children and mother lives on a pavement in Choolai. Rajalakshmi said she was turned away from the Thiruvottiyur shelter and another shelter near Kelly’s citing lack of space. “They asked us to contact a corporation official, get tested and find another place,” she said.

R Arunachalam, another daily wager and pavement dweller at Besant Nagar, said, “The police do not want us on the streets and said we would get the virus. But the shelters are turning us away. What are we supposed to do?” he asked.

“Unless they are referred by a corporation official and screened at a public health centre, we cannot allow them in. We have to take care of our people here,” said A Sophia from a women’s shelter on Ibrahim Street. 

Alby John Varghese, deputy commissioner (health), Greater Chennai Corporation, said though they have temporarily stopped conducting rescue operations, every homeless person who comes to the shelter individually for help will be admitted. “Nobody can be denied admission. We are also looking at other alternatives to keep them safe during this time.”

“The ‘stay at home’ advice sadly doesn’t work for the homeless,” said Vanessa Peter, a policy researcher at the Information and Resource Centre for the Deprived Urban Communities. She urged officials to open more shelters or at least accommodate them at community halls.

