Shelter homes making kids feel at ‘home’ during lockdown
2020-04-12
EDITED: 

Jaipur: Even as schools, hostels and colleges go empty in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, thousands of children continue with their routine with a little more caution in government shelters that are ‘home’ to them. 

Confinement to home is not such a novel experience for most of these kids who came to these homes after being abandoned by family or due to being in conflict with law. Aware of the pandemic that has swept the outside world, they do their best to beat the blues, while maintaining social distancing. 

“The state government has been extremely sensitive on the issue and even before the nationwide lockdown got imposed, social distancing measures including restrictions on staff movement were implemented in care homes across Rajasthan,” says commissioner child empowerment department, Veena Pradhan. 

It is a routine practice for such care homes to involve the children in entertainment activities and skill learning. These efforts have further been boosted due to the lockdown. 

A 17-year-old Rama (name changed) says, “There has been no reduction in the gaming or any such activities, but we have been asked to ensure that social distancing is duly followed and the children wash their hands at regular intervals. We also no longer sit side by side in group activities. Even during dance activities, we stand apart from each other.” 

Some students also find time to read at the library on campus, but are asked to sit at a distance. Interactions with councillors and family members are now only being done through video sessions. 

A major change that has come into their lives is that they are being asked to wash hands regularly and maintain social distancing. However, it’s not just the kids that are impacted. 

Over a dozen caretakers of government girls and childcare centre at Gandhinagar, Jaipur, have made their workplace their home, for past couple of weeks now. These caretakers, all women, no longer visit their homes, so as to ensure safety of nearly 70 children, for whom the government shelter is home. Similar efforts are being made across the over 200 childcare homes being run by the government and associated NGOs. 


