Coronavirus scare: Shift us to private hospitals or let us go home, say patients
2020-01-30
BENGALURU: People with travel history to China, who self-reported themselves at Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD) to ensure they haven’t contracted coronavirus, now don’t want to stay in the hospital. Reason: there are just four toilets for all patients in the isolation ward and those admitted fear getting infected. 

Relatives of these patients say the four washrooms are open for all, which is a cause for concern. Most of them have visited the government hospital for the first time and are now asking doctors if they could be shifted to private facilities or allowed to go home. 

 
 

“My wife is absolutely fine. Because she had travelled to China, we wanted to rule out the possibility of an infection. She is uncomfortable here and we want to shift her,” the spouse of a patient told TOI. 

Since last week, 10 patients with travel history to China got themselves admitted at the special isolation ward set up at RGICD. Of these, test reports of three persons have come negative and two of them have been discharged. 

“One of the patients whose report came negative was asked to stay here for another day. But he chose to leave the hospital on seeing other self-reported cases and due to lack of basic infrastructure here,” said a patient’s relative. Hospital authorities, however, claim the man was discharged after due procedures. 

The admission of a woman on Tuesday night got other patients worried. “She doesn’t seem to be from India. She could be Tibetan or Chinese. We don’t have anything against her. But if she is infected, the rest of them in the ward shouldn’t be affected,” said the relative of another patient. 

Patients’ attendants wrote a letter to the hospital director on Tuesday night stating they either be provided with better toilet facilities and private wards or shifted to private hospitals. 

A patient’s relative told TOI that in no way did the facility meet the requirements of an isolation ward. “The gap between two beds is barely one meter and there is just a thin curtain separating the two. There are chances of infection spreading from one patient to another,” the person added. The primary concern is that even if one patient is infected, he/she could spread the virus to others in the ward. 

“Nurses have protective gear. But patients are only given a mask. My brother is worried that he may get infected here and not from his China travel,” said a relative. 

Hospital authorities, meanwhile, seem to be disappointed with the way patients and their relatives are reacting. “We provide food from the hospital and dinner is served at 7.30pm. But one patient demanded food from outside late at night and we still obliged. That’s too much to expect. Some of the patients now want to be shifted to private hospitals,” said Dr C Nagaraja, director, RGICD. 

Even for patients whose sputum and blood sample results have come negative, the health department has suggested that they be kept in the hospital for another day. But most of the patients don’t seem to be keen on this. 

RGICD authorities said patients’ concerns have been communicated to the state health and family welfare department (surveillance wing). 

