Himachal Pradesh: SDM accuses municipal corporation of not cooperating in cremation of coronavirus positive victim
2020-05-07
SHIMLA: Issue of cremating the coronavirus positive victim from Sarkhaghat of Mandi district has resulted into controversy with Shimla’s SDM (Urban) Neeraj Chandla accusing the municipal corporation of not cooperating in cremation in Shimla on Tuesday night. While the civic body authorities are claiming to have followed the protocol of Union ministry of health and family welfare in this, the SDM said that she along with tehsildar was standing at cremation ground till 12.35am when the municipal corporation team arrived. On this lack of communication and coordination, Neeraj Chandla is also submitting a report to Shimla district magistrate.

On Tuesday evening, the 21-year-old youth had died at Indira Gandhi Medical College and Hospital in Shimla, while his samples were tested positive at Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Government Medical College in Ner Chowk of Mandi district. Following his death, family members, who were in quarantine, were informed and permission was sought for the cremation.

The SDM said that primarily it was the duty of municipal corporation to assist in the cremation so she had immediately informed the municipal health officer. She said that initially she got positive response from the health officer, who said they have the PPE kits but after a while she was informed that there were no clear-cut instructions for the cremation and the municipal corporation has no role to play in this.

“I only wanted the help of health workers of municipal corporation as PPE kits were needed to cremate the body. While no one from municipal corporation came, it was staff of medical college, who had cremated the body,” she said.

Chanda said that she along with tehsildar remained at the cremation ground from 10.30pm to 12.35am. She said that official from municipal corporation came there around 11.30am at his own while she had needed health workers help in PPE kits to cremate the body.

She said that vehicles of municipal corporation and a fire tender arrived there at 12.35am but by then body was consigned to flames. She said that beside municipal corporation, even police personnel should have also been present at the place as the district administration comprises of them too.

“I left only after team from municipal corporation arrived, but incident has exposed the lack of communication and coordination. To ensure such things do not occur in future, I am submitting a report to district magistrate for further submission to the state government,” she added.

While interacting with media persons, joint commissioner of municipal corporation Ajeet Bhardwaj said that protocol was followed by them and six employees and two vehicles were sent for the cremation who remained there till 2.30 am. He said that civic body was, according to the guidelines, issued by Government of India.

