Ship from China to city screened; 2 COVID-19 suspects in hospital
2020-02-13
Kolkata: For the first time since the coronavirus (COVID-19) scare broke out, a medical team from Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust (SPMPT) boarded a Panama-flag vessel mid-sea near Sagar anchorage to check for possible symptoms among the 19-member Chinese crew. 

This was done not because the crew are Chinese but the cargo ship is bound for the Kolkata Dock System (KDS) from Shanghai via Singapore. The Sagar anchorage is nearly 144km from Kolkata.

“A medical team led by SPMPT’s chief medical officer Mukund Kelkar boarded the 120-meter long MV Genius Star-VII while it was anchored mid-sea. Though the ship’s captain Zhou Yingde was sending regular medical bulletins, including temperatures of crew members ever since it sailed from Shanghai on January 29, we quarantined it at the Sagar anchorage as per procedure,” said a senior SPMPT official. 

Meanwhile, the state-run ID&BG Hospital in Kolkata admitted two Covid-19 suspects in the isolation ward on Wednesday. The swab samples of the first patient with a travel history to China have been sent to ICMR-NICED Kolkata for a confirmatory test. The patient who complained of fever will be kept in the hospital for observation and conservatory treatment till the test reports come in. Sources in the hospital said that the patient does not have severe symptoms. The second suspect, a flyer from Bangkok and resident of Madhya Pradesh, was admitted to the hospital late in the evening with symptoms. He too has history of China travel. 

Ajay Chakraborty, director, health services, West Bengal confirmed admission of the first suspect. At IIT Kharagpur, a research scholar from Thailand has been kept in isolation at the hospital inside the campus as he had travelled home recently. District health officials said that he has been kept under hospital isolation as a precautionary measure and they have no plans to collect his swab samples. He will be kept under observation now. So far the state health department has got the swab samples of 16 suspects screened. While 14 samples have tested negative to Covid-19, the results of two samples are awaited.


