Ships from 15 countries to face quarantine
2020-03-20
KOLKATA: Ships whose last ports of call have been in China, Italy and 13 other countries will be quarantined for 14 days before being allowed to use the facilities of the Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust (SPMPT). These restrictions started on Thursday and will continue till March 31. The decision will be reviewed thereafter. SPMPT had started taking precautions since January 29 and screened 100% of the crew of all ships entering the ports of Kolkata, Haldia and Budge Budge. Shore leaves for crews were also cancelled. 


“The list of the restricted countries includes China (including Hong Kong), Italy, Iran, Republic of Korea, France, Spain, Germany, United Kingdom, Turkey, UAE, Qatar, Oman, Kuwait, Malaysia and the Philippines. Crews of ships arriving from ports in other countries will continue to be screened. They will not be allowed shore leaves though the ships will be allowed to berth at the ports. Shipping agents will also take adequate precautions while boarding vessels that berth at the ports,” a senior SPMPT official said.

Restriction on movement of ships to China had affected the transportation of iron ore from Haldia. The latest decision to quarantine more vessels is likely to affect movement of other cargo as well. This will happen as the turnaround time for ships will go up. However, the restrictions are necessary for the safety of port officials and workers. Though isolation facilities have been created at the port hospitals in Kolkata and Haldia, no port user, seaman or employee has tested positive for Covid-19 till now.

Port authorities have also confirmed that the country’s first woman marine pilot, who is now employed at SPMPT, has tested negative to Covid-19. The woman had travelled to Sri Lanka on vacation and had returned with certain symptoms suspected to have been displayed upon contracting the virus. She was admitted to the Beliaghata ID hospital in Kolkata a couple of days ago and her samples were sent for tests. She has now returned home.


