Ship with Chinese crew kept off Chennai port for a day over coronavirus scare
2020-02-21
CHENNAI: Drama preceded the docking of M V Magnate from Shanghat at Chennai port on Tuesday as two of its crew showed symptoms of fever and were quarantined onboard. They later tested negative for novel corona virus (COVID-19). The bulk carrier with a cargo of steel had to wait for a day in the outer anchorage after staff of pilot boats refused to guide it in.

Ships cannot enter a port unless staff of pilot boats board it and guide the captain to steer it through water channels that lead to the dock. Giant bulk carriers need at least four pilot boats and a tug to guide them. 

When M V Magnate, bearing a Panama flag, reached the city port’s outer anchorage, the captain requested permission to be guided into the port, but staff who man pilot boats refused to do it because of a scare that the Chinese crew could be infected with COVID-19 as it had come from Shanghai. Later, workers by the side of the quay also refused to handle the ship if it was brought in, saying they were frightened to touch the ropes that would be thrown out from the ship to moor it. There is no ban on ships from China entering ports in India. 

On Wednesday, sources in the port said, the authorities had to send a team led by a health officer on a boat to the ship. “The team checked the crew and found that two of them had symptoms of fever. Then another team reached the ship and collected blood samples of the unwell sailors to be sent to the lab for testing,” he added.

The authorities, meanwhile, convinced the staff and workers to handle the ship as the affected crew had been quarantined onboard. It was brought in after they were informed that the affected sailors had only mild fever and no symptoms of respiratory problem. 

Another official said that the ship had to wait for a day at the outer anchorage and the cargo was not unloaded till the results showed that the two crew members had tested negative for COVID-19. “They have docked the ship and the unloading began on Thursday evening. The ship is scheduled to leave the port on Saturday. Now that it has lost a day, the departure may get delayed,” he added.

The protocol put in place at ports includes thermal screening of the crew and passengers and a quarantine facility where people with symptoms of fever can be moved. But all these are to be followed only after ships reach the docks.


