Shiva’s deep dive amidst lockdown saves many lives in Hyderabad
2020-05-05
HYDERABAD: While the lockdown has invoked the spirit of charity and goodwill among numerous individuals and organisations, for Shiva Ilias Hanumanth it is still business as usual. 

Shiva is carrying on with his efforts to save those who jump into the Hussainsagar lake to end their life or prevent them from taking the extreme step. In case he’s unable to save them, he recovers their bodies while risking his own life.

The ‘unofficial Baywatch guard’ of Hussainsagar, Shiva has saved over 100 lives in and around the lake and continues to do so. He has so far retrieved over 15 bodies and saved three persons who attempted suicide during the lockdown. “One of the men whom I saved was a 70-year-old TB patient. He jumped into the water a few days ago in the afternoon. I jumped into the water and pulled him out. I spoke to him, counselled him and sent him home,” said Shiva. 

Even if he fails to save a life, he helps recover the bodies. Even when the positive cases of coronavirus have increased in the city, Shiva continues to retrieve the bodies without any safety gear. “I am aware of the risks involved,” he says nonchalantly. That no safety gear is provided to him by the officials is not a deterrent.

Shiva lost two brothers to drowning. “I try to save as many people as I can from the lake. Even police are aware of the risk. With the lockdown in place, there are hardly any jobs. But, they (cops) call me to recover the bodies from the lake,” says Shiva. 

It has been over a decade since Shiva had lost his adopted brother Pavan, who died in an attempt to save a suicide victim. Since then, Shiva has made it a mission to save people. 

But, he hardly makes any money from the what he does. He doesn’t ask for a fee or reward either. Shiva takes whatever police officials offer him voluntarily. “A police officer has ensured that my three sons get residential school education. Some officials offer food,” he says.

As the lake water is dirty, a resident of Secunderabad has donated 10 cans of drinking water. Even though he has a shortage of food and drinking water, he has made it a point to share his food with stray dogs. “Some eight to 10 dogs are staying with us. I have kept three drinking water cans aside for the dogs and pigeons and share whatever food I eat with them,” said Shiva. 

Shiva, his wife and another son along with 20 others reside in a shed near a temple around the lake area.


