Shivraj Singh Chouhan's Covid-cabinet has five ministers, no portfolio yet
2020-04-22
BHOPAL: Nearly a month after CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan took oath of office, Madhya Pradesh got a ‘covid-cabinet’, but still no health or home minister.


The ‘mini-cabinet’ has just five ministers — none with a portfolio. The chosen ones are Narottam Mishra, Kamal Patel, Meena Singh, Tulsi Silawat and Govind Singh Rajput.

Silawat and Rajput are Scindia loyalists and were ministers in the Kamal Nath cabinet. They played key roles in the breakaway from Congress, which led to the collapse of the Nath government in March.

No portfolios have been allocated yet, but the ministers have been put in charge of two divisions each to manage the fightback against Covid-19. For health minister, Chouhan had a choice of two Mishra and Silawat have handled the portfolio earlier but the state will have to wait till after the corona lockdown is lifted to know if any of them gets it.

For nearly a month after being sworn in as CM, Chouhan ran a one-man show tirelessly, without a council of ministers, triggering criticism from the opposition. The buzz is that a tug of war between factions in BJP — including Scindia’s — for plum portfolios was delaying formation of the cabinet.

On Tuesday, when Governor Lalji Tandon administered oath of office to the five ministers at Raj Bhavan, there was anticipation that key portfolios would be allocated, but that wasn’t to be.

Chouhan said: “The cabinet is small but balanced, and effort has been made to give representation to all sections of society. Whatever is left will be taken care of in the next expansion after the lockdown is lifted.”

Silawat has been put in charge of Indore — MP’s corona hotspot — and Sagar divisions. Mishra has been given charge of Bhopal and Ujjain – the other two red zones of MP. Patel will handle Jabalpur and Narmadapuram divisions, Rajput gets Chambal and Gwalior and Meena Singh will look after Rewa and Shahdol divisions. 

The CM said the ministers would keep watch on the situation in the districts under their charge and, in consultation with local public representatives, officials and public at large, would formulate strategies to overcome the menace.


How many days will this government run, asks Kamal Nath

Former CM Kamal Nath criticized the mini-cabinet, saying it was a “mockery of the people of Madhya Pradesh”.

“During this time of Corona pandemic, BJP has made fun of the 7.5 crore people of the state. A cabinet has been formed after a month, that too with only five ministers and no allocation of department,” Nath tweeted.

In a second tweet, Nath took a dig at BJP, and said: “It’s clear how much internal conflict is on in BJP. How many days will this government run? Let’s wait and watch.”

Many top state BJP leaders have been left out, including former LOP Gopal Bhargava and several powerful ministers in the previous Shivraj cabinet -- Bhupendra Singh, Yashodhara Raje Scindia, Sanjay Pathak, Rajendra Shukla, Vijay Shah, Surendra Patwa, Rampal Singh and Paras Jain.

Political observers feel the covid-cabinet was more of a “ritual” to silence Congress, coming as it did just a day after Kapil Sibal and Vivek Tankha petitioned the President not to approve two financial ordinances promulgated by the Shivraj government since there was no cabinet in madhya Pradesh.

What stands out in the mini cabinet, however, is that all sections have been represented -- Brahmin, Thakur, OBC, Dalit and tribal. And, except for Mahakaushal, so have all regions of MP.

Narottam Mishra is undoubtedly No. 2 in the state BJP now, as indicated by the order of swearing-in, and his getting a cabinet berth came as no surprise. The two candidates from the Scindia camp were also obvious names, but Kamal Patel and Meena Singh were indeed a surprise for many in BJP and outside.

Talking about Patel, who had been in political oblivion for a long time after his sons were accused of serious criminal activities in his hometown Harda, a BJP leader said: “Kamal Patel has been with Kailash Vijayvargiya and his comeback could be attributed to him.”

Meena Singh, a tribal MLA from Manpur in Shahdol, may not be a high-profile leader in the saffron party but her influence is palpable in the tribal belt of Vindhya. A five-time MLA, she was a minister in the Shivraj cabinet once. 

