Shivraj forms team of 10 officials to tackle Covid
2020-04-08
Bhopal: A team of ten top bureaucrats is working round the clock along with chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan to tackle the Covid-19 pandemic in Madhya Pradesh.

Supervised by chief secretary Iqbal Singh Bains, the ten-member team comprises director general of police, Vivek Johri; additional chief secretaries, Mohammad Suleman, ICP Keshari; principal secretaries, S N Mishra, Faiz Ahmed Kidwai, Sanjay Shukla, Manish Rastogi, Sanjay Dubey, and secretary P Narhari, who are leading from front to tackle pandemic in the state.

Bains, who was appointed as chief secretary on March 24 after Chouhan took oath as chief minister for fourth time, handles the reviewing and monitoring part. He updates Chouhan on all developments. He also coordinates with district collectors and gets from them a report from each district.

DGP Vivek Johri, who took over on March 12, oversees the law and order situation. Every evening, he gets an overall report of the entire state, briefs the CM and then reviews it with him.

Principal secretary Manish Rastogi, who replaced Ashok Barnwal on March 29, lines up all review meetings of the CM on corona crisis and tracks their agenda. Rastogi also coordinates with district collectors and plays a critical role while taking important decisions. Rastogi reviews the situation twice everyday.

Principal Secretary Faiz Ahmed Kidwai, who given the charge as MP Health Department Commissioner on April 1 released a health bulletin on Monday. Apart from handing this responsibility, Kidwai supervises medicine supply and arrangement of logistics.

Chouhan has tasked principal secretary Sanjay Shukla with arrangements for medical treatment, hospital management, including arrangement of ventilators and isolation wards. Shukla receives reports from hospitals and medical colleges.

Additional chief secretary Mohammad Suleman manages the coordination part and plays a crucial part in the decision-making process. He is also reviewing a possible post-lockdown scenario. This involves taking a call on what all services could be restarted. 

Additional chief secretary, ICP Keshari takes a stock of after the availability of essential goods and services; and ensures state-level coordination. He also coordinates with the district collectors to make sure there is no shortage of essential goods during the lockdown.

Principal Secretary Sanjay Dubey monitors the corona situation in the urban areas of the state. He also manages screening and other arrangements.

Principal Secretary S N Mishra supervises the implementation of lockdown. Whereerver reinforcements are needed Mishra ensures it and takes crucial decisions in case of for contingencies.

Information, contact and communication is being supervised by secretary P Narhari is. He ensures that government initiatives and decisions on corona crisis are effectively communicated to the people.

Apart from this ten-member team, another team of IAS and state administrative service officers is monitoring the situation across the state.


