Chennai: Sholinganallur sees 13-fold rise in Covid-19 cases
2020-05-18
CHENNAI: While the focus on increasing number of Covid-19 cases has been on Royapuram, Thiru-vi-ka Nagar and Kodambakkam zones, statistics released by Greater Chennai Corporation show that the rate of increase in May has been higher in zones like Sholinganallur, Adyar and Madhavaram.

For instance, from May 4 to 10, cases in Royapuram have increased by 107% (doubled). During the same period, cases in Adyar zone saw a 448% jump, increased by 5.5 times. Similarly, cases went up by 4.2 times in Sholinganallur zone and 5.1 times in Madhavaram.

 


A similar trend is seen during the period from May 4 to May 17, with Sholingnallur registering a 13-fold jump in number of cases, while cases in Adyar and Madhavaram surged by 11.6 times. Considered a troublesome hotspot, Thiru-vi-ka Nagar however, had the least surge, indicating that containment measures may have worked best in the zone.

Twitter user @amasaesle, who posted a comparison of the rate of growth of the cases on social media, said between May 9 and 15, cases in Sholinganallur grew by a daily average of 28%, while the city’s average was 11.2%. Cases in Thiru-vi-ka Nagar grew at 6% daily.

Speaking to TOI, officials said this indicated that the Covid-19 virus was now spreading across the city, while it was restricted to a few clusters in April. “For instance, cases in Adyar and Sholinganallur shot up in few days due to the Thiruvanmiyur market and the Kannagi Nagar slum clearance board apartments clusters,” an official said.

Cases reported in residential colonies in Madhavaram were linked to the milk factory as well as Koyambedu market clusters.

Ambattur zone, which had zero cases for around three weeks, saw a five fold jump between May 4 and May 17.

J Radhakrishnan, special officer for Covid-19 deputed to Greater Chennai Corporation, has stated that they have formed street-wise plans for different zones to tackle the spread. For instance, a separate plan has been formed for Kannagi Nagar, while the narrow streets of Royapuram will have a different containment strategy.


