Bhopal: Shopping too gets sanitised in Covid-19 times
2020-05-30
BHOPAL: After a gap of over two months, cosmetics and garment shops have reopened in the city, albeit with a number of precautions in place. The coronavirus pandemic has changed the entire shopping experience, affecting sales as well the old way of buying a dress or lipstick that involved multiple trials.

Shopkeepers made elaborate arrangements to clean and sanitise the shops as they opened them after 60 plus days. Ajay Devnani, secretary, New Market vyapari mahasangh and owner of a garment shop said, “We have made it clear to all the shopkeepers to ensure the safety of their staff as well as the customers and sanitse the shops every day. They have also been told to make gloves and masks compulsory for their helpers and try to accept payments through cards or online transactions and avoid exchanging cash as far as possible. If they do accept cash, they must sanitize the currency notes and coins.”

“We cleaned and sanitized the shop after opening and are only allowing one person inside the shop at a time. I am only calling 3 of my helpers and all of them have been given masks, caps and gloves. Customers are asked to keep their masks on and sanitise their hands before entering the shop,” said Deepak Basme, who runs a cosmetic shop in New Market.

Cosmetic shops are no longer letting the women test the shades of foundation or lipsticks from the sample products. Another cosmetic shop owner in Bittan Market, Mukesh Jain, added, “Earlier, women used to demand testers to apply shades of foundation and lipsticks on their skin before buying a product to ensure the colour suited their complexion, but now we are not allowing them to apply the product from the sample shades as it can be risky. We are asking them to choose the colours after looking at the shade-cards.”

Raj Babani, dealer of a cosmetic company , said that some of the top makeup brands have certain products that are in the running for the last 20-25 years, and women remember their product numbers. So, they can tell the shopkeeper the product number and get that shade. 

Demand for makeup products has actually gone down these days, with people mostly demanding creams, lotions, soaps and shampoos. “We are having more customers for nurturing and hygiene products including bathing bars, shampoos and face washes,” said Kavita Singh, who runs a small cosmetic shop in Laharpura market, near Katara Hills. 

Garments shop owners are also not allowing customers to try the clothes before buying to check the fitting and drape. “Our patrons are also cooperating with us and not insisting on trying the clothes. Even the clothes they look at or put under their necks or on the shoulders to see if they would fit them, are immediately kept aside in ‘quarantine’ for three days before they are shown to other customers,” said Krishna Gangrade who runs a readymade garment shop in New Market. 

Sonika Sharma, who opened a readymade garment shop for women last year, in Baghmughalia, said, “We can neither wash nor sanitize the garments and it is a big challenge for women to buy clothes without trying. Right now, I am asking my customers to only buy what they really like and come back to the shop if there is an issue with the fitting. We are trying to alter the purchased clothes as per customer’s need and have totally done away with exchanges and return of garments.” 


