Coronavirus in Delhi: Shops down shutters, but essential services running
2020-03-22
NEW DELHI: In a bid to keep the novel coronavirus at bay, key markets in the city voluntarily decided to down shutters for three days. On the first day on Saturday, commercial centres appeared deserted, though stores dealing in essential items were open and well-stocked. 


TOI visited many markets and found that grocery shops, chemists and fruit/vegetable stores were open with no apparent shortage of supplies, contrary to rumours. Connaught Place, however, wore a deserted look and many of its restaurants were only offering takeaway/delivery services. People, however, could be seen crowding medicine shops. Jagdish Dogra (46), manager at Medicine House, Marina Arcade, asserted that people should not fear short supply of medicines. “The supply chain is working perfectly fine,” he assured. 

Even though there is a level of panic among people, shopkeepers and market associations reassured of availability of supplies, some of them underlining this by restricting bulk purchase. In south Delhi’s Defence Colony, Rajinder Malik, president of the residents’ welfare association and owner of a grocery shop, said he failed to understand why people were panicking. “The Prime Minister has told the country there is no shortage of any essential item. When we try to stop buyers from making purchases for many months, some get angry but they have to understand that hoarding will create artificial shortage and hit the poorest members of society,” Malik said.

While other stores there were closed, those selling fruit, dairy products and medicines were operating. Some of them restricted entry at any particular time to prevent crowding inside the establishments.

Sarojini Nagar market was in a lockdown, though local residents had no problems procuring items of daily need. Mukesh Chhabra, owner of Dera Provisional Store, said his shop would remain open even during the ‘janata curfew’ on Sunday and dismissed all news about shortage as “rumour mongers exploiting people”.

Ashok Randhawa, president of the Sarojini Nagar Market Association, also appealed to customers to only buy as much as they normally did. “Prices will not go up. They might fall in fact because hotels and restaurants are buying less,” he pointed out. “However, people should take precautions just as we are doing by shutting the non-essential stores.” 

Nearly 15 lakh business establishments in Delhi will participate in the janata curfew on Sunday, according to the Confederation of All India Traders. Its general secretary Praveen Khandelwal said, “The closure on Sunday will be extremely useful in protecting traders, their 30 lakh employees and the consumers from mass infection.” He also assured of plentiful supplies and asked people to desist from panic buying.

CAIT has also advised traders across the country not to deprive any employee of their wages or retrench workers because of closure of markets. 

