Shops open after 8 weeks, but Covid fears keep buyers away
2020-05-21
Prayagraj: Prayagraj residents preferred to stay indoors rather than thronging markets in the wake of the novel coronavirus pandemic even as shops in Civil Lines, Katra and Sulem Sarai re-opened on Wednesday, after an eight-week gap because of the lockdown.

Ruing the low turnout, traders claimed that the sales recorded for the day were barely 25% of the regular levels. 

On Wednesday, shops in Mundera, Preetam Nagar and Dhoomanganj opened under the roster system. Shops selling mobile phones, utensils, crockery, sports items, gift items and, printing presses and dry cleaners were open on Wednesday, as lockdown norms were relaxed. These shops will now open again on Friday.

Shops selling computers, IT products, readymade garments and sarees would open on Thursday.

President of Civil Lines Vyapaar Mandal Sushil Kharbanda said, “Most shops saw lukewarm business on Wednesday, despite opening after eight weeks. The sales in shops in Civil Lines were not even half of what we see on regular days. Despite the precautions being taken by shopkeepers, buyers still seem to be hesitant in going to stores.”

The number of customers spotted in Katra and Sulemsarai shops was more than that compared to Civil Lines. 

“Compared to Civil Lines, there was more rush in Katra market in the afternoon as most shops in the area were open. There were some who were not supposed to open their shops, but they still did,” said a trader from Katra.

Ravi Kumar, a customer spotted in a mobile phone shop, said, “Rather than allowing only some shops to open, it’s a better idea to let stores in different markets open on alternate days, so that people are able to get what they want and there is no unnecessary rush.”

Another buyer Vinay said, “I am relieved that shops have now re-opened. However, more markets should be made accessible to residents so that people are not deprived of goods.”

On Tuesday, the district administration had announced that no trials and exchange facility would be offered at shops selling readymade garments and spectacles. While medical stores and grocery shops will remain open on all seven days of the week, home delivery of fruits, vegetables and milk is will be available throughout the entire week. Even restaurants will offer home delivery service.

Police removed barricading on some of the routes located in an around these three markets. 

As part of their efforts to contain the spread of novel coronavirus in the city, police had announced that officials of above inspector rank would issue challan against any person found not wearing mask or gamchha/ handkerchief or scarf or found spitting at any public place or outside his/her house and punish him/her accordingly.


