Covid-19: Shops to shut in 69 hotspots in PMC areas from midnight
2020-05-11
PUNE: Barring hospitals and clinics, all emergency and essential goods services and distribution in the 69 containment areas of Pune Municipal Corporation limits will remain shut with effect from the midnight of Monday (May 11) till May 17.


Pune municipal commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad passed an order to this effect on Sunday evening, stating that the decision was spurred by the continuing violation of social distancing norms at the essential shops, which were allowed to operate in the containment areas between 10am and 2pm since May 3.

“The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) and the police will oversee arrangements for doorstep delivery of essential items like milk and vegetables or will make the same available at bigger open and spacious places in the areas as per requirement,” the order stated.

The PMC has declared total 69 containment zones _ mostly the central parts or the peth areas, the slums and some densely populated localities which are the worst affected by the COVID-19 contagion. Civic officials pointed out that 80% of the city’s 2,400-odd nCov positive cases have been reported from these 69 containment zones. As many as 1,900-odd cases are from these areas, which stand sealed since May 3.

A civic officer said, “Our survey teams which are constantly moving around in the containment areas and our ambulances placed at strategic locations will play a role in providing emergency services. Similarly, at all entry point of the containment areas, a policeman and a PMC representative will be stationed aiding doorstep delivery. People can approach their nearest entry point in case of need of delivery of essential items. The ward offices and the local corporator can also be contacted for help.”

The PMC had declared some areas of the city as containment zones on April 6. These areas included Peth areas from Maharshi Nagar to RTO and parts of Kondhwa. More areas were added in these zones on April 13. They were Shivajinagar, Parvati, parts of Kondhwa, Ahmednagar Road, Satara Road and Yerawada. On April 20, the whole city was declared as the containment zone. Restrictions were put on movements of people and vehicles.

The city’s containment zones were reduced to only 3 per cent of the total city’s area on May 3. The other areas were converted into red zones (noncontainment areas), giving mobility to the residents. The civic administration had decided to open the shops across non-containment areas from May 6. The shops in red zones were opened between 7 am and 7 pm they were all essential shops and five non essential shops per 1km areas.

The shops with essential items in the 69 containment zones were kept open from 10am to 2pm. Even those have now been shut from Monday, till the next order.

