Coronavirus in Pune: Shortage of hand sanitiser in SPPU, affiliated colleges
2020-03-13
PUNE: Savitribai Phule Pune University and its affiliated colleges were found wanting in terms of measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19.

The varsity students claimed that there was no provision for hand sanitisers or liquid soaps though the washrooms and other places were cleaned regularly. The same problem was highlighted by students of affiliated colleges.

The University Grants Commission (UGC) has instructed all institutes to regularly disinfect door knobs and other public areas besides providing hand wash/sanitisers within the campus.

Dayanand Shinde, a postgraduate student of Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU), said, “There is no soap or liquid soap in the washrooms. Hand sanitisers are not available despite the UGC’s instructions. Many people from outside visit the university. So, hand sanitiser should be made available even in library and laboratory.”

Prafulla Pawar, the SPPU registrar, said, “We have provided soaps in all areas, let it be handwashing facilities or washrooms. There is a scarcity of hand sanitisers. We had tried to purchase sanitisers in bulk, but stocks are not available. If students say that soaps are not available in any of the washrooms, the administration will look into it.”

He said, “We held a meeting on Wednesday with 250 staffers from the housekeeping department to train them in dos and don’ts. We also provided them with disinfectants. We have issued circulars to the affiliated colleges to strictly follow the UGC guidelines.”

Dilip Sheth, the principal of Sir Parashurambhau College, said they were cleaning the washrooms on the college and hostel premises on a regular basis, but they refrained from keeping soap citing it as a mass germ carrier.

“We shall form a policy in the next two-three days. At present, awareness among students is the key priority for us,” he said.

When asked if hand sanitisers were available in the washrooms, Sheth replied in the negative.

Devidas Golhar, the principal of Marathwada Mitramandal’s College of Commerce, said they were planning to procure masks for students, but there was a shortage. “We have provided liquid soap across staff rooms as well as students’ washrooms. Social gatherings have been cancelled,” he said.

Ajinkya Adake, a student from the department of communication and journalism, SPPU, said the awareness about coronavirus was on the rise. “There is a possibility of unnecessary panic among citizens and students. Everybody seems to be sporting masks when there is no need for healthy individuals to wear one,” he said. 


