Shortage of water forces residents to ignore lockdown, step out of homes
2020-04-04
Aurangabad: Residents from areas, where there is no tap water supply, have to step out of their houses amid the ongoing lockdown to get water from nearby wells, hand-pumps or public taps. 

Many areas within the jurisdiction of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation are not connected to its piped water supply. Many of the newly developed residential societies in these areas are well insulated with either borewell or has a private water tanker supply. 

However, the lower-income group of people mainly comprising workers have to get water from neighbour’s hand-pumps or public taps.

According to Sominath Shirane of Satara-Deolai Sangharsh Samiti, around 3,000 to 4,000 residents of Sadat Nagar in Satara village does not have any source of water supply. 

“The people living in this area are mainly workers or street vendors who are struggling to arrange food during the lockdown. At the hand-pump near Mahadev Temple in Satara, people rush to fill water,” Shirane said. Hence,they are at a higher risk of getting exposed to the infection, he said.

Shirane has asked that during the lockdown period, the AMC should provide water tanker in the areas without charging anything as the gathering of people is not allowed during the lockdown.

He had also raised concerns about the consumption of hand-pump water which may cause health issues. 

In Padegaon, a 10th standard student in Maji Sainik Colony was run over by a truck in 2019 while he was going to get water on his scooter from a nearby public tap. The areas does not fall under the piped supply network of the AMC.

Situation is similar in Naregaon, Jatwada, Misarwadi, Brijwadi and Jai Bhawani Nagar areas. Especially during summer, the water crisis becomes severe.

Demands for free water tank supply has been refuted by municipal commissioner Astik Kumar Pandey citing the poor financial condition of the AMC.

On Friday, mayor Nandkumar Ghodele said that the gathering of people is worrisome. Relief will be sought from the administration considering the prevalent conditions, he said.


