SHRC seeks report on police excess during lockdown
2020-04-11
Chennai: State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) has sought a report from the director general of police (DGP) on the excesses by police across the state while enforcing lockdown, based on a complaint filed by a final year student of Tamil Nadu law university. The complaint also pointed out that police themselves were not provided with adequate protective equipment, which can be seen from the videos circulating on social media.

R S Aafreen, in her complaint stated that a few police officers are beating people on the roads without even asking them the reason for venturing out. 

A police officer assaulted a doctor and then went on to question why he did not inform earlier about his profession earlier, the complainant said, citing a video clip which went viral on social media and pointed out that it is one among several such incidents. The complainant also noted that many such incidents might have gone unnoticed. 

Terming the Epidemic Disease Act a colonial era legislation, the complainant pointed out that the Act was enacted by the British in 1897 to curtail the spread of plague. This law empowers governments to take extraordinary measures and the Act gives full protection to authorities even if they violate the law of the land in the name of ‘action taken in good faith’, said the complaint. 

Aafreen contended that there are several other humane methods by which police can implement the lockdown such as spot fines. “It is the responsibility of the police to come out with innovative humane methods to execute the lockdown. They need to strike a balance between executing the law as well as respecting the dignity of citizens,” she stated and added that a lot of efforts were put by legislators, judiciary and non-governmental institutions in the past seven decades to make police refrain from inhuman methods to execute the law. 

The complaint said the public are appreciative of the dedication of police but are equally worried about inhuman force by a few officers. 


