Covid-19 scare: Shut till Mar 31, schools introduce online classes for new academic year
2020-03-16
HYDERABAD: With the state government directing all educational institutions to remain closed till March 31, many schools have asked parents to buy books for the 2020-21 academic year so that the students can prepare for online classes.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Many schools, especially those affiliated to CBSE and ICSE, which were scheduled to start the new academic year in the last week of March, have sent out e-mails to parents saying that online classes will begin shortly. 

 
 

“Anticipating this situation, our teachers have been working for the past two weeks on developing online modules to compensate for the academic hours that the students will miss in the case of closure. Virtual classes in times such as these are the only practical alternative and we shall intimate you about the date of their commencement once your children have the books and resources they need to avail the online lessons,” read an e-mail from Chirec International School. 

The e-mail further read that issuance of new books for the coming academic session for grades 6, 7, 8, and 9 will begin from Monday. The school, however, asked parents to refrain from coming to school to collect the books if they have any history of travel to countries affected by Covid-19 in the last 14 days.

Several other schools are conducting online classes for current students, especially for those in high school, and have framed a special timetable to be followed by students from their homes.

“We have initiated online classes for Grade VII students as schools are closed as a precautionary measure to prevent the spread of Covid-19. A specific timetable has been prepared and sent to parents so that the students can join the classes from home. This initiative is done so as to ensure children don’t lose touch with their subjects,” said Narasimha Murthy, executive vice-chairman of Global Indian International School, Uppal campus.

