Siblings test +ve for Covid, Prayagraj tally reaches 36
2020-05-18
Prayagraj: A brother-sister duo who had returned from Mumbai about a week back tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19) taking Prayagraj district’s tally to 36 cases on Sunday.

Nodal officer and additional chief medical officer Dr Rishi Sahai said the two were a part of a group of 10, which had returned from Mumbai on May 9 to the city. They are residents of Tilai Bazar in Mauaima area. After their return, they were quarantined at an isolation centre in Soroan area on May 10. Their swab samples were collected on on Saturday and they tested positive for the virus on Sunday. The other eight who came along with them tested negative for the infection.

Sahai said of the 36 novel coronavirus patients in the district, 10 have recovered and been discharged and one had died. 

Sahai said while the woman was 35 years old, her brother was 22 years old. 

Health department officials have sealed Tilai Bazar area and the locality to the list of hotspots. 

Meanwhile, a 40-year-old man who was isolated along with his wife and son died at a quarantine centre late Saturday night. The family was a part of a a group of five who had come to the city from Ullaas Nagar in Maharashtra on May 13 and were quarantined at a local school.

The victim’s cousins told the police that the man complained of chest pain around two months back and the doctors who treated him said that the pain was due to a cardiovascular disease. His had condition improved after the treatment, the family said. He experienced a similar same pain at the quarantine centre on Saturday evening. He tested positive for Covid-19 posthumously. 

A 32-year-old novel coronavirus patient, who had been undergoing treatment at ward number 10 of Swaroop Rani Nehru Hospital, also died on Saturday night. The Handia resident worked in Mumbai and had returned home in a truck on May 11. He was quarantined at a centre and was later admitted to SRN Hospital due to some health complications. He also tested positive for the infection after his death.


