SIC pendency crosses over 51k applications amid lockdown
2020-04-24
Aurangabad: Though the Supreme Court and different benches of the Bombay high court are conducting virtual hearings on urgent matters during the current lockdown, the State Information Commission ( SIC) has not adopted any such measures.

Due to this, by the end of February, the SIC and its seven divisional benches have been witnessing pendency of over 51,000 applications towards the second appeal made under the RTI Act.

And this number is expected to mount further with fresh applications piling up for the month of March and April. Notably, every year, the SIC witnesses summer vacation for a few weeks that may further aggravate the pendency issues. 

A senior administrative official from Aurangabad bench of the SIC said that hearings of second appeals were deferred till further notice since March 24 — when the lockdown was announced first. 

"No virtual hearings for second appeal made under RTI Act, 2005, have been planned so far. Many applicants hail from rural areas and we cannot expect them to attend virtual hearings even if we raise the desired infrastructure and facilities at our end," he said.

Going by the current pendency and average disposal rate of applications, an RTI applicant will have to wait for around two years to get his or her turn for the hearing at the SIC.

As per procedure followed in the appeals and complaints under the RTI Act, 2005, the information commission receives second appeals against the orders of appellate officers under section 19 of the Act.

The applicant along with the public information officer or assistant public information officer and appellate officer (where required) are called for hearing by the information commissioner for the second appeal as their say has to be considered while deciding the case.

Social activist and advocate Vishnu Dhobale said the SIC should have adopted the measure of virtual hearings during the current lockdown. "The current pandemic has been led to an unprecedented situation for every individual and establishment. However, there is a need for improvisation rather than making compromises. Like many other institutions, the SIC should have made the best use of latest technology to carry out the virtual hearing," he said.

Stating that justice delayed is justice denied, Dhobale said average waiting period of two years to conduct the hearing for second appeals under the RTI would be detrimental to the spirit of the transparency Act. 

Being asked about the issues arising out of mounting pendency of RTI appeals, SIC administrative officials said cancelling summer vacations could be one of the options to expedite the disposal of pending applications.

"It is most likely that the summer vacations would be called off this year. An official communication to this effect could get issued shortly," the official said.

An official mail sent to SIC headquarters in Mumbai seeking official comment on mounting pendency of second appeals during lockdown, remained unanswered till Thursday evening. 

BOX

SIC division Pendency of second appeals (till February 29)

Pune 13,547

Amravati 8,776

Mumbai 7,229

Nashik 5,932

Aurangabad 5,481

Grater Mumbai 4,355

Konkan 3,688

Nagpur 2,227

Total 51,235

(Source- SIC, Maharashtra)


