Coronavirus scare: Sikkim bars entry of foreigners, bans permits to Nathu La
2020-03-06
DARJEELING/KOLKATA: Sikkim has decided to ban entry of foreigners to insulate itself from the novel coronavirus (Covid-19), leading to wide-spread fears among travel and tour operators and hoteliers in Darjeeling that bookings would be cancelled.


A blanket ban has been issued for permits to visit Nathu La that borders China.

“Darjeeling and Sikkim are inter-linked tourist destinations. Overseas tourists usually spend four-and-a-half days in Sikkim and two-and-a-half days in Darjeeling. Now that they will not be able to travel to Sikkim, they are most likely to cancel the Darjeeling leg of their visits and go elsewhere for week-long holidays,” said Amit Periwal, the proprietor of Clubside Tours & Travel, who spent most of Thursday, informing his clients in the US and Europe about the development. 

 
 

The tourist season in the Hills gets underway in April. 


Ban will affect tourism but health safety is priority: Sikkim

The Sikkim home department on Thursday issued a notification placing curbs on the issue of inner-line permit, a travel document that foreigners require to have in addition to the Indian visa to visit the Himalayan state. The restriction also applies to nationals from Bhutan. Within hours of the notification, an Australian group that was due to travel to the belt from March 28 sent a cancellation request to Pradeep Lama, proprietor of Blue Line Tours & Travel. “I fear there will be more such cancellations,” Lama said.

Around 8% visitors to Darjeeling are foreigners. Americans and Europeans in addition to Japanese and Chinese make up a bulk of travellers to Sikkim and north Bengal. While restrictions have been placed on entry of Chinese and Japanese travellers into India following the spread of the novel coronavirus, the Sikkim government’s decision will now impact not only hotels in Darjeeling, but also the travel industry in Kolkata and the rest of India.

“With outbound travel business gone, we were trying to woo foreigners to India that had been relatively free of nCoV. But with cases in Kerala and then Delhi and Agra, some of the big tourist draws are gone. Now with Sikkim’s no-entry to foreigners, the recovery efforts by selling India is as good as over,” said Travel Agents Federation of India chairman (east) Anil Punjabi. Raj Basu, tourism advisor to the Sikkim government, acknowledged the move would deal a blow to the sector but pointed out health safety was the priority.

