Coronavirus: Silent cinemas take a toll as malls stick to hygiene drill in Delhi
2020-03-15
NEW DELHI: The closing down of cinema halls till March 31 has collateral damage: malls and shopping centres, many of which are designed around the movie experience. As it is, the fear of the novel coronavirus has already halved footfall from last week, and now the cinema shutdown will further affect business.

But given the nature of the threat, these commercial centres can do little other than to take counter measures such as disinfection of vulnerable surfaces, providing employees with masks and keeping hand sanitisers at the entrances.

“Almost a third of the traffic in our malls comprises moviegoers,” said Abhishek Bansal of Pacific Malls at Tagore Garden and Dwarka, both of which have six cinema screens each. “So with the restrictions on movies, our footfall is directly impacted. In turn, this will also affect our retail and food court sales.” Not to worsen a bad situation, Bansal makes sure the staff are regularly tested and every possible effort is made to maintain high hygiene in the retail spaces.



Coronavirus outbreak live coverage


At the DLF Mall in Saket, visitors squirt hand sanitisers into their palms at the entrances. The crowd is visibly less than usual. At Select City Walk nearby, a staff member of an outlet said, “For now things are ok, but the state government may soon announce more restrictions on the malls. We have to wait for some days to see how things evolve.”

Delhi government has ordered a daily disinfection for all commercial complexes where people gather in big numbers. Pintu, a member of the cleaning staff at Ambience Mall in Vasant Kunj, confirmed that teams now worked every day to disinfect the escalators and common services and important public spaces. “We are taking all precautions,” the staffer asserted. At another mall, the outlets, including play zones for children, now have hand sanitisers at easy reach and staff standing by to coax people into using them.

Shoppers aren’t deserting the malls yet, of course. Anshul Chaturvedi, a Malviya Nagar resident shopping at DLF Mall, said there was only so much precaution that one could take. “In the end, it is entirely likely that you will still catch the infection despite the precautions,” he reasoned. On the weekends, there are usually around 50,000 visitors milling around. But these number are dwindling. With cinema auditoriums closing, the crowd will be further pruned.

A mall manager who didn’t wish to be identified said it is wait-and-watch time for them. “Movie watching had become a family affair in the past few years. Families came to see films and enjoyed a meal at the food court or the restaurants,” he said. “We know that the coronavirus threat will impact this aspect of malls. We are carefully observing the evolving situation.”

While restaurants at the mall are already facing a dip in business, many daily wagers employed in various capacity at the shopping hubs expressed apprehensions about retaining their jobs in this economically challenging situation. In particularly, temporary employment is already being adversely impacted by the shutdown. A mall supervisor explained that the rush for movies is normally so high at certain times, including weekends, that many outlets hire temporary staff to manage the crowds. “Such jobs are hit with the cinema screens going dark,” he said. He added darkly, “The economic impact of the novel coronavirus will probably kill more people than the virus itself.”


