‘Silent epidemic is brewing for non-Covid patients thanks to bureaucratic approach’
2020-05-24
Meerut: A sudden spike in blood pressure knocked Gaurav Singh out. His family took him to six hospitals and nursing homes one after another, but none admitted him. In such a forbidding situation, however, a ray of hope for the family came when a hospital agreed to treat Gaurav but refused to admit him — the 24-year-old youth had developed a blood clot in the brain and his treatment began without admission to a hospital. Similarly, a 70-year-old resident suffered acute abdominal pain and a phone call to a physician hardly served any purpose as there could be “a hundred reasons for the pain and that could not be diagnosed over the phone”.Reduced access to private healthcare facilities to out-patients and denial of hospitalisation services are proving to be a medical crisis for thousands of non-Covid patients and as has been put by medical fraternity — the suffering of non-Covid patients can be ten times more serious problem than Covid ones, but the entire state machinery and policymakers are only focussed on coronavirus-related issues.“Even after two months of lockdown, the government has permitted us to treat only emergency non-Covid patients. But, a large number of patients are suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, cardiovascular diseases, chronic diabetes, renal complications, etc, and they require regular monitoring and frequent change of medicines and their doses, but all these are not allowed. And, by not giving them proper attention, we are letting these patients enter the emergency stage,” says NK Sharma, president, Meerut chapter of Indian Medical Association (IMA).Senior physician Dr Tanuraj Sirohi told TOI, “The problem is the bureaucratic approach. There is a communication between the government and private medical fraternity, but the approach is top-down, which means policies are drafted at the government level and being implemented on the ground without seeking medical fraternity’s opinion.” However, the government is clear in its priorities. A senior director with the health department in Lucknow said on condition of anonymity, “We are aware of the problem, but at this juncture, the government’s entire focus is on preventing the spread of coronavirus. Because, if it goes out of control, there will be havoc. It should not be seen as insensitivity on our end, but a desperate measure to outsmart the killer virus.” 