Goa: Since lockdown began, nearly a thousand violations a day, almost 2,000 fined for spitting
2020-04-29
PANAJI: The nationwide lockdown had ordered citizens to remain indoors, but that didn’t deter some people from ending up on the wrong side of law.

Despite strict measures, which also included curbs on vehicular movement, Goa police registered nearly 1,000 violations every day since the lockdown commenced on March 24 in view of the Covid-19 threat. 





Over 31,587 people violated orders, of which over 29,079 have been issued motor vehicle challans. More than 1,893 spitting cases were reported and 615 FIRs registered.

Most of the violations were reported in South Goa with 22,394 cases as compared to 9,193 violations in the north district. Police also arrested 1,094 people during the lockdown, and seized 440 vehicles. 

A total of Rs 38.8 lakh in fines have been collected. 

Speaking to TOI, SP crime branch Pankaj Kumar Singh said that 29,079 motor vehicle challans have been issued for defying lockdown orders, and not traffic violations. 

Cases are being booked against those moving around villages and towns without permission of the authorities, shopkeepers for opening stores by ignoring government orders. In some cases, even drivers were found transporting furniture.

Police had not only put out appeals on social media urging people against venturing out of their houses during the lockdown, but also met religious heads and asked them to request their followers to remain indoors. 

Besides, police patrolling staff also persuaded citizens to comply with conditions stipulated under the lockdown.

Police patrolling has been intensified all over the state, and pickets have been set up at existing patrolling points. Traffic personnel have been deployed along with district police at straegic checkpoints.

In its recommendation, the state government on Monday urged the Centre to extend the lockdown beyond May 3 to contain the spread of Covid-19. The government also sought to keep the state’s borders sealed in view of the alarming rise in cases in neighbouring Karnataka and Maharashtra. 

With the Union government easing restrictions on Monday, economic activities have begun in rural and urban areas of the state. All standalone stores, neighbourhood shops and those in residential complexes are allowed to open. 

Shops in markets, market complexes and shopping malls are not allowed to operate. E-commerce activities will continue to supply essential goods only, while liquor shops and allied items will remain closed.


