Sing Bande Utkal Janani and motivate Covid warriors, Naveen urges people
2020-05-29
Bhubaneswar: They have been at the forefront in the battle against novel coronavirus. They have been working tirelessly to contain the spread of the virus and keep the people safe. Now, people living in Odisha and beyond will get a chance to thank these Covid warriors who are risking their lives daily to keep the system up and running. On Thursday, chief minister Naveen Patnaik urged Odias across the world to sing Bande Utkal Janani at 5:30 pm on Saturday to motivate the frontline workers.

“The time has come for us to acknowledge and honour all our people who have been working tirelessly to keep us safe. I request all of you, who are connected to the soil of Odisha, wherever you are in the world, to join us and sing Bande Utkal Janani by maintaining social distancing. The purpose is to inspire our Covid warriors and to honour their sacrifices,” said Naveen while addressing the people in a video message.

Naveen also spoke to Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan, state Congress chief Niranjan Patnaik, BJP state president Samir Mohanty, Samajwadi Party state chief Rabi Behera and CPM’s Auli Patnaik and requested them to sing Bande Utkal Janani.

“Reciting the song at this moment will inspire us, strengthen our commitment to continue the fight and provide unparalleled energy and zeal to all of us. The future may have more challenges. But this will provide us strength to face the challenges successfully and work with renewed commitment,” the chief minister said, taking a leaf out of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s efforts to boost the morale of frontline workers in the fight against novel coronavirus.

Written by Kantakabi Laxmikant Mohapatra, Bande Utkal Janani became famous during the movement for a separate Odisha province. Though it is yet to get official status of state anthem, it is sung on important occasions like Utkal Divas, end of assembly sessions and while celebrating the birth anniversaries of eminent Odias.

Naveen, who had clapped and showed solidarity with Covid warriors following Modi’s call, had also announced financial assistance of Rs 50 lakh for family members of health workers and support staff, if they die in the fight against Covid-19. The state government will also treat them as martyrs, he had said.

Meanwhile, hailing his government’s handling of the pandemic in the past two months, Naveen said his government’s priority is to save lives. “The Covid mortality rate in Odisha is one of the lowest in the country and the world. Besides, more than 50 per cent of the infected people have recovered and gone home,” said Naveen, who sought blessings from Lord Jagannath and also expressed his gratitude to the people of Odisha for their support in the fight against Covid-19.

Stating that powerful nations as well as rich states in the country have not been able to achieve this feat, the chief minister said the low fatality rate is indeed a major achievement for a state like Odisha and its people. Despite the fact that more than 3.5 lakh people have returned from different states, Naveen said his administration has effectively handled the situation to contain the spread of the virus.

“The credit goes to our Covid warriors, who have been working day and night with commitment. From the frontline health workers, panchayati raj institutions and people’s representatives, government employees cutting across all departments, private sector employees, self-help groups and individuals – all have been working round-the-clock keeping their personal lives aside and providing service to the people,” Naveen said.

Earlier in the day, Naveen spoke to a sarpanch as well as Asha and Anganwadi workers who have tested positive for the virus. The chief minister lauded their courage and dedication in providing outstanding service to society and wished them speedy recovery.

EoM


