Covid-19 outbreak in Delhi: Single-use masks, gloves pose risk to sanitation staff
2020-03-24
NEW DELHI: With a large chunk of the city’s population now using and discarding single-use face masks and gloves, especially those under home quarantine, the municipal bodies are facing a waste management challenge. The daily garbage collectors and ragpickers are being exposed to bio-medical hazards, jeopardising Delhi’s Covid-19 containment strategy.


In the current garbage management system, mixed waste is dumped in receptacles or dumps where ragpickers comb the thrash for reusable items with their bare hands. In household garbage these days are discarded masks, gloves, tissues and other soiled items. “These should be a separate collection system for such items,” said Chitra Mukherjee, head of operations at Chintan Environment Research and Action Group, which works extensively with ragpickers. “It is irresponsible of the civic authorities to let these potentially hazardous items end up in dhalaos and landfills.”

Mukherjee said that such items could not be recycled so the only solution was to collect them separately and incinerate them. The waste collectors have reported that used face masks have no resale value, but there is fear in the community about the novel coronavirus infection.

Swati Sambyal, an expert in solid municipal waste management, said at a time when more biomedical, plastic and other hazardous waste is being generated due to the coronavirus outbreak, household segregation of garbage assumed new importance. “All those instructed to be in home quarantine should not mix their garbage. They need to segregate it properly,” Sambyal emphasised. “Such households should not hand over waste every day to reduce the garbage collectors exposure to the virus. The garbage bags should be sealed and the municipality should ensure a separate vehicle to transport it for incineration.”

Under the new Central Pollution Control Board guidelines, medical waste is to be thrown in a yellow bag. The municipal bodies have been instructed to engage biomedical waste treatment facilities to pick up such waste from houses or from designated spots. Delhi, which generated 27 tonnes of biomedical waste daily before the Covid-19 crisis began, has the capacity to process 63 tonnes of such waste.

A South Delhi Municipal Corporation official said that at a meeting on Monday, biomedical waste concessionaires have been asked to depute two vehicles for every municipal zone to pick up garbage from quarantined homes. “All five local bodies are starting this service,” the official informed. “This waste will be sent to incinerators.”

The official admitted that civic officials were negligent till date but a system would be quickly put into place to handle bio-hazard waste. “We still don’t know how to tackle the masks coming from non-quarantined houses,” he added. A north corporation official said while awarding contracts to concessionaires, the civic body would have guidelines for handling waste of this sort.


