Coronavirus scare in Pune: Sinhagad Road corporators rope in Ganesh Mandals to spot the ‘ill’
2020-03-14
PUNE: Corporators from the Sinhagad Road are taking proactive measures to mitigate the spread of coronavirus as the number of positive cases recorded in the area has touched five. 


Multiple disinfection drives, sharing of Covid-19-related videos on social media platforms, monitoring of the areas by Ganesh Mandal workers, cancellation of public events and keeping an eye out for those arriving from outstation were among the several measures undertaken by the corporators in the past few days.

The elected representatives said the measures were being taken, as the area has recorded the highest number of coronavirus cases in the city so far. Out of the 10 people in the Pune district who tested positive for the contagion till Friday, five are from the Sinhagad Road area.

Local corporator Haridas Charvad said he has started circulating informative video clips in the social media groups to raise awareness about the highly contagious disease.

“I am connected with over 50,000 people from the area through several social media platforms. We created a Covid-19 related video. The clip is now being circulated through my social media platforms to raise awareness,” Charvad said, adding that he was in constant touch with the Pune Municipal Corporation’s (PMC) health department to provide better facilities to people in the area.

Charvad said he has urged the PMC to intensify the disinfection drives at public places, markets and housing societies. “While several disinfection drives have been undertaken since the news of positive Covid-19 cases in Pune broke, I think there is a need to intensify it further,” the corporator said.

Another corporator Rajabhau Laigude said he has roped in over 30 local Ganesh Mandals workers to keep a watch on people exhibiting flu-like symptoms. “We cancelled the Shivjayanti celebrations to mitigate the contagion’s spread. We have appealed to the people to avoid stepping out of their homes,” Laigude said.

The corporator said the Sinhagad Road area has a significant floating population which could pose a challenge if the number of positive cases in the city rises. “We have avoided initiatives like distribution of masks as it could lead to unnecessary panic,” he said, adding that the citizens were continually being advised to contact the PMC-run hospitals in light of flu-like symptoms.


