Sisters drop b’day plans, ask parents to donate for Covid
2020-04-18
Vadodara: One is seven years old, another 12 years. And neither of the sisters has missed celebrating their birthdays which interestingly falls on the same day – July 7. But this year, younger Sharva and Durva have decided not to celebrate their birthdays and neither will they do any shopping for a year.

Instead these daughters of city-based Bhatt family have inspired their parents to donate their savings to PM Cares Fund to help ‘Modi dada’ and the nation to fight the battle against coronavirus. And the parents have readily fulfilled their wish by contributing Rs1 lakh to the fund through Vadodara district collector Shalini Agrawal.

From the first day of the 21-day lockdown, the Bhatt family had started contributing their bit by providing 500 food packets on a daily basis to Sayajigunj police station, which in turn would distribute the packets to the needy.

“After a week, it became a chain as other family members and friends started contributing in this drive,” said Swati Bhatt, mother of the two and a company secretary by profession.

While Swati, 42, and her chartered accountant husband Yash, 44, both of whom run their own firm, continued their drive, they were pleasantly surprised when their daughters came forward with a proposal.

“After hearing Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s address to the nation urging the countrymen to help the poor, they came out of their room holding a piggy bank. When I told them that their savings worth Rs17,000 would hardly make any difference, they demanded we provide them some advance with the promise that they will not celebrate their forthcoming birthdays, neither do any shopping nor buy gifts,” said Swati.

“We were surprised but were also happy by their gesture. We asked them what is the amount that they wish to contribute and accordingly handed over the cheque,” she said.

Agrawal praised the girls and acknowledged the contribution made by them through official handle on microblogging site Twitter on Thursday.


