In Bihar, youth sounds ‘Covid alert’, lynched
2020-04-01
PATNA: The death of a youth in Sitamarhi district on Monday allegedly after being thrashed for informing officials about Covid-19 suspects in his village has raked up a controversy.


Even Union health minister Dr Harsh Vardhan expressed his concern over the incident on Tuesday. “The news of a youth thrashed to death in Bihar for informing about suspects of Covid-19 is extremely saddening. We are required to stand in unity as a society at this difficult time. The future of Indian society depends on it. Don’t step back from your responsibilities,” he tweeted while tagging an ANI tweet regarding the incident.

 
बिहार में #COVID19 के संदिग्धों की जानकारी देने वाले एक युवक की पीट-पीट कर निर्मम हत्या की ख़बर बेहद दु:खद है।इस मु… https://t.co/w1Vx0s7UP6— Dr Harsh Vardhan (@drharshvardhan) 1585633100000 
Bablu Kumar (20) was brutally assaulted by some people at Madhaul under Runnisaidpur police station in Sitamarhi district, leading to his death on way to the SKMCH at Muzaffarpur.

The deceased’s brother, Guddu Singh, in his statement before Ahiapur police in Muzaffarpur, alleged that Babloo was killed by fellow villagers for informing on the district helpline about Munna Mahto and Sudhir Mahto, who had returned from Mumbai.

Guddu has accused six people, who used to help his father in his agricultural work.

Sitamarhi SP Anil Kumar Singh, however, said the allegation was not found true during preliminary investigation. “The incident is a fallout of an altercation between the deceased and the accused after a motorbike hit one of them on March 29,” he said, adding that two of named accused have already been arrested.

ADG (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said Babloo’s murder had nothing to do with coronavirus. “The incident is a result of personal enmity,” he said.

He, however, said one Munna Mahto was examined by a team of doctors at the village on March 27. “The deceased’s relative has not provided any evidence to substantiate the claim that Munna’s health was examined by a medical team on the basis of information given by Babloo,” he said and added that the medical team had, in fact, examined Munna on the information given by one Om Prakash Bharti, stated to be the husband of Sitamarhi district board chairperson.

The deceased’s father, Vinod Singh, alleged that the case was being suppressed. “The police officers are under pressure,” he alleged.

Meanwhile, Munna and Sudhir were sent to jail on Tuesday.


