Sivaganga bookseller lends books for free to beat lockdown blues
2020-04-27
Madurai: At a time when most booksellers cash in on the idle lockdown hours to make a quick buck, a 36-year-old man from Madurai made a difference by lending books without any charges and thereby inculcating the habit of reading in people. 

M Murugan, of Sivaganga, has his old bookstore in Kaalavasal in Sivaganga town and gives them free son people would develope the habit of reading. He said he has always had the desire to read books and set up an old bookstore to fulfill this desire. I thought I could make others read the books,’’ he says.

Most of his customers, who come to his shops ask for the books for preparing for the competitive examinations, and he says he makes about Rs 12,000 a month by selling his books on normal days. “Rs 2,000 goes to the rent my shop and then I manage my monthly expenses with the remaining amount which is more than sufficient because I don’t have big ambitions,’’ he said.

Murugan takes book from a relative named Kutty, who runs a shop of old newspapers and books, in Madurai. He buys them from him for a nominal cost and sells them in Sivaganga.

“When the lockdown started, I decided that this was the best way to promote the habit of reading. I passed the word around and have given away 300 books so far,’’ he said. People have started asking for the translated versions of autobiographies and biographies of great leaders, motivational books and novels. Murugan learnt that people in villages have no access to books during lockdown and he took a stack of his books to villages for them. People in Pilloor village on the Sivaganga-Madurai road were happy at getting old books to read. “I asked him for magazines and my husband found a very good set of books. We were allowed to take a book each from him,’’ said Shengabagam, a resident of Pilloor.

As the books are free, people often want to borrow many books at one time. “I politely tell them that they can take a book, read it and return it and take another book,’’ he said. But if the book is a favourite of the reader, he gets to keep it. Murugan says he would like people to keep passing down the books in a chain reaction, so that many people would have read at least a few books when the lockdown ends. Murugan has a collection of 1,000 books now.


