Six-year-old girl beats Covid in Koderma, wants to become a doctor
2020-06-04
Koderma: Six-year-old Archana Rana, youngest among the 29 others who recently recovered from Covid-19 in Koderma district, now aspires to become a doctor. Archana and her mother Rekha are currently under home isolation in their village in Kakarcholi under Jainagar police station after the duo was released from Holy Family hospital on May 30.

The duo, along with Archana’s father and her four-year-old brother, returned in a Shramik Special train from Surat on May 14. Samples were drawn from the four on May 15, following which, Archana and her mother tested positive on May 20 and were shifted to the Covid-19 hospital in the district. Till Wednesday, Koderma recorded 44 cases, of which one patient died and 14 are still active.

Talking to TOI, Rekha said, “Our stay at the hospital became memorable as the doctors and other staff members were not only courteous, but also kept motivating us. My daughter made many friends in the hospital and after we returned, she started dreaming of becoming a doctor when she grows up.” 

Archana said, “I saw how they were treating so many people at the hospital and many called them god. When I grow up, I want to serve people by becoming a doctor.”

Koderma DC Ramesh Gholap said the girl is very promising and tweeted a picture of her during her discharge and said he is glad to know that the girl wants to become a doctor. “Completely curing a patient of covid-19 is a challenge for all of us and a proud moment whenever we discharge them. Amid all this, I was elated when the girl promptly told me that she wants to become a doctor,” Gholap said.

Archana’s father, Anand Rana, worked as a carpenter in Surat while her mother was a teacher at a private school where Archana studied. Rekha, said, “With the help of villagers and other family members, we are slowly returning to normal life, but the future is uncertain. We don’t want to return to Gujarat as migrants, but will we be able to eke out a decent living to fulfil our children’s dreams?”


