Six from Rajkot & Porbandar defeat Covid-19, discharged
2020-04-11
Rajkot: Jitendra Savalia 37, Mayurdhwajsinh Zala, 36, and Priyadarshansinh Jadeja, 37, three Covid-19 positive patients from Rajkot got discharged from private hospitals in the city on Friday. Three patients recovered in Porbandar on Friday and got discharged from the hospital. The first Covid-19 positive patient, Jyoti Goswami, got discharged on Friday evening after her two consecutive test reports came negative, while late in the night 27-year-old Swati Goswami and 42-year-old Bharat Kachhela, were also discharged.

While Savli got admitted in hospital on March 26, the same day he had donated Rs 5 lakh in CM’s relief fund to help the government fight against coronavirus, Zala tested positive after he returned from Dubai, while Jadeja too got infected after his return from France. 

Savalia engaged in the business of real estate had given the amount to Rajkot Builder Association (RBA), collecting fund from its members for donation to the CM’s fund.

Savalia got infected while helping his friend who had returned from Dubai, by taking him to the hospital. 

Savaila lives in a joint family with his brother. His wife and three children had gone to Keshod at the house of his brother-in-law before the lockdown started. Savalia thereafter took his friend to the hospital who was complaining of feeling unwell. His friend tested coronavirus positive and he was quarantined in the government facility. However, his health deteriorated and he asked health officials to send his samples for testing and on March 27 he also tested positive. 

Talking to TOI, Savalia said, “My family was out of station at that time but I was worried that I came into the contact of my nephew who used to serve me food during my quarantine period. So, when I tested positive I first started worrying for him. However, thankfully he tested negative.” 

Savalia used to video call his family and decided to remove all negativity from his mind. “I had a television in the hospital but I did not watch any news channels because I did not want to get negative feelings while recovering. I remained mentally strong and positive till the time I recovered,” he said. 

Savaliya has twin teenage daughters, aged 13, and an 8-year-old son. They all came back to Rajkot two days ago when the rest of my family was allowed to go back home from government quarantine facility. His message to people: “Stay in your homes and till there is no emergency, please don’t step out. I had to go outside because I had to help my friend.” 

Zala reported to the civil hospital after returning from Dubai but the doctors on duty did not find him to be a suspected case. His health, however, started to deteriorate and he got admitted in a private hospital. Talking to TOI, Zala said, “I had feeling that I got infected and that’s why I was living in isolation in my home too. This despite the civil hospital doctors did not take me as a suspect case. I could save my family from the infection in this manner. I was regularly following the news and though at first I was scared to know that I tested positive, I mentally prepared myself to recover fully.” 

After returning from France, Jadeja went into self quarantine and also informed the authorities and he was kept under observation.


