Six more test positive for Covid-19 in Meerut, take tally in district to 19
2020-03-31
MEERUT: As many as six persons tested positive for novel coronovirus in Meerut on Monday, taking the tally in the district to 19. While four of these cases are contacts of the 50-year-old Bulandshahr man who had travelled from Amravati to Meerut and 16 of his contacts have tested positive so far.


The man with no foreign travel history, travelled from Maharashtra to Meerut in two trains, stayed in three localities, attended a wedding and prayed at two city mosques before testing positive here. All the areas he visited have been sealed and are being disinfected while his contacts, which are in excess of a hundred, are being screened.

Four of his contacts, including his wife and three brothers-in-law, had tested positive on Saturday. Eight other tested positive on Sunday and four others on Monday. Admitted to the isolation ward in Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical (LLRM) College, the 50-year-old man is being treated for the disease.

Other than this, two others, who had returned from Philippines and Singapore and are residents of Surya Nagar and Civil Lines area, tested positive for Covid-19.

“As many as six cases of novel coronavirus tested positive in Meerut on Monday, taking the tally go up to 19 in the district,” said chief medical officer Dr Raj Kumar.

The two foreign return cases were kept under quarantine by the health department on Sunday after the both of them approached the officials. “Before Sunday, both of them were in home quarantine. The samples of their families have been taken and sent for tests. Even then, we will investigate if there were any other people whom they came in contact with,” said Dr Kumar.

Meanwhile, tests of all the contacts of the first Covid-19 positive case have been completed, and more of his contacts are being traced.

“As many as 382 teams reached a population of 2,65,189 and five suspected cases were sent to Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College. Meanwhile, 310 people were kept in home quarantine. A total of 17 samples were tested on Tuesday, out of which six tested positive. Until now, a total of 109 samples of coronavirus have been tested, out of which 19 have tested positive,” said district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary.


