Six from Mohali tested 'negative' for coronavirus
2020-02-02
MOHALI: The Mohali health department has scanned six residents for coronavirus on Saturday. All these residents have returned from China, Thailand, Canada, Malaysia and Europe. 


"The teams visited their residences and tested them," said civil surgeon Dr Manjit Singh. 

He said two residents of Zirakpur returned from China. A girl who was studying medical and her brother who had gone to get her back were scanned for the suspected virus, but they tested negative. 

He said more such residents who had returned from Canada, Thailand, Malaysia and Europe living in Kharar, Mohali city and Mullanpur, were tested for the virus and the results were negative. 

Dr Manjit Singh said, "We have issued instructions to all the teams in PHCs and CHCs to keep a tab on anyone returning from abroad and conduct the test. Also, meetings were held with four leading private hospitals to institute isolation rooms which can be used if any person tests positive. Max, Fortis, IVY and Sohana eye hospitals have been put on alert." 

He said a medical team of the district hospital screened a total of 186 passengers of Air India Express flight from Sharjah at the International Airport in Mohali. However, no passenger was found having symptoms of the disease. 

Civil surgeon Dr Manjit Singh, who led the team comprising of district epidemiologist and medicine specialists, said all the passengers were screened for symptoms of the disease and no passenger was found to be having symptoms of severe fever, cough, shortness of breath, diarrhoea, congestion in nose and throat, all passengers were asymptomatic. Besides, no passenger was found, who had traveled to China in the last few days, to have contact with any person returning from China. 

He said isolation wards were already in place at the airport and all the government health institutions across the district. 

Passengers, especially having travel history of China, are under close watch of the health authorities. 

The medical team include district epidemologist Dr Harmandeep Kaur, medicine specialist Dr Navdeep Singh, Dr Puneet, Dr Amarjeet Kaur, chief immigration officer Sanjeev Kumar and other health and airport officials. 


