Six-yr-old among 11 tested positive for Covid-19 in city
2020-05-08
Chandigarh: Eleven persons, including a six-year-old child, tested positive for novel coronavirus in Chandigarh on Thursday, taking the total to 135. While 10 of 11 cases are from Bapu Dham Colony, one is from Sector 30. Total cases in Bapu Dham now stand at 76.In the first half of the day, five cases were reported from Bapu Dham in Sector 26. The youngest is a six-year-old boy, who is the community contact of a positive case in the same locality and has eight family contacts, all of whom have been sampled. Three more residents of Bapu Dham from a family also tested positive. They are the contacts of a previously reported case from their family. Besides, a 36-year-old woman, also of the area, too, has contracted the virus. She is the community contact of a case in the same locality. In the afternoon, five more cases were reported positive at Bapu Dham, of which three belong to the same house and are community contacts of a case from the locality. Remaining two cases are family contacts of an already diagnosed positive case, said doctors. Other family members of this case have already been sampled. From Sector 30, a 12-year-old girl was reported as positive; she is the family contact of the already diagnosed positive cases. As many as 1,845 people have been sampled in the city to date, of which 1,698 tested negative. While 22 have been treated and discharged, the result of 311 is awaited.Nayagaon patient discharged A 30-year-old healthcare worker beat coronavirus and was discharged from PGIMER on Thursday. He is a resident of Nayagaon. He was admitted to NHE Covid Hospital on April 23. He had developed complications, but responded well to the treatment and remained stable thereafter. Finally, with two consecutive tests coming negative, he was discharged. He, however, will be home quarantined for 14 days, as per the standard protocol.4 of PU employees home isolatedAfter a resident of Bapu Dham, a PU security staff member, tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday, the university asked four of its staff members to home isolate themselves. As per authorities, the positive case had not come to PU after April 23.Virus spreads tentacles in EWS colonies Chandigarh: Starting from the core urban area of the city’s Sector 21, the Covid-19 pandemic has gripped the economically-weaker section (EWS) in colonies. Over one-third of the cases have been reported from these areas as the spread of the virus is the highest in congested zones. This has not only raised a challenge for the Chandigarh administration, but also made the task tougher to ensure essentials’ supply in bulk to the thousands of residents. Over 4,200 have been home quarantined in different areas of the city (largely contacts or neighbours of positive patients) and more than half of them are in these congested colonies. Cops are also finding it tough to control the situation.After the first positive case was reported in Sector 21 on March 18, only 27 cases were seen throughout the city till March 24. But after the detection of a positive case in Bapu Dham on March 24, the virus started spreading. Before Bapu Dham detection, cases also came from the EWS Colony of Sector 30, one each from Kachchi Colony, Dhanas and Maloya. To date, around 75 cases have been reported from Bapu Dham alone. Later, cases started pouring in from other congested colonies too, like Mauli Jagran, Ram Darbar, EWS colonies of Dhanas and sectors 52 and 56.“Though the affected areas of the colonies have been sealed and regular health monitoring was being done, it has become tough to manage the situation due to the crowded living,” sources in the UT administration said. Since all these colonies are either EWS or rehabilitation settlements, the houses are small and lie cheek by jowl. Besides, the areas are thickly populated and many people live in one house.Maximum cases are from these areasBapu Dham ColonySector 52 ColonySector 56 ColonyKachchi Colony, DhanasEWS Colony, DhanasMaloya Rehabilitation Colony, Sector 30Rehabilitation Colony, RamdarbarRehabilitation Colony, Mauli Jagran