Six new Covid-19 cases in U’khand, all returnees
2020-05-15
Dehradun: Six new people tested positive for coronavirus in Uttarakhand on Thursday, taking the state’s tally to 78. With three patients getting discharged on Thursday, the tally of active cases in the Himalayan state is now 27.

The new patients include a 36-year-old woman who had returned from Delhi to Mussoorie as well as two others who are from Raipur and Old Dalanwala area of Dehradun. Three other migrants have tested positive from US Nagar, including a 10-year-old girl.

Covid-19 nodal officer of Government Doon Medical College (GDMC) Dr NS Khatri told TOI that the woman from Mussoorie, along with three of her family members, were admitted to Doon Hospital.

“The man from Raipur is now admitted to an isolation ward while two of his family members are in hospital quarantine. The patient from Old Dalanwala has also been admitted to Doon Hospital with three of his family members,” he said, adding that samples of all the patients were collected at Asharodi check post at Dehradun-Saharanpur border. The patients from Mussoorie and Dalanwala had returned from New Delhi, while the one from Raipur was staying in Maharashtra since two months. CMO of US Nagar Dr Shailja Bhatt informed that the 10-year-old girl from US Nagar was coming back with her parents and five others from Delhi and was quarantined at the border. Meanwhile, three patients – one each from Dehradun, Haridwar and Nainital – reportedly recovered and were discharged on May 14, taking the total number of active cases in Uttarakhand to 27.

With the increasing number of returnees in all 13 districts across the state, the health department has increased surveillance to ensure that people serve the quarantine period of 14 days after arriving to their destinations. The state has now seen 15 fresh cases in the last five days, all of whom were either migrants or returnees. As many as 8,000 people in the state have been placed in home quarantine in the last 48 hours. Around 39,700 people are in home isolation. The number of people placed in quarantine facility is 3,600. The recovery rate is 66.67% while 11,297 samples have been tested so far, as per the health department.


