Six more test positive, total coronavirus cases rise to 38 in Rajasthan
2020-03-26
JAIPUR: Six persons—four from Bhilwara, one each from Jhunjhunu and Jodhpur—tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Wednesday.


Among the three from Bhilwara, a 75-year-old patient, who tested positive, is undergoing treatment at a private hospital in the district which became the hotspot for the spread of the virus in the state.

He was in the ICU when the first case of Covid-19 was reported from the hospital on March 21. He was in a coma following a stroke. His sample was taken for the test when the family shifted him home. He tested positive today. He is still unconscious and undergoing treatment at his home in Bhilwara. He is the first patient from the hospital to get viral infection. The rest 16 are hospital staff.

Apart from him, two other healthcare workers at the hospital also tested positive for the disease. So far, 17 persons have been diagnosed with the disease at the private hospital.

According to the health department, the four new cases have taken the total number of infected person in the state to 38.

After the 75-year-old tested positive, a team of doctors and nursing staff rushed to his house and isolated him. Officials said that a nurse and an administrative department staff at the hospital too had tested positive.

“The two hospital staff and the patient were infected by the doctor, who had tested positive a few days ago in Bhilwara. The fourth infected person, a woman from Jodhpur, had travelled along with a couple, who had already tested positive for the disease few days ago. They travelled together in the same first AC compartment from Mumbai to Jodhpur,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health department.

Following this, chief medical health officer (Jodhpur) Dr Balwant Manda launched a drive to track all people who came into contact with the infected person and traced 17 persons.

She had boarded the Surya Nagri Express on March 17 from Mumbai abd travelled with the elderly couple. The two were travelling back from Istanbul in Turkey. The health department team tracked the woman while checking the couple’s contacts. The train had reached Jodhpur on March 18 at 6.30am. She was picked up by her friend and reached home in 15 minutes. Officials said that she had told them that she did not meet anyone other than her family members. She is now at MDM Hospital undergoing treatment for the disease. 

