Six new Covid cases reported, 7 recover
2020-05-28
VARANASI: While eight new cases of Covid-19 were found in the district, seven old patients who recovered from the illness were discharged from the hospitals on Wednesday. Earlier, no new case of Covid-19 was found in the district on Tuesday. 

The total number of positive cases in district rose to 160. While 90 recovered from the illness, 66 patients are under observation in isolation wards. Five patients were discharged from Pt Deen Dayal Upadhyaya district hospital, while two patients were discharged from Sir Sunderlal Hospital of Banaras Hindu University. Besides, two hotspots of Madanpura and Lallapura became green zone.

According to district magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma, the reports of 10 positive cases were received from the BHU laboratory out of which two persons belong to Jaunpur district. Among the eight infected persons of Varanasi, six are migrant workers and other two are a policeman and a compounder.

Among the migrants, a 25-year-old woman, who came from Mumbai in a truck, is the resident of Siswa village in Kapsethi area. Other migrants include a 36-year-old resident of Ratanpur village in Phoolpur area who worked in a textile mill in Mumbai, a 30-year-old resident of Ratanpur village who operated auto rickshaw in Mumbai, a 58-year-old resident of Madhopur village in Badagaon area who worked in a power loom in Bhiwandi, a 26-year-old resident of city’s Kotwali area who had a betel shop in Mumbai, and a 50-year-old resident of Pahadi village in Cholapur area who worked as a tailor in Mumbai.

Besides, a 34-year-old constable at the police lines and a compounder and resident of Ramakant Nagar in Sigra area also contracted infection. 

A total of 178 samples were collected in the district on Wednesday. So far 5,156 samples have been collected for testing out of which the results of 4,734 sample were received. 

Two new hotspots — Nayi Pokhari in Sigra and Paradih in Cholapur — have come into existence, while Harteerath would switch over to red zone again after becoming green zone. Now, the total number of hotspots in the city has gone up to 80. 


