Six more test +ve for Covid-19 as contact tracing intensifies
2020-06-12
Coimbatore: The district reported six new novel coronavirus cases on Thursday. Two of them - a 39-year-old woman and 29-year-old woman from Vadavalli - were family members of the 27-year-old Chennai returnee who tested positive for the virus on Tuesday.The man had earlier told health department officials that he had gone straight to the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH) after he arrived in the city by road on Monday.A health department official said, “He said he went home only after submitting his samples at the hospital. However, when our team visited Vadavalli and his neighbourhood, people said they had seen him in the area much before that. We then asked his family to go to the nearest primary health centre and provide samples for Covid-19 test. We have also collected samples from their neighbours and close contacts of the entire family.”Another two new cases comprise a 37-year-old administrative officer with the police department and his 32-year-old wife, who is a nurse with the urban primary health centre in Mettur in Salem. The officer, who was posted in Chennai, returned to the city on June 5 and joined duty in Tirupur the very next day, without remaining in quarantine. His wife, who was in quarantine, was to join duty later this week. But since her husband had a travel history, doctors at the primary health centre asked them to get tested and the results showed them positive.One of the remaining two patients is a 10-year-old girl from Peelamedu who returned to the city from Chennai in a flight along with her 31-year-old mother and four-year-old brother on June 7. While the other two had tested positive for the virus at the airport, the girl was then tested negative. However, health department officials again collected her sample for the Covid-19 test during the contact tracing drive. This time, the girl was also tested positive. She has been moved the private hospital, where her mother and brother are undergoing treatment.The remaining one is a 37-year-old woman from Olympus, who lives next to the house of CMCH physiotherapy technician, who tested positive on Sunday after he returned from Villupuram. She has been admitted to the ESI Hospital.