Six staff members booked for keeping club activities open amid coronavirus scare
2020-03-19
KOLHAPUR: The Satara city police have registered an offence against six staff members of a recreational club for keeping the club activities open and violating the government orders. 


The six employees are identified as Sambhaji Anandrao Patil, Mohan Ramchandra Chavan, Vishal Ramesh Chavan, Amit Ramchandra Jadhav, Vishal Pradip Solanki and Amit Narayan Kamble. They were booked under section 188 (disobedience of public order, duly promulgated by a public servant) and 505 of IPC (public mischief). 

Acting on a tip-off that the private club has continued its activities, a team of policemen reached the club and checked its premises, where they found few citizens exercising at the gymnasium. The citizens were warned and told not to use the club services until the government orders are evoked. Subsequently, the six employees were booked under different sections of IPC. For disobedience of public order, a court can sentence an individual for imprisonment for up to six years. 

Following the activity, the club immediately stopped all its services and put up a board announcing the same. 

Two-days back, the Satara district collector told all the shopping malls, movie halls, gardens, and other spots to be shut for the general public in view of the coronavirus outbreak. 

Meanwhile, the NIV report of a six-year-old girl, who was admitted to Satara civil hospital, has tested negative, said an official communication from the district administration. The girl had been to Abu Dhabi with her mother recently and as a precautionary measure was admitted to hospital on Monday. Earlier, a thirty-year-old youth also returned from Abu Dhabi tested negative. He too was kept under observation in the isolation ward of the civil hospital. 

Sangli district guardian minister Jayant Patil conducted a review meeting on administrative efforts to curb the coronavirus outbreak. Talking to media persons, Patil said that over 20 ventilators have been made available as demanded by the local administration.

He added that reports of 11 people, who were kept in the isolation ward at Sangli hospital, are found negative. As many as 180 people in the district have been asked for home quarantine by the district health administration. 


