Skill training, match practice take a hit for Uttarakhand’s sportspersons during lockdown
2020-04-28
Dehradun: With the outdoors becoming out of bounds due to the nationwide lockdown, Uttarakhand’s sportspersons say their training schedules have taken a major hit. Skill training is no longer a viable option and match practice has taken a hit because of all the cancelled tournaments. 

International cricketer and senior bowler Ekta Bisht said that while she was able to work on her fitness, her bowling practice had become difficult due to the lockdown. 

“Our trainers have given us a three-week-long program and we are following that as of now. While I do my fitness drills from 5 am to 7 am daily in a gym next to my house, I am forced to do my bowling practice in an open area inside my house,” said the 34-year-old spinner. 

“A lot of national camps used to take place at this time of the year as most matches typically conclude by March. We have had to miss out on those,” Bisht added. 

Bisht is the first Indian cricketer with a T20I hat trick and the recipient of Khel Ratna award in 2017. In a career high, she felled five wickets against Pakistan during the 2017 Cricket World Cup, which was a defining for women’s cricket in India. 

Domestic cricketers from Uttarakhand echoed Bisht’s concerns. “I have some gym equipment at home, so I am able to do some strength training and other work outs,” said Sunny Rana, fast bowler in the Uttarakhand Ranji team. 

Mayank Mishra, spinner in the Ranji team, admitted that having no open space to practice was badly hampering his skill training. “I have a patch of land behind my house, where I do a bit of batting sessions. However, as a bowler, I am losing out on a lot of training time,” Mishra said. 

First-class cricketer, Karanveer Kaushal said, “As an opening batsman, I need to go out in the nets on a daily basis but am confined to my house due to the lockdown. I do a bit of tennis ball training in order to maintain my reaction time, coupled with some shadow practice.”

For cricketers, off season is an important time to identify and work on weaknesses. This year, however, there is no scope for that. “In the 15 days after the end of a cricket season, sportspersons work on their deficiencies. Also, in Uttarakhand, the monsoon starts in June and with the cricketing season starting in September, we will hardly have any time to prepare,” Kaushal added.

The cricketers said that a lot of small tournaments, which helped them practice for the domestic matches, have also been cancelled due to the lockdown. “There used to be the Gold Cup (tournament) in Dehradun, as well as some competitive tournaments in Pilibhit, Allahabad and Varanasi. Some players also used to take part in the robust club tournaments of Delhi. These used to provide some good match practice, but all of them have either been postponed or cancelled,” said Kaushal.

“In 2020, the Cricket Association of Uttarakhand (CAU) was planning to start the District Cricket League. Players for the state team would have been selected on the bases of their performance in the district leagues. However, that seems unlikely this year. It looks like we will again resort to the trial system, which had been the norm the past two seasons,” said Mishra.

International shuttler from Dehradun Lakshya Sen said that while he was trying to make the best use of the time at home, the lockdown had certainly dampened spirits. “A lot of major tournaments, including India Open, Malaysia Open and others got cancelled due to Covid-19. Performance in these tournaments could have been a player’s entry ticket to the Tokyo Olympics,” Sen explained.

About his lockdown routine, the 19-year-old said that players follow a schedule given by coaches and further instructions are passed on through WhatsApp. “I am currently doing lots of skipping and strength training at home to stay fit. I am focusing on body weight training too,” Sen added. 

Almora’s Aditi Bhatt, another international badminton player from the state, said that her skill training had taken a back seat. “As far as the skill set is concerned, not much is happening apart from a little bit of wall practice. as we are confined to our flat and there isn’t much space,” the 17-year-old shuttler said.

“My day starts with rehab training as I am nursing an ankle injury. Later during gym session, the focus is mostly on strength training. The Asian Badminton Championship (junior) was supposed to take place in June but, it is likely to be postponed. So, a lot of match-practice won’t happen this year,” Bhatt added. 

Mountaineers Tashi and Nungshi Malik, who have scaled the Mount Everest together and completed the Adventurers Grand Slam (which includes climbing the highest peak in each one of the seven continents and traveling to the North and South poles on foot) say they are doing fitness training indoors. 

“Tashi and I are currently home with our grandmother. Being outdoor lovers, we miss spending time in nature, but are mindful of the risks. We have had to cancel several future commitments. However, we have set a strict schedule for ourselves. We spend time creating, training and meditating at home right from 5:30 am. We are focusing on a mix of cardio, strength and agility programs every week, with a day or two of rest,” Nungshi Malik said.

The sisters are also making use of this time to learn new skills. “We are cooking a new dish every day and spending time in the garden learning more about the soil and treatment of plants. We’re also doing webinars to exchange notes on latest climbing techniques with our friends from around the world. Every day, we call people we think might be struggling with mental health issues

Footballer Anirudh Thapa, 22, a midfielder for India, said while he was working on his fitness at home, his skill training has totally stopped since the lockdown. 

“Right now, I can only do indoor exercises and focus on the core. I do yoga daily with my mom. Since I can’t go to an open field right now, I can’t play football. However, I am making sure that my fitness is up to the mark and that my muscles are ready for the next challenge that comes the team’s way,” Thapa explained. 

“Our ISL tournament had concluded by mid-March and we had a few AFC Qualifier matches lined up against Afghanistan, Qatar and Bangladesh. As of now, we haven’t lost out on a lot of match practice since the domestic football season only just ended in March,” Thapa added. 

Seventeen-year-old national judo player from the state Unnati Sharma said, “I am punctually doing all exercises related to my sport at home. I do repetitions of techniques in shadow practice in order to maintain skill set.”

Sharma last participated in the Khelo India Games in January 2020. She was also supposed to participate in the annual National Judo championship in Chandigarh in March, but it was postponed due to the lockdown. 

“We have some major tournaments lined up from July. Time will only tell if those are taking place or not,” Sharma said. 


