Slow testing makes it difficult for Vidarbha doctors to deal with suspects
2020-04-08
NAGPUR: With over 350 samples from all over Vidarbha are yet to be tested, it has become difficult for respective district hospital authorities in the region to convince suspects to stay in the isolation wards and wait for their results come.


For example, in Yavatmal, as many as 47 suspects without any symptoms, are staying in the isolation facility at Government Medical College and Hospital since last Wednesday just because their samples are yet to be tested in Nagpur.

“These suspects include some Tablighi returnees, some having USA travel history and some close contacts of the earlier positive patients,” said Dr Milind Kamble, dean of Yavatmal GMCH. Many of these suspects have themselves approached the hospital and got admitted for testing. Their samples are pending from April 1.

“In Nagpur, the presumptive patients are kept in institutional facilities like MLA Hostel, Ravi Bhavan and Vanamati. But, we have our own limitations. We have created good facilities, but the Yavatmal suspects are all in hospitals only. It’s difficult to convince people that they have to stay here unless their results come out,” said Dr Kamble. 

Government hospitals in Buldhana, Gondia and Amravati are also facing same problems.

As district authorities and police admit suspected persons and go away, entire responsibility of dealing with them comes to doctors and staff in government hospitals. Most of the suspects are asymptomatic and it’s difficult to convince them that they need to stay in hospital until results come. 

“We are doctors and our job is to treat patients. These suspects keep on asking us how many more days they have to wait here in hospitals. As part of standard practice, we must get results within 24 hours of sending the sample. But this is not happening since last week,” said Dr Premchand Pandit, civil surgeon of Buldhana.

The snag developed in IGGMCH laboratory in Nagpur is one of the reasons behind delay in testing of samples. Authorities at this lab claimed that the snag has been repaired and lab has started functioning from Tuesday. Total 62 samples from Nagpur division were tested here on Tuesday, and all turned out to be negative. 

The AIIMS lab in Nagpur is now dealing with samples coming from Amravati division. On Tuesday, it tested 49 samples. One of them from Akola and three from Amravati tested positive.

But, the problem still continues as more than 350 samples from Vidarbha have been piled up.


