Small businesses keep guest workers in pink of health amid lockdown blues
2020-04-06
Coimbatore: While bearing the brunt of the lockdown, owners of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) are doing their best to look after the guest workers stranded here.

But the small industrialists are facing severe fund crunch. Some of them had to take loans to pay the workers an advance, which is around 30%-40% of their pay.

District president of the Tamil Nadu Association of Cottage and Tiny Enterprises (TACT) J James says only around 25% of the micro job-work units have been able to pay the guest workers. “Other have given them an advance. Unit owners buy flour, vegetables and oil for the workers. As a result, many unit owners are feeling financial crunch,” he told TOI.

President of the Coimbatore Tirupur District Micro and Cottage Entrepreneurs Association C Sivakumar says the workers were paid last week. “We already cover their food expenses. With small units facing fund crunch, we are mulling to give the workers half the pay for the next 15 days.” 

The Centre should provide a reimbursement package for MSMEs to take care of the guest workers, representatives of the Joint Council of Industrial Associations from Coimbatore say. “Industries are retaining some of the guest workers on their premises and other places and taking good care of them. Most of them are contract workers. MSMEs incur lot of expenses on this account. We request the government to devise a package for MSMEs. It should consist of an incentive component to bring back guest workers who have already left for their native places,” a communication says.

According to the industrialists, the only way to tide over the crisis is for the banks to give them interest-free loans of up to 25%-30% of their working capital or their current account status. “For these loans, we also need a moratorium of six months to one year after which we can pay interest-free EMIs,” James says.

The joint council, comprising the Confederation of Indian Industry, the Coimbatore District Small Industries Association and the Indian Chamber of Commerce Industry among others, sought a waiver of interest on all loans and cash credits for MSMEs for six months.


