Hyderabad: Small businesses fear death blow, desperately hope lockdown eases
2020-05-18
HYDERABAD: The government’s decision to open up wine, electrical and hardware shops even in the red zone but preventing other small shops to restart created a lot of problems for the latter.


There are hundreds of people who run small shops like photoshop and internet centres, stationary, paan, chai bandis, bakeries, tailoring, mechanic, puncture repair. The lockdown has dealt a severe blow to their livelihood. Some of them are forced to sell vegetables and fruits to survive.

Take the case of Mohammed Sameer, who has a small ‘dabba’ at the Mehdipatnam bus stop from where he operates his puncture shop. “This has been the most difficult phase of our lives. We are ruined as the lockdown destroyed our livelihood. For the last 45 days, I was not able to earn even a single paisa as I had to keep my shop closed. Luckily, I don’t have to pay rent but there are many others who are struggling to even pay the rent of their shops," he told TOI.

Sameer is from Bihar and has been in the city for the last six years. 

“There is no point in going back as we will be quarantined for 21 days. We don’t even know what the conditions are back there,” he said and added that he doesn’t have a ration card and therefore cannot avail the government’s scheme.

“One day someone was giving rice, so I stood in the line for several hours before getting some. But it was very fat rice and there were a lot of stones in it,” he said.

Mohd Afzal, who has been a mechanic for the last 50 years and works in Paradise circle, said the long lockdown is killing poor people. “A week or so would have been manageable but this is too long for anyone to survive. The government should allow small business to restart or several families will end up in debts and poverty,” he said.

”If is highly unfair to allow select shops to open. We too need to survive as we are forced to pay rent for the ‘mulgi’ even though we are shut. The government needs money and so do we,” said Pradeep Kumar, who runs a Xerox shop near AWHO Colony.

