Small kids vulnerable to Covid-19, but mostly asymptomatic: Doctor
2020-05-21
Nagpur: It came as a shock for entire family of a 5-month-old baby boy from Gaddigodam (Nagpur) when only he tested positive for Covid-19 from the family. Eventually, it was revealed that the baby got infected by a maid servant who had earlier tested positive. Now, the baby along with his mother is admitted in Covid Hospital at GMCH. Doctors said that infants, kids are vulnerable for coronavirus infection and they need to be protected. 

“The 5-month-old baby boy is city’s youngest Covid-19 case. As per guidelines, mother is allowed to stay with the baby in isolation hospital. We will take care to keep both of them away from other admitted patients as per protocol,” said Dr Avinash Gawande, medical superintendent of the GMCH. Dr Gawande himself being a paediatrician said that infants and newborns needed special care. 

“We must follow hand hygiene and Covid distancing from the infants. Their immunity is already low and they have all the chances of getting infected,” he said. The baby boy will be roomed-in with his mother until he recovers from the Covid-19. He will be exclusively breastfed and expert doctors will provide necessary medication to him. 

As per Perinatal-Neonatal Management of Covid-19 guidelines issued by Indian Academy of Paediatrics, nurses trained in newborn care and lactation management should be provided to the baby. A healthy asymptomatic willing family member who is not positive for Covid-19 and has not been in direct contact with suspected or confirmed Covid-19 person may be allowed to provide support for mother and the baby. However, as the baby is 5-month-old, his mother is capable of providing all care and probably there will be no need of someone else’s help.

Studies have shown the elderly as well as children have an increased risk of contracting Covid-19. More worrisome fact is that a significant number of kids are asymptomatic even when they are infected. 

“Children who are symptomatic may have mild flu like symptoms like fever, cough and cold. Most are asymptomatic. Interestingly, even if children get affected, a majority of them recover very well,” said Dr Gawande adding that the newborns as well as infants have been affected by Covid-19 earlier too and all have done very well.

In Vidarbha, a 3.5-month old baby boy was detected as Covid-19 positive in Buldhana in March. The boy and his family-members also recovered and were discharged in 14 days.


