Small steps that docs, nurses take to keep Covid-19 at bay
2020-03-27
Coimbatore: The healthcare workers are exercising maximum precautions to ensure their safety and that of their family while working in the front line to handle both confirmed and suspected cases of Covid-19. 

Most doctors in private hospitals, especially general medicine doctors, pulmonologists and those attend emergency cases, had stopped wearing watches at work more than a week ago. They had also stopped taking their medical kits or any other equipment, including stethoscope, home. On Monday, many hospitals had cancelled all their elective surgeries, shut non-emergency departments and prepared rosters to ensure that only a third or fourth of their staff work at any given point, until the situation improved. 

Even as prime minister Narendra Modi again reminded that healthcare workers, including doctors and nurses, were at the forefront to handle Covid-19 patients, putting themselves at risk, he had in his latest address urged them to take all the necessary preventive measures to keep themselves and their families safe.

Dr Dinesh Narasimhan, general medicine doctor at PSG Hospitals, said, “We neither wear watches nor carry any of our hospital things to our houses. When we exit the hospital, we wipe our hands with sanitizer and also surfaces of our mobile phones and spectacles. We also immediately remove our clothes and take a quick shower.” 

Many doctors have stopped carrying wallets and distributing visiting cards, besides appointing themselves the designated person to step out for groceries or medicines. 

Dr Krishnananda, chief operating officer of Royal Care Hospital, said in their advisory they had asked doctors to stop carrying purses. “We have advised our staff to remove clothes and soak them in soap water and take shower immediately after they reach home and not to touch anyone or anything else before that. We have also ensured that no one else at our households step out of the house, unless spouses or children are also doctors.” 

Other private hospitals like GKNM have already prepared a roster, by splitting doctors and staff into three teams, each of which would be incharge for a week. 


