Delhi Covid-19 lockdown: Small vendors being turned away
2020-04-13
NEW DELHI: Local vegetable vendors have been the lifeline for people during the lockdown, delivering greens to the doorstep of residents which ensures there is no crowding at the local bazaars. However, social distancing norms being implemented in the local mandis by the administration and the police is leading to many vendors being turned away. On Sunday, many areas in south Delhi didn’t get fresh vegetables because the vendors couldn’t procure fresh stocks.

There are hundreds of such vendors who are not registered with the civic bodies and are unable to get e-passes. Thirty-year-old Rajesh, who has been getting vegetables from Okhla mandi for years now, was turned away from the Govindpuri metro station, along with others, by a police team on Sunday morning. They asked him to approach a retailer to get the vegetables or procure a pass. That’s a virtually impossible task for the small vendors.

The police say they have had to stop the local vendors from reaching the wholesale markets since social distancing norms were not being followed. “There are hundreds of such small vendors who reach the markets with carts between 1 am and 8am. Since none of them has any pass or permission, they are no different from an individual person buying from a wholesaler. There were complaints of crowding at these markets,” said a senior police officer.

Another seller, Raj Bahadur, who had planned to form a group with some of his neighbours and go to the wholesale market in a vehicle was similarly stopped. “We will be losing our livelihood if this continues,” he said in despair. “Even the small shop owners at the markets manage to get a pass as they have registration. Since we sell vegetable from carts, we cannot get any pass. What should we do?”

This situation can lead to an artificial shortage, crowding at the local markets, panic buying and an eventual rise in prices.

The Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) secretary, Tanvir Ahmed, told TOI that the decision to restrict the movement of small retailers was taken after a sudden spike in the number of small buyers at Okhla mandi. "We have decided to issue tokens from Monday to retailers for entering the mandi. These tokens will be given out on the basis of e-passes issues by the district administration. This will ensure that only genuine vendors enter the mandi and social distancing is maintained," he said.

He added that the vendors will be allowed to enter the mandi only between 10pm and 6am. This, said Ahmed, will also check crowding at the Okhla mandi. “This mandi witnesses a huge rush between 6am and 8am when members of the general public also reach here to buy fruits and vegetables. The new timing will ensure that only vendors come to the mandi and people buy vegetables from retailers," Ahmed said.

The cops are passing the buck to the APMC, saying that if a temporary pass is issued to the vendors by the committee after checking their antecedents, they would be allowed to enter the wholesale markets.

Another measure that the authorities had tried to adopt was making it mandatory for people not to purchase less than 5kg of any item. This was to ensure that only bulk buyers are allowed to go in. The vendors say that, if necessary, they can abide by this though the demand for different items is not uniform. However, for now, it seems that no one will be allowed to enter without an e pass.

“We have been trying to bring some order to the wholesale markets that have turned into major points of congregation. If a system put in place, we will abide by it,” said a police officer.

