SMC anticipates spike in Covid-19 cases after 43 test positive in Surat
2020-05-30
SURAT: Surat city has been witnessing over 40 Covid-19 cases daily for the last two days. On Friday, 43 Covid-19 cases were recorded which took the tally to 1,476 in the city. 

Jubela Memon, 73, a resident of central zone, succumbed to the virus at New Civil Hospital on Friday. This took the Covid-19 toll in the city to 66. SMC officials said she was suffering from comorbidity. 

"For the last two days, over 40 new Covid-19 cases are being reported daily in Surat. Coronavirus cases may increase in the coming days and we need to be cautious after giving relaxation in lockdown rules,” municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani said. 

"More cases have been reported from Limbayat, Udhana and Katargam zones in the city. Limbayat zone, a Covid-19 hotspot, accounts for about 50 per cent of total cases in the city. On Friday, 11 new cases were reported from Limbayat zone, seven from Udhana zone, seven from Katargam, nine from Varachha (A) zone and five from central zone,'' Pani added. 

"Surveillance is in full swing where we are identifying aged people and those with comorbid conditions. We have asked them to report to their nearby hospital immediately if they develop any symptom of coronavirus. Early treatment can help them fight off coronavirus,'' Pani said.

"We held a meeting with members of Indian Medical Association’s Surat Branch in the presence of mayor Dr. Jagdish Patel. We are of the opinion that early identification of cases and following a certain treatment protocol will help fight the pandemic. Doctors have assured us their full help,” Pani added. 

Meanwhile, another 28 Covid-19 patients were discharged on Friday. Thus, the total number of discharged patients in the city has gone up to 1,013. Thirteen patients were discharged from Covid Care Centre and 15 from New Civil Hospital. 

The civic body continued its drive to enforce social distancing norms. It shut down 146 paan parlours and 153 salons for violating norms announced to prevent spread of coronavirus.

63-year-old woman tests positive for Covid-19 

Surat: After remaining free of Covid-19 for long, there has been a sudden spike in the cases in Valsad district. On Friday, a 63-year-old woman tested positive for Covid-19. She is a resident of Dev Prayag Apartment on Halar Road in Valsad town. Health officials said she has been referred to Tristar Hospital in Surat for treatment. 

"Till now, a total of 35 people have tested positive for Covid-19 in Valsad district. The virus has claimed life of one patient even as 14 patients have been discharged so far after their recovery,” an officer said


