Covid-19 scare: Surat civic body closes its swimming pools, halls till March 31
2020-03-15
SURAT: Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) has become the first civic body in the state to announce a slew of measures to tackle COVID-19 threat. 


In a circular issued to all department heads on Saturday, the civic body has ordered shutting of swimming pools across the city and 100% refund to individuals and institutions who had booked community halls, party plots and auditorium till March 31. 

The corporation has also suspended biometric attendance for civic staff and ordered implementation of manual attendance system till March 31. 

In an important decision, the corporation has increased fine amount from Rs100 to Rs250 for spitting on roads and public places and instructed health teams and respective municipal zones to keep a close vigil on offenders. 

Also, the civic body has directed health department to open 24x7 helpline number and set up help desk at the headquarters. 

A 100-bed quarantine facility will be set up in the city for suspected cases of coronavirus at Community Health Centres (CHCs). At present, the civic body has 15-bed quarantine facility at CHC in Vesu, while about 260 bed isolation wards have been set up in government and private hospitals in the city. 

Municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani told TOI, “The next 15 days are very critical and we are getting prepared in advance to tackle the spread of COVID-19 in the city. After March 31, mercury levels will rise, which will help in curbing the spread of coronavirus.” 

The city has reported 10 suspected cases in the last one month and that reports of all the patients were negative. 

Pani said, “There is not a single positive case so far. But, we are still taking extra precautions to keep residents in the city safe from spread of the virus. Passengers travelling in taxis, autorickshaws, BRTS and city buses will be sensitized by health department teams over the dos and don’ts to stay safe from coronavirus.”

