SMC to issue Covid-free identity cards to vegetable vendors
2020-05-05
Surat: Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) has started screening of vegetable vendors and shop owners for Covid-19 infection. If the vendors and owners of provision stores test negative for coronavirus, they will be issued identity cards declaring them disease-free. 

“We are screening vegetable vendors, provision store owners and others who come in contact with large number of people on a daily basis. If these people engaged in essential services test negative for Covid-19, we will issue them identity cards. Thus, people would not have to worry about them but still need to maintain social distancing to ensure that they don’t get infected,’’ municipal commissioner Banchhanidhi Pani said. 

Meanwhile, Surat city witnessed highest single day discharge of 65 Covid-19 positive patients upon their recovery from New Civil Hospital (NCH) and Covid care centre at Samras on Monday. Health officials said these patients were discharged after their two consecutive test results came negative for the virus. Out of the 65 discharged patients, 30 were in NCH, two in Seventh Day Adventist Mission Hospital and 33 at Covid care centre. So far, 261 patients have been discharged after they had fully recovered from the disease in the city. 

However, death toll due to Covid-19 reached 31 in the city. A 55-year-old woman of Limbayat died on Sunday night. Raziabibi Pathan was suffering from high blood pressure and diabetes. She was admitted to NCH on Sunday morning where she was detected with the infection. 

Meanwhile, the city reported 17 fresh positive cases from different areas, taking the number of positive cases to 674. City’s Limbayat zone has the highest number at 261 followed by Varachha zone with 116. 

“We have now entered the lockdown’s third phase from Monday. People believe some relaxations have been given. I want to make it clear no relaxations have been granted and that everyone will have to follow the lockdown rules strictly,’’ Pani said. He asked residents in containment areas to cooperate with health teams visiting their houses for survey.

“I have come to know that some residents are asking why the health teams are coming again and again to their houses. But it is good for you and we want to find out every suspected case and get the patient treated early,’’ Pani said. 

He informed that branches of banks will remain closed in containment areas in the city. 

Seven patients discharged from Tapi, Surat, Navsari districts

Surat: Seven Covid-19 positive patients were discharged on Monday from Tapi, Surat and Navsari districts after their recovery and repeat samples tested negative for the virus. No fresh cases were reported from Bharuch, Navsari, Tapi, Valsad and Dang districts on Monday. However, three fresh cases were reported from Surat, which took the total number of Covid-19 positive cases in the district to 39.


