SMC’s home quarantine app replicated in four Guj cities
2020-03-28
Surat: The Diamond City, which had experienced a horrific plague outbreak in 1994, has taken the lead in fighting novel Coronavirus pandemic in Gujarat. Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC)'s three unique initiatives to fight against pandemic has found place in 'Managing COVID-19- good practices in 100 Smart Cities'. These initiatives can be replicated anywhere in the country to effectively fight against global pandemic. In fact, Gujarat government on Friday announced that the COVID-19 Tracker App, developed by SMC, will now be replicated in Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, Vadodara and Rajkot to effectively monitor home quarantined people in respective cities. "SMC was the first civic body to develop a special app to track home quarantined people on a real-time basis. Our in-house team developed the app within 48 hours. Google and Apple are not approving applications quickly at present, so we are distributing this app from our website. Till now, 3005 people have downloaded this app and we are constantly monitoring them,'' Banchhanidhi Pani, municipal commissioner, Surat, told TOI."Every home quarantined person has to upload their selfie and status twice in a day on this app. This has helped us warn 42 home home quarantined people who were violating the rules and we have issued warning to them,” Pani added."Till Friday evening, we have 4,331 people under quarantine including those at home in Surat city, the largest numbers in the state,'' Pani said.SMC has adopted three Ts approach to deal with the outbreak - Track, Test and Treat. Eight FIRs have been filed against those found violating home quarantine.SMC's two other initiatives also found place in good practices. These include self declaration forms on its website by travellers in the city and voluntarily declaration of their travel history. The civic body has has started a toll free helpline number (1-800-123-800) where citizen can share details about travellers or suspects. The details are verified by SMC team including health officials. A field team visits the location and if the details provided on helpline is verified, the individual is asked to stay in home quarantine and assigned unique tracker ID. They are asked to download SMC COVID-19 tracker app.