Smokers more susceptible to coronavirus attack, say experts
2020-02-22
KOLKATA: Smoking makes you several times more vulnerable to an attack by the novel coronavirus (nCoV) that has taken more than 2,000 lives across China and southeast Asia so far, warn experts. 


A cell receptor — a component in the cell to which viruses stick easily — turns more pronounced in smokers thus attracting the virus and allowing it entry into the system, the experts have pointed out. In case of an outbreak in the state, transmission of the virus could be rapid since 36% of Bengal’s population use tobacco and two-thirds of Kolkatans are exposed to smoking in public places, according to a recent study. 

 
 

Studies conducted in the aftermath of the SARS outbreak in 2003 revealed that the ACE2 or the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 receptor of the human cell turns more ‘expressed’ in smokers. Both the human airway epithelia as well as lung parenchyma of smokers were found to have the more pronounced receptor and a considerable number of them were afflicted with SARS — the deadly respiratory distress triggered by a virus that resulted in more than 800 deaths. It might be happening in the case of Covid-19 as well, suspect doctors.

SARS and Covid-19 are similar in the way they affect the human system. Both affect the lungs severely leading to respiratory distress and death in some cases, pointed out consultant Arindam Biswas. 

Biswas said, “Some initial analyses have suggested that COVID-19 might have affected smokers more than the rest. While the studies are still incomplete there is reason to believe that it’s true since both SARS and COVID affect the human system in a similar fashion.” Kolkata, he added, could be at a greater risk due to the large number of smokers in the city.

Is it too late for a smoker to quit now hoping to avoid the virus? It takes at least 2-3 years for the ACE2 receptor to lose its prominence, said experts. “Quitting now may lessen your breathing distress but it won’t save you from the virus,” said Biswas. 

Any virus that affects the upper respiratory tract like the adeno, rhino or the nCoV is likely to affect smokers more, pointed out virologist Amitabha Nandy. “Smoking reduces the normal immunity of the lungs’ mucus membranes making them more prone to a viral attack. So, it is likely that nCov, too, will affect smokers more easily,” said Nandy. 

Potent viruses like SARS and nCoV usually infiltrate the lower respiratory tract, said RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences (RTIICS) critical care head Souren Panja. “While those getting into the upper respiratory tract are relatively harmless, the ones triggering SARS and nCoV tend to affect the lungs and trigger pneumonia,” said Panja.

Explaining the latest threat, experts pointed out that nCoV was a mutated strain of the coronavirus group to which humans are yet to grow a resistance.


