Jaipur: SMS Hospital to deploy doctors at RUHS for care of Covid-19 patients
2020-05-13
JAIPUR: A team of doctors from Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Medical College inspected Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (RUHS) on Tuesday regarding preparations for shifting of Covid-19 patients from SMS Hospital. While shifting the patients, the SMS Hospital will take measures for sanitization after wards are vacated. 

The SMS Medical College is aiming to start routine services in SMS Hospital from June 1.

Headed by SMS Medical College principal and controller Dr Sudhir Bhandari, the panel inspected the RUHS hospital to make it a dedicated Covid-19 treatment centre. “Gradually we will make SMS Hospital a non-Covid hospital and RUHS a Covid centre,” said Bhandari.

He said it will be done over the period of three weeks. The team of SMS Hospital doctors and healthcare staff will be deployed at the RUHS to take care of the Covid patients.

“The work for making the SMS Hospital free of Covid has been started and it will be done on a priority basis for normal functioning of the hospital like it was earlier before pandemic,” said Dr Ajit Singh, additional superintendent, SMS Hospital.

The SMS Medical College will deploy doctors from medicine and paediatrics department and doctors for care of female patients at RUHS for Covid-19 treatment.

Besides, directions have been issued to all superintendents of attached hospitals to submit action taken report for starting non-Covid services on medical emergencies, routine surgeries, social and physical distancing, canteen arrangements, OPD in Dhanwantri and Charak Bhawan of SMS Hospital, investigation facilities, queue system for patients and separate ward for suspected Covid patients.

Besides, SMS Medical College faculty members have suggested to the authorities that they will start preparing for increasing non-Covid services and try to build up as before taking all precautions.

Department of ophthalmology has already given a representation for early resumption of services at Charak Bhawan where Covid patients are kept. All head of the departments of the hospital have been asked to give their complete plan to restart their services. 

Besides, Rajasthan Medical College Teachers Association of Rajasthan University of Health Sciences demanded that the state government should immediately create a post of superintendent and deputy superintendent and additional superintendent at RUHS hospital. They pointed out that chief minister Ashok Gehlot had inaugurated the RUHS hospital recently.


