SMS Hospital tests new ‘Wuhan drug’ to treat Covid patients
2020-05-28
JAIPUR: The city's Sawai Man Singh Hospital is using a 'new' drug, tocilizumab, for Covid-19 treatment. This drug was successfully given to patients in Wuhan, the epicentre of Covid-19 outbreak. Tocilizumab is used for treating diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. The 'controversial' drug hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) too is used for treating arthritis. The SMS Hospital has given tocilizumab to two patients, so far, and has claimed that it is showing good results.


The hospital, which has provided treatment to over 1,000 Covid patients, has already taken initiative to use drugs such as hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir-ritonavir, a combination useful for HIV treatment; and plasma therapy.

Now, in the series, the doctors have decided to use tocilizumab for treating Covid patients.

While treating patients, the doctors had discovered cytokine storm, a condition in which the immune system attacks the body in critical patients. The doctors at the hospital looked for a medicine to block the cytokine storm, which could cause multiple organ and cardiovascular failures. For preventing cytokine storm, the doctors started using tocilizumab. “So far, we have provided tocilizumab to two patients. They have responded well to the treatment. Three other patients are lined up for the same treatment,” said Dr Sudhir Bhandari, principal and controller, SMS Medical College, and one of the five members of the core group for treating Covid-19 at SMS Hospital.

The treatment is effective in critical Covid patients, suffering from bilateral pneumonia. “Increased concentration of cytokine inflammatory markers such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-10 cause acute respiratory distress syndrome in which the level of oxygen in tissues and cells goes down dangerously and causes hypoxia. So, there is a need to block the cytokine storm and tocilizumab is proving an effective drug for such a condition,” said Dr Ajit Singh, a member of the core group.

Dr Singh said that tocilizumab is a humanised monoclonal antibody against IL-6 receptor. The IL-6 is a cytokine which plays key a role in Covid-19 induced cytokine storms. Doctors at SMS Hospital are keeping an eye on the level of IL-6, a cytokine, in Covid-19 patients undergoing treatment.

The doctors have taken lessons for using the drug from a study conducted by the department of pharmacy, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

