Soaps, sanitisers to fight virus at fair price shops in Telangana
2020-03-26
HYDERABAD: The Telangana government on Wednesday decided to utilise biometric equipment installed at fair price shops for distribution of 12 kg rice per person free of cost to white card holders.

Sources said that care will be taken to sanitise the biometric equipment as well as the card holder for every transaction as a preventive measure against spread of coronavirus. Sanitisers and soaps would be in place at fair price shops.

While the distribution of rice commenced in Karimnagar district on Wednesday, it will start in parts of Hyderabad, Rangareddy and Medchal on Thursday. The rice distribution in remaining parts of the state will start from Friday. 

The biometric system is being used to ensure that the rice meant for supply to the poor and needy is not diverted and the government has an exact data of which of the white ration card holders had come out to avail the rice and cash offer. “Plans are afoot to issue tokens with time slots to card holders so that they don’t gather at the fair price shops, and come as per their allotted time and maintain three to five feet distance from each other,” civil supplies minister Gangula Kamalakar told TOI. 

As all the white ration cards have been linked with Aadhaar cards, Rs 1,500 cash, as announced by chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao to be given to the white ration card holders for purchase of essentials, would be deposited into the bank account of the beneficiaries. “Bank account details will be verified once again with the white card holders when they come to take the rice,” Kamalakar said. 

It is also proposed to give two-month rice i.e. 24 kg rice to the card holders as a precautionary measure. “There is no need to panic. The 1 kg rice per person is sufficient for a month for an individual,” said civil supplies commissioner Satyanarayana Reddy. 

While school buildings would be utilised to keep the rice stocks in the rural areas, the government will use community halls in towns and cities to stock the rice bags. A vehicle with audio and speaker facility would be used to make announcements in villages and residential areas in the city about the fair price shop timings, token system, time slots and other necessary norms to be followed before coming to take the rice.


