Covid-19 in Delhi: Social distancing not on track yet
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: The stringent advisory given by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) on Thursday to prevent spread of Covid-19 in the mass transit system remained only on paper a day later.


Coronavirus in India latest updates

However, DMRC said the drastic rules, including thermal scanning, no standing passengers, trains skipping crowded stations, leaving alternate seats vacant, etc, would be gradually implemented over the next few days and the advisory was issued to instill self-regulation.

Though none of the measures were implemented on Friday, there was massive drop in footfall when TOI visited various stations across the capital during morning peak hour.

Kashmere Gate station had a sparse gathering of passengers at 10am, a time period during when a sea of humanity changes between three corridors on usual days. Other busy interchange stations, such as Rajiv Chowk and Central Secretariat, also saw much fewer commuters. Activity was only seen when people exited the trains to switch over to another line.

Inside the trains, there was hardly any space for a person to “socially distance” himself or herself with all seats being occupied. Commuters were seen standing as usual. No metro official was present on the platform or inside the trains to enforce the new rules.

At Lajpat Nagar, which acts as an interchange station for Violet and Pink Lines, a similar situation was seen. A CISF official stationed at the X-ray baggage inspection machine said there had been a slight drop in footfall on Friday compared with the last couple of days. “It could be due to the DMRC announcement, or simply because people are trying to avoid travelling by the metro,” he added.

Contrary to DMRC’s claims of not allowing people with cough and cold in the trains, many such commuters were seen. The frequency of disinfection and cleaning at stations was visibly increased, but so had confusion and disarray. A commuter, Mohit Bhatia, asked, “What do they mean by metro may not stop at crowded stations? This creates a lot of confusion.”

Anuj Dayal, executive director (corporate communications), DMRC, said, “Delhi Metro is making all necessary efforts to implement the new guidelines. They are being gradually brought into effect. All individuals must come together to fight the pandemic and prevent it from spreading any further.”

“Passengers have already reduced with about 37 lakh journeys performed on Thursday compared with the general weekday average of 55-60 lakh. Announcements at stations, trains and publicity messages on social media have commenced to raise awareness about the issue,” Dayal said.


