Coronavirus in Nagpur: Social distancing now part of daily lives
2020-03-20
NAGPUR: Social distancing can be stressful and annoying as it may invite boredom, but considering the need of the hour citizens are practicing various techniques to keep themselves safe and sound.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Dr Mrunalini Ballal is practicing social distancing keenly and has also involved a few hygienic habits in her day-to day-life. “It’s been over a week now I have avoided weddings and social gatherings. Whenever I am meeting my relatives or friends in the society I am greeting them with namaskar, and avoiding shaking hands. I am making sure to wash vegetables, fruits neatly and also washing the milk packets that the vendor delivers,” she said.

Sarita Samatkar, an engineer, believes that social distancing must be practised consciously by citizens, and people are still seen wandering around in markets and shops. “I am staying at home and avoiding going out anywhere. Sometimes it feels frustrating that I cannot meet my friends but spending time with family helps. I am eating only home cooked food. I am not leaving home if there is no emergency,” she said.

Adding to this, Varsha Kulkarni, a writer, is using some tips to avoid going out to the gym or vegetable market or cinema hall. “I have stopped going to my relatives’ place, hence they have also stopped visiting. I am not hitting the gym but exercising daily. I am not going to the market but buying vegetables from vendors,” she said. 

Manank Panchmatia has a positive approach towards social distancing. “Although we have our entire life ahead of us to meet strangers, currently it is important to take a step back in such a crisis. I am making good use of technology to make video calls, conference calls and Skype with friends,” he said.

Advocate Vriddhi Bhagat is avoiding visits to the courts unless it’s some very important case as per notification of the bar association on social distancing. “It’s very difficult for a full-time professional lawyer to stay at home, and avoid public places, as that is our job. I am practising social distancing by cleaning at home and spending time with family, also making sure my parents and family members clean and sanitize their hands,” she said.

Mrunal Naik, project head at SGR Foundation, is strictly avoiding any kind of public gathering and enjoying some time at home. “I am taking care cleanliness of self and area around me. At home, I am talking on the phone with the people who are isolating themselves to save others, so that they will not feel bad or depressed,” she said.

For Dr Neha Rahate, who loves to socialize and try different food items, there is no going out now. “I have stopped going out to meet friends or to restaurants. From the hospital, I go to jog every evening and go directly back home. But I am enjoying the comfort of cooking food at home,” she said.

It’s getting a bit difficult for students as they constantly need to go for tuitions and stationery shops for supplies. “I am not even visiting the library, but reading and studying only at home. Xerox shops and net cafés are also shut, but mobile phones and technology make it easy to study,” said Srujal Randive, a student.

People working at airports and corporate sector are finding it a bit difficult as shops operate there day and night. “I am not able to completely isolate myself at home. But even at work, we are practising social distancing. We are not letting customers gather in huge numbers. Sanitizer is been given before placing any order and even in our shop, limited people work in shifts," said Roshan Khatri, manager at a food joint at the airport.

