Covid-19 scare in Tamil Nadu: Social welfare department to send aid to the elderly
2020-03-21
CHENNAI: As part of efforts to check Covid-19, the department of social welfare is roping in women’s self-help groups to take care of the elderly and the disabled, many of whom are stuck at home with no one to help them with their daily chores.


The self-help groups will make home visits to assist the aged and the infirm with their daily activities, provide them masks, hand sanitisers, and required medicines. They will also stay in constant touch with senior citizens through phones, e-mails, and social media. 

Social welfare officials said they were coming across cases across the state where senior citizens were struggling to go out and run errands because they were getting anxious about contracting the virus. “Many of them live alone, and have locked themselves in their homes to avoid the virus. This will impact their overall health,” said a senior official.

The self-help groups will be assisted by men and women from the local community, medical officers, nurses, psychologists and social workers. The teams will cover all neighbourhoods in the state and coordinate with local authorities and primary health centres to make a list of senior citizens and people with disabilities who need help. They will also cover people from economically weaker sections.

Dr. Lakshmipathy Ramesh, senior consultant in geriatrics at Kauvery Hospital, said the elderly were especially vulnerable. “Once you reach 60 years of age the immune system weakens. Those who are under medication for diabetes or cancer are more vulnerable to the virus,” he said, adding “Senior citizens, in general, should not visit doctors or clinics, telephonic consultations or home visits are ideal.”

“The ideal way would be to set up helplines exclusively for senior citizens where they can seek help or consultation,” said D. Rajasekaran, general secretary of the Tamil Nadu senior citizens organisation.

V. Sivakumar, director Helpage India (Tamil Nadu), lauded the state’s initiative but at the same time warned them to be careful as “even mere visits to their home would stigmatise them. But at the same time, a home visit is a good idea.” Since the outbreak, Helpage has been receiving calls from anxious senior citizens. “Many of them are living alone, their children are abroad. Some don’t have money to seek help. Loneliness can be detrimental to their health,” he said.

 Dr. Lashmipathy said having families nearby can boost the morale of senior citizens. 

