Some defy lockdown by showing old medical files
2020-04-04
Kolhapur: Some people in the city were found showing old medical files to get through the barricades set up by the police in order to restrict the movement.

A person from Ruikar Colony who wanted to travel to Nagala park was stopped by the police at Sinchan Bhavan. The hospital file that he showed to the police was dated two years ago. After an enquiry of 30 minutes, he told the police that he was going to his friend's house in Nagala park. He was asked to go back to his house and the police threatened him to seize the vehicle.

A senior police officer, requesting anonymity, said, "We have a system set up where we check with the hospital to see any prior appointment taken by the particular person. If we find no urgency we do not let the person travel. In the last couple of days, we found such cases in several places."

Some were seen roaming outside in the evening. In the morning, many move around without buying any essentials. Farmers from nearby villages arrive early morning to sell the vegetables. They sit at the locations marked by the administration after which they go back home at around 9.00 am. 

Some said the movement is restricted by the police as the day progresses.

Social distancing is not followed properly in many places. People take evening walks in open grounds or gardens. One security man guarding it, is helpless when the locals move out in the evening.

"We are getting bored staying in our houses the whole day. Like social distance markings, the administration should mark tracks in the open grounds for walking at safe distance," said a person walking at the ground near Kasba Bawda Pavilion.

Institutional quarantine to have music system 

Civic chief Mallinath Kalshetti said that the music system of Saregama Carvaan will be set up in institutional quarantine after the people brought there, complained about feeling like prisoners. Kalshetti said at some quarantine wards, the social distancing was not being practised. Some had complained that there is not enough space in the quarantine centres. They circulated the photos of the centres through social media. These are the people who have a history of travel to cities where coronavirus patients have been reported.


