South Tamil Nadu records lowest average Covid-19 positive cases per district
2020-05-12
Madurai: With south Tamil Nadu averaging 57 cases per districts, the region recorded the lowest average Covid-19 cases per district. After witnessing lowest average, experts pointed to various factors like rural-urban divide, population density and literacy that are likely to be influencing the number of cases.

Though the western region, which includes Coimbatore, has lower number of Covid-19 cases in total as compared to the south, the average cases per district there stands at 60. In the central and north regions, the average cases per district are 85 and 126 respectively. However, these numbers are still fewer than the average cases per district in the state, which is 216.

Chennai region on the other hand, comprising Chennai, Chengalpattu, Kancheepuram and Thiruvallur, which has been seeing massive rise in cases, has recorded as many as 1,325 average cases per district.

According to experts, for any kind of epidemic, the main influencing factor for spread is the mode of transmission. In the case of Covid-19, the main mode of transmission is by aerosol and transmission by contact.

“Population density is a major factor. The population density of Chennai is 26,903 per sq km as per the latest census data, which is highest in the state. The average population density in the state is, however, close to around 550 per sq km. In such a scenario for Chennai, where the number is higher, it is expected that spread happens without people even realising,” said Dr Sudharsan Balasubramanian, assistant professor, community medicine at a private medical college hospital in Madurai.

Notably, among the southern districts, barring Madurai and Kanyakumari, which have relatively higher numbers, the population density of all other districts is well below the state average. In fact, Ramanathapuram and Sivaganga have among the least numbers in the state when it comes to population density.

However, in the case of Kanyakumari, which has the second highest population density in the state at 1,106 per sq km, the number of Covid-19 cases in the district is as less as 25. “Kanyakumari has the highest literacy rate in the state. When people are more educated and aware and are able to follow preventive measures, it is likely that the numbers will be less,” Sudharsan said.

Meanwhile, experts also admit that without equal and enough testing done across the state, it is hard to get a grasp of the real picture of whether in some areas the number of cases are actually less because of factors other than low number of testing.


