South TN crosses 1,000 Covid-19 cases, 8 in new cases in central region
2020-05-22
Madurai/Trichy: With 79 more Covid-19 cases on Thursday, the total number of cases in the ten southern districts climbed to 1,076. Tirunelveli tops the list with 253 cases, followed by Madurai with 191.Out of the 79 cases, 62 are those who had returned from other states, while 17 are local infections. Tuticorin and Tirunelveli districts together recorded 33 out of the 79 cases, including 17 and 11 cases from other states. The second highest number among the southern districts was reported in Madurai, 19 cases. Among them, 16 were those who had returned from Maharashtra. A 20-year-old woman who had travelled from Delhi to Madurai also tested Covid-19 positive. Two other local cases, an 80-year-old man from Thathaneri who was a contact of Covid-19 patient and 50-year-old man from Jaihindpuram, which is a containment area, were also reported.Tenkasi and Virudhunagar reported eight cases each on Thursday. While Tenkasi saw five local cases and three Maharashtra returnees, in Virudhunagar, all those who tested positive were from Maharashtra. Theni district reported three local cases, all contacts of Covid-19 patients with a recent travel history to other districts and a Maharashtra returnee. Sivagangai district reported two new cases on Thursday, including one who had returned from West Bengal. Dindigul district also reported five new cases, including four from Maharashtra.Meanwhile, the central region of the state witnessed eight more new Covid cases on Thursday. Four new positive cases were registered in Thanjavur district. With this, the total number of cases has climbed to 80.A 48-year-old man of Patharakottai village and a 20-year-old man from Kollukadu village in Pattukottai returned from Maharashtra tested positive. A 31-year-old man of Sunnambukara Street in Orathanadu taluk is a Maldives returnee. A 27-year-old man of Kuzhimathur who returned from Chennai also tested positive.A 58-year-old ex-serviceman from Kulithalai of Karur district tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. He was posted as a volunteer at Manavasi check post. According to health officials, he could have contracted the infection from Maharashtra returnees.A 24-year-old Covid-19 patient under treatment in the government hospital in Karur was discharged on Thursday. In Pudukottai, three people including a one-year old boy tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday.A 56-year-old man with chronic renal issue tested positive at a private hospital in Trichy. He had initially tested negative at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital in Trichy last week. Testing at a private lab in the city showed that he was Covid positive. The district administration is yet to take the case into account.Ariyalur and Perambalur districts did not report any fresh Covid-19 positive cases.Meanwhile, a 29-year-old pregnant woman from Gengavalli in Salem district on the way to a private hospital in Trichy had reported breathing difficulty while nearing Perambalur last night. The woman was rushed to Perambalur government hospital where she died. Swab samples collected from the woman tested negative for Covid-19 on Thursday.