Southern districts report 48 new Covid-19 cases, central region 10
2020-06-04
Madurai/Trichy: With 48 new cases, the southern districts’ Covid-19 tally has climbed to 1,632 on Wednesday. Among them, 40 are local cases. Meanwhile, the central region of the state reported ten more Covid-19 positive cases taking the tally to 932.

In Madurai, seven local cases were reported on Wednesday. Among them, five cases are within the corporation limits. The other cases are from Alathur near Oomatchikulam. There are no new cases in Dindigul and Sivaganga districts. Kanyakumari, Theni and Virudhunagar reported one case each.

Tuticorin reported 17 cases, the highest number in south TN, on Wednesday. On Tuesday too, the district reported the most number of cases. Speaking to TOI, Tuticorin district collector Sandeep Nanduri said that a majority of the local cases in the district were related to two funerals held in the district. The collector said that as many as 35 Covid-19 cases have been related to the two funerals and that all measures have been taken to contain the spread.

Ramanathapuram reported five new local cases taking the district total to 90. Tenkasi has three new local cases and one imported case. With 12 new cases, Tirunelveli has the highest number of active cases at 378.

The number of positive cases in Thanjavur district has crossed 100 after six more people tested positive on Wednesday. Among them, three had been residing in Chennai. All of them have been admitted to the Government Medical College Hospital in Thanjavur. Besides, two more people with Chennai contact also tested positive.

In Nagapattinam, the number of cases rose to 64 with one more new positive case. In Tiruvarur, the total number of cases has climbed to 51 with two more new positive cases on Wednesday, all returned from Chennai.

A 51-year-old man from Karur tested positive for Covid-19 in Chennai today. He was tested positive at a private hospital and is undergoing treatment there.

While there were no positive cases reported in Pudukottai, three people have been admitted to the isolation ward with Covid-19 symptoms. Among them a 64-year-old comorbid patient is in a critical condition.


