South Mumbai diamond merchant is 2nd coronavirus victim
2020-03-23
MUMBAI: A 63-year-old south Mumbai resident, with no apparent history of international travel, succumbed to Covid-19 early on Sunday, taking the count of coronavirus fatalities in the city as well as the state to two. State officials said that the man, a diamond merchant, had travelled to Surat in Gujarat about a fortnight ago, but didn't label it as a case of community transmission. The death has pushed the country’s toll to five. In all cases, the deceased had an underlying ailment such as hypertension, diabetes and heart disease in a few.


The Walkeshwar resident’s 64-year-old wife too has tested positive for the infection and is currently admitted to H N Reliance Foundation Hospital at Charni Road in a dedicated isolation facility. At least eight high-risk contacts from the family have been referred to Kasturba Hospital, Chinchpokli, for testing, while another eight of his low risk-contacts have been placed under home quarantine. TOI has learnt that a private physician, who had seen the man on March 14 after he developed fever, has been counted among the low-risk contacts and placed under quarantine.

State epidemiologist Dr Pradeep Awate said that the senior citizen had a history of ischemic heart disease, blood pressure and hypertension. He had undergone an angioplasty about 12 years ago. The man developed fever and chills on March 13 and went to see a private physician on the next day. On March 17, his condition worsened after he developed dry cough and breathing difficulty. Two days later, he was admitted to H N Reliance Hospital where civic sources said that he needed ventilator support within hours of admission. Here, doctors suspected that it could be a case of coronavirus and sent his swab for testing, which tested positive. Civic officials said that the man developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) early on Sunday that led to his death. The first Covid-19 casualty from the city, too, was also a 63-year-old man, who had a travel history to Dubai.

Civic officials said that the hospital was informed about the protocol to be followed for cremation, which includes placing the body in a leak-proof plastic body bag, decontaminating the exterior of the bag, among others. A BMC ambulance was summoned to ferry the body to the nearby Chandawadi electric crematorium where the last rites were carried out in the presence of a few family members in the wee hours of Sunday. “The family was extremely cooperative. They informed their relatives but asked them not to gather for the funeral,” a civic official said, adding that civic volunteers facilitated the cremation. It was unclear if his wife was informed of the death. While civic officials remained tight-lipped about where the individual may have contracted the infection, they are investigating his meeting with a relative who had travelled from Berlin and flown back.

The death also triggered a massive community exercise to sanitize the area while quelling the fears of an outbreak in the neighbourhood. The civic officials said the neighbourhood has been divided into containment and buffer areas. “Buildings within the containment area have been put under strict watch. We are asking every resident about their travel history and those with symptoms are asked to visit the Kasturba Hospital,” said an official. While buildings in the buffer area are given information and awareness. “Every case causes a panic, so anxiety following a death is understandable. We go to buildings and tell them the dos and don'ts. A good part of our time is devoted in counselling,” a civic official said.

