South Nagpur Covid-free; NMC drives curbed spread in other parts
2020-04-23
NAGPUR: The Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) claims to have prevented spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) in four of the six assembly constituencies in the city due to aggressive containment drive. As per the civic body’s calculations, it has notionally contained spread of Covid-19 to nearly 33,600 citizens in four constituencies — East, Central, North and South-West Nagpur — and further multiplication.


Interestingly, in the last 42 days, not a single coronavirus positive case has been reported from South Nagpur, the only constituency which has remained untouched by Covid-19 since March 11 when the first case was detected in the city.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI, “One Covid-19 positive person can spread the infection to over 400 persons, if not isolated in time. This has been established by an Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) study. As per World Health Organization (WHO) estimates, the number is over 800.”

“We had launched an aggressive containment drive in the areas from where the first positive case was reported on March 11. A few citizens, who tested negative and had to remain quarantined, may have been inconvenienced, but our containment drives worked and prevented further spread of the disease. All positive cases could be detected only because of effective tracing, examining and quarantining people who were in close contact with the positive persons and their family members,” he said.

As on Wednesday, the district has recorded 98 positive cases of which 57 are linked to a single Satranjipura case (East Nagpur), 17 from Mominpura (Central Nagpur) and 11 connected to Khamla (South-West Nagpur) of which five are from Jaripatka (North Nagpur). 

After test reports of 68-year-old deceased turned out to be positive on April 6, the NMC had traced, examined and quarantined over 200 persons by carrying out a massive containment drive. Similarly, the number of people examined and quarantined are over 120 in Mominpura and 120 in Khamla and Jaripatka. Also, the NMC had quarantined 281 persons as per the orders of ministry of home affairs. All this led to detection of 84 positive cases during the containment drives. The lone deceased and six earlier cases had led the NMC to launch containment drives.

Going by the ICMR study projection of one infected person spreading the disease to 400 persons, the NMC has prevented the spread of Covid-19 to nearly 33,600 citizens as on date as 84 positive cases have been detected in the city during the containment drives so far. 

Elaborating further, Mundhe said, “Over 200 persons were traced, examined and quarantined because of one infected person in Satranjipura. The number of positive cases could have been lesser had we been informed about the person’s symptoms earlier and the family had disclosed proper information in the beginning.”

“The NMC has launched door-to-door survey to find out suspected Covid-19 patients and also high-risk persons. The drive has already covered over 25 lakh people. Survey was also conducted in Satranjipura in March-end. Had the family disclosed information then, we could have curbed the coronavirus spread there in the initial stage itself. The need of the hour is not to create a monster and instead become warrior to contain Covid-19,” he said.

Fortunately, the number did not spike after the first four positive cases were detected from Bajaj Nagar, Abhyankar Nagar and Swawlambi Nagar (South-West Nagpur). Also, no further case was reported from a housing society situated in front of Gandhisagar (Central Nagpur) after one person had tested positive there. Similarly, no new case has been reported from Gittikhadan (West Nagpur) after one positive case was reported there.

East Nagpur MLA Krishna Khopde said, “A large number of cases have come to fore from Satranjipura. Need is to test all citizens from the affected area so that we can know the actual number of infected persons and accordingly take steps to contain coronavirus. If required, Army should be deployed for implementing containment drive strictly.”



