Bengaluru: SP turns truck driver to inspect cops at Covid-19 checkposts
2020-04-04
BENGALURU: An IPS officer disguised as a truck driver to monitor his subordinates posted at Covid-19 checkposts in and around Nelamangala taluk on Thursday night.
 

Ravi D Channannavar, superintendent of police (Bengaluru Rural district), drove two trucks and a private car during the operation. He kept switching from one vehicle to another to check whether the lockdown was being enforced. VJ Sajeeth, additional superintendent of police and Mohan Kumar, deputy superintendent of police (Nelamangala sub-division), accompanied Ravi. 

“We were inspecting vehicles at a checkpost near Thyamagondlu. Around 2.30am on Friday, we found a car coming from Nelamangala side and stopped it. The man driving the vehicle said he wanted to go Tumakuru. We didn’t allow him to move forward. We were surprised to find that he was our SP and his co-passengers were our superiors. Later, they asked us to continue working and left the spot,” said a police officer.

“Following complaints of cops collecting bribes at checkposts, we paid a few surprise visits. We found the charges were baseless,” Sajeeth said.


2 RTO inspectors held for extortion

Three people, including two motor vehicle inspectors attached to Jayanagar RTO, were arrested on Thursday evening for allegedly extorting money from truck drivers at an RTO checkpost in Attibele. The accused are TK Jayanna, 49, Kariyappa, 59, both MV inspectors, and Vivekananda, 30, a home guard.

Police said RTO officials had shut the checkpost due to Covid-19 but the accused opened it to extort money from truckers passing by. “We registered a case of extortion after a truck driver, who was transporting muskmelon, lodged a complaint with Attibele police station. VJ Sajeeth, additional SP, and his team swung into action, arrested the trio and seized Rs 15,500 from them,” an officer said. 

According to police, Jayanna and Kariyappa are supposed to be part of a Covid-19 checkpost at Karnataka-Tamil Nadu border. But they didn’t do the job properly. Vivekananda recently joined hands with the duo to extort from the public.

GN Shivamurthy, deputy commissioner (Bengaluru Urban), suspended Jayanna and Kariyappa on Friday on charges of dereliction of duty, under provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005.


