Covid-19: Spate of salary cuts, layoffs & leave reduction
2020-04-30
BENGALURU: A number of companies are looking at ways to cut costs, as the Covid-19 pandemic plays havoc with consumer demand. Hardcastle Restaurants, which owns and operates McDonald’s restaurants in west and south India, plans to defer 40% of the fixed salary, excluding retirals, of the top management from April to September. Employees a level below would have a 25% deferment.


SpiceJet, one of the most financially stressed Indian carriers, on Wednesday told its pilots they won’t be getting any salary for April and May. Pilots operating cargo flights, the only ones allowed in the lockdown, will be paid for the hours flown. 


Coronavirus outbreak: Live updates

Chennai-based software-as-a-service firm Zoho said it will cancel staff bonuses. Founder Sridhar Vembu said there would be no layoffs. There’s no salary cut either for now. “We have our own assets and have no debt, so the impact is not as severe,” Vembu said. Capgemini, for the first half of the year, ending June 30, has capped leave balances at 15 days.

The reduction means there may be less to be paid out for leave balances in case an employee is quitting or retiring. Capgemini has also asked all non-billable employees, those without projects, to apply for leaves with immediate effect, while continuing to seek billable opportunities. In case of insufficient leave balance, they can avail of advance leave.


More on Covid-19Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won'tHow to quarantine yourself at home
Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news 

Automation Anywhere, the robotic process automation company last valued at $6.8 billion, is said to be laying off 10% of its employees. Co-founder Mihir Shukla said their growth projections are lower than planned before Covid-19, and they will reduce the workforce and realign the organisation. The company has a big presence in India, but Indian employees are said to be not impacted yet.


