Spate of burglaries in lockdown period
2020-06-07
Pune: Thieves have taken advantage of the lockdown period to steal valuables from locked flats in Katraj, Hadapsar and B T Kawade Road. 

As many as five flats have been burgled in these areas with valuables collectively worth Rs3.22 lakh stolen.

According to Bharati Vidyapeeth police, unidentified thieves stole gold ornaments and cash, worth Rs3.04 lakh, from a locked flat at Katraj sometime between March and May 19 this year.

Police inspector Vishnu Tamhane of Bharati Vidyapeeth police station told TOI, "Flat owner Jyotiram Durude (38) from Katraj had gone to his village in March after the lockdown was announced. He returned only after the restrictions were relaxed. On returning, he found the locks of the front door broken and cupboards in the bedrooms open. Cash and valuables worth over Rs3.04lakh were stolen from the flat."

Tamhane said, "In March, Durude had gone to his village when the nationwide lockdown was announced. He got stuck in his village and his flat was burgled in the ensuing period."

Three flats at Caprivilla Society on B T Kawade Road were also burgled during the lockdown period. All the flats were locked as their occupants had gone to their hometowns in other states, Mundhwa police said.

"All the three flats were rented out. One of the tenants, Pratik Maheshwari, called up his landlord, Kunal Kamalnath (26) of Mundhwa, and urged him to take a look at the flat. Kamalnath visited the building at B T Kawade Road and found the flat burgled," Mundhwa police said.

On checking the entire building, it was revealed that two other flats were also burgled, police said. 

"The actual amount of valuables stolen from the three flats can only be ascertained after the flat occupants return to Pune," police said.

Another flat located at Hadapsar was also found burgled. Flatowner Yogesh Nagawade (35) lodged a complaint with the police saying that unidentified persons broke open the locks of his flat and stole cash and valuables worth Rs19,000 in the last one month. 


