Tamil Nadu: Special containment plan for Tablighi Jamaat group
2020-04-02
CHENNAI: Several more of those who participated in the three-day Tablighi Jamaat conference from Tamil Nadu agreed to be tested for Covid-19 on Wednesday and the state health department rolled out a special plan to contain the cluster. The aim, officials said, is to ensure the infection is not passed on to the community


Finally, 1,103 participants across 15 districts were isolated and tested, while their family members are being taken to government quarantine facilities or advised to stay in home quarantine under the supervision of religious leaders and government officials, said director of public health Dr K Kolandaswamy. “All family members and close contacts of participants who turn positive will be tested between the fifth and the 14th day whether or not they show symptoms.”



Until now, the state authorities had tested people showing symptoms after they were found having a travel history. Their family members or close contacts exhibiting the symptoms were also tested. “In this case, testing will be done whether or not the family members show symptoms,” he said. Several people who tested positive for the virus did not show any symptoms of the infection, but they can spread the infection to family members and members of the community, he said. The decision was made as per ICMR guidelines and the real time risk assessment prepared by state public health officials.

Health secretary Beela Rajesh said the state has 17 testing centres including 11 in the government sector and a capacity to test 5,000 samples in day. “We will be adding at least six more labs soon in the government sector to increase the number of daily samples,” she said. Samples for 658 of the 1,103 people have been drawn. While some are still being processed, 110 turned positive today [Wednesday],” she said.

In the quarantine facilities, district authorities have ensured that the vulnerable including the elderly and people with chronic ailments such as diabetes, hypertension and heart or kidney diseases are isolated from the rest.

“If other members in the family are infected they may pass on the infection to the high risk group even if they don’t show symptoms,” officials said.

Officials have cordoned off the 5km containment zone around houses of people testing positive, preventing entry and exit. Sanitary workers are disinfecting the area with handheld machines. Health workers have been directed to do house-to-house screening in the zone for people with symptoms of the viral infection and create a line list of high-risk patients, including the elderly and those with chronic ailments such as heart and renal conditions.

Patients showing symptoms and their caregivers will be provided with masks and will be counselled about the virus. “People among high risk groups and those vulnerable will have to be in self isolation. Our counsellors and volunteers will talk to people about safety measures,” she said.

