Special care for those who fast at quarantine centres
2020-05-15
Kochi: It was a difficult Ramzan for T H Shajahan, one of the stranded Keralites who was ferried to India in a flight which landed in Kochi from Abu Dhabi on Thursday night. He had lost his job and struggled a lot before managing to get a ticket in the homeward flight. After the flight landed at the Cochin International Airport, he was shifted to a quarantine centre set up at SCMS Cochin School of Business in Muttom along with other Ernakulam natives.

But on reaching the centre early morning, he was surprised to see authorities offering him bread and fruits before he began fasting. 

“We were given chapati and chicken curry on Friday night. Next day morning, we were given bun, fruits and juice before we started fasting,” said Shahjahan. At the institutional quarantines set up in the district, the authorities have been taking special care to meet the requirements of those who are fasting during Ramzan.

While local bodies are supplying food at the quarantine institutions identified by the government there are a few sponsors as well who are pitching in. In the mornings, samosa, fruits and juices are provided to those who go on fasting.

There are three people who returned from UAE observing fasting undergoing quarantine at the hostel of SCMS Cochin School of Business.

“Besides offering us food, the authorities enquire about our well-being,” said H Shajahan, who shares a quarantine room with two others.

The authorities said they are prepared to meet the requirements of people housed in the quarantine. More people have started to come to the centre on Saturday and their number is expected to grow in the coming days. “Though we have been directed to provide vegetarian food, we can also provide their choice of food as they are fasting. But no one has approached us so far with any such demands,” said Bindu Manoharan, health standing committee chairperson of Kalamassery municipality.

In Thrikkakara, the local body has collected details of food the people in quarantine would prefer to have. “We will give them food as per their choice, veg or non–ve,” said Thrikkakara municipality secretary P S Shibu.


