Special mechanism helped Kasaragod arrest virus spread
2020-04-14
KANNUR: Kasaragod district, which has the largest number of Covid-19 cases in the state, was successful in curtailing the spread of the disease, thanks to the special mechanism it launched in the district, which was effectively enforced in the past two weeks, said officials. The district has recorded an appreciable discharge rate and as on Monday, only 93 out of the 166 who tested positive are in hospitals. 

Releasing ‘Care for Kasaragod’, the details of the strategy enforced in the past two weeks, at the Corona core committee meeting on Monday, Alkesh Kumar Sharma, principal secretary, industries department, who is the special officer to the district in the wake of pandemic situation, said the initial success of the lockdown and social distancing was strictly realized by those who were in the room quarantine.

“Due to the collection and quantification of Covid-19 confirmed patients and their contact lists, community outreach has been prevented,” he said. 

He said the disease was confirmed only among those who came from abroad and those who had the closest contact. Preparation of a proper route map and travel history made it possible to control the disease in the district. However, the stringent measures would continue in the coming days as well, to prevent any community transmission, Sharma said. 

In the early days of the spread of the virus, seven senior officials of the district were appointed in different areas as incident commanders, and the institutions in each area were acting on their instructions. With the help of police, they also raided markets to prevent price hike, hoarding and black market, he added.

Considering the unprecedented situation that emerged in the district, the lockdown was stringently implemented and areas were divided into separate clusters and strict controls were imposed here, he said. 

Facilities like corona control room, effective corona monitoring system, as also the setting up of hospitals to treat the Covid-19 cases and even the virology laboratory in the Central University, helped the containment process, the official said.

On Monday, 12 more people who were under treatment were discharged after consecutive tests turned negative. 

With this, a total of 73 out of the 166 patients who tested positive for the virus have been discharged, and the remaining 93 are also fast recovering, said the officials. The number of people under observation have also come down in the past few days. There were 11,807 people under surveillance on April 7 but, as on Monday it is 10,056.


