Spike in Ariyalur dist as 33 test positive for Covid-19
2020-05-12
Trichy: Ariyalur district saw a spike in Covid-19 positive cases as 33 people tested positive on Monday. With this, the total number of Covid-19 cases in the district has increased to 308. Ariyalur is the only district in the central region that crossed 300 positive cases, after Chennai, Tiruvallur, Cuddalore and Chengalpat in the state.The new positive cases include 28 who had returned from Koyambedu market and belonging to Nammagunam, Sendurai, Sirukalathur and Vanjinapuram villages. The remaining five people were close contacts of the Koyambedu returnees.With 260 active Covid-19 cases in the district, asymptomatic people were accommodated in four isolation centres established in schools and colleges in Andimadam, Rayampuram, Jayankondam and Ariyalur. Active Covid-19 cases displaying symptoms were admitted to Ariyalur GH, Ariyalur covid care centre and Trichy MGMGH.In Perambalur, a 32-year-old woman tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday. Her husband, who was working at Koyambedu market, tested positive a few days ago. The number of Covid-19 cases in Perambalur district is 105. The 97 active Covid-19 cases in Perambalur are undergoing treatment at MGMGH in Trichy, government hospital in Perambalur and Ariyalur.Around 50 samples were awaiting results in Perambalur district. “We are testing at least 20 expecting mothers per day,” an official with the Perambalur district administration said.Thanjavur numbers climbed to 69 on Monday with three more new positive cases. A 37-year-old truck driver from Cuddalore district, a 32-year-old Chennai returnee, a native of Kazhumangalam in Ariyalur and a 23-year-old woman of Thippirajapuram in Thanjavur tested positive. The woman is a teacher in Chennai.Trichy, which witnessed no new cases on Monday, discharged four patients from MGMGH after recovery. Nine active cases in the district are undergoing treatment. The total number of positive cases in Trichy is 64.There were no positive cases in Karur district on Monday, but six positive patients are undergoing treatment at the Karur government medical college hospital. Five positive patients from Namakkal district were discharged on Monday from the hospital.No new cases were reported in Pudukottai, Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam on Monday. 