Patna: ‘Spike in coronavirus cases due to contact tracing’
2020-04-26
PATNA: Covid-19 pandemic seems to have started showing its contagious nature in the state with the number of cases rising sharply in the last one week. From 96 cases till last Sunday, the number jumped to 242 on Saturday. Altogether 53 positive cases were recorded on Friday alone.


Also, the number of districts with Covid-19 positive cases increased from 10 on April 15 to 20 on Saturday. The first three Covid-19 cases were reported in the state on March 22 and average reporting of people affected with the virus in March was 2.2 positive cases per day.

 

However, the scenario has now started turning from bad to worse. Maximum number of Covid-19 cases has been recorded in last five days. On Monday, there were 17 cases, followed by 13 on Tuesday, 17 on Wednesday, 27 on Thursday and 53 on Friday.

Health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar said there cannot be an exact explanation for increase in number of Covid-19 positive cases. “It is because of many factors. We are detecting more cases because of our accurate contact tracing,” he added.

Another reason for the sharp rise in number of positive cases is transmission of virus from one person to many others, which the health department’s principal secretary describes as ‘super spreader’.

State Health Society has shared a list of five super spreaders, who have alone infected more than 100 people. While one Munger native has infected 29 people who came in contact with him, another Siwan man passed on the virus to 22 people. Similarly, one Nalanda native has infected 19 of his direct contact. A Patna resident has infected 18 others. Even a Rohtas native with travel history from Hindpiri in Ranchi has so far infected 14 of her close contacts.

“For us it is important to identify who are infected and then segregate them and break the chain,” Sanjay had said earlier this week.

State epidemiologist and nodal officer for Covid-19 Dr Ragini Mishra had also told TOI earlier this week that reason behind rising number of cases is more testing as well as commencement of door-to-door screening of people.

As far as geographical spread of Covid-19 positive cases is concerned, maximum number of cases has been detected from Munger, followed by Nalanda, Siwan, Patna and Buxar.

Opposition parties have also started cornering the state government over rising number of Covid-19 cases. “The speed at which the virus is spreading poses serious questions on the containment measures of the government and indicates its abject failure,” leader of opposition in state assembly Tejashwi Prasad Yadav said on Saturday.

Meanwhile, experts have claimed that situation is not alarming in Bihar. As per health department officials, 75% of cases in the state have been asymptomatic.

“It is estimated that the number of infected cases are at least 10 times the number of officially declared figures as on date and expected to rise further in coming months. The only silver lining is that we are dealing with more number of asymptomatic cases and mild symptomatic cases,” said Dr Arun Shah, an expert in studying acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) cases.

