Pune: Spike in coronavirus cases in PCB areas near Bhavani Peth
2020-05-03
PUNE: Some areas of Pune Cantonment Board, adjacent to Peth areas of the Pune Municipal Corporation, recorded a surge in Covid- 19 cases in the past 48 hours.


About 14 new cases were detected in Modikhana, a core part of the cantonment. It shares boundary with the Bhavani Peth, recording maximum coronavirus cases so far in the Pune corporation limits. The board authorities, with the help of police, sealed the entry and exit points of the Pune Municipal Corporation limits as a precautionary measure on Friday.

Two more positive cases were also found in the sealed Ghorpadi area.

Amit Kumar, the chief executive officer of the Pune Cantonment Board (PCB), told TOI, “We conducted an active testing drive in the Modikhana area over the past three days and the outcome was alarming. We found 14 positive cases in the past 48 hours. Our staffers have collected more samples and the test results are awaited.”

He said, “Unfortunately, people with symptoms like fever and cough are not coming forward and giving their health details. Our staffers found some of them during the door-to-door survey. Subsequently, we collected their samples and found them positive. We have been urging people not to conceal information. Otherwise, it would be a challenge to track positive patients.”

The board fears that more positive cases are likely to be reported from the area. “Modikhana and Bhimpura localities are highly congested and maintaining the required social distancing norms is impossible there. Since we have found positive cases, our primary focus is on tracking as many people as possible, who came in contact with the patients,” Kumar said.

“We have created 150-bed quarantine facilities at two schools. Also, testing kits have been purchased for conducting tests in the PCB limits,” said another official from the board 13 patients recover

A total of 13 Covid-19 patients were discharged from Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Cantonment General Hospital on Friday after two weeks of treatment.

“It’s a positive news for us as our doctors and staffers worked hard to provide treatment to the patients,” said Amit Kumar, the chief executive officer of the PCB.

