Madhya Pradesh: Amid coronavirus, Ramzan traditions adapt to lockdown, piety intact
2020-04-22
BHOPAL: This year’s Ramzan is expected to begin from April 23 — depending on the sighting of new moon.


This holy month usually sees huge gathering of devotees who come together to pray and share a meal as a community. With India living in the shadow of the coronavirus pandemic, the Ramzan rituals and traditions are set to change amid lockdown — but the quintessential spirit of charity, compassion and zakat will rule unhindered despite the restrictions on movement.

“It is necessary that people observe lockdown restrictions and provide charity to the poor in keeping with the spirit of Ramzan. It is our duty to ensure that our neighbours do not sleep hungry, and wherever possible to help those who need assistance in keeping with lockdown rules,” said Bhopal Qazi, Syed Mushtaq Ali Nadvi. “Charity and zakat, which is one of the five pillars of Islam, is encouraged during Ramzan,’ he added. Bhopalbased, Masajid committee, constituted by government of MP, has also issued directives for the faithful to offer prayers. The committee has underlined that congregational prayers during the holy month should be offered at home and people should maintain social distancing.

Auqaf-e-Shahi to distribute food and ration to those in need: Taking into account the spread of Covid-19 pandemic and its social and economic impact, custodian of Auqaf-e-Shahi, Saba Sultaan, in a press release announced the plans to distribute food and ration to those in need in Bhopal, Raisen and Sehore. Saba currently heads the Auqaf-e-Shahi, a royal endowment trust formed during the rule of Bhopal State.

Daughter of late Nawab Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi, Saba, expressed concern over the prevailing condition of the poor. She has also requested people of Bhopal to adhere to lockdown rules and be safe at home during the pandemic. She also requested everyone to remain in their homes during Ramzan and offer prayers, including Namaz and Tarabih, at home only. “Please don’t go out and follow lockdown that is for your own safety and security. Also, please follow the community elders’ appeals who have asked you to offer prayers at home during Ramzan,” she said.

‘Ensure proper supply of food and water’: President of All India Muslim Tehwar committee, Ausaf Khurram Shameeri, said, “There are issues of food distribution, water and power needs to be sorted by the government. Everyone can’t order supplies online and there has to be some regulation and monitoring of pricing. It makes a lot of directives irrelevant for the poor and those in need.”

