Spiti rejects Unlock 1.0
2020-06-13
Manali: While the businesses, transportation system, hotels and free public movement are coming back to life in the country, the residents of Spiti valley in Himachal Pradesh have refused to welcome government’s unlock 1.0 and decided to keep the valley cut off from rest of the state.

The residents, who are themselves guarding the entry points of Spiti, say the Centre and Himachal government should not enforce their decisions on Spiti regarding Covid-19 as they are in no mood to take the disease lightly. They have asked the government not to run bus service to the valley and decided that non-local movement including tourists and residents from other parts of Himachal will also not be allowed.

Local residents will not go outside the valley till it’s urgent and will undergo 14-day quarantine. They want government and local administration to help them in implementing this rule on government officials and politicians without discrimination.

After mahila mandals and yuvak mandals of Spiti denied entry to agriculture and tribal welfare minister Dr Ram Lal Markanda and his team to his home district for not opting to quarantine after coming from Shimla, the residents have made it clear that the minister will also have to obey the locally-imposed lockdown norms.

They said they will continue to take hard decisions to keep the valley Covid-19 free. The residents, yuvak mandals, mahila mandals, panchayat representatives, social action groups and lamas from five major monasteries on March 17 had formed a committee for preventive measures and sustainable development (CPMSD), Spiti, to take all required decisions to fight Covid-19. Spiti was the first in Himachal to impose complete lockdown in March and the lockdown is still imposed in valley by residents.

Takpa Tanzin, a member of CPMSD, said the committee has nothing to do with Congress, BJP or any political party and decisions are independently taken by the members.

“We are not supported by any political party. We are concerned for our remote valley with poor healthcare and limited resources. Over 50% of the population is elderly and children and over 40% are suffering from hepatitis. The altitude is high with low oxygen. We have to go over 250km only for ultrasound examination. Once Covid-19 enters the valley, it will wreak havoc. That is why everybody decided unanimously to keep the valley isolated for some more time. This is result of our strictness that our district is the only coronavirus-free district in Himachal,” he said.

Himachal government has decided that quarantine is not necessary for intrastate movement, but Spiti residents want the government to let people decide on it based on the geography, local infrastructure and other problems. They said government should cooperate with them in “self-government and security” as tribal areas have been given a special status in the constitution of India in order to safeguard the rights and interests of the communities. The hotels, guesthouses and other tourism establishments will also remain closed in the valley.

Sonam Targe, another member of the committee, said residents in all the villages of Spiti have sacrificed a lot in the past three months. “Our livelihood is dependent on farming and tourism. Not allowing labourers into the valley was a decision taken by CPMSD and we were cooperated by administration. The farmers here did not cultivate cash crops this year and have taken up traditional farming. We want the government to support us in our cause. We want to inform everyone in advance so that they are not harassed if not allowed to let into valley from Sumdho. Some tourists were also sent back from Sumdho,” he said.

Full report on www.toi.in


