Spl officer in K’god to contain Covid
2020-04-01
Kannur: Alkesh Sharma, principal secretary of department of industries, who has been appointed special officer to oversee the coronavirus containment activities in Kasaragod, has said that the state government is equipped to prevent the spread of Covid-19, and there is no threat of a community spread in the present condition.

“As of now, there is no fear of a community spread as we have put under quarantine all the primary and secondary contacts of the people who tested positive, and also they are responding positively, as they have understood the gravity of the situation,” he told TOI. No secondary contact has tested positive so far though the number of positive cases is high in the district, he said.

The district, which is deficient in hospital facilities, need more healthcare professionals and technicians, and efforts are on to get their services from the private sector, he said.

Since the hospitals in Mangaluru are denying entry to patients from the district, the health of other critically-ill patients also has to be taken care of and the district administration is giving importance to them as well,” he said.

The issues pertaining to the elderly people, guest labourers, as also the old-age homes and orphanages would be taken care of and it would be ensured that nobody is starving, said the special officer.

If anyone faces any issue due to the lockdown, they can get in touch with the control room but they should not violate the quarantine rules, said Sharma, urging people to remain indoors and break the chain to prevent the spread.

The health facility in Kasaragod is poor and the work of the medical college is still going on. However, now the medical college building, which has been partially complete, is being developed as a Corona Care Centre.

Nodal officers in Palakkad 

The Ottapalam sub-collector Arjun Pandian (Mob: 8921593496) was appointed as the nodal officer to coordinate the Covid-19 pandemic management in Palakkad.

The additional divisional magistrate T Vijayan (Mob: 9446336357) is appointed as the nodal officer to coordinate the district level coordination of Covid-19 prevention activities. District collector D Balamurali said that 18 other district-level officers are also given charges to coordinate various activities to fight the virus.


