SPMPT handles 63 MT despite Covid-19 slowdown
2020-04-02
Kolkata: Despite the Covid-19 scare across the country and the subsequent lockdown, the Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust (SPMPT) continued to handle essential cargo at the ports of Kolkata, Haldia and Budge Budge after taking necessary precautions. 

Till March 31, SPMPT handled nearly 63 MT of cargo. This could have been 65 million tonnes for the financial year 2019-20 had traffic not been hit since January this year due to the coronavirus scare globally. 

“All operations are going on at the ports with co-operation and support from labour unions, workers, stakeholders, agents and port employees. All precautionary measures including maintenance of social distancing, wearing of Personel Protection Equipment, sanitization are being taken. The port also appeals to everybody to carry on providing their assistance to ensure the movement of essentials,” SPMPT chairman Vinit Kumar said. 

Essentials do not necessarily mean consumer or food items but also raw materials to keep industry running in these difficult times. Between March 29 and March 31, eleven vessels arrived at the Haldia Dock Complex (HDC) and nine sailed out after completing cargo operations. 

Lighterage operations were also carried out in a few vessels at the Sandheads and Sagar taking the total cargo handled at HDC during the three days to 1,88,506 tonnes. The cargo handled included Paraxylene, Naptha, LPG, Coking Coal, Thermal Coal, Container, Steel, Limestone, Steam Coal, Butadine and Benzene. Receipt and dispatch of cargo by road and rail was also undertaken by the port with its own manpower.

“At the Kolkata Dock System (KDS), nine vessels arrived and eight sailed out after completing cargo operation during the three days. During this period, 3,181 TEUs of containers were handled and the major commodities included raw paper, raw plastic, steel, electronic items, solar panels and pharmaceuticals. During this period, 2,700 tonnes of break bulk, 16,122 tonnes of liquid cargo including high speed diesel and lube oil were handled at KDS,” an official said. 

According to him, video conferences have also been held with all stakeholders including shipping lines, agents, transporters , importers and exporters for smooth movement of cargo. Close coordination is also being maintained with customs and state authorities and police for online clearance and movement of goods. To promote rail movement, 50% discount in terminal haulage charges has also been provided. The Ministry of Shipping has advised for remission of various charges.


