SPPU issues post-lockdown plan for affiliated colleges, institutes
2020-05-11
PUNE: The Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) has released the first draft of the Covid-19 prevention protocol to be followed by 705 affiliated colleges, 234 recognized institutes, 46 on-campus departments and 71 research institutes when they reopen after the lockdown. The advisory will address further concerns in due course, said university officials.


The 30-page protocol document seeks to address every minute detail that goes into the running of academic establishments. From completing 1/3rd of the syllabus online, staggered lunch breaks and curbs on the presence of outsiders in hostel rooms, to cancelling all social gatherings and sports events until further notice, the university has created a list of safety measures to be followed in classrooms, hostels, laboratories, canteens, etc.

 

SPPU registrar Prafulla Pawar said, “This is an advisory to all institutes, not a binding document. It has been published so that whenever institutes re-open, some measures are in place to curb the spread of the virus.”

SPPU pro vice-chancellor NS Umrani said, “Senior academics Kuldip Charak and Mahesh Abale have authored the document after perusing various literature available currently.” 

The e-booklet will be sent to all affiliated colleges and other institutes under SPPU, added vice-chancellor Nitin Karmalkar. “Social distancing is key to preventing the spread of the coronavirus hence we need to avoid all large gatherings for the next academic year. Sanitization and fumigation of the entire campus would be done at least twice daily. All institutes and departments would be asked to install a sanitizer spray machine at the entrance,” he said.

Karmalkar further said that it has become imperative that all teachers be trained in online communication tools so that at least 1/3rd of the syllabus can be taught virtually. “The university will create a separate link to upload course-wise and topic-wise content. While regular counselling will now be a feature, we have also given an opportunity for interested students to complete a course on counselling online so that they can help college students resolve and handle psychological concerns post-lockdown.”

The document also includes points such as the compulsory use of hand sanitizers and face masks for the long term. Charak, a director of the Navsahyadri Group of Institutes, explained, “Subjecting staff and visitors to non-contact thermal scanner checks or temperature checks at the time of entry will also be among the measures that must be adopted by institutes for the long term.” 

