Spread of Covid-19 among those involved in supply of essentials worries residents & admin alike
2020-05-12
Meerut: In a worry for the residents of Meerut, those involved in the supply of essentials, especially vegetables, form a large chunk of patients who have tested positive in the last 11 days. The sudden surge in the Covid-19 patients has also worried the Meerut administration which is struggling to keep a pace with the spread of the highly contagious disease. In case of those involved in supply of essentials, the contact chain is much larger and wide.The first case in Meerut was reported on March 27. In the next 35 days, 106 cases were reported. However, in the last just 11 days the number of cases has jumped by 149, taking the tally to 255. So, 58.4% cases in Meerut were reported in just 11 days.The number of cases started increasing after those involved in supply chain in the district started testing positive, which health authorities believe have a major role in spreading the infection in the city. According to the statistics maintained by the health department, as many as 64 people involved in the supply chain have tested positive in Meerut so far.Dr Raj Kumar, Meerut’s chief medical officer (CMO), said, “The major reason in the spike of cases in May is that vegetable vendors and others in the supply chain have tested positive for coronavirus. When their contacts were tested, they too were found to be suffering from the disease.”Among those found Covid-19 positive are milkmen, food and vegetable vendors. According to the health department, it all started with the death of a 62-year-old fruit seller-- a Covid-19 positive patient-- of Naveen Sabzi Mandi. It is the biggest wholesale vegetable market in the city.“After the death of 62-year-old man, who belonged to Shri Ram Palace area, we conducted sampling in the sabzi mandi and the cases started coming positive thereafter. So far, as many as 64 people from the supply chain, related to essentials, have tested positive in Meerut. As these people come in contact with locals on a regular basis, the number of cases increased suddenly. We are tracking all contacts and continuously getting testing done,” said Dr Vishwas Chaudhary, Meerut district surveillance officer. 