Spurt in poaching amid lockdown, 50kg bush meat seized in Allapalli
2020-04-28
Nagpur: Several cases of poaching, illicit tree felling and sand smuggling from forest areas in the past one month indicates a spurt in such activities during the lockdown.

On Sunday, Allapalli (Gadchiroli) forest officials seized 50 kg meat of chital, nilgai and wild boar that was being dried in reserve forest compartment number 71. 

The officials also seized arms including bows and arrows, utensils, empty rice sacks, rope net, knives and other material used to kill the animals, three cell phones, and 29 bicycles of the accused in nearby nullah. Pieces of skin of chital and nilgai were also found at the spot.

With people indoors due to lockdown, poachers are having a good time. However, Allapalli deputy conservator (DyCF) CR Tambe said, “Prima facie this case has nothing to with lockdown. It seems to be a case of traditional community hunting. Many locals dry meat in this tribal district as an alternative food source during rains.”

“I don’t think non-availability of food is the reason for killing wild animals. Apart from distribution of food kits by social workers, government is supplying enough grains from PDS shops,” Tambe added. 

“Taking advantage of lockdown, private contractors are rampantly felling teak trees. In Chimur, teak worth Rs 15 lakh was felled and dumped near Jamgaon on April 12. Four other similar incidents happened in the area during the same period. Besides, smuggling of sand from forest areas is also rampant. We have urged chief minister Uddhav Thackeray to take action against those involved,” said Kawdu Lohkare, president, Environment Protection Committee, Chimur.

“A day before a leopard got caught in a steel trap laid by poachers in Khairi in Paratwada range, which is a serious issue. During last month, several incidents of poaching have been reported in newspapers. Setting up of jaw trap is a wake-up call. There are sensitive areas like Ghatladki (Amravati) and Sironcha (Gadchiroli), where department needs to focus more during lockdown,” said Kishor Rithe, president, Satpuda Foundation.

Though forest officials say the spurt in poaching has nothing to do with lockdown and the trap in Khairi was for herbivores, it is a fact that with most people indoors and streets deserted, poachers have been active. “The forest department needs to strengthen its intelligence and local community connect to know whereabouts of unknown people in forest,” said conservationist Prafulla Bhamburkar. 

“In the initial phase of lockdown we saw number of alerts going up dramatically but they tapered off. Some were about poaching but others were mostly illicit felling, sand mining and fishing. In the last 37 days, we received about 45 alerts in Central India,” said Nitin Desai, Central India director, Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI).


