Spike in Covid-19 cases among youngsters after easing of curbs
2020-06-14
BHOPAL: Youngsters making the most of the easing of lockdown and reduced restrictions are being cautioned by experts. Simply put, they are not immune to Covid-19. An analysis of the easing of lockdown indicates that infection rate in youngsters has doubled or more, whereas infection rate in the middle and elderly population, who are more at risk, is under check.

The data of the first two weeks of June indicates a spike in active Covid-19 cases in Bhopal. Under age 10 infections increased almost fourfold from 9 to 31. In the age group 11 to 20, active cases doubled to 77, in about 11 days. For the age group between 21 and 30, the cases went up from 58 to 128 active cases.

Active infection cases for people in age about 40 declined by a few points. They remain the most infected age group, but their numbers decreased from 40 to 35. Similarly, infection rate of people with co-morbidities increased, according to health department data analysis by consultants appointed by the urban development department. The report is an assessment of cases on June 4 and June 12.

“Easing of the lockdown has made life closer to normal for many youngsters. In most cases, the youngsters are asymptomatic and harder to detect and diagnose. There is a reason to be cautious for the young who may also expose the elderly at home,” said Gandhi Medical College, pulmonologist and Covid-19 team lead, Dr Parag Sharma.

According to the latest study released by ICMR on Saturday, patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), especially young children, may de-saturate quickly during intubation. Patient is followed up regularly for temperature, vitals and Oxygen saturation (SpO2).

Detailed clinical history is taken, including that of co-morbidities too. Clinical assessment parameters are respiratory rate of more than or equal to 24 and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of less than 94% on room air (range 90-94%).

As per data from the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) portal, case investigation forms for COVID 19, the details on the signs and symptoms reported are (June 11 and over 15k cases scanned), fever (27%), cough (21%), sore throat (10%), breathlessness (8%), weakness (7%), running nose (3%) and others 24%.


