Spurious liquor claims two lives, six ill amid lockdown in Uttar Pradesh
2020-04-13
KANPUR: Two persons including a health worker died and six others including a village head fell ill after consuming spurious liquor in Mawai Bhacchan village in Sajeti area of the district on Sunday. 


The state government had decided to shut liquor shops soon after the nationwide lockdown was imposed. The district administration had also sounded an alert to prevent and arrest those involved in producing spurious liquor.

The deceased was identified as Anup Sachan (32), a truck driver and Ankit Sachan (32), a health worker posted at the TB clinic of a community health centre (CHC) in Amauli block of Fatehpur district. Both were residents of Mawai Bhacchan village. 

The village head Randheer Singh and five others—Puttan, Lal Ji Vishwakarma, Vivek, Prince and Raman—had fallen ill after consuming liquor and our undergoing treatment at Lal Lajpat Rai Hospital.

Police said Anup and Ankit were declared brought dead at LLR Hospital on Sunday morning. 

During preliminary investigations, it came to fore that the truck driver Anup had managed to bring liquor bottles on Friday night and later distributed them among villagers including the aforementioned seven people. They all consumed the spurious liquor on the same night. On Saturday morning, they vomited and complained of nausea and uneasiness. It was in the afternoon, when their condition started deteriorating further that their family members took them to Ghatampur CHC. Doctors there, however, referred them to LLR hospital, where Anup and Ankit were declared brought dead.

“Police are trying to find out the place from where Anup managed to secure spurious liquor bottles during th lockdown period,” said SSP/DIG Anant Deo said. 

DM Dr Brahmdeo Ram Tiwari and SSP also visited LLR Hospital and inquired about the condition of the six persons undergoing treatment. 

“Doctors stated conditions of all six to be stable,” added Deo.

The DM, meanwhile, said, “In wake of the tragedy, I have instructed district excise department and police officials to form teams and launch a massive search operation in villages from where spurious liquor has been caught before.”

