Spurt in Covid-19 cases in rural areas sparks concern
2020-05-12
Nashik: The rural areas of Nashik district have witnessed a sudden spurt in the number of coronavirus cases in the past week, with the number of positive patients rising to 81 on Monday as against the tally of 17 on May 4, triggering concern. Officials have attributed to the over four-fold jump in the cases to violation of the lockdown rules and ignoring of the social distancing norm by people.Meanwhile, the total number of Covid-19 cases in the district has increased to 686, with Malegaon reporting the highest of 545 cases while Nashik city 39 cases.Dindori taluka reported its first Covid-positive case on May 8 and the number of cases have jumped to six — all high-risk contacts of the patient. “Yeola has witnessed the maximum number of cases in the Nashik rural areas, barring Nashik and Malegaon Municipal Corporations, as the numbers rose to 31,” said a senior official. “It has been noticed that most of the people who tested positive have contracted the infection from Malegaon. The cases in Malegaon rural, in Manmad, include the police personnel who contracted the infection while performing duty in Malegaon,” a senior official of the zilla parishad said. “There are, however, still others who have contracted the infection because they failed to follow the lockdown and social-distancing rules across the talukas,” added the official.According to the official, there were also cases of people having been infected after had returned from Mumbai and this is worrisome. The administration is talking to the villagers and asking them to cooperate by restricting the movement of the people to cities where the infection rate is high. Except Yeola, where a large number of people have tested positive for coronavirus, cases in all other areas are so far limited. “Through 25 containment zones, which sometimes cover the entire village, we are effectively monitoring the health of the people who have come in contact with patients. Every small change in their health will be monitored by the health workers, who carry out survey in and around the house of the person who has tested positive,” said the official.The citizens of Dindori taluka , which was in the orange zone at the time of classification by the district collector, are worried because of five of the contacts of the first patient testing positive for the contagion. “It is unfortunate that a few people of a couple of a villages have been infected, though accidentally. We hope that the infection remains limited to the areas. Hope coronavirus does not take the entire taluka into its grip and disrupt life and economic activities, which are normal as of now,” said Sampat Ghuge, a resident of Dindori. 