Squalls bring down temperature in Kolkata, doctors warn of fresh viral attack amid pandemic
2020-04-22
KOLKATA: Two successive squalls in less than 12 hours since Monday evening brought the mercury down by nine degrees in Kolkata, raising fears of fresh viral attacks in the Covid 19-hit city. Doctors warned that the sudden temperature plunge could activate a range of viruses, including rhino, human meta-pneumo and influenza that have symptoms similar to Covid-19. While a squall struck Kolkata around 9pm on Monday, another lashed the city around 5.25am on Tuesday with a wind speed of 56 km/hr.


The squall on Tuesday was followed by a steady drizzle in some parts of the city that remained cloudy and windy throughout the day with a maximum temperature of 26.6°C, nine notches below normal. It pulled the minimum temperature down to 20.5°C , six degrees below normal.

Even as the Met officials predicted more thunderstorms over the next two days, the unexpected chill could lead to illnesses, said doctors.

Since the temperature is likely to start rising again from Friday, acclimatizing to the fluctuation may be difficult for many people. Such temperature variations help viruses to multiply, especially when the mercury slides up, they explained. “Most common viruses like rhino, human meta-pneumo and influenza viruses die out in cold. They start multiplying when the ambient temperature and humidity rises. If the mercury shoots up suddenly, it fails to gear itself to the alteration, making us vulnerable to viral attacks,” said AMRI Hospital consultant, Debashish Saha. This early summer temperature fluctuation could not have come at a worse time, said RN Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences consultant Arindam Biswas.

“A low-pressure trough from Uttar Pradesh to Bengal triggered the nor’wester. The system has been drawing moisture from a high-pressure zone above Bay of Bengal. Since the conditions still persist, we expect another thunderstorm in next 48 hours,” said RMC director GK Das.


