Coronavirus in Goa: Senior citizens withdrawing funds to stock provisions
2020-03-15
PANAJI: A number of people, many of them senior citizens, have begun withdrawing large sums of money from their bank accounts to fall back on in case of an emergency and in order to purchase provisions. The moves are in anticipation of a statewide lockdown or a potential outbreak of Covid-19 in the state.


Reports state that the risk of coronavirus fatalities is higher among those with pre-existing ailments and senior citizens, and it is this section of the population that is beginning to dip into their savings, bankers said. India has seen two deaths due to Covid-19, one a 76-year-old man from Karnataka and the second a 68-year old woman from Delhi.

“Over the last two days, we have noticed that people are withdrawing a lot of money. An NRI customer, an old man, withdrew Rs 1 lakh from his savings account,” a employee of a public sector bank in Mapusa, said.

On an average, businessmen tend to withdraw funds while most citizens either deposit funds or withdraw just enough for a week. But over the past few days, banks in some parts of the state have seen at least 10-15 people withdrawing significant sums of money from their savings accounts, sometimes anywhere between Rs 70,000 to Rs 1 lakh.

“A staffer asked them why they are suddenly withdrawing their money and they said that they are making arrangements to purchase provisions in case the government says they cannot leave their homes like it happened in Italy,” said a cashier working at a private bank in the state capital.

Senior citizens are stocking up on groceries, medication and disinfectant products. Items such as tinned food, hand sanitisers and cleaning supplies have seen a spurt in sales, but apart from hand sanitisers, supermarkets remain well-stocked.

“People have started panic-buying since late Friday night. They are buying extra, basically groceries,” owner of Delfino’s HyMart at Porvorim, Prakash Pereira, said.

Another supermarket confirmed that footfalls have increased, but also said that stores remain well-stocked. “There is a lot of stock and there is regular supply,” the Margao-based supermarket owner said.

