Andhra Pradesh: Sri City buzzes with activity amid lockdown lull
2020-05-22
HYDERABAD: While the coronavirus pandemic has changed the day-to-day lives and stopped the economic activity in ways one could never have anticipated, Sri City or Satyavedu Reserve Infracity Private Ltd, one of the largest SEZs in the country, in Nellore — where metro coaches to matchboxes to sambar powder to breakfast cereals are made — has bounced back in the midst of an extended lockdown. 

Around 75 units have commenced work in Sri City, which is not far away from Sullurpet, which is a red zone owing to a series of Covid-19 positive cases reported in the small town. 

Out of the 148 industrial units in Sri City, located 50 km north of Chennai, popular brands like Kellogg’s, Alstom which manufactures metro coaches, Cadbury, Bluestar, Isuzu, Colgate Palmolive and others — around 100 — are ready to kick-start their operations. 

While the workforce of around 6,000 have been waiting in the wings, Sri City authorities said the units that have commenced works are strictly complying with the standard operating procedures. As the units are permitted to deploy only those staff residing outside the containment clusters, all the manufacturing industries are facing a severe shortage of workforce. 

Ravindra Sannareddy, founder MD, Sri City, said works at the industrial park will pick up pace soon. “We are optimistic that in a week’s time situation will improve and the percentage of workforce will go up significantly.” He said Sri City has emerged as one of the leading ‘Make in India’ hubs in the country. “Because of difficulties in bringing employees from green zones and the cumbersome exercise in obtaining inter-state permits for staff to commute, some units are working with minimal staff,” he said.

Construction activity is also gradually picking up at different work stations within the industrial city. Sandeep Deoghare, plant manager, Kellogg’s, said the pandemic and the nation-wide lockdown had brought the supply chain to a grinding halt. “We worked with governments to secure permissions to kick off two manufacturing units, including the one in Sri City,” he said.


