SRPF jawan from Jalna tests positive for Covid-19
2020-04-26
Aurangabad/Pune: A 27-year-old jawan from the Jalna unit of the State Reserve Police Force (SRPF), who was posted in Malegaon of Nashik district, tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday. He had travelled with the six other jawans, who had tested positive earlier and were placed in quarantine in Hingoli.

Hingoli district civil surgeon Kishorprasad Shrivas said two groups of jawans of platoon number 12 of the Hingoli SRPF had returned from Malegaon and Mumbai on April 19 and 20, respectively.

These jawans, about 107 from Malegaon and 87 from Mumbai, were placed in institutional quarantine at the SRPF camp Hingoli. The throat swab samples of the suspected cases were sent to the Government Medical College and Hospital, Aurangabad, for Covid-19 analysis.

On April 22, six jawans of the SRPF, five of whom were posted at Malegaon and one in Mumbai, were admitted to the isolation ward of the district civil hospital at Hingoli after they had tested positive for Covid-19.

Gopal Kadam, resident medical officer at district civil hospital, Hingoli, said they started contact tracing of the six confirmed cases. During this process, they realized that one jawan, a Hingoli resident, had taken a drop at the Jalna SRPF camp.

“He later travelled to Hingoli on a motorcycle. He too has now been detected with Covid-19. The 46 people, who came in contact with him at Jalna the SRPF, are being screened,” Kadam said.

The district civil surgeon said all the jawans are stable and not displaying any critical symptoms.

So far, as many as 13 SRPF personnel, posted in various parts of the state, had been detected with the Covid-19 infection. “Three personnel from Pune, six from Hingoli and three from Mumbai tested positive for Covid-19 as of Friday evening,” said Archana Tyagi, additional director-general of police, SRPF.

The SRPF jawans have been on bandobast duty along with the local police units in Pune, Mumbai, Nashik, Malegaon, Solapur, Nagpur and other areas, where positive Covid-19 cases have been reported.

“The SRPF jawans are posted at the checkpoints as well as deployed for bandobast on the streets and lanes of the red zones to strictly implement the lockdown,” Tyagi said.

She said the jawans come in contact with residents and, sometimes, with infected persons as well. “We have a team of doctors, who visit the checkpoints and the red zone areas where the SRPF jawans are posted and conduct their medical check-ups every day. If any personnel raises any health complaint, especially Covid-19 symptoms, he is sent to the hospital without delay,” Tyagi said.

The SRPF personnel have been given the necessary masks, sanitisers and face shields for personal protection.

The personnel working in the red zone areas or hot-spots will not be allowed to go back home immediately, Tyagi said. “We have good facilities at different command centres and we have also created a large isolation facility. The jawans will be sent to these facilities for 14 days before they are allowed to go home,” she said.

Tyagi said the unit heads are looking after the needs of the personnel’s family members.


