Coronavirus outbreak:  SSB alerts personnel on Nepal border
2020-01-30
PATNA: All formations of Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) guarding porous India-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan border have been asked to keep an eye on people entering the country with symptoms like fever, running nose or throat infection and keep them in isolation in view of the globally spreading coronavirus from China.


Sources said SSB headquarters in Delhi has issued a letter to all its frontiers engaged in guarding the border and manning trade routes and integrated border checkposts (ICP) to immediately segregate those who showed symptoms of coronavirus while entering India.

They said the letter was sent to frontiers headquarters at Ranikhet in Uttarakhand, Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh, Patna in Bihar, Siliguri in West Bengal and Guwahati and Tejpur in Assam.

A senior SSB officer, preferring anonymity, said personnel involved in guarding trade routes and frisking people entering Indian territory have been supplied with protective equipment, including gloves and masks, so that they don’t get infected with the virus.

“In Bihar, there are ten trade routes, including two ICPs at Raxaul and Jogbani. SSB personnel are frisking people with their protective gears at all these places. We are keeping a close watch on people with specific facial features matching those from region from where virus started spreading,” he said.

“Main movement takes place on India-Nepal border shared with Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Rest of the terrain is almost inaccessible,” he said.

“There are 215 border outposts on India-Nepal boundary shared with Bihar. Of these, 15 to 20 in Kishanganj are under the control of Silliguri frontier. Around 12 battalions under Patna frontier are deployed to guard the porous international border,” sources said.

Another SSB officer said field officers on borders have been directed to simultaneously alert respective frontier headquarters along with the district administration concerned to handle anyone who is suspected with virus or showing similar symptoms.

“Each SSB battalion consists of a medical team. However, as the force doesn’t have required infrastructure like isolation ward to deal with infected people, we would rely on district administration,” he said.

He further said the districts sharing boundary with Nepal had yet not shared any contact number with SSB to deal with any such situation.


