SSB IG acts as Good Samaritan for non-Covid patients in state
2020-05-18
PATNA: The Sashastra Seema Bal personnel of Patna frontier are nowadays helping those in need amid the nationwide lockdown. Its IG, Sanjay Kumar, is using his Twitter handle to help patients in dire need of life-saving drugs and other medical facilities.

According to Kumar, he and his men helped at least 40 critical patients amid the ongoing lockdown. Life-saving drugs were provided to a woman suffering from lung cancer at Mairwan in Siwan. Kumar said the drugs were procured from Kolkata. Kumar also said he arranged an ambulance for a critically ill ten-year-old child to rush him to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital in Delhi from Gopalganj. The boy required bone marrow transplant immediately.

With the help of a company of Patna frontier stationed in Delhi, Kumar also got delivered medicines for six months to the mother of an eight-year-old schizophrenia patient at Motinagar without charging a single penny. He also got life-saving drugs delivered to critical patients at Jamtara, Godda and Khunti in Jharkhand as it comes under the Patna frontier.

Sharing his experience, Kumar said he came to know about Siwan patient through a tweet after which he got in touch with his officers in Kolkata as the medicines required were neither available in Patna nor in Ranchi.

“I personally monitored the delivery of medicines. One of our SSB officers purchased the medicines in Kolkata and sent to Patna with the help of Railway Protection Force (RPF). At Patna, a goods train guard was handed over the medicines. RPF men at Siwan railway station received the consignment and delivered to the person concerned at Mairwan,” he said.

The IG said he came to know through Twitter about an elderly male cancer patient in need of life-saving drugs in Gaya. “We already have our battalion in Gaya. The patient’s daughter and son-in-law had tweeted the SOS. The medicine was procured in Patna and our one vehicle returning to Gaya delivered it to the patient,” he said.

About the child in Gopalganj, he said, “SSB, with the help of volunteers, arranged private ambulance and got that child transported to Delhi. My men in Delhi helped the family in getting the child admitted to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. I had also alerted SSB men at Gorakhpur and Lucknow for assisting the family on way,” he said.

Kumar said helping a daily wager maid’s eight-year-old child at Motinagar in west Delhi was the most satisfying. “I came to know about the patient through a scribe’s tweet and got his six months’ medicine delivered to the mother with help of my men in Delhi. The family is very poor and we didn’t not take money from them,” he said.

Kumar said he had to form a Twitter handle ‘India Cares’ with his batchmate Arun Bothra in Odisha in April. It has around 400 volunteers across India. “Now they are also involved in extending help to critical patients as well as others in need for supplying dry ration,” he said, adding SSB Patna frontier Twitter handle is also being used for getting information about critical patients in need of life-saving drugs.

In reply to a query, Kumar said he and other SSB officers are sharing the cost of medicines for poor patients. “Those who are capable pay. We ensure that no official work is hampered and all precautionary SOPs for Covid-19 are maintained,” he said.


