SSP office sealed after cop tests Covid +ve
2020-06-02
VARANASI: The office of senior superintendent of police (SSP) was sealed on Monday and sanitization was carried out after a constable at the office tested positive for coronavirus.

District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said as per the Covid-19 protocol issued by the state government, if any employee of any office is tested as infected it has to be shut down for 24 hours for proper sanitisation. Thus, the SSP office was sealed on Sunday evening when the laboratory test report confirmed that one of its staff is positive, he said adding, after getting the report the decision for sealing the SSP office was taken.

SSP Prabhakar Chawdhary said that on Sunday three policemen, who dwelt in barrack 8 of police lines, had been tested positive. One of them worked as runner, who deliver letters and officials documents from one office to other, in SSP office. Chawdhary said that the sanitisation works at his office was in progress and likely to be completed by Tuesday afternoon. The DM said that even after completion of sanitisation proper ventilation and other sterilisation would also be done there till Wednesday after which it will be reopened.

Following the detection of three more cops as Covid-19 positive the total number of police personnel infected so far has become 18 in the district. Initially 12 policemen of Varanasi Municipal Corporation outpost of Sigra police station had become infected. Later, more cops including the constables deployed as followers of CO Sadar became infected after coming to contact of infected persons while performing their duties.

Chawdhary said that 12 infected cops had become cured while six are still under treatment. He said that all the cops are being sensitised since the beginning of Covid-19 menace. But, he said, as the police personnel are being deployed for all kind of works including handling migrant labourers, performing duties at hospitals and even in containment zones. Despite all the odds the morale of force is high, he added.


