Staff nurse at AIIMS Rishikesh found Covid-19-positive
2020-05-04
Dehradun: A staff nurse in urology department of AIIMS Rishikesh was found Covid-19-positive on Sunday taking the toll of Covid-19 patients in Uttarakhand to 60. This is the fourth case of a healthcare professional getting infected in AIIMS Rishikesh in last one week.

Dr Madhur Uniyal from AIIMS Rishikesh informed that the institution has started collecting the data of the primary and secondary contacts of the nursing staff.

“The staff nurse, who has been found Covid-19 positive, was working in the intensive care unit (ICU) of the medicine department where a coronavirus positive patient from Nainital was admitted till last week. She was deployed in the ICU from April 15 to April 25. The nurse developed fever on April 26 but she took medicines on her own and didn’t get coronavirus test done,” said Dr Uniyal, while adding that she found was found Covid-19 positive after every staff member deployed in the ICU of the medicine department was tested for the virus.

The institution will now quarantine everyone who has come in contact with the nurse as a precautionary measure and they will be tested as well. So far, six coronavirus positive cases have come up at AIIMS Rishikesh. Among these cases, four are staff members of the institution and while one patient had died of the disease at the facility last week, another one is undergoing treatment.

Notably, AIIMS Rishikesh has been divided into two zones — Covid-19 cases/suspects are kept in the first zone and the other one is reserved for patients suffering from other ailments. However, all the four staff members who have tested positive for Covid-19 were deployed in the non-Covid-19 zone of the hospital.

Meanwhile, a CRPF man from Joshimath area of Chamoli district was admitted to the district hospital on Sunday after he showed coronavirus-like symptoms. The health department has sent his samples for testing. The jawan had recently visited New Delhi along with his troop.

The health department has also home quarantined around 27 staff members of a private hospital in Dehradun. These people had come in contact with the Covid-19 patient who was tested positive at a private facility in New Delhi but had returned to his home in city’s Chaman Vihar colony on Saturday (May 2).

Till now, the health department has tested samples of 7,578 cases across the state. Among these, 60 have been found Covid-19 positive.

AT present, the recovery rate in the Himalayan state is 65% as 39 patients have already recovered since March 15, the day when the first Covid-19 case was reported from the state.


