Staff, residents, nurses oppose GMCH as Covid-19 hospital
2020-03-30
Nagpur: The state government’s plan to convert the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) into an exclusive Covid-19 treatment centre received a major setback on Sunday when resident doctors, nurses, health workers and sanitary work force of the hospital together opposed this plan.

Three separate delegations of resident doctors, health and sanitary workers, and nurses called on GMCH dean Dr Sajal Mitra on Saturday and demanded not to convert GMCH into a Covid-19 hospital. All three organizations have their own reasons to oppose the plan.

First and foremost, the students are worried about their academics. GMCH houses more than 2,000 students of UG, PG and super speciality courses. All stakeholders are also worried about the lack of proper resources like protection equipment and masks in enough quantity to do the job properly.

“We are ready to fight against Covid-19 and mostly resident doctors are taking the responsibility of treating patients in isolation wards. But converting the entire hospital into Covid-19 centre is not at all a good idea,” reads a statement issued by Maharashtra Resident Doctors Association (MARD) in GMCH. According to MARD, poor patients being treated at GMCH will have to go to private hospitals in case GMCH is reserved only for Covid-19 patients. Students are also worried about the future of their academics. 

Nurses are also worried about patients and their own academics. “GMCH is India’s most prominent medical colleges and many courses related to nursing are conducted here. Nurses trained in GMCH are working all over India. Converting the hospital into Covid-19 centre will be a setback for us,” the statement issued by Sahayohita Mhaisagawali, president of Maharashtra State Nursing Association, reads. 

Association of Health Workers has also raised issue of poor patients. “Patients coming from across Central India get free treatment at GMCH. Trauma care centre, super speciality hospital and neonatal care unit will suffer in case the premises are sealed for Covid-19 treatment,” said Trisharan Sahare, president of the Health Workers Association attached to INTUC. They have also claimed that GMCH is centrally located in Nagpur and it may spread infection in city if many patients of Covid-19 are accommodated here.

GMCH dean Dr Sajal Mitra said that the state government will take a final decision on setting up the Covid-19 centre only after consultation with medical education department. 

Meanwhile, the Directorate of Medical Education and Research (DMER), on Saturday, issued a resolution that government can now accommodate registered private practitioners to treat Covid-19 patients. Deans of government medical colleges have been given powers to avail services of private practitioners in the district if required in an emergency. A formal permission of DMER will be necessary for this.

GMCH NAGPUR

GMCH is the biggest medical college campus in Asia

Total area of campus was 190 acre when it was built in 1947

Present capacity of hospital is 1,750 patients

Hospital treats patients from Maharashtra as well as neighbouring states 

Hospital has inflow of a more than 3,000 patients daily at its OPD

With UG, PG and super speciality courses, hospital has more than 2,000 students 

All academic activities will suffer if hospital gets converted into Covid-19 centre


