Coronavirus in Kochi: Staff shortage hits waste collection
2020-03-27
KOCHI: At a time when communicable diseases like Covid-19 are spreading in the city, waste collection in Kochi corporation limits has been disrupted. The difficulties in travelling forced many workers engaged in waste collection to stay indoors, thereby affecting door-to-door collection of garbage in the city.


According to the officials with the corporation, they have given instructions to their workers to turn up and ensure smooth collection of garbage. Most of the workers come from distant places such as Aroor, Kuthiyathodu and Vaikom. “We have made arrangements for picking the workers living within corporation limits. We can’t conduct trips to distance places for picking the labourers as we will have to spend an entire day for the purpose,” said Anu R, secretary, corporation. “Residents also will have to adjust with the situation for the time being,” she said.

Though the residents call up the councillors in each area, they also are unable to do anything to solve the problem. “In our area, collection of waste has been affected for the past two-three days. Contingency workers and other workers who are engaged in waste collection don’t turn up,” said Vijayakumar, councillor from Devankulangara division. Councillors are exploring options to bring the labourers from distance places so that the waste collection can be removed. “In our division, plastic waste is being collected every Wednesday. But, today few workers reached and so, there were problems in collecting the waste. I called up many of the workers and promised them help in their transport. Some of them have agreed to come from Friday after we reminded them of the gravity of the situation,” he said. “Some of them are not coming as they are afraid of police checking while another group doesn’t have motorcycles. With all public transport facilities having come to a stop, many of them are left with no option to arrive in Kochi,” said Baiju Thottali councillor of Vytilla-Janata division.

Councillor Shyamala S Prabhu, who represents Cherlai division of the corporation, also raised similar concerns. “Moreover, the corporation authorities have made some changes in the deployment of workers for the purpose. Though the authorities have decided to deploy workers selected through employment exchange also, they are yet to complete the formalities. This adds to the crisis,” Shyamala said. Officials with health department in the district raised concerns regarding the chances of communicable diseases spreading in the city. “We are already in the middle of a crisis following Covid-19 spread. If waste is not collected and treated, it will lead to other communicable diseases also spreading in the city,” an official with health department said.

Corporation authorities are still unable to provide adequate safety gears to the workers engaged in waste collection. “They haven’t given us masks and other safety equipment. Indiscriminate disposal of used masks also poses health risk for us,” a worker engaged in waste collection said. 

