Stale food, filthy loos: Paid hotel quarantine in Bengaluru turns hellish for returnees
2020-05-16
BENGALURU: Insects in food, bed bugs, dirty toilets and no TV signal or WiFi — these are among the horrid conditions many returnees claim they’re being forced to endure in two and three-star hotels, despite having coughed up exorbitant amounts for institutional quarantine. 


Pregnant women, children, the aged and the ailing, who are allowed home quarantine as per a government order on Thursday, are yet to be sent back. 

IT professional Swathy (name changed), who’s six months pregnant and is lodged in a Koramangala hotel with her husband, was shocked on finding a cockroach in her lunch on Friday. The couple is shelling out Rs 2,450 per day and is not allowed to leave the room. Complaining of stale food being served to them, the 30-year-old said: “I got sick at the sight. My husband and I told hotel authorities and BBMP health officials but no one is bothered.” They arrived in Bengaluru from Kerala on Tuesday night after a 10-hour ordeal.

As per the revised government order, pregnant women are exempted from institutional quarantine and can be isolated at home if asymptomatic. But the change in rules is yet to be implemented as some like Swathy are left at the mercy of a BBMP doctor, who hadn’t arrived at the hotel after 48 hours of being alerted about her gestational situation. 

Meanwhile, a tweet from state authorities slamming people opposing institutional quarantine has irked netizens. The tweet from the official handle of Karnataka health department said: “Yes, one needs to spend if they choose hotel. To treat a Covid-19 patient Govt is spending in lakhs (sic).” 

Railway and BBMP authorities allegedly told train passengers that hotel quarantine was only for two days and asymptomatic persons could leave for their homes on the third day. Some protesting passengers at KSR City railway station on Thursday were packed off in a bus to a paid hotel. 

“They told us we would be quarantined only for two days and made us leave the platform. Only when I was brought to a hotel near Kanteerava Stadium and the receptionist told me I must pay for 14 days, did I realise we have been cheated,” said Manoj Singh, an executive with Nippon India mutual fund, who took the train from Delhi. Singh said he forced to spend the night in a non-AC room despite having paid Rs 1,900 in advance.

Many people who arrived by train and are lodged in different facilities said paid hotel quarantine was a revelation to them as prior information wasn’t provided at the time of booking or boarding. 

Some staying in two and three-star hotels have complained of dirty toilets and no TV/internet access despite paying the full amount. “The toilets are filthy, delivery of meals is erratic and there is no TV and WiFi, but I was forced to paid Rs 1,400 per day. No official has come to check these conditions,” said Krishna (name changed), a staffer with Wells Fargo, Kadubeesanahalli, who is quarantined at a Majestic hotel after he arrived from Hyderabad on Thursday.

BMTC on Thursday operated 30 buses from KSR City railway station to institutional quarantine facilities like hotels and community centres. However, many passengers, including children, were charged Rs 50 per head to facilities within the city and Rs 100 for those outside. Passengers who picked hotels in Majestic, less than 200m away from the railway station, were forced to pay Rs 50 per ticket. 

BMTC officials said each bus will carry only 30 passengers to ensure social distancing and will be empty on the return trip. “Many buses are coming from far-off depots and the earnings per bus amount to only Rs 1,250. We are operating them on a contract basis,” said a BMTC official.

