Startups step up to help seniors amid lockdown
2020-05-20
CHENNAI: K Manickam is stuck in Kuwait, while his aged parents are in Chennai, as the Covid lockdown has shut Indian air space and consequently arrested their movement. With many such seniors being stranded by themselves and hence vulnerable, geriatric care is proving to be a big business opportunity for a clutch of startups. 


“We are healthy on most parameters. While there was no lockdown, we could go out for our walk and shop what we wanted. Everything has come to a standstill as we have to depend on someone else for services,” said 84-year-old S Krishnamurthy, whose apartment complex has imposed restrictions, severely cramping their activities. From offering services like medical assistance, personal care givers, grocery shopping and home-cooked meals for senior citizens, now companies are arranging even funeral and last rites as families are stuck abroad.

Hyderabad-based service provider Anvayaa has seen a 75% increase in demand and traffic for their services. Its founder and CEO Prashanth Reddy said, “It is unfortunate that we not only arranged the funeral of eight customers, but our staff conducted three funerals by themselves since the families were stuck abroad. All of them were natural non-Covid deaths.” 

 


Launched in January, Chennai-based startup Alserv has seen about 250 elderly couples, who live by themselves, downloading the app and using the services. The company’s co-founder Jagadish Ramamoorthy said, “Grocery and food delivery are the top requests. With this app, even remotely located children can monitor their needs.”

Similar to the growing fear of getting infected by the novel coronavirus stopping senior citizens’ movement outside their homes, many have shared that the absence of house maids has been a worry. E-tail platforms are seeing enquiries from sanitisers to vacuum cleaners. “Majority orders are placed for automatic vacuum cleaners, which could cost around Rs 30,000,” said Seniority’s co-founder Ayush Agrawal.


