Start-ups come up with innovative solutions to meet Covid challenge
2020-04-07
Hyderabad: With the novel coronavirus cases rising, focus is on providing medical care and making it affordable to Covid-19 patients. Some individuals have come up with innovative solutions and brought them to the notice of IT minister KT Rama Rao who has asked officials to look how best they can be utilised. Here are some.

1. Krishna Ganji and Tarini Puglia, who run Nexbyte Innovations Pvt Ltd, said since the need would be more for ventilators, they have come up with a low-cost ventilator. “Not only is it affordable, but also easy to operate,” Krishna said on the low-cost ventilator they have developed. It costs from Rs 4,000 to Rs 6,000, while those available in the market cost Rs 40,000. Krishna completed his engineering last year and his start-up had decided to speed up the process following escalation in Covid-19 cases. The low-cost ventilator has a solution to operate the manual Ambu bag in order to pump oxygen into the patient’s body with two variable parameters. “Our solutions give flexibility to control the volume of air pumped and number of breaths per second,” he said. While it runs on power, it also has a two to three-hour battery backup.

2. Bhairav Shankar of Avantari Technologies Pvt Ltd has come up with a 3D printed ventilator. “While medical care and equipment is available is urban areas, the scene is different in rural areas. That is where the need arises to come up with ventilators that can be used easily and serve the need,” Shankar said. His five-member team came together and designed the 3D printed ventilator. “It is so easy that anyone can operate it,” he said. The team has built a working prototype which is capable of delivering a rate of 0-30 BPM and a tidal volume to 200-800 ml. The team is also working on a 3D printed PEEP value with minimum assembly. It has an alarm in case of a failure. It works on a 12V DC supply, which means it can be powered by a car battery in a worst scenario, Shankar said. “Visualising a situation where there are not enough hospital beds and people will have to be treated at home, the 3D printed ventilator will serve the purpose,” Shankar said.

3. Mohammed Abdul Ahad of Daavagroup, an engineering graduate, has designed 3D printed face shields and eye covering glasses for medical personnel and relief works. His start-up along with other engineering graduates — Mohammed Abdul Shakoor, Chiluka Karan and Talha Adial — came up with the idea when they were still in college last year. “The goggles will need to measure up to the standards for medical purposes but the 3D printed face shields that we have designed will be a protective equipment,” Abdul (21) said. While this is what they have to offer during a critical situation arising out of Covid-19, he said they were equipped to render their services for undertaking maintenance of related equipment. “The full face shield is a simple forehead clamp shield which acts as an additional barrier, to be worn upon the ordinary mask. This is especially meant for those who work in affected environment,” Abdul said. “At a time when Covid-19 is spreading fast and there is a shortage of equipment for healthcare and social relief workers, we explored some ideas to contribute in our own way. We could finally prototype a few designs,” they said. 


