Startups battling lockdown hit by RoC penalty
2020-03-29
KOCHI: Several startups and newly-registered private companies registered with the Ernakulam RoC (Registrar of Companies), battling fund-flow due to lockdown, have been dealt a blow because of penalties imposed on them for delay in declaration of commencement of business.

As per the Section 10A of Companies Amendment Act 2019, all companies registering after November 2, 2018 have to file INC-20A (declaration of commencement of business) form with proof of bringing the paid up capital subscribed by shareholders within 180 days from the date of incorporation.

The ministry of corporate affairs (MCA) portal used to accept the submitted e-forms after making them pay additional fee, proportionate to the company’s share capital, for delay but after December 2019, the companies started receiving show cause notices.

“Even after INC 20A e-form was accepted in the MCA portal after payment of the delay fee, we have been charged a hefty penalty, bigger than their share capital for an offence that is mainly technical in nature. I think around 400 companies have been affected,” said Sebin Joseph, a chartered accountant. The companies which failed to submit the form have been fined Rs 50,000 and Rs 1,000 for each additional day of delay.

All these companies are in a budding stage and facing cash-flow issues. “None of us had such a guidance and it’s only Ernakulam RoC which is doing it. Since we delayed for three days we have been asked to pay Rs 53,000,” Joshy C George of Jungle Cart, a startup which is developing a platform to market tribal produce.

“Several of my clients are facing the issue. Many companies are yet to start operations. Even companies which have not started operations may have to wind up because of this as some have been slapped a penalty of up to Rs 2.5 lakh. Since most of them are facing a shortage of funds and can’t avail loans, promoters are in deep trouble,” said Prince Mathew, a company secretary.

Three companies have petitioned the MCA to take the necessary steps since it has the potential to push them into debt.


