State police games in Nashik temporarily stayed amid coronavirus scare
2020-03-08
Nashik: The prevailing coronavirus scare has put a temporary stay on the 32nd Maharashtra State Police Games, which were earlier scheduled to be held at the Maharashtra Police Academy (MPA) in Nashik between March 19 and 25.

Though the state has not had any confirmed coronavirus case yet, the Maharashtra government has issued guidelines. The same guidelines discourage large public gatherings. Against this backdrop, a decision to temporarily stay the state police games was taken at the state police headquarters level.

Police commissioner Vishwas Nangare-Patil confirmed the news. The new date is yet to be finalised. Senior police officers said that all the units of the state police will be informed of the decision.

After 2014, the state police games were to be held in Nashik this year. Senior police officers from across the state were to attend it.

Meanwhile, the Nashik police too have been forced to scale down the side attractions of the Nirbhaya Marathon scheduled on Sunday. The 1,500 school students, who were to cheer the runners, have now been asked not to participate. The talk show on women’s safety, which was to be attended by 6,000 people, has also been cancelled. Those suffering from cold, cough or fever have been appealed to not participate in the event.

In place of the school students, ‘dhol pathaks’ — teams of drummers — would cheer on the marathoners. Nangare-Patil said they would be sending bulk messages to people suffering from cold, cough and fever to not participate in the event.

Even the roles of Rinku Rajguru (of Marathi movie Sairat), Janhavi Kapoor (actress in the Hindi version) and other celebrities have been limited to flagging off the event.

Additional civil surgeon Nikhil Saindane said: “There has been no positive case in Maharashtra so far. Hence, there is nothing to worry about. Nonetheless, it is necessary to take precautionary measures as per the recent instructions issued by the state health secretary. Those who have cold, cough and fever should not attend the event. On their part, the organisers have taken all the measures to ensure that there is no spread of coronavirus.”

All along the route, a team of 110 doctors would be available to provide medical treatment if necessary. A large number of washbasins have also been arranged for along the route and near the venue. Two hundred beds too have been reserved in hospitals all along the marathon route.


