State allows entry of non-Covid patients from Kerala via Talapady border
2020-04-08
Mangaluru: The Karnataka government has decided to allow ambulances carrying victims of road accidents and persons in need of emergency healthcare facility to enter the state through Talapady from Kerala, said Sindhu B Rupesh, deputy commissioner, Dakshina Kannada. However, patients suspected of Covid-19 will not be allowed to enter the state.

In an official communique, the deputy commissioner stressed that patients entering Karnataka border must produce documents from local government hospitals that he/she has no Covid-19. This apart, an official document stating that the same healthcare facility is not available in Kerala must also be produced, the communique said.

The communique has been issued after Karnataka agreed to allow ambulances carrying non-Covid-19 patients through Talapady border in Kerala’s Kasaragod district for treatment at hospitals in Mangaluru during lockdown. Karnataka had barred all vehicles from Kerala even as Kerala government had moved Supreme Court to lift the order. 

The communique further states that ambulances can enter through the border only after it is completely sanitized. The patient can be accompanied by an assistant, driver and a paramedic. Once the ambulance reaches Talapady, doctors from Karnataka will carry out a thorough check of patient and documents. It is allowed to enter only after that.

Man loses 10k to OTP fraud

Mangaluru: A man lost Rs 10,000 to an online fraudster after sharing his OTP in Arala village in Bantwal rural police station limits on Tuesday.

According to police, a fraudster, who made a call to the victim, made him believe that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had deposited money in his account.

Once he receives OTP message on his phone, he needs to share it with fraudster, he was told. The victim did as instructed by the fraudster and Rs 10,000 was withdrawn from his account. A similar call was received by another person but he didn’t share OTP, said police.

A case has been registered at Bantwal rural police station.


