Kerala readies three-stage plan for Covid-19-only treatment centres
2020-04-04
KOCHI: Ramping up its response to the coronavirus pandemic, the state health department has devised an extensive plan for conversion of hospitals—both government and private—into centres to treat Covid-19 patients.

This will be done in three phases, depending on the spread of the infection. Though private medical colleges and hospitals have been asked to ensure that they have space ready to treat Covid-19 patients, they will be roped in only in case of a community spread.

“As the epidemic is progressing, there is an urgent need to be fully prepared to provide the best healthcare to patients,” says government’s reference guide for converting hospitals into dedicated Covid hospitals. The state government has maintained that there is no evidence of clusters forming in the state, yet.

“Everything is being ramped up and we are trying to ensure that systems are in place. But, it is important for people to ensure that they don’t break the lockdown law and invite crisis. Virus doesn’t know religion or class, the only thing it knows is distance. Therefore, social distancing and personal hygiene are crucial,” said Dr Amar Fettle, nodal officer (public emergency) and currently in charge of anti-Covid-19 efforts in the state.

There are 1,286 centres under the health services department and 10 government medical colleges. The private sector has 1,307 hospitals and 19 medical colleges.

According to the plan, that has been shared with all healthcare facilitators, hospitals have been divided into Covid-care centres, Covid first-line treatment centres and Covid hospitals. While the first two will comprise government hospitals and government medical colleges, Covid hospitals will include private hospitals and private medical colleges.

“All private medical colleges are trusts and it is our responsibility and duty to support the government during such a crisis. We have informed the government that our facilities and staff are available for treatment of Covid-19 patients,” said Dr Fazal Ghafoor, former president of the Kerala private medical college management association.

However, the health department plans to use private facilities only in case of a symptomatic outbreak among contacts or when there is evidence of community spread and bed occupancy in the government hospitals reaches 50%. They have been asked to list out the number of ICU beds and amenities, such as oxygen, infusion pump, ventilators and monitors, they can spare to treat Covid -19 patients.

“In all our hospitals, a separate space is being created to admit Covid-19 patients. We will ensure that non-Covid patients don’t come into contact with Covid patients. The staff is also being trained to handle Covid-19 patients,” said Kerala private hospital association president Dr P K Mohamed Rasheed.

Kannur: The virology laboratory at Central University of Kerala (CUK) in Kasaragod has become operational, and has started testing samples on an experimental basis. Another lab at Kannur Government Medical College, Pariyaram would start functioning from April 8. 

The laboratory at Malabar Cancer Centre (MCC) in Thalasseri has already begun operations.

The laboratory at CUK tested 10 samples but in the coming days it will be scaled up further, said Rajendra Pilankatta, head of the biochemistry department and dean of school of medicine and public health, department of biochemistry and molecular biology. TNN

As of now, the facility has two machines, of which one has become operational but in the coming days the second machine would also be used. Apart from Pilankatta, two more teachers, R Aswati Nair and VB Sameer Kumar, are also part of the team, which also comprise five research scholars and one lab assistant.

“We would be able to run two machines, as they are all trained in testing the virus, but we are expecting two more machines in the next few days and once those are here, more people would be needed,” he said.


