Delhi: Status of Covid-19 beds and ventilators on fingertips, says CM Arvind Kejriwal
2020-06-03
NEW DELHI: A new mobile phone app called “Delhi Corona” was launched by chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Tuesday to inform people about the availability of beds in various state-run and private hospitals in the capital.


Addressing a digital press conference, Kejriwal said the app would have the latest information on the number of vacant Covid-19 reserved beds, ICU beds and ventilators in each hospital.

“Due to the information gap, people don’t know which hospital to approach to get a bed for a patient. To plug that gap, we have launched this mobile application that will provide information on which hospital, government or private, has how many vacant beds,” the CM said.

Kejriwal said that despite a surge in novel coronavirus cases, there was no need to panic. He added that adequate arrangements of beds, oxygen, ventilators and other health facilities had been made in the city. The death rate in other countries was high because of lack of beds, ventilators, ICU and health infrastructure.

If a hospital refuses to give admission despite having a vacant bed, the patient can call on 1031 for help. “A special secretary-level officer will talk to the hospital authorities and ensure that a bed is provided,” Kejriwal said.

As of Tuesday, there were 6,731 beds earmarked for Covid-19 patients in various government and private health facilities. Of these, 2,819 were occupied and 3,912 vacant. Similarly, of the 302 ventilators, 92 were occupied by Covid-19 positive patients and 210 were vacant.

The CM said information could also be accessed on 
delhifightscorona.in/beds, WhatsApp number 8800007722 and the helpline 1031. “The information will be updated twice a day at 10am and 6pm,” he added.

“However, if a doctor suggests that the patient doesn’t require hospitalisation and can be home isolated, the family shouldn’t insist on a bed. Of the 20,000 Covid-19 positive cases, only 2,800 required hospitalisation. About 7,000 are being treated at home,” Kejriwal said.

Government teams talk to those isolated at home 2-3 times a day, the CM said, adding, “While you are under home isolation, please do not panic. A team will be in regular touch with you and your family. If your condition worsens, you will be immediately transferred to a hospital and a bed will be arranged for you.”

