West Bengal panel checks private hosps’ coronavirus preparedness
2020-03-18
KOLKATA: A team from the West Bengal Clinical Establishment Regulatory Commission (WBCERC) on Tuesday visited seven private hospitals along EM Bypass to inspect their preparedness in the wake of the coronavirus crisis.

“All hospitals, including the private ones, must keep their facilities ready to receive and treat Covid-19 patients or the suspected cases, if the need arises. Our motive of visiting these hospitals is to see if they are prepared for this,” said Justice (retired) Ashim Kumar Banerjee, the chairperson of WBCERC.


 

So far, the government hospitals — mostly Beliaghata ID Hospital — have been handling the suspected cases that has crossed 70. A few cases had earlier been referred from private hospitals in the city. Few days ago, chief minister Mamata Banerjee had asked the private hospitals to keep isolation wards ready and not to refuse admission to any Covid-19 suspect.

Accompanied by members of the health panel, including doctors Makhanlal Saha and Maitreyi Banerjee, the chairperson went to seven hospitals to see they had kept the isolation wards ready and if facilities like hand sanitizers and masks were available, especially for frontline health workers. They also enquired if hospitals were playing their part in disseminating the correct information for awareness on the outbreak. 

“We found facilities at four hospitals satisfactory. But the rest have been suggested to revamp its preparedness immediately. We will revisit these three hospitals towards the end of this week to see if they have implemented our suggestions,” said Banerjee. The health panel will be visiting more hospitals on Wednesday.

“We have a five-bed screening ward for Covid-19 suspected patients. The WBCERC delegation inspected it on Tuesday,” said a source at Rabindranath Tagore International Institute of Cardiac Sciences. While AMRI has two isolation beds in Mukundapur, its units in Dhakuria and Salt Lake have kept three and four isolation beds ready, respectively. “We have 10 isolation beds ready for Covid-19 suspected patients in addition to the isolation area in the emergency wing for screening of such patients,” said a source at Fortis Hospital.

Peerless Hospital, Medica Superpecialty Hospital and Ruby General Hospital were the other hospitals the team inspected on Tuesday.

