Bihar targets 50,000 beds to tackle Covid-19
2020-06-14
PATNA: With the continuing surge in the number of Covid-19 cases, the state health department has targeted to arrange for 50,000 beds in the coming weeks in its three tier facilities for admission of coronavirus positive people. So far, the department has identified space for over 40,000 beds.


The three-tier health facilities to tackle Covid-19 cases comprise District Covid Care Centres, Dedicated Covid Health Centres and Dedicated Covid-19 Hospitals. State health secretary Lokesh Kumar Singh said they have identified the space for around 33,000 beds in the district category and 5500 in the DCHC category.



In the previous month, DDC and DCHC together had 7,381 beds.

“Apart from DDC and DCHC, we have three dedicated Covid hospitals, Nalanda Medical College and Hospital, Anugraha Narayan Medical College and Hospital and Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College and Hospital with around 19,000 beds altogether. Those patients who need special medical care are kept in these hospitals, while others are admitted in DCCCs or DCHCs,” said Lokesh.

He added, “Right now we have 2,700 active patients and this number is quite less than the number of beds we have in the three facilities. We are not facing any bed shortage and are fully prepared to tackle Covid-19.”

A senior health department official said the district centres have been converted out of hotels, guest houses and newly constructed government buildings that are not in use. Asymptomatic people, who do not need medical aid, will be kept here and doctors and paramedics will visit the premises to take stock of their health. However, these facilities will not have medical equipment.

Those with mild symptoms who do not require critical care will be admitted in the DCHCs. Beds have been earmarked in the sub-divisional and district hospitals and newly constructed buildings in the hospital campus which were built for academic purposes. These will have pulse oximeters, oxygen pipeline and doctors and paramedics will be available 24X7.

Critical patients will be admitted in either of the three dedicated hospitals, which have ventilator facilities. “As of now, bed occupancy is much less and there are around 70 patients in these three hospitals. This number keeps changing frequently. We have even planned to reserve 50% of beds in all the government as well as private medical colleges and hospitals in Bihar,” said an official. He further said additional 50 ventilators have been procured which are being installed in these medical colleges and hospitals, in addition to the 378 ventilators which they already have. 

