Coronavirus scare: Uttar Pradesh blood bank faces stock crisis
2020-04-03
LUCKNOW: Stock in the state blood bank in the department of transfusion medicine of the King George’s Medical University (KGMU) is fast depleting with the voluntary blood donation dropping to zero in the past 10 days.


Only about 10 units of blood group AB, 50 units of group O and around 100 units each of group A and group B were left in the stock on Thursday afternoon. There is also an acute crisis of blood components like plasma and platelets with only 50 and 30 units left respectively. The bank used to distribute over 250 units of blood and its components daily to patients of KGMU and other hospitals of the city. In nearly 75% of the cases blood units were given only after receiving equal units in donation. However, in 25% cases, including in thalassemia, HIV and leukemia and in emergency, blood units were given without seeking the donation in exchange.

For these 25% cases, the bank has to maintain a buffer stock of 250 units donated voluntarily by people. This donation has now dropped to zero since March 21 when the UP government imposed a partial lockdown in the city.

KGMU blood bank is among the most advanced in the state with facility of nucleic acid testing that detects viruses like HIV and hepatitis B at an early stage, making the blood units safe. As a result, it is the most preferred destination for thalassemia, HIV and leukemia cases.

On an average besides emergency cases, over 60 cases of thalassemia, HIV and leukemia are reported daily and the bank uses its buffer stock to help them. This category of patients will now be the worst hit if the crisis continues for three-four days, said head of the transfusion medicine Prof Tulika Chandra.

“Around 100 thalassemia cases are registered with the KGMU. They need transfusion every third week. We need to act fast to increase the buffer stock for them. As of now, we have asked them to come with donors. We are giving blood units without exchange only to those who need them urgently and do not have anybody who can donate for them,” she added.

Five-year-old Divya, who is undergoing treatment for thalassemia for a year, needs transfusion regularly. “Earlier, we used to get blood without exchange, but on Wednesday the bank told us to try and bring a donor. I contacted an NGO that helped me in locating a a genuine donor,” said Shivakant Tiwari, the girl’s father.

Balraj Dhillon, who runs a group of voluntary blood donors, said that they receive about 15-20 requests of donors daily. “Earlier, we used to cater to all, but now some donors are facing problems due to lockdown,” he added.

