West Bengal plans drive to dispel rumours about chickens spreading coronavirus
2020-03-01
KOLKATA/ARAMBAGH: Novel coronavirus cannot spread through consumption of chicken and eggs, said doctors, microbiologists and experts in veterinary sciences on Saturday, attempting to clear the air on the possibility of nCoV infecting poultry and then spreading to humans consuming it. Pradip Majumdar, the agricultural advisor to the chief minister, said the state government will launch an awareness drive o from Monday to assure consumers that there is no link between the virus and chicken.


The West Bengal Poultry Federation (WBPF), which is reeling under the impact of rumours about nCoV in poultry products, involved experts on Saturday to counter the fake social media messages on contamination that had spread like wildfire, triggering a 50% slump in chicken and egg consumption and causing losses amounting to Rs 300 crore to the industry over the fortnight. In Kolkata, price of dressed chicken has come down by 20% following the crisis triggered by the rumours. 


 
Pointing out that the virus host was mammals, not birds, the experts ruled out the possibility of birds being infected. The nCoV is believed to have spread from bats in an animal market in Wuhan. Thereafter, the contagion had spread among humans, doctors said. 

“There are 60 variants of coronavirus. Of them, three — MERS-CoV, SARS CoV and nCoV — lead to fatalities. All three have their origin in bats. Though it is now getting transmitted from humans to humans, there is no possibility of it infecting poultry and then spreading to humans through consumption of chicken or eggs,” said RG Kar Medical College professor Jyotirmoy Pal.

Barun Roy, a professor in the department of animal nutrition at the West Bengal University of Animal & Fishery Science, felt that the rumour has not only affected the poultry industry, but had an impact on the common man as well since chicken and eggs are a source of good and affordable protein essential to develop immunity to fight against virus.

The crisis in the industry has the potential to affect the lives of 15 lakh workers who are directly or indirectly associated with the poultry industry in the state. “The situation is grave. We need to stamp out the rumour,” said WBPF general secretary Madan Mohon Maity.

Poultry farm owners in the districts are reeling under severe losses since the beginning of February. In districts like Bankura and Hooghly, price of whole chicken has plunged to Rs 65 a kg to spur demand. But it hasn’t helped yet. 

Even a major hatchery like Arambagh Hatcheries is witnessing a slide in business. Its city manager Gopal Ray said, “Our farm in Arambagh was closed for a few days in November after hens showed signs of a viral disease. We found they were shivering too much. We closed the farm for a few days and followed all necessary procedures, like removing the ailing birds, before reopening the farm the same month. Since then, chicken was regularly supplied from the Arambagh farm. But in February, when we had healthy livestock, we noticed that demand was declining. It is only recently that we realised that this slump has been sparked by rumours on social media that chicken in the state has been affected by the coronavirus.”

