Bihar records 8th Covid death and 106 fresh cases
2020-05-18
PATNA: Bihar on Sunday reported its eighth death due to Covid-19 and 106 fresh cases, including the highest 57 in Patna district in a single day. The new cases took the tally of Covid positive cases in state to 1284. Altogether 475 people have recovered from the virus infection so far while the number of active cases stood at 801.

A 54-year-old diabetic man died of cardiopulmonary arrest on May 15 while undergoing treatment at the Gogri referral hospital in Khagaria district. He, along with his wife and grandson, had come from Mumbai by a Shramik special train on May 11. The medical team collected his samples for Covid- 19 testing after his death and the report came positive on late Saturday evening, said principal secretary (health department) Sanjay Kumar. His wife has also tested positive, he added.

“The family had reached Khagaria via Saharsa. They were kept at Sharda Gayatri College in Maheshkhunt block. He complained of breathlessness around 3pm on May 14 after which he was admitted to Gogri hospital. After treatment, the man showed signs of recovery. On May 15 around 4.30am, he passed away,” Sanjay said and confirmed it as 8th Covid death in state.

With 57 fresh cases, including 18 women patients, Patna district has so far registered 164 coronavirus cases, out of which 44 recovered and two died. With the 21 fresh cases (including six women constables) reported from BMP-14 Khajpura, altogether 50 personnel of BMP have been infected. Barh reported 17 such cases, closely followed by 12 in Athmalgola, two each in RPS Mor area and Belchhi and one each in Agamkuan, Patel Nagar and Fatuha in Patna district.

There were substantial increase in the number of fresh Covid cases in Rohtas an Madhubani.

Dr Ragini Mishra, state nodal officer for Covid-19, told this newspaper that all the positive cases were migrants who had returned to Bihar by special trains while the constables at BMP-14 were infected from a colleague who was tested positive on May 7. “So far, 840 samples randomly of migrants have been collected randomly from the quarantine centres across the state. Of which 140 tested positive. The medical teams collect the samples randomly from quarantine centres every day and send them to testing centres,” she said.

