Rajasthan turns into learning ground for treatment of coronavirus
2020-03-21
JAIPUR: Doctors of Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital are receiving phone calls from other states and countries including the US after it cured three coronavirus patients using combination drugs. The World Health Organisation (WHO) has already declared Covid-19 as a pandemic.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Since there is no such standard protocol available for treatment of Covid-19, the treatment provided to these patients was on ‘trial’ basis who eventually recovered from the disease. 

 
 
“Many states, Centre and many from the US called us and wanted to know more about the treatment we provided to the patients for their complete recovery. Most of them are doctors who contacted us,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (ACS), health department. 

He said the job was quite challenging for the doctors as two patients were senior citizens and otherwise vulnerable due to their medical conditions, aged 69 and 85, respectively. “With timely detection and due care under appropriate supervision and drug regime, any medical challenge can be met, it has now been proved,” said Singh. 


Rajasthan doctors cure coronavirus patient with HIV drugsSawai Man Singh (SMS) Hospital doctors here have successfully treated an Italian coronavirus (Covid-19) patient using a combination of HIV, swine flu and malaria drugs. The patient, who has now tested negative for Covid-19, had come to India along with her husband as part of a 23-member Italian group that had travelled major tourist destinations in Rajasthan. 
The SMS Medical College administration officials too are receiving such calls demanding protocol of treatment of Covid-19. 

Since, there was no clearly beneficial targeted treatment for Covid-19 available before the first case was reported in the state on March 3, the SMS doctors held a meeting on the same day to decide the protocol of the treatment. The meeting was headed by SMS Medical College principal and controller, Dr Sudhir Bhandari and the treating doctor Prakash Keswani and other doctors of SMS Medical College. 

They decided to provide the patient three anti-viral drugs, two of them are useful in treatment of HIV and one is helpful in treatment of swine flu. Besides, one medicine they decided was chloroquine, which is useful in treatment of malaria. 

“We immediately sought the permission from the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), New Delhi, which gave its nod for the treatment that we had decided upon,” said Dr Bhandari. 

They took the consent of the patients before they provided medicines to them. “We want those drugs which are safe to treat Covid-19 patients. Since Covid-19 is a viral disease, we selected safest anti-viral drugs for their treatment. Now, all the three patients are free from virus of Covid-19. They need treatment for the lung damage caused by the virus,” said Dr Keswani. 

