State is conducting tests, spurt in Covid cases not a concern: CM
2020-04-17
Bhopal: Chief minister, Shivraj Singh Chouhan, said on Thursday that spurt in the number of Covid patients in Indore and Bhopal was not a matter of great concern, as earlier tests weren’t being conducted, but now they are. 

“People in Indore started dying in March due to coronavirus, which means the infection was there but patients were not tested and treated because there were no facilities. Till March 23, there had been no test for coronavirus in the state, now that tests are taking place at several places in the state, patients are being detected and treated. The good sign is that maximum number of patients are responding to treatment and returning home after cure,” he said in a statement. 

Chouhan attributed the increase in Covid cases in Bhopal to spread of infection among health officials and staff and presence of jamaatis in mosques in large numbers.

“There had been no meeting on coronavirus with the chief minister in attendance till I took charge. Health staff had also not been trained on how to protect themselves from infection. An IAS officer got infected followed by another IAS officer and then a whole lot of health officials and staff were infected. I have ordered an inquiry on how the coronavirus infection spread among the health staff and action will be taken after the probe report is submitted,” he said. Chief minister said there has been a delay in attempts to tackle the menace, but now the state government is on the job to contain the coronavirus infection.

“We have divided the state in three categories. More-affected places — Indore, Bhopal and Ujjain — are in the first category, places where infected persons have been but they are only a few are in the second category and places with no infected cases are in the third category.”

While the places in the first category have been sealed so that infection doesn’t go out from there; efforts of controlling infection through hotspot, epicentres and containment areas are being made and medically “identify, isolate, test and treat” strategy is being followed.

He said special attention is being paid to Indore, where 3.9 lakh people have been surveyed and samples if 5,120 people collected from high-risk zones. He said the city has been divided in 11 zones and 489 teams are deployed for health survey of people. Chief minister said that 80% of the patients in Indore come from 3-4 localities and the pandemic would soon be under control.


