State seeks 20 CAPF companies from Centre to fight Covid-19 pandemic
2020-05-14
With the state police force already under stress due to Covid outbreak, state government has sought 20 companies (2,000 personnel) of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) from the NDA government to maintain law and order situation.

Home minister Anil Deshmukh said the police force was overburdened and working overtime in war against Covid-19 and many of them infected with it in the process. “With festivals like Eid and Ramzan coming up, the state needs more personnel. We’ve requested the central government to allot 20 companies of CAPF, which would ease burden on our police personnel,” he told TOI.

He added that 32 companies of State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) were already helping out the state police. “The government will make all possible efforts to take care of our officers’ health,” he said.

Denying rumours that state would be roping in paramilitary forces to maintain law and order situation, the minister called on the citizens to disbelieve any such rumours.

According to him, ever since lockdown was implemented, the government had distributed over 3.47 lakh travel passes to citizens for emergency services and those working to contain the deadly virus.

“We’ve so far quarantined over 2.97 lakh persons across the state. During lockdown period from March 22 to May 12, the police have registered over 1.05 lakh offences under Section 188. About 20,072 offenders are arrested in this period and fine of over Rs4.05 lakh is imposed on accused for various offences.”

Warning those who were attacking the doctors, police, nurses and health department employees, Deshmukh said orders were issued to take strict action against such culprits. “All these front-line warriors are working day and night to fight the Covid-19 pandemic, but some anti-social elements are targeting them. In lockdown period, 214 cases of attacks on police are reported in which 764 accused are rounded up.”

Speaking on police on duty getting contracted from the virus, the senior minister said about eight of them had unfortunately lost lives that included five from Mumbai, and one each from Pune, Solapur and Nashik. “About 84 officers and 709 constables from police force have tested positive and being treated. Orders are issued to establish special control cells for providing immediate treatment to the cops showing symptoms of deadly virus.”

The NCP MLA from Katol informed that the police received over 90,556 calls on 100 number across the state during lockdown period. “We’ve taken due cognisance of all complaints and found out 668 persons having stamp of quarantine on their hands. All of them were sent to the quarantine centres. In same period, offences are registered against 1,296 vehicle owners while 57,430 vehicles are seized. 15 offences were lodged against foreign nationals violating Visa conditions.”

According to him, the government had set up 3,964 relief camps in state where over 3.84 lakh migrants are taking shelter.


