Coronavirus in Gujarat: Government bans interstate private bus, taxi movement till March 31
2020-03-23
GANDHINAGAR: The state government, through a notification issued on Sunday, banned the movement of inter-state passenger vehicles like private buses and taxis until March 31. The notification will not be applicable to goods vehicles and personal use vehicles, along with vehicles used for maintaining essential supplies.

The notification stated that inter-state transportation activity of public is one of the major factors for spread of coronavirus, and the state government finds it necessary to take immediate action to control passenger transportation between Gujarat and other states.


 

Accordingly, private buses will not be permitted to operate between Gujarat and other states and they have been banned from interstate travel until March 31. The state-run GSRTC has already suspended its inter-state operations until March 31.

The core committee formed to counter the Covid-19 pandemic, chaired by CM Vijay Rupani, met on Sunday and decided to include Gandhinagar in the list of cities which have been placed under lockdown until March 25. On Saturday, the state government had said that only essential services will be open in Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Rajkot and Surat until March 25.

Supply of milk, vegetables, fruits, grocery, medical stores, clinics, hospitals and laboratories, along with health services will continue to function normally in these five major cities.

In a significant decision, it was decided on Sunday to use the newly built 1,200-bed facility at the Civil Hospital in Ahmedabad, as ‘Infection Isolation Hospital’ for Covid-19 positive cases from Monday. Similarly, such ‘infection isolation hospitals’ will be made operational in Rajkot, Surat and Vadodara as well. 

In the meeting, it was also decided that to prevent transmission of Covid-19, 50% employees of the total staff of Class 2 to 4 in all government offices will attend their duties on rotational basis till March 29. However, this will not be applicable to employees and officials of local governing bodies who are connected with essential services and those who are directly involved in preventing spread of the virus.


