States crack whip to check quarantine breach, book 9
2020-03-23
NEW DELHI: While the nation stayed indoors in response to PM Narendra Modi's call for a 14-hour janata curfew on Sunday, many with travel history to Covid-19-affected countries were found flouting quarantine norms and moving about in public. 


In Mumbai, 15 men from Punjab who fled the quarantine facility after landing in the city from Dubai were tracked and taken back on Sunday. All of them, with quarantine stamps, travelled from Andheri and boarded the local train in western suburbs and deboarded at Khar railway station when they were tracked. 

A 21-year-old student travelling in New Delhi-Chennai Express with a quarantine stamp on his hand was offloaded at Nagpur station on Sunday. He was taken to MLA Hostel quarantine facility as a precaution . The student had recently returned from Russia to Delhi, was travelling alone and his temperature was found normal, officials said. 

 Panic gripped Bengaluru's Majestic area after a 28-year-old man, who had come from Dubai and carried a home quarantine seal on his hand, was spotted going around in search of food on Sunday morning. Noticing the seal, locals informed cops who provided the man food and took him and his companions to a quarantine centre. 

In Odisha, Cuttack's Purighat Police registered a case against a US-returned man found flouting home quarantine and moving about in a market. He was booked under several IPC sections . Chhattisgarh Police booked three businessmen for allegedly flouting home isolation after their return from Kazakhstan. 

In Gujarat, a Ghatlodia resident was booked for spreading false information under section 3 of the National Security Act. The accused had falsely tweeted that there were no thermal checks performed on foreign passengers at Ahmedabad airport. He had returned from Toronto via Abu Dhabi on Saturday night. 

In Ahmedabad's Maninagar, a 23-year-old youth, who had returned from Oman (Muscat) on March 21 and his 26-year-old cousin were found throwing a birthday party at their house on March 22, though the younger one was under home quarantine for 14 days. Inspector S M Patel of Maninagar police station said both have been booked . 


