Bihar ministers making optimum use of lockdown
2020-04-08
PATNA: The nationwide 21-day lockdown has changed the daily routine of majority of the ministers in the state. 


As all offices including the secretariat are closed and no socio-political events are being organised since March 25. The cabinet ministers, who usually remained occupied throughout the day holding meetings with officers or attending socio-political programmes as chief or distinguished guests, are today confined within the four walls of their official bungalows. While some are utilising their time by making frequent calls to people of their constituencies and reading books, a few are busy providing necessary guidance to those stranded outside the state.

CM Nitish Kumar, deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi, health minister Mangal Pandey and a few others are busy holding frequent meetings with officials to check the spread of Covid-19 and making necessary arrangements for migrant workers returning home. However, some ministers who are not directly related to the mainstream departments, are enjoying this break with their family members. 

“I am in touch with the public and party workers through phone calls and reading books about prominent political personalities. As my cellphone number is in public domain for the last several years, many people who are stranded outside the state make calls seeking help. I try to help them out,” state road construction department (RCD) minister Nand Kishore Yadav told TOI on Wednesday.

“Besides these, being the cabinet minister incharge of Patna and Vaishali, I take feedback from officials of on phone. When free from phone calls, I read books on prominent personalities. Recently, I read two books on PM Narendra Modi and former Bihar CM Karpoori Thakur. At present, I am reading a book on JP movement, in which I had actively participated,” the RCD minister said.

Industries minister Shyam Rajak too is utilising his time by remaining in touch with the people of Phulwari constituency. “Recently, I finished two books—‘Sanskriti Ke Chaar Adhyay’ by Ramdhari Singh Dinkar and ‘Bari Sonch Ka Bara Jadoo’. I am now reading ‘Gram Swarajya’ by Mahatma Gandhi,” Rajak said. 

State agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries resources minister Prem Kumar said, “I am working from home. As the state is also facing bird flu and swine flu threats and several districts are undergoing fodder crisis, work in both the departments have increased manifold. Two days back, I did a videoconferencing with some district officials from my residential office. However, in the morning, I do exercises and yoga. I also feed the four cows at my residence, and watch the ‘Ramayan’ serial in the night.”

Information and public relations minister Neeraj Kumar spends his days hearing public grievances over phone. “People know that I personally receive calls on my cell phone. A large number of people who are stranded outside the state, calls me up. I hear their problems and try to help them out,” Neeraj said.

