Telangana sees 35 Covid deaths in 10 days, spurt leaves doctors clueless
2020-05-29
HYDERABAD: A sudden jump in Covid-19 deaths in the state — 35 casualties in 10 days (from May 18 to 28) — has left doctors scrambling for answers. These 35 deaths account for more than half of the Covid-19 deaths reported in Telangana till date (67 total deaths). 

Experts treating Covid-19 patients say that the severity of the virus has increased over the past few days. This might be indicative of an increased virulence or even a mutation.

 

In many cases, a sudden deterioration in the condition — going from stable to death — in one day or a few hours has been noticed. For instance, an elderly woman who had pneumonia and was undergoing treatment suddenly developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and succumbed while on a ventilator support within four hours of developing the complication. 

“Depending on the patient’s immunity levels, even an asymptomatic patient might suddenly deteriorate from being normal to reaching ARDS and succumb within 30-48 hours. We are even seeing this in asymptomatic patients. There is no clear understanding on why it is happening. It could be anything, even a mutation of the novel coronavirus. It has to be studied,” said a senior doctor on Covid-19 duty at Gandhi Hospital.

Dr Mahaboob Khan, superintendent of Chest Hospital, said on one hand, there are patients who are deteriorating very quickly, on the other there are others who are asymptomatic and became stable even though they have been Covid-19 positive for 30-40 days. “We are unable to explain this. The impact on a particular patient depends on the individual immunity, health status and the viral load. Most of the deaths are patients with comorbidities. Going by the kind of cases we are seeing of late, it can be said that the severity and virulence of the virus has increased,” he said. 

Other experts believe that the delay in testing could be another reason for increase in viral load among patients, which is ultimately leading to deaths. “There is a need to change the testing system. Currently, we are testing only symptomatic patients. Even patients who are coming from abroad are tested after seven days or 14 days if asymptomatic, which means that asymptomatic patients with a viral load of one lakh might see a jump in the load by the time he/she turns symptomatic,” said a senior official.


