Bengal to start rapid testing from today
2020-04-20
KOLKATA: From Monday, 14 medical colleges will start conducting state-wide rapid tests. This step coincided with ICMR clearing the decks for RG Kar Medical College and Hospital and Command Hospital, Alipore, to start Covid-19 testing. Institute of Post Graduate Medical Research and Education (IPGMER) has been tasked with conducting rapid tests in Kolkata, Howrah, Hooghly and South 24 Parganas.


To stop panic-mongering, the Bengal government will follow the ICMR guidelines and will not immediately reveal the results to persons tested. ICMR had on Friday cautioned all states that rapid antibody test is only a supplementary test to gauge prevalence of the disease in specific zones and can be used for epidemiological studies and surveillance. The council has already made it clear that rapid tests cannot replace the real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based molecular test and can be effective within a week after a person develops symptoms. 

The Bengal government is likely to prioritize the rapid tests in the high-risk zones, or clusters, which have reported multiple Covid-19 positive cases, but it may also conduct these tests in places which have not reported even a single case for surveillance. The state notification also stressed that “such tests are to be done under strict medical supervision” and, therefore, all districts have been mapped with 14 medical colleges. While IPGMER will handle a bulk of the high-risk zones, including those in Kolkata and Howrah, School of Tropical Medicine (STM) will conduct rapid tests in East Midnapore and Nandigram and RG Kar Medical College and Hospital will take care of North 24 Parganas.

Bengal has been scaling up its nCoV tests. On April 1, 659 samples were tested in the state. On Sunday, the figure was 5,045. “Several more facilities are likely to apply to ICMR for a testing nod,” an official said. Till now, NICED, Kolkata, IPGMER-SSKM and STM were the only government facilities in the city that were conducting Covid-19 tests. 

TOI has reported that the state on Saturday decided to start pool-testing samples in low-risk zones, which have reported 2% or lower Covid-19-positive cases, according to the preliminary samples tested. This method will involve pooling in samples of five possible suspects, even if they are asymptomatic, and testing them together. A negative result will prove that all five samples are negative and a positive result will prompt further tests of individual samples. 


