Maharashtra government wants ‘pool testing’ to boost capacity 10 times
2020-04-12
MUMBAI: With pressure to increase the number of Covid-19 tests performed daily, the state wants to start “pool testing” samples to increase its testing capacity by over 10 times almost instantly.

Maharashtra health minister Rajesh Tope said the state government has sought permission from the Centre and the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) to allow pool testing. 




The pooled testing method involves putting multiple swab samples together and testing them in a single real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test. If a batch tests positive, then everyone whose samples were a part of that batch would have to be tested separately. Conversely, if a batch tests negative, then all the samples are negative.

“This method will increase the testing capacity by 10 times almost immediately,” said a senior state government official. The state conducts roughly 3,000 tests a day.

“If we get the permission, we can test 10 or even 20 times more with the same infrastructure we have at present. We will be able to save time, testing kits and test more people,” said Tope. He added some doctors from the state who are working in the US have suggested this technique be adopted in Maharashtra.

Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray presented the idea at a video-conference with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday and has sought permission from the Centre for the state. The ICMR, too, has mentioned pooled testing before, but was in the process of validating it.

“Pooled samples have been used previously in times of epidemics and also to test for HIV among pregnant women visiting antenatal clinics,” said a state health department official.

In the current Covid crisis, Israel was the first country to use pooled testing to increase the daily number of tests. Covid tests are expensive as they have to be carried out in a PCR machine; while government tests for free, the private sector charges Rs 4,500 for each test. Last week, many US universities validated the use of pooled tests for Covid.

 Tope said the state has also asked the Centre to expedite permission for five new testing laboratories, which, if given, will see the state have a total of 30 labs. 

As on Saturday, the state had conducted over 36,000 tests, of which over 19,000 were in Mumbai alone. On Sunday, Mumbai will start swab collection at parking lots that would lead to 3,000 samples being collected every day.


