Goa yet to take over private hospitals, hotels for quarantine facilities
2020-04-06
PANAJI: The state administration, which was quick to take over residencies and hotels belonging to Goa Tourism Development Corporation (GTDC) residencies for quarantine facilities, is yet to issue orders requisitioning starred hotels and hospitals even nine days after health minister Vishwajit Rane moved a note. 


Moved on March 27, the note had asked the administration to start the process to requisition Manipal Hospital on priority. If not Manipal Hospital, Healthway Hospital is to be requisitioned, Rane’s note stated. 

In South Goa, Rane asked that the Victor Apollo Hospital and some hotels be taken over. He said that it was “important” to be prepared.

However, till Wednesday no orders were issued by either district collectors.

Under the Epidemic Act, the state has power to take over private properties to convert them into quarantine facility. Health official said some hotel owners are reluctant so also private hospitals for obvious. “This is the time they should pay back to the society,” he said.

Rane recommended that hotels be requisitioned for quarantine facilities as GTDC residencies were not adequate and there had been complaints of unhygienic conditions. 

He had noted that the facilities at Margao residency were bad. “No housekeeping was done and they (persons quarantined) are being treated worse than animals.”

Secretary health Nila Mohanan has issued a detailed directive over maintenance of quarantine facilities. 

Admitting that there had been teething problems, nodal officer for quarantine facility, P S Reddy, said the issues have been sorted out. “We have appointed good caters to provide quality food to people who are quarantined in GTDC residencies,” he said. Problems arose as GTDC-appointed contractors stopped providing service after the lockdown compelling the government to appoint independent caterers.

Some of the GTDC staff was scared but clear instructions have been given to inmates as well staff.

“With regards to waste, inmates are required to put it in a plastic bag provided and leave it outside their room to be picked up by cleaners. This is done to avoid cleaning staff from being exposed to suspects,” he said.

With regards to complaints about food plates being left outside the door, he said the staff has been instructed to inform inmates what time food will be served and a chair or a table be placed outside the door to place the plate on.

He said it is not possible to provide either fish or chicken and they are serving vegetarian food at all facilities. “Some suspects asked that they be served non-vegetarian food, but it is not possible. Boiled eggs are included in their meals,” he said.

He said inmates have been told that they can order food of their choice from outside or on Swiggy or Zomato, but the government will not pay for it. “They will have to pay for online for food ordered from out. The food ordered will be delivered in the reception. Residency or hotel staff will deliver it outside the room,” he said.

As many as 46 suspects have been placed in Margao residency, 18 at the Mayem residency, 15 at Old Goa and 9 at the Water Resources Department (WRD) centre at Keri.


