State buckles, abandons compulsory Covid testing for those entering Goa
2020-06-09
PANAJI: Goa on Monday tweaked its standard operating procedure, its seventh in two months, as it decided to do away with compulsory testing for persons arriving in the state and instead mandatorily put them in 14-day home quarantine if they clear thermal screening. The state’s latest SOP comes at a time when Covid-19 cases have seen a massive spike amid local transmission at Mangor Hill, forcing it to be made a containment zone, and cases across the state linked to it.


Chief minister Pramod Sawant was at pains to justify his government’s decision to do away with compulsory testing, calling it a “well-thought out strategy” as increasing backlog of tests and rising number of people entering the state has put the healthcare infrastructure under strain.

Sawant said the new SOP, which is expected to come into force from Wednesday, did not mean that the government had reduced Covid-19 testing and that 1,500-2,000 samples were expected to be tested every day.

Putting the onus on society, Goans and the elected members of the civic bodies to ensure the people under home quarantine did not violate it, Sawant said: “We will inform the sarpanch, panch or the councillor of that particular ward to keep a watch on the person concerned and they will be held responsible.”

The state government’s move comes at a time when states across the country have ramped up testing with the Telangana high court on Monday pulling up the government there and instructing it to not dodge testing.

Goa has been the only state that tested each visitor, except those who had obtained Covid-19 negative certificate from an ICMR-approved lab.

Sawant said people still had the choice of getting tested by paying Rs 2,000 and staying in paid quarantine facility till their results are out or can even opt for a 14-day paid institutional quarantine.

“The new SOP is aimed at reducing the backlog of test reports. With an increase in the number of people coming into Goa by road, and with air and rail services resuming, at least 2,500 test results are still awaited,” Sawant said.

The chief minister said the new SOP will ensure that people arriving in the state do not come in contact with anyone.

“Earlier, when the government compulsorily tested people coming into Goa, they were sent home soon after and most likely mingled with people in the locality. In case they were found to be positive, they were admitted to the Covid hospital,” he said.

The focus of the “well-thought out strategy” is to ensure that the most vulnerable sections of society are given due attention. “Elders above 65 years of age, pregnant women, children below 5 years of age, people with comorbidities and those with symptoms will be our focus,” Sawant said.

By testing each person entering the state, the government was stretching thin its resources and thereby diluting the focus from the vulnerable section, officials said.

Like Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro’s comment about coronavirus as “little flu”, Sawant and his team of officials also tried to dismiss it as “nothing but a virus” and said, “the mortality rate in the country was around 2.5%, while Goa has not seen any deaths so far”.

