Coronavirus scare: Andhra Pradesh government identifies 27,000 foreign returnees in 2nd round of survey
2020-03-27
VIJAYAWADA: The on-going second round of the household survey in Andhra Pradesh has identified 27,015 foreign returnees as of Thursday. As per official data, 26,934 people have been placed under home isolation and 81 people have been put in isolation wards in hospitals. Nearly 15,000 people were identified in the first round of the household survey which concluded a few days ago.


Health officials say that they have managed to track all the returnees who were missed in the first round owing to the efforts of volunteers, village secretaries, ANMs and Asha workers at the field level.


 
In a few cities, officials have been pasting notices on doors of foreign returnees asking them to home quarantine. Field-level staff has been mandated to report on the status of home isolation of foreign returnees twice a day.

The modus operandi is that among foreign returnees, those exhibiting symptoms of infection are directly admitted to isolation wards in a special ambulance. Those asymptomatic have been issued notices for home quarantine for 28 days.

Tracing foreign returnees has become a crucial part of containing the spread of Covid-19. Andhra Pradesh had 11 registered cases on Wednesday, of which 8 have foreign travel history and one is a close relative of another patient. The one other patient is said to have acquired the infection while staying at a religious place in New Delhi.

Authorities are also tracking close contacts of foreign returnees to carry out tests and send them to isolation wards. Officials are also gathering details of the complete itinerary of these foreign returnees— from their arrival in India to how they reached home, details of the cab driver, meetings with friends, relatives and other social gatherings.

Chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Monday heaped praise on the volunteer and secretary system which managed to track foreign returnees.

