State mines data to get its Covid death toll right
2020-06-12
CHENNAI: For more than four hours, the 11-member committee appointed by the directorate of public health to “analyse and streamline Covid-19 death reports with regard to Chennai Corporation” was poring through case summaries of people who died after testing positive for Covid-19 at hospitals in city and a line list of people buried or cremated in the city in the past three months.

On Friday, the state will revise the toll for the city, which may push up the case fatality rate. On Tuesday, the state health department said that at least 236 more Covid-19 deaths that were in the city death registers until June 8 were not added to the death toll. TOI had published case sheets of at least 20 infected patients who died in Railway Hospital and NGOs like Arappor Iyyakkam had produced mortuary cards of Covid positive patients who died at the Stanley Medical College Hospitals.

The director of public health Dr T S Selvavinayagam had asked the corporation to send reports of all Covid-19 deaths reports as per the prescribed format. “This is the protocol for all notified diseases and deaths. Doctors declaring such deaths will have to inform the local sanitary inspector and the zonal health officer about the death. This is done so safety and sanitary measures can be initiated. Depending on the infection, it would be disinfection, water chlorination or vector control measure. That system did not work,” said a senior public health official, who is a part of the committee.

In April, May and June, as cases started to increase, officials were posted for containment, contact tracing and testing duties. “No one actually compiled the death record. An internal inquiry is being held and more importantly it is being corrected now,” said a senior official at the Greater Chennai Corporation’s health department. “We are now sending all of them for reconciliation,” he said. City health officer and health officials will also notify deaths due to the infection on a daily basis to the state, besides sharing details of all Covid-19 deaths since March 2020.

The directorate of public health is awaiting a reply to the show cause-notices to hospitals on why they did not update the nodal officer about admission and death of patients in their hospital. Health secretary Beela Rajesh said reconciliation is a scientific process that happens in many countries and states. “Even China has revised its numbers recently,” she said.


