Andhra Pradesh on right track to check spread of Covid-19, say experts
2020-04-03
AMARAVATI: Notwithstanding the sudden jump in the number of Covid-19 positive cases in the state, experts in the health sector say that the state could succeed in containing the spread of the virus as it had already tested almost all the Delhi returnees and their primary contacts and shifted the positive cases to the hospital. 


Since over 30,000 foreign returnees were also under close observation in home isolation, the situation is thus far well managed, they noted.

The government acted fast in identifying those who attended the Delhi congregation soon after getting reports about chances of a spurt in the cases and brought majority of the Delhi returnees to quarantine homes. In fact, it completed the testing of almost all Delhi returnees and their primary contacts within two days. Although, the trend of positive cases among the Delhi returnees looked relatively high, completion of tests will help containing the spread of the coronavirus, a senior official said.

The government had launched a massive hunt to track down every suspected case of Covid-19 with a comprehensive door-to-door survey by field-level staff. The huge exercise—covering nearly 1.5 crore households, irrespective of foreign returnees and Delhi returnees—is expected to be completed by Friday.

Meanwhile, the state government has already shifted nearly 1,100 people who attended the Delhi Jamaat to isolation centres and collected their samples. According to state-level Covid-19 nodal officer Dr Arja Srikanth, about 91 of the 758 Delhi returnees and 20 of their primary contacts tested positive for Covid-19. 

“There is nothing to panic about the rise in the positive cases as it happened chiefly due to the increased testing of samples. The positive cases might increase further in the next three to four days before stabilising,” said a senior official. He, however, said that extra caution need to be taken in the implementation of containment plans to prevent the spread of the virus to new areas.

While the rate of positive cases among Delhi returnees is around 12 per cent, it is just 4 per cent among their immediate contacts. At this rate, experts believe that the chances of Delhi returnees spreading the virus to more areas are remote. Moreover, the positive cases rate among the foreign returnees is less because all of them were not tested as in the case of Delhi returnees, said an expert.

There is nothing to panic about the rise in the positive cases as it happened chiefly due to the increased testing of samples. The (number of ) positive cases might increase further in the next three to four days before stabilising


