Bihar intensifies coronavirus vigil at Nepal border, 71 isolated
2020-03-13
PATNA: Even as the World Health Organization has declared Covid-19 a global pandemic, the state government has rolled out measures across Bihar to contain the virus threat, keeping a strict vigil at the airports and districts bordering Nepal.


Seven additional directors of the state health department have been given the charge of the districts bordering Nepal — Madhubani, Sitamarhi, East Champaran, West Champaran, Kishanganj, Araria and Supaul — which are under special surveillance owing to a positive case of the virus in Nepal. 

As part of these measures, all 38 districts have been provided isolation facilities at the nearest medical college and hospital and altogether 144 suspected cases of novel coronavirus have kept in isolation so far. Of these, 73 people have completed their 14-day quarantine. The remaining cases are still being monitored by the state health department.

Four senior health department officials been given additional duties at isolation wards of medical colleges and hospitals in four cities, including Patna, Bhagalpur, Gaya and Darbhanga. 

State health department officials have issued advisory that those who have arrived from Covid-19 affected countries should self-isolate at home. “They should not go out in public gatherings irrespective of their status of being symptomatic or asymptomatic. People with similar symptoms should immediately call 104 or visit nearest government healthcare centre,” state surveillance officer Dr Ragini Mishra said.

She added, “Since the symptoms of Covid-19 are quite similar to viral fever, people even with a normal cold or cough raise their queries on the helpline number that has been provided to them. A total number of 786 calls have been received regarding the enquiry of the virus from February 5.”

According to health officials, as many as 52 samples of Covid-19 suspected patients from the state have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune. Sample of a suspect, who was admitted in the isolation ward of Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) was sent to NIV on Thursday. “As of now, we have received five suspected cases of Covid-19 at the PMCH. Of these, four have tested negative. Test result of the remaining case is awaited,” a senior doctor at the PMCH said.

Meanwhile, three more cases were detected in Bettiah on Thursday. “Of these, one suspect is from Lauria, Majhaulia and Narkatiaganj each. As of now, the Nakatiaganj native hasn’t reached Bettiah and the one from Majhaulia has been contacted and he will soon be kept in isolation,” said Bettiah civil surgeon Arun Kumar Sinha.

Altogether 10 people from Bettiah have completed isolation so far. “Nine people who completed 14-day quarantine in Manesar were kept in isolation for another 14 days. Even though no positive case has been detected, we are ensuring precautions,” Sinha said.

