Telangana government unlikely to relax lockdown norms till April 30
2020-04-19
HYDERABAD: With no let-up in the coronavirus positive cases, more so in Greater Hyderabad limits, the state government is considering continuing the lockdown till April 30 stringently, giving scope for very few relaxations. The government is more worried about growing cases in Hyderabad and has apprehensions that if the lockdown is eased for even some sectors as being allowed by the Centre, it would lead to further progression of cases in the state.


The state cabinet is meeting on Sunday to take stock of the situation and discuss the exemptions to be given from lockdown apart from economic situation in the state. The Centre had announced some activities would be allowed from April 30, keeping in view the situation in non-hotspots areas such as farming, daily wage labourers and some selected industries including IT companies with up to 50% strength.



The government is of the view, that some exemptions, which are to be given from April 20 by the Centre, have already been given in the state such as agriculture related works and MGNREGS related works engaged by the labourers. Many companies have asked their employees to work from home. 

The state government also has reservations about permitting construction activity after April 20. “Except some major companies, the labourers are coming from other parts of the city. The government is in dilemma whether to allow major construction companies where labourers are at the site or continue a complete ban on this,” a senior official of the CMO said. 

According to sources, the Centre said people in service sector like plumbers and electricians are permitted, but there are thousands of people in the city, who cannot be allowed at this juncture. Similarly, since agriculture season is over, there is no need of opening fertiliser and seed shops now. The government is also of the view not to allow dhabas on the highways till April 30 while permitting movement of trucks on the directions of the Centre.

Meanwhile, chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao has instructed the officials to continue measures to prevent spread of coronavirus cases. He said no one should suffer hunger during the lockdown period in the state. 

The CM held a high-level review meeting on Saturday on containing Covid-19. “The poor should not suffer due to lockdown and should not face any difficulty. This is the reason why the government supplied rice and cash to the white ration cardholders. Identify daily wager workers and extend assistance to them. Agriculture programmes should continue and collectors and public representatives should monitor the procurement centres,” the CM said.


