Maharashtra needs six months to one year plan for coping with pandemic, says expert
2020-04-17
PUNE: A one-time lockdown that ends on May 3 to get a grip over the Covid-19 pandemic may not work for Maharashtra, pandemic expert Subhash Salunkhe told TOI onThursday 

Salunkhe, consultant to the state government, and his team, after meeting experts from Kerala, said Maharashtra will have to draw out a detailed plan for six months to a year to beat the pandemic.




“Not just Covid-19, but the state would have to gear up to tackle dengue, malaria and other vector borne diseases in the monsoon,” he said.

Containment measures will be needed to tamp down on the cases that are rising in the state. “The strategy is not to reinvent the wheel but to strictly follow the proven strategy,” he said. 

Health experts across the world have said that social distancing measures would be needed for many more years and a resurgence of the virus may happen till 2025. Scientific papers have also said that the secondary peaks of Covid-19 may be more vicious. 

Kerala and Bhilwara in Rajasthan have followed them well and their models have been successful. Maharashtra started addressing the pandemic one month later than Kerala which benefited from its quick action, Salunkhe said.

“We still have a window of opportunity if we strictly follow the containment measures, tracking of patients and high risk cases. Those who have any symptoms should report early,” he added. 

Before the pandemic hit, Kerala had already issued directives to the elderly and rolled out social distancing measures

The Maharashtra government will have make better plans for by people to follow the lockdown rules. “ The cases will not drop immediately; the community and the administration will work towards it. Kerala, that was leading in the number of Covid-19 cases was now 20th in the mortality rate registering 388 cases with three deaths and a mortality rate of 0.77%,” Salunkhe said.

State health minister Rajesh Tope in a live interaction with the media on Thursday said the only solace in this pandemic was that doubling of cases that earlier happened every two days was now in five days because of more testing. “After every five days, the number of cases double in the state. However, this has to reduce drastically,” he said.

The state has formed a team of doctors who can be called by any of the medical faculty at the Covid-19 hospitals to address issues of serious patients. 

With comorbidity issues being the maximum in death cases, the death audit of each and every case has been ordered 

To prevent last-minute intervention, citizens have been urged to approach flu clinics if they show any symptoms rather than wait for last-minute tests. Salunkhe said citizens must not neglect the state’s instructions. 


