Kerala seeks pandemic bonds to bail out economy
2020-04-11
Thiruvananthapuram: After finance minister TM Thomas Isaac said that Kerala’s perilous fiscal position cannot endure the fiscal stress arising out of Covid-19 situation, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan wrote a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi suggesting ‘pandemic bonds’ as a quick remedy to help all states overcome their immediate fiscal crisis.

In his letter, Vijayan said public finances of all states, including Kerala, are in a perilous position as all revenue generating sectors have come to a standstill. Pointing out that the burden of tackling public health emergency and ensuring a social safety net for the vulnerable sections is the responsibility of the state government (in the fight against Coronavirus), Vijayan told Modi that market conditions are unfavourable for states to look at open market for fund mobilization. 

He asked Modi to give permission to all state governments to issue ‘special pandemic relief bonds’, which RBI may be requested to buy at a coupon rate below 5%. Vijayan repeated the state’s demand for raising the borrowing ceiling of states from 3% of GDP to 5%.

Isaac mooted the idea of pandemic relief bonds in the wake of state selling bonds worth Rs 6,000 crore in the open market on April 7 at a high interest rate (8.96%). "Normally we give 7-8% interest on borrowings. We could afford it because our annual growth rate was 11-12%. Such a proportion would not lead us to a debt trap. But, things are changing now. Since our economic growth rate is about to dip, the borrowing at higher interest rate would wreck our fiscal condition," Isaac said in a Facebook post, justifying his call for more borrowing options.

However, though everybody knows the present unprecedented crisis, not many are ready to buy his theory that the state economy management was in good hands before Covid-19 situation. MLA VD Satheesan claimed FM was eyeing an opportunity during crisis created by Covid-19. 

The state had recently signed agreements for foreign funds (borrowing) worth over Rs 17,000 crore, following floods in two consecutive years. This is over and above the huge sums KIIFB sources from international agencies for infrastructure development.

"Financial mismanagement has reached its zenith. Government had to restrict the operations of treasuries to disburse salary and pension for the past seven months. Over Rs 3000 crore in tax arrears are due from jewellers and state could collect only Rs 300 crore," he said.

The gravity of mismanagement will be known when one comes to know that government diverted the first instalment of Rs 1,780 crore it received from World Bank for Rebuild Kerala initiative for its daily needs, including disbursing salaries and pensions. Instead of doing its job, government is running after quick remedies, he said.

Economist BA Prakash said the economy is heading for an unprecedented crisis. "State need to buckle up and find more options to source funds. The impact of lockdown could be devastating as almost all revenue generating sectors are shut," he said, adding that the present crisis doesn’t justify the callous financial management of state. 

But, economist Mary George justified government’s move and said it was quite natural for states to seek help from Centre to tide over crises just like the current one created by a pandemic.


