State’s Covid tally jumps to 517 as 36 more test positive
2020-05-04
Patna: The number of Covid-19 patients in the state increased to 517 with 36 more people, including two cancer patients, testing positive for the disease on Sunday.

Altogether 12 patients, on the other hand, were discharged from hospitals in the last 24 hours after they recovered from the disease. The number of active cases in the state now stands at 394. The virus has so far claimed four lives in the state.

Of the 35 new cases, seven are from Munger, six from Bhagalpur, five each from West Champaran and Aurangabad, four from East Champaran, three from Buxar and one each from Kaimur, Katihar, Siwan, Sheohar, Arwal and Saran districts.

An 81-year-old man, who had returned from Delhi after undergoing cancer surgery, was tested positive for coronavirus at Shikharganj under Belaghat block in East Champaran district. State health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar said the man had returned to his native place on April 30 in an ambulance along with three other people. “He is so far the oldest Covid-19 patient in the state. A 23-year-old youth, who had come in contact with this man, has also been tested positive for the virus,” he said.

In West Champaran, the five cases were recorded in Sanachari and Yogapatti. These people are contacts of migrants from New Delhi who were tested positive on April 30.

“Three men (41, 22 and 18 years of age) and two women (36 and 17 years of age) have been tested positive in West Champaran. In Bhagalpur, four men (17, 22, 25 and 55 years of age) and two women (26 and 60 years of age) have contracted the disease,” Kumar said.

State nodal officer for Covid-19 Dr Ragini Mishra said a 34-year-old man from Garhwa in Sheohar district, who was tested positive for Covid-19, is a third stage liver cancer patient who returned to his native place from Mumbai’s Tata Memorial Hospital on April 20. “His first test report had come negative on April 21. However, the second report came positive on Sunday. The man had earlier gone to IGIMS in Patna for treatment,” she said.

A 30-year-old woman from Sadalpur in Katihar was also tested positive. Her sample was collected during door-to-door screening in the district. 


