State zoos on alert after a tiger tested positive for Covid-19 in US
2020-04-08
Ranchi/Jamshedpur/Bokaro: All three zoos in the state — in Ranchi, Jamshedpur and Bokaro — are on alert after the Central Zoo Authority of India’s (CZA) on Monday issued an advisory asking them to handle all animals in enclosures with utmost care and safety measures in place. The advisory was issued after a Malay tiger at New York’s famous Bronx zoo tested positive for the novel coronavirus. It was reportedly infected by its handler. 

The three zoos in the state are currently closed for visitors due to the nationwide lockdown and authorities said they have stepped up surveillance to ensure safety of the animals.

India’s environment & forests ministry on Monday advised wildlife/zoo authorities not to allow keepers, handlers and veterinary officials in the vicinity of animal enclosures "without safety gear, preferably personal protective equipment" and "isolate and quarantine" sick animals. 

"Mammals like carnivores, especially cats, ferrets and primates to be carefully monitored and fortnightly samples of suspect cases to be sent to the designated animal health institutes to initiate Covid-19 testing while following all bio-containment and safety measures required to handle this high-risk pathogens as per national guidelines," said S P Yadav, member secretary, Central Zoo Authority, in his note to all states and UTs.

Talking to TOI on Tuesday, D Venkateshwarlu, director of the state-run Bhagwan Birsa Biological Park at Ormanjhi in Ranchi, said, “We have provided safety kits and gloves to our animal keepers to ensure none of the animals get infected. We are also screening the zookeepers regularly and have directed them to wash themselves completely once they finish cleaning and feeding one cage.”

The authorities are also using potassium permanganate solution as sanitizer, nano silver solutions on the entire campus and lime solution as disinfectant on both sides of the road. Venkateshwarlu said, “We are talking all preventive measures in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic and the bird flu reports.”

In Jamshepur, the Tata Steel Zoological Park (TSZP) said it has taken up strict norms to ensure safety of animals. Zoo director Bipul Chakravarty said, “The staff members are wearing protective masks, gloves and boots while providing food and water to the animals. We have been following safety norms at the highest level to ensure there is no physical contact between our men and animals.”

Chakravarty added that in the wake of the alert sounded by the CZA, they are practicing the guidelines in letter and spirit. “We keep assessing the arrangements regularly and will add new measures if required,” he added.

Jawaharlal Nehru Biological Park (Bokaro Zoo), owned by Bokaro Steel Plant, is also on high alert. Authorities have intensified surveillance of animals, mainly the carnivores, and arrangements of PPE kits for the zoo keepers are in place, officials said. BSL chief of communication, Manikant Dhan, said, “As of now things are normal in the zoo and we are on high alert.”

The Bronx Zoo incident is the first known case in the world where a human infected a big cat with Covid-19 and has sent alarm bells ringing across the globe. Even as there is concern among people who have pet animals, there is, however, no evidence to suggest that pets are at risk. 

Confirming the instance of a tiger being infected, the United States department of agriculture (USDA) on Sunday advised that anyone sick with Covid-19 should restrict contact with animals, out of an abundance of caution, including pets, during their illness, just as they would with other people.


