Goa tightens SOP, makes Covid-19 testing mandatory
2020-05-28
PANAJI: The state government’s standard operating procedure (SOP) for persons entering Goa changed again on Wednesday, after it removed the option entrants had of opting for a 14-day home quarantine. Now, only two options remain available for those coming in to Goa — submit a Covid-19 negative certificate from a lab approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), or pay Rs 2,000 and get tested. 


Chief minister Pramod Sawant said that this altered SOP will be valid till June 3. He said the option to opt for 14 days of home quarantine was removed after a cabinet meeting. “We discussed the SOP with the cabinet, and now that we can test 1,000 persons a day, there will be no need for the home quarantine,” he said. “Every person who enters Goa will have to bring a Covid-19 certificate issued within 48 hours prior to arrival, or get tested when they enter Goa.” 



“Passengers who enter the state will be tested and sent home, where they will have to self-quarantine themselves from their family till their result is out,” Sawant said. 

“It may take up to a day for the result, and when it comes, we will telephonically inform them. If a person tests positive, we will send them to the Covid-19 hospital, and the family will be placed in facility quarantine.”

While the SOP currently stands valid till June 3, it is open to be revised from time to time based on the situation, Sawant said. “When we saw flight and other bookings, it was estimated that 4,000 persons would enter Goa every day,” Sawant said. “It would take four days to test them (4,000) based on our current testing capacity. Keeping this in mind, we decided on the earlier SOP. Then, we started monitoring the situation on a daily basis and noticed that many have cancelled their bookings. Now, around 1,000 persons arrive in a day, and this is a manageable number. If the number of arrivals increases, we will decide accordingly.” 

Sawant said that the cabinet is worried about the health of the people. “We maintain that Goa is a Green Zone. All those who have entered Goa have been tested and quarantined, or admitted to the Covid hospital. We are sure that most persons in the quarantine facility will be sent home shortly.” 

Meanwhile, the CM said that since testing has now been made mandatory, there will be no separate SOP for those entering the state from Maharashtra. 

He also said that the issuance of travel passes has now been simplified, as those entering at the border can self-generate a travel pass from the government app. There is no need to provide the self-declaration on arrival at the border check-post either, he added.

The CM also said that even after regular trains resume in June, Goa isn’t expecting bulk arrivals, as most Goans who were stranded in other parts of the country have already returned. “Now, the numbers are far fewer,” he said. “Even if trains start, limited trains will come (to Goa).” 

Meanwhile, power minister Nilesh Cabral said that some politicians keep criticising the government without understanding why SOPs are being altered from time to time. “The day we changed the SOP, 4,000 persons were set to arrive in Goa,” he said. “In Goa, we have the facility to test up to 1,000 persons a day. Those who are criticising us are doing so out of frustration, because under the CM, Goa has been declared a Green Zone. They are criticising because they find no other outlet to suit their political agenda. We are open to suggestions. But such accusations show their level of frustration.”

