Karnataka gets 5,000 new testing kits; need for many more
2020-03-29
BENGALURU: The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on Saturday supplied 5,000 coronavirus testing sets to Karnataka, which plans to significantly scale up examination of samples over the next two weeks.


With the latest additions, the state has nearly 5,500 kits, which include some residual ones at the six labs authorised to conduct Covid-19 tests. 

To date, Karnataka has conducted 3,000 tests, the highest in the country. Seventy-four samples turned out to be positive. 

Confirming the arrival of new kits, Dr CN Manjunath, the nodal officer for lab testing, Covid-19 Taskforce, said they were conventional sets that would check for the virus based on the polymerise chain reaction process. 

“There is a need to enhance the number of tests. It’s only when we do more and more tests that we understand the actual velocity of the Covid-19 spread,” he told STOI. 

Karnataka needs more kits as it targets 25,000 random tests to determine if there is a community spread, the so-called ‘Stage III’ of the coronavirus outbreak. 

It takes 18-24 hours to process each sample and costs Rs 2,600. For positive cases, two confirmatory tests are conducted, and checks are repeated every three days to ascertain the viral load. Before discharging a patient who has recovered, doctors order two more tests in a gap of 24 hours.

In all, a Covid-19 patient’s samples are examined eight times, and the state government spends nearly Rs 21,000 on tests for each positive case. 

The state government has decided to buy 1 lakh rapid testing kits from China, but the order has suffered delays because of flight restrictions. Each cycle of rapid testing costs Rs 600-800 per person and produces the results in less than four hours. 

Who can be tested?

*Current ICMR guidelines say symptomatic and asymptomatic persons can seek free tests at designated labs. But there are certain criteria.

Symptomatic persons: 

*Those who had direct and high-risk exposure to confirmed cases should be tested once between Day 5 and Day 14 after the exposure. The point of direct and high-risk contact could be someone with history of recent international travel.

*Healthcare workers can also request a test.

*Also eligible: People who have no travel history or exposure to a positive case but are hospitalised with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI), Influenza Like Illness (ILI) or severe pneumonia.

Asymptomatic persons: 

*Those who had been living with a confirmed case.

*Healthcare workers who examined a confirmed case without adequate protection as per WHO recommendations.

Source: Union ministry of health and family welfare 


