State govt agrees that U’khand needs 3 more Covid-19 test labs, Assistant Solicitor General to consult Centre: HC
2020-04-16
Nainital: The officials of the state government and Assistant Solicitor General of India have reached a consensus that Uttarakhand needs at least three more government facilities for coronavirus test in addition to the present three facilities at Sushila Tiwari Hospital in Haldwani, AIIMS Rishikesh, and Government Doon Medical College and Hospital in Dehradun. The development comes as Uttarakhand High Court was hearing a public interest litigation (PIL) through video conferencing. 

Earlier this month, advocate Dushyant Mainali had written a detailed letter to the Chief Justice of Uttarakhand High Court in which he highlighted lack of protective gear with the doctors and other frontline workers. 

The HC took cognisance of the letter and decided to treat it as a PIL which was heard on Wednesday by the bench of Justice Sudhanshu Dhulia and Justice Ravindra Mainthani.

In its order, the court said that Rakesh Thapliyal, Assistant Solicitor General of India, has told the court that he will consult the central government on the issue. “After hearing all the concerned authorities, there is a common consensus (including that of Assistant Solicitor General of India) , that it is desirable that at least three more testing laboratories may be made functional i.e. one each at Haridwar, Udham Singh Nagar and Nainital/Ramnagar… The Assistant Solicitor General of India has assured this Court that he will consult the relevant ministry of Government of India and apprise the court on the next date of listing,” the order read. 

The HC has also asked the state and central governments to file a detailed response apprising the court of what measures are being taken to comply with the guidelines of World Health Organisation (WHO) and the Union ministry of health while also detailing what other measures can be taken in “the main and the most frequently visited government hospitals of the state, so that the doctors who are examining the patients in their OPD are properly protected in these times.”

The court said that the response must be filed by Saturday, when the case will be heard next.


