Goa plans walk-in kiosks to widen testing: Vishwajit Rane
2020-04-13
PANAJI: The state is taking the fight against Covid-19 a notch higher by introducing widespread testing in its bid to be free of the virus. Health minister Vishwajit Rane said the state is set to introduce sample collection kiosks or walk-in kiosks at different locations to increase scope of testing samples.

“As the number of Covid-19 cases in the state has dropped from seven to two, our aim is to make Goa free of Covid-19. (For this) a robust detection method, which is in sync with the vision of our Prime Minister Narendra Modiji, will be followed,” Rane told TOI on Sunday.

Goa has done well in its fight against Covid-19 vis-à-vis other states, but its scope of testing samples has been low. As of Sunday, the total number of samples tested stood at 398.

The health minister, however, added that the new concept would be adopted only after discussing it with the Centre and that kiosks would be set up in accordance with guidelines issued by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).

The aim is to reach out to and test more citizens and this will be achieved by placing sample collection centres at different locations, Rane said. “People will be encouraged to come out and give their samples. It could be factory workers, labourers or people who may have entered the state,” Rane said, while claiming that Goa’s testing kiosks were a new concept. 

Only suspects and immediate and high-risks contacts of Covid-19 persons have been tested so far. A health official said they have been testing samples in line with the protocol issued by the Union ministry of health and family welfare.

With the virology laboratory set up at GMC, the state is expected to test more samples. A few days ago, a private laboratory, SRL Diagnostic in Porvorim, was certified as a collection centre enabling public to get tests done privately.

Meanwhile, four suspects were admitted to the in isolation ward at Goa Medical College (GMC) on Sunday while 27 test reports came negative, the health bulletin released by the Directorate of Health Service (DHS) stated.

Of the seven positive cases detected in Goa, five — four on Saturday — have been declared cured by the DHS. All five are being monitored at the 14-day quarantine.

Twenty-five samples have been sent for testing and as many as 63 persons have been placed under home quarantine besides four being kept in facility quarantine.

Rural sub-health centres to start soon

Health minister Vishwajit Rane said that within the next 72 hours six rural medical dispensaries and sub-health centres will be made functional with standard operating procedures (SOP) in view of the Covid-19 threat.

“This has been done as most people living in far flung areas have difficulties in visiting health centres due to the lock down,” Rane said.

Rural dispensaries of Quepem, Netravali in Sanguem, Agonda in Sattari, Pali in Sankhali and Keri in Sattari will become operational.

Also, immunisation session for children and ante-natal clinics will start from Monday. “The SOPs will be put in place for functioning of these services with strict protocol in place,” he said.


