State records 53 covid cases in a day, tally at 223
2020-04-26
Patna: Bihar recorded its highest number of coronavirus cases in a single day on Friday, with 53 people testing positive till Friday evening, taking the total number of cases to 223.

Maximum cases were reported from Munger where 31 people tested positive on Friday. Four of the positive people are those who are undergoing treatment at the Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Science (IGIMS) and include a 44-year-old Dakbungalow resident from Patna.

State health department’s principal secretary Sanjay Kumar said apart from the Dak Bungalow resident, one each from Masaurhi, Madhepura and Munger, who have tested positive, are undergoing treatment at the IGIMS, Patna. Even on Thursday, a Siwan native admitted at the tuberculosis ward had tested positive.

Others who tested positive include 12 from Buxar, three from Nalanda (one from Asthwan and two from Biharsharif), two from Aurangabad and one each from Masaurhi in Patna, Bishanpur in Banka, Bhagwanpur in Saran.

While the youngest to have tested positive on Friday was a 14-month-old girl child from Buxar, the oldest was a 70-year-old Munger man.

This is the highest ever one day positive result from Bihar. So far, 45 people have recovered and two have died, taking total number of active cases to 176 in Bihar.

On Thursday, 27 people had tested positive in the state, including eight people from Khajpura in Patna.

As per the information shared by the state health department principal secretary, there are 36 containment zones in 15 districts with 2.82 lakh households with 15.19 lakh people under containment.

19 IGIMS staffers quarantined

Nineteen health workers of the IGIMS, including a senior medical officer and nine nursing staff, have been put under home quarantine and their samples have been sent for test. They attended to a patient admitted at the multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB) ward whose test report confirming Covid-19 came on Thursday night. The patient, a Siwan native, was admitted on Wednesday night.

As per information shared by IGIMS superintendent Dr Manish Mandal, entire MDR ward has been sanitized and sealed.


