Goa’s quarantine plans hit unforeseen hurdle: Manpower
2020-04-22
PANAJI: After identifying several hotels to turn into quarantine facilities for seafarers the government has run into a hurdle. With most of the hotels having shut operations and sent staff home, sourcing manpower to provide services is proving a problem.

“We have practical difficulties on hand. We will have problems in sourcing housekeeping staff and providing food to inmates,” an official said. Some 7,000-odd seafarers are expected to be brought home.

Hotels owners too are not keen to hand over their properties for use as quarantine facilities, an insider from the hospitality industry said. 

However, while the government can overcome this problem under the Disaster Management Act, the source questioned how the government would provide basic services to those in quarantine when “hotels have sent their staff home with instructions to return only in October”. “Few are operating with a skeletal staff,” he said.

The official said that, initially, the government had encountered hurdles when Goa Tourism Development Corporation’s (GTDC) residencies were converted into quarantine facilities. However, they could manage the GTDC residencies despite inadequacies since the number of people placed there were few, he said.

The problem of providing those lodged at the quarantine facility with food was overcome by roping in a few self-help groups, he said. 

“We could arrange food as the number of persons in quarantine is small. We would have found it difficult to manage if 500 or 1,000 people were required to be served,” he said.

At all the residencies canteen facilities are not operational.

The second major problem that the government will face with the hotels is arranging people for cleaning work. “At residencies, we have minimal staff and we are afraid they too will run away once the lockdown is lifted.”

The government will have to sort out all these problems before the seafarers are brought back, he said. “If the problems are not worked out now, we will have trouble on our hand. Merely requisitioning hotels is not the end.”


