State ropes in 41 private hospitalsfor dedicated Covid-19 treatment
2020-06-15
JAIPUR: In a bid to boost its capacity to treat Covid-19, the state government has empanelled 41 private hospitals to turn them into dedicated coronavirus treatment facilities, with oxygen-supported beds.

The health department has prepared a list of 96 hospitals, 55 government and 41 private ones, for treating Covid patients. These hospitals have a capacity of over 17,000 isolation beds, with private hospitals providing nearly 7,000. The state has so far reported 12,694 corona positive cases. About 2,800 patients are undergoing treatment in various hospitals. Some of the asymptomatic patients are being treated at their homes in isolation.

Apart from these hospitals, the Ashok Gehlot government has prepared a list of 81 hospitals and buildings (such as hotels, coaching centres, hostels), which do not have oxygen-supported beds, but can be converted into dedicated Covid treatment centres, when required.

The empanelled private hospitals, some of them have received land on concessional rates from the government, are on a stand-by mode. “As of now, in Jaipur, we are providing Covid treatment at SMS Hospital, RUHS Hospital and one private hospital. Covid cases reported from other private hospitals are shifted to any of these three for treatment,” said a health department official.

The department claimed that the situation is under control. 

“We are not reporting the same number of cases as earlier. If in future, there is an outbreak of cases in the city, the private hospitals will be roped in for treating patients,” said the official.

Majority of these hospitals have ICU facility, oxygen-supported beds, isolation beds and other equipment.

However, the state government will not use all these empanelled hospitals for Covid treatment now to prevent exposing healthcare staff to infection. 

While the government-run Jaipuria Hospital, which was providing virus treatment, has been made Covid free, the RUHS Hospital is the main dedicated facility in Jaipur where a majority of the patients are undergoing treatment.


