Gujarat for phased easing of lockdown
2020-04-11
GANDHINAGAR: Unlike many other states which have sought continuation of the ongoing lockdown, the Gujarat government has recommended easing the lockdown in a phased manner.


A high-level committee worked out the modalities of the proposed phase-wise easing of the lockdown and the report has been sent to the government of India. The ongoing lockdown, necessitated by the Covid-19 pandemic, is scheduled to end on April 14.




 The Gujarat government has proposed lifting of the lockdown in three phases, with each phase lasting over a period of 10 days. Thus, the state government has suggested complete lifting of the lockdown over a period of one month even as Gujarat has been witnessing a sharp increase in locally transmitted cases of coronavirus.

A top source in the state government said the suggestions made to the Centre are mere recommendations and the Union government will take a final call on the fate of the lockdown after April 14.

The gujarat government has proposed that the state be divided into three zones – green, yellow and red – based on the number of Covid-19 positive cases and number of people quarantined. It has recommended permitting movement in the green zone, restricting free movement in the yellow zone and prohibiting any movement in the red zone.

The state government has also proposed that industrial and commercial activity connected with essential commodities be allowed in the first phase of easing of the lockdown. Other industrial and commercial activities can resume in the second and third phase with adherence to all safety and precautionary guidelines, the report said. The report also says that schools, colleges and educational institutions could start functioning from the second and third phase of lifting of the lockdown.

The government has suggested that public transportation within cities should remain shut until the lockdown is completely lifted, while airlines and trains ought to be allowed to operate in the third phase of easing of the lockdown. Malls and multiplexes should remain closed until the lockdown is completely lifted, the state government has proposed.

A top government official said the suggestions have been made keeping in mind the current status of the pandemic spread and the economic challenges faced by the government because of the lockdown. “A decision on the lockdown and whether it should be lifted in a phased manner will be taken by Centre. If the central government extends the lockdown, the state government will abide by the decision. We have conveyed our phased lockdown lifting plan to them,” the official said.

