Maharashtra tests new surveillance method against coronavirus
2020-05-24
PUNE: The increasing numbers of Covid-19 cases and casualties have prompted public health experts in Maharashtra to adopt a monitoring tactic called “syndromic surveillance” to contain the spread of infection.

The new public health tool will proactively survey communities for a group of symptoms — mainly in the elderly and those with pre-existing illnesses — and medically manage them like “positive cases”. This is in addition to current measures such as physical distancing, contact tracing, testing and aggressive treatment.


 


Experts at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) have called the surveillance pivot a “critical step in risk mitigation” which may prove crucial in “reducing the number of deaths” from Covid-19.

Public health expert Subhash Salunke, the technical advisor to the Maharashtra government on Covid-19 containment, said: “I have advised the state government to start syndromic surveillance not only in affected areas but also in areas that have remained relatively naive to the infection. It’s really time to go beyond existing containment measures.”

For over two months, the focus of the whole containment exercise in Maharashtra has been limited to keeping daily records of positive cases, deaths, tracing of close contacts, testing, treatment and ensuring physical distancing is in place.

 Earlier community interviews — carried out during the early days of the outbreak — were also largely limited to questions on travel history and contact. 

But the new measure actively looks for symptoms. “We need to go beyond and start conducting syndromic surveillance in the community by gathering information on patients with group of influenza-like symptoms - cough, fever, sore throat and shortness of breath — especially among elderly — and those with the pre-existing medical conditions such as diabetes and hypertension during the early phases of illness,” Salunke explained.

These individuals, officials said, will then be taken to specialised centres where their symptoms will be managed at early stages. If there's need, they will be treated as any other Covid-positive patient. 

“More than just testing, this technique will pick up cases of ILI at early stages and treat them like any other positive patient of Covid-19,” Salunke said. The ICMR’s senior epidemiologist, Raman Ganagakhedkar, backed the efficacy of the surveillance technique. “Syndromic surveillance is a critical step in risk mitigation. Its implementation in the state will reduce mortality associated with Covid-19 and to an extent, its spread,” Gangakhedkar told TOI.

Unlike swine flu, which causes serious complications in young healthy adults, the novel coronavirus mainly affects the elderly.

“Syndromic surveillance, particularly among vulnerable groups, is cost-effective and will reduce deaths. Telling people on how to report early symptoms, in case of influenza-like illnesses, can immensely reduce Covid-19-linked mortality,” said senior epidemiologist Amitav Banerjee. Although the surveillance model was developed to detect quickly the large-scale release or dispersal of a biological agent, researchers over the years have noted that it can be extended to detect novel diseases. 

According to research by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “current surveillance goals reach beyond terrorism preparedness”. 

“Medical-provider reporting remains critical for identifying unusual disease clusters or sentinel cases,” the agency has noted. 

“Syndromic surveillance might help determine the true size, spread, and tempo of an outbreak after it is detected, or provide reassurance that a large-scale outbreak is not actively occurring, particularly in times of enhanced surveillance.” 


