Jharkhand set to offer lockdown relaxation to boost rural economy, restart govt departments from today
2020-04-20
RANCHI: A host of industrial and non-industrial services, mainly in the rural and the semi-urban areas are set to resume across the state from Monday in sync with national advisories with a focus on providing stimulus to rural economy.

While all state and central government offices will restart functioning with 33% attendance from Monday, intra and inter-state movement of vehicles carrying goods too will begin on the national highways. Roadside dhabas and garages on the highways will begin operation besides statewide restart to MGNREGA jobs across all panchayats. To bail out farmers, all kinds of agricultural works too are set to commence from today.

State finance minister Rameshwar Oraon said, “From Monday, the focus will be to restart rural economy and rural life but in sync with all the advisories related to coronavirus and lockdown rules issued by government of India. Operation of sectors like industries, agriculture, transport (goods), shops of even non-essential items etc will slowly begin from Monday. We are now focusing mainly on rural areas and gradually as things come under control, it will be expanded in urban pockets too.”

Oraon however clarified that lockdown restrictions however will continue to remain in force till May 3 across the state. Till Sunday, a total of 38 coronavirus cases have emerged in the state covering seven districts including Ranchi, Bokaro, Hazaribag. Of the total cases, two fatalities have been reported from Ranchi and Bokaro.

Clarifying the ease in restrictions, Oraon said, “Specific pockets that are covid-19 hotspots will continue to observe strict lockdown norms while non infected areas will witness relaxations. For example, there will be no relaxation in Hindpiri unlike rural pockets of Ranchi.”

Citing some of the to-do things, another senior official in the state government said, “Social distancing norms, mandatory use of masks, ban on spitting in public places etc will be strictly in force pan state wide. Every departmental head in government office will devise roster to regulate staffing, ban entry of visitors and ensure all hygiene norms are followed at work place.”

Many districts have begun steps to implement relaxations. Talking to TOI, East Singhbhum deputy commissioner Ravi Shankar Shukla said, “We have identified few dhabas, garages along NH passing through our district to restart them. This apart, we are also giving permission for industrial activities in rural areas to begin. Both in rural and urban areas, we are also now allowing services of plumbers, electricians etc.”

Deoghar DC Nancy Sahay said, “We have asked industries, warehouses and the likes to send their requisition via mail (permissioncelldgr@gmail.com) to begin operations. This apart, we have also uploaded a self declaration form on our district administration website which anyone, who qualifies for relaxation as per MHA norms, can fill and begin operations.”

In Hazaribag deputy commissioner B P Singh said that except Bishnugarh block where two covid-19 cases surfaced, relaxation in lockdown will be given in all other 15 blocks. He said, “From Monday, all the shops including electrical and electronics, motor garages, offices, nursing homes, clinics, factories etc will be allowed to function. Each organization will have the onus of following prescribed norms failing which action will be taken. As far as transportation is concerned, only essentials will be permitted now.”


