Covid-19: Goa government orders closure of weekly markets, shopping malls
2020-03-20
PANAJI: Inching closer towards a lockdown, the state government on Thursday ordered the closure of weekly markets, shopping malls, pubs and operations of coaching classes till March 31. The order comes into effect from midnight of March 20-21. 

Director of health services Jose D’Sa issued the order on Thursday evening in the view of the novel coronavirus. 

Though the state has not reported a Covid-19 case till Thursday, it is feared that mass gatherings could lead to the spread of the disease since Karnataka and Maharashtra have detected cases. 

 
 

On Wednesday, health minister Vishwajit Rane had expressed the need to shutdown shopping malls. Many pubs have already halted operations, while cinema halls are closed till March 31.

A health official said that regular bazaars will continue as their closure would inconvenience citizens in buying groceries and other items. 



Coronavirus in India live updates


The weekly markets held in the talukas are thronged by people from adjacent villages as well as from across the border who come to shop or sell vegetables, fruits and grains, the official said. 

The wide range of relatively cheaper items sold at these markets are much sought after by people.

This is mostly seen at the Mapusa and Valpoi weekly bazaars, he said.


For now, restaurants to stay open

Authorities have not ordered the closure of restaurants, but owners have been advised to follow social distancing as a preventive measure, he added.

Pernem takuka is popular for the fruits and vegetables that are sold by vendors from neighbouring Banda and Sawantwadi in Maharashtra, while vendors from Karwar in Karnataka sell their wares at Canacona.

With regards to coaching classes, he said, it was brought to their notice that some coaching classes are continuing even after schools and colleges were shut down and exams were postponed.

On March 14, chief minister Pramod Sawant had directed the closure of all educational institutes, pubs, clubs, gyms, casinos, cinema halls, spas and boat cruises till March 31.

Sawant had also urged tourists not to visit Goa until March 31, when the state government would conduct a review of the situation, before deciding on the future course of action. The Shigmo float parade was also cancelled at some places.



