Coronavirus in Karnataka: Six positive cases reported, highest in a day
2020-03-23
BENGALURU: Six more persons tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday in Karnataka, the highest ever on a single day, taking the total number of those declared infected in the state to 26. Three of the positive cases were from Bengaluru, while Chikkaballapura, Dharwad and Uttara Kannada districts reported one each.


The two in Dharwad and Uttara Kannada were the first positive cases in the district. In Dharwad, a 35-year-old man who had travelled to Dubai via Goa on March 11 tested positive, while a 64-year-old woman from Gauribidanur in Chikkaballapura district, who had travelled to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, was declared infected. On Saturday, her 31-year-old son, who had travelled with her to Mecca, had tested positive. Both are now being treated at a Bengaluru hospital. 

The three Bengaluru positive patients were a 27-year-old man who returned from Germany on March 14, a 51-year-old man who came from London on March 13 and a 36-year-old woman, who had travelled from Switzerland on March 9.

A 22-year-old Bhatkal resident who arrived from Dubai on March 19 became Uttara Kananda district’s first Covid-19 patient. He was admitted to Wenlock Hospital in Mangaluru.

In all, 38 people were admitted at isolation facilities across the state on Sunday, including a dozen in Bengaluru. As on Sunday, 135 persons were in isolation facilities, while 28 suspected patients were discharged. 

On Saturday, 1,406 international passengers from 11 flights were screened on landing at Kempegowda International Airport. Five of them were isolated and the rest were quarantined.

The government set up 50 home quarantine enforcement teams, each with an ambulance and comprising one Ayush doctor and a policeman with a wireless set. These teams will track people who are not following self-quarantine guidelines issued by the department. The teams will be alerted by Dial 100 or 104 helplines which get calls of home-quarantine people roaming around. The teams will take such individuals to the nearest police station and register a complaint before taking them to a mass quarantine centre. 

The government said it will seek permission from Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and The National Institute of Virology (NIV) to allow government and private hospitals to test for Covid-19. Presently Karnataka has five testing laboratories. 

New testing guidelines

The Directorate of Health and Family Welfare Services ordered all health workers complaining of fever, cough and difficulty in breathing to undergo testing.

The directorate’s new guidelines mandated all persons showing symptoms within 14 days of international travel, all symptomatic contacts of confirmed cases and all severe acute respiratory illness patients where other causes are ruled out to be tested.

Asymptomatic persons who have come in contact with a confirmed case should be tested once between day five and day 14 of coming in contact with the confirmed case. Direct and high-risk contact include those who live in the same household with a confirmed case and health workers who examined a confirmed case without adequate protection as per WHO recommendations. 

