West Bengal likely to requisition 52 flats, plans 500 more quarantine beds
2020-03-16
KOLKATA: The state health department is likely to requisition 52 flats of NBCC Square, a massive building quite detached from the rest of the buildings at New Town. 

Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Saturday hinted the health department would require an isolated building in New Town to create 500 beds for quarantining Covid-19 suspects, as a part of its preparedness against nCoV outbreak. 


 

Besides, the second campus of the Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute (CNCI) at New Town, which is already being used as quarantine centre by the state, on Sunday saw arrival of some suspects. On Saturday, the state requisitioned CNCI for quarantining the in-bound travellers with symptoms of fever and cough. 

According to health department, in bound passengers from the foreign countries have been categorised into three categories — first category suspects are those with fever and other symptoms. They will be quarantined. Second category of passengers are the ones, who are above 60 years of age with a history of hyper tension, diabetics. They will be in isolation ward under close observation. Third are with no symptoms or co-morbidity, who will be advised 14-day home isolation.

Initially, a new building of Barasat State General Hospital was earmarked for quarantining. But in case of an outbreak, when number of suspects may grow exponentially, the 28 bed arrangements at Barasat may be highly inadequate. Moreover, many norms laid down by Central Health ministry directive may not be complied with at the Barasat facility. 

This is why CNCI and NBCC Square are chosen for quarantining process, said a health department source.

On Sunday, basic facilities for suspects and basic amenities for their relatives were put in place at CNCI on a war footing. Similar exercise will be taken up at NBCC Square as well, said state Health department officials.

According to National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), NBCC square was built keeping in mind the requirement of state and central PSU.Apart from the airport, the state health department is putting up health screening facility at 78 entry points at inter-state and international borders. 


