‘State in better position to explain status of coronavirus’
2020-03-17
Jaipur: In a letter to the directorate of local bodies (DLB), under the department of local self government, the state election commission (SEC) has stated that it shall conduct the elections to the six newly-formed municipal corporations as per the schedule announced and complete it by April 18, as directed by Rajasthan High Court. It also stated that if the state government deems it necessary to postpone the elections considering the prevalent situation, it may approach the high court and get it deferred or rescheduled.

An SEC source said the state government was in a better position to explain the status of the spread of coronavirus in Rajasthan to the court and not the commission.

“As per Rajasthan High Court directions to complete the municipal body elections by April 18, the commission has already announced the programme for elections to the municipal corporations. Now, if the state government deems it necessary to postpone the elections considering the prevalent situation, it may move the high court and get it deferred,” the letter stated.

The source also said, “If the court asks the commission about the status of the spread of the virus in the state, it shall not be able to provide the details. The state has not shared the status report with the commission. Therefore, only the state government can convince the court by furnishing these important details.”

After collectors of Jaipur and Kota urged department of local self government (LSG) to reschedule and postpone the elections to the six newly formed municipal corporations in the wake of the spread of coronavirus, the department on Sunday wrote to the state election commission (SEC) requesting it to consider the same.

Elections to the posts of 560 ward members in the six newly formed municipal corporations in Jaipur, Kota and Jodhpur is scheduled to be held on April 5. The counting of votes will take place on April 7. The elected ward members will elect the mayors on April 16 and the counting of votes will be held on the same day.

The six newly formed nagar nigams are — Jaipur Heritage and Jaipur Greater (Jaipur), Jodhpur North and Jodhpur South (Jodhpur), Kota North and Kota South (Kota).


