State reports highest Covid cases in single day, total count at 1,735
2020-04-22
Jaipur: Rajasthan reported the highest single-day spike in Covid-19 cases on Tuesday with 159 persons testing positive and one person falling prey to the virus in Jaipur. So far, 14 people have lost their lives due to the pandemic in the capital city while the total death toll in the state stands at 26. The total number of infections rose to 1,735, while 274 have recovered. A 64-year-old man, resident of Babu Ka Tiba of Ramganj, who was admitted to Sawai Man Singh Hospital on April 18, died on Tuesday. Health department officials said that the patient had comorbidity as he was suffering from bronchial asthma. Out of the 159 cases, 72 were from Jaipur and 35 from Ajmer. The other districts that reported cases were Jodhpur (16), Nagaur (10), Dausa (7), Bhilwara (5), Hanumangarh (5), Jaisalmer (2), Kota (2), Sawai Madhopur (2), Tonk (2) and Jhunjhunu (1). “It is relevant to mention that test results of the backlog 4,000 samples sent to a private laboratory in Delhi have started coming in and these are being captured in the report issued of positive cases today. Hence we expect a rise in number of positive cases today and tomorrow as the results of 4,000 tests will be available and will be entered in the database,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health). In Kota, a 55-year-old constable, posted at Makbara police station, and a 47-year-old home guard from Mokhapada area , tested positive, taking the total number of cases to 108. “Following the positive report of the constable, entire staff of Makbara police station has been quarantined,” said Devesh Goyal, who took charge of Makbara police station on Tuesday. In Jaipur, the total number of cases reported till date have increased to 657. Health department has deployed senior medical officer Dr Sunil Singh here to assist Dr AN Mathur, in-charge of Jaipur on Covid-19. Dr Singh had played his part in preventing the swine flu outbreak in 2015 and Zika spread in 2018. Dausa reported seven positive cases, including a priest of a temple , taking the total cases to 20. The health department has started preventive activities around the temple. “The temple is closed. We are conducting activities to find out how many people came in contact with him in past few days. He belongs to Gangapur City originally,” said Dr PM Meena, chief medical health officer, Dausa. 