Goa cabinet meet today on lockdown extension
2020-04-08
PANAJI: The state cabinet will meet on Wednesday to decide on measures to be implemented in the state once the national 21-day lockdown ends on April 14. Suggestions received during the cabinet meeting will be submitted to PM Narendra Modi, CM Pramod Sawant said.

“If the central government relaxes the lockdown then what kind of lockdown should be implemented in the state? It is to decide this that the cabinet meeting has been called. Views of all ministers will be taken,” Sawant said.

With the national lockdown set to draw to an end in seven days, Modi has sought suggestions from all states before taking any decision on the issue. A final decision will be taken on April 13. “The state has already closed its borders. But what are the other precaution that need to be taken post the lockdown. This will be deliberated,” he said.

Many state governments have indicated that they will continue the lockdown in some form or the other even after April 14. Some have suggested to the Prime Minister that the lockdown be extended for two weeks while some others have suggested that it be continued. A few states are planning to regulate entry of visitors into the state.

With regards to regulating movement during the ongoing curfew, Sawant said that issuing of travel passes to citizens has solved the problem. 

Movement of essential commodities is also smooth now, he said, adding that everything has been streamlined and the government has stopped receiving complaints. 

The chief minister said that at present the ministry of home affairs has not given cooperative societies permission to operate. 

Sawant chaired the meeting of the state disaster management authority and reviewed measures taken by various departments. During the meeting, food supply to migrant camps was also reviewed. Officers have been asked to submit the expenditure report to the government after April 14. The authority will meet again after a fortnight.


