State borders face space crunch to quarantine incoming migrants
2020-03-31
Bhopal: A day after the Centre decided to stop the massive migration of labourers, the bordering districts of Madhya Pradesh faced a practical problem of identifying space to quarantine thousands of migrants who have already reached the entry points to the state.Unaware of the fresh orders, the labourers continued to walk or proceed towards their destination in trucks or even atop empty petrol tankers. Many of them who already travelled hundreds of kilometers from Dahod in Gujarat to Morena in Madhya Pradesh on way to Mathura in UP are stuck midway after the MP government order.Now look at the plight of Jagdish Kumar of Mathura. Heading a group of 17 people of the same family including 15 children, Jagdish had started his journey from Dahod in Gujarat last week.After he left Dahod, he reached Western MP to take AB road and reach Morena in about 3 days. By the time he reached Morena, he had already covered about 1000 kms and was unaware of the new government order.“I am a resident of Mathura, but now police have stopped me at this border check post in Morena. They have promised to let me go after two hours. My home is just 140 kms from here”, he said pleading the local journalists to talk to police so that he can proceed further.Meanwhile, ill-equipped and overworked doctors brave the adverse circumstances. In the absence of mask, many of them wrapped a piece of white cloth around their face to cover nose and face as they screen the migrants.A top government bureaucrat in Bhopal said, “It’s a huge task. It’s difficult to seal the borders. It’s not a building gate that can be closed down. The number of people reaching from Gujarat in Jhabua and Alirajpur is huge. So is the case in the district of Morena.”He said that the administration was asked to identify “nearest buildings” to quarantine the migrating population and provide them food.On Monday morning, arrival of large number of people continued in Morena district. Sarai Chola, a village bordering Rajasthan is the centre of activities.The district collector Priyanka Das said, “We have identified places to quarantine those who wanted to proceed further from Morena to the districts of UP and MP.”In the neighbouring Sheopur, district collector Pratibha Pal told TOI, “We have identified tribal hostels which were vacated after the students left for home. We have about 90 people who wanted to go to Jharkhand. But they are lodged at the hostel and we will provide them food and water.” In the afternoon, a large number of people arrived at Harpalpur , a bordering town of Chhatarpur district. They were travelling from Delhi to Banda and Jhansi districts of Uttar Pradesh. Over 1000 people stuck near Harpalpur before the district authorities talked to their UP counter parts. After the and after their nod, the buses carrying the migrants were allowed to move further.