State to cash in on Covid-19 resistance to woo investors
2020-05-06
Thiruvananthapuram: The state is gearing up for a total makeover as an industrial-friendly destination by riding on the recognition it earned internationally for successfully controlling the spread of Covid-19 pandemic.An ordinance that will facilitate to clear all applications for investment in the state within seven days of the date of application is on the anvil. According to top government sources, other than clearing all the applications within seven days, it will also have a clause to provide relief to the investor from the high land value, which is the biggest deterrent for investors in the state. “The government is considering a clause that the investor would only need to pay 20% of the value of land value required for the investor, initially. The remaining 80% can be remitted by him in the next five years as instalments, which would also be interest-free,” sources said.In addition to the ordinance, the government will also set up two committees - an industrial advisory committee and an economic revival committee - that would give recommendations on various sectors and various locations and for measures to find new avenues for revenue generation. According to sources, the industrial advisory committee will soon be set up that will mainly consist of successful entrepreneurs, investment advisers and some policy makers. The finance department is, meanwhile, working on the committee for economic revival.“The state’s successful fight against Covid-19 has proved the institutional and administrative discipline in the state and the consciousness level of the people regarding their health. The state has also proved that it is a destination where the best quality of human resources is available,” said principal secretary (industries) K Ellangovan, who is also the former health secretary of the state.  Kerala will soon be a preferred destination for leading companies in the country because of its excellence in fighting Covid-19, expects the state government. A section of officials also foresee that even those companies which are planning to exit China may evince interest in Kerala. States like Uttar Pradesh have already initiated steps to woo companies that are leaving Chinese base. The state had last year passed the Kerala micro, small and medium enterprises facilitation bill, which allows entrepreneurs to launch an industry with an investment up to Rs 10 crore without the prior sanction of the government.Sources said that primary focus now would be to transform the state to healthcare capital of the country. Industries minister E P Jayarajan has already announced that there would be a lot of possibilities in the industries sector after Covid-19 and there would be opportunities galore for industries for manufacturing medical equipment and medicines.The government is already considering amendment in the relevant land laws for conferring powers for assignment and permitting mortgaging of industrial land on district collectors and general managers of district industries centre, respectively. 