Coronavirus scare: Goa seals borders, to allow only essential items, residents
2020-03-22
PANAJI: Goa braced itself to contain the spread of Covid-19 by sealing its borders with neighbouring Maharashtra and Karnataka from midnight. All passenger vehicles will be denied entry and only essential goods, other cargo and bonafide residents of Goa would be permitted to enter the state.


“Even though there has not been a single positive case in Goa, considering the critical phase the country is going through, it is necessary to be more vigilant and take all preventive measures that are required to prevent the community transmission of the virus,” chief minister Pramod Sawant said on Saturday.

 
 
The order was issued a day after the Karnataka government banned entry of passenger vehicles from Goa and Maharashtra.

“We don't want tourists coming to Goa until the situation settles,” health minister Vishwajit Rane said. He also said interstate movement of private vehicles will be restricted.

“We will use thermal screening to check occupants of private vehicles. We do not want people coming from neighbouring states to Goa. Families travelling in their personal vehicles will be allowed only after they are screened with thermal guns,” Rane said.

Inspector general of police Jaspal Singh told TOI that additional personnel will be deployed to strengthen existing teams at the borders and ensure passenger vehicles from Karnataka and Maharashtra don’t find their way here.

The orders have been issued by both district magistrates, R Menaka and Ajit Roy, under section 144 of the CrPC.

“Certain stringent measures are required to ban the movement of passenger vehicles viz maxicabs (12+1 seater), heavy passenger vehicles such as contract carriages, stage carriages and all-India tourist buses (tourist omni buses) plying from Karnataka and Maharashtra into North and South Goa districts and vice-versa with immediate effect until further orders,” states the order by the collectors.

Any person contravening this order shall be punishable under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

“With Karnataka banning entry of vehicles from Goa and Maharashtra and vice-versa, passenger flow into the state has reduced,” said Singh.

On Friday, the state government imposed a ban on assembly of four or more persons and holding of any processions. The district collectors have also banned demonstrations and public meetings on streets. Those violating the order will be penalised under section 188 of the IPC.

