State to use indelible ink to stamp people in quarantine
2020-04-24
Bhubaneswar: As the 14-day quarantine period has been made mandatory for every person returning to Odisha from outside after the lockdown restrictions are lifted on May 3, all those who are put in quarantine here will be stamped with a date in indelible ink for better community monitoring. 

According to the state government’s estimate, around 7.5 lakh people, including migrant workers, professionals, students, stranded pilgrims and patients are expected to return to Odisha after May 3. While around five lakh people are expected to return to the rural areas, nearly 2.5 lakh people may return to the urban areas. 

Those returning from outside will be stamped on their left hand using indelible ink, which will last for more than 14 days. The state special relief commissioner PK Jena has issued guidelines in this regard. 

Jena has asked the state panchayati raj department to procure the indelible ink from Mysore. The Election Commission of India has allowed the health authorities the use of the ink to stamp individuals in quarantine. 

“Since a large number of persons are expected to return to the state after the lockdown curbs are lifted, we need the involvement of the community to ensure that every person coming to the state is put in quarantine, at least for 14 days. The objective of putting the stamp is to mention that a person is in quarantine and the date on which the quarantine period ends. It’s a precautionary measure. The move will ensure that people refrain from stepping outside during quarantine,” a senior government officer told TOI. 

States like Maharashtra and Karnataka had adopted similar practices earlier to monitor the home quarantine of suspected Covid-19 cases. 

The state government has made elaborate arrangements, both for the rural and urban areas, anticipating a huge influx of people after May 3. The mandatory registration process of those returning to the state will start on Friday. 

While home or self-quarantine facilities are not allowed in rural areas, the state government may allow self-quarantine facilities in the urban areas. 

In many places, hotels have been identified as quarantine facilities on use-and-pay basis. Those who wish to use such paid quarantine facilities will be allowed to do so in the urban areas. 

The expenditure on such paid quarantine facility shall be borne by the person concerned

The authorities should make detailed arrangements for proper monitoring of the quarantined persons, the guidelines issued by Jena said. 

In case a person is allowed home quarantine in the urban areas, stickers will be affixed on the front of the house, which has already been done earlier. 

For monitoring of the quarantined persons in rural areas, the state panchayati raj department has decided to constitute committees at the panchayat-level. 

“The sarpanchs will head the committee that will ensure social distancing, hygiene and monitor the activities of those put in quarantine,” state panchayati raj minister Pratap Jena said. 

Meanwhile, state health and family welfare minister Naba Das said Odia people stuck in different states should be tested for Covid-19 before they are allowed to return to Odisha after the lockdown is lifted. 

Demanding an interstate committee of ministers for testing of migrant workers before they are allowed to return, the health minister said he will raise the issue during the video-conferencing of all state health ministers with Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Friday. 


