Kerala to spend Rs 78cr from SDRF to fight coronavirus
2020-03-20
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The state government will spend Rs 78.4 crore from the state disaster response fund (SDRF) for containing and preventing Covid-19 pandemic.

The state government has been given the liberty to utilize the funds from the SDRF as the Centre has announced Covid-19 as a notified disaster and permitted the use of SDRF to deal with it. 

The funds will be used for measures for quarantining, sample collection, screening, procurement of essential equipment and setting up laboratories for response to Covid-19 outbreak.

As per Centre’s regulations, the state can spend 25% of SDRF allocation for the ongoing financial year for quarantine measures, sample collection and screening and 10% of the allocation for procurement of essential equipment and setting up laboratories. The total allocation for SDRF for the state for the ongoing year is Rs 224 crore.

The measures for quarantine and sample collection include provision for temporary accommodation, food, clothing and medical care for people sheltered in quarantine camps (other than home quarantine) and for cluster-containment operations. Funds can also be used for checking, screening and tracing the contacts. The cost of setting up additional laboratories, cost of consumables, personal protection equipment for healthcare, municipal, police and fire-force authorities also can be met from these funds. The funds will also be utilized for procuring thermal scanners, ventilators and air purifiers.

However, the state’s attempt to seek permit from the Centre to utilize the funds also for providing financial assistance to families in case of death due to Covid-19 and for meeting the expense for the treatment of positive cases has failed.

The Centre had issued an order last Saturday, in which it was said Rs 4 lakh can be provided to the family of a deceased person including those involved in relief operations or associated in response activities. It had also said the cost of hospitalization for all those persons who have been detected positive in the test of Covid-19 can also be met from the SDRF. Later in the day, the Centre issued a revised order by removing these two crucial purposes for which SDRF funds can be utilized.

The state has now issued an order releasing the funds to be utilized only for those purposes that have been listed as per the Centre’s revised directive.


