States race to put brakes on spread of virus and rumours
2020-03-04
NEW DELHI: As the coronavirus scare hits home, states are scurrying to plug holes in health surveillance, put preventive mechanisms in place, and stem the panic fuelled by a surge of rumours and misinformation since two more positive cases were reported on Monday.


In Telangana, two back-to-back cabinet meetings were held on Tuesday to review the situation and devise an action plan. One of the decisions taken was to send a team to Kerala on Wednesday to speak to officials there on what they did right to combat the threat after the first case was reported. Hoardings carrying information on novel coronavirus will come up across Hyderabad district in three languages — Telugu, Hindi and English — as part of an awareness drive to combat fear. Telangana is also enhancing the capacity of its call centres dedicated to answering coronavirus-related queries.

Rajasthan, too, has been on high alert since an Italian tourist tested positive for Covid-19. CM Ashok Gehlot took stock of the state’s preparedness in an emergency meeting late on Monday, after which the health department issued an advisory to all hotels to fumigate the rooms in which a large group of Italian tourists had stayed during their Rajasthan trip. The health department is also drawing up a list of hotel staff who were in contact with the tourists.

Surveillance of patients with severe acute respiratory infection and influenza-like illness has been strengthened across all 33 districts. A series of awareness activities have been planned to bust myths and dispel rumours. “Rapid response teams have been formed in all districts. Sanitisation of hotels is under way. We are advising people not to panic. They only need to remain vigilant and follow basic hygiene regularly,” additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh told TOI.

In Bengaluru, health minister B Sriramulu said, “Karnataka has set up 630 beds in isolation wards across hospitals exclusively for suspected cases. Besides, 1,689 beds have been reserved in private hospitals.” Screening of international passengers from affected countries had started at Bengaluru airport on January 20. Till Monday, 39,391 people underwent thermal screening. Of the 468 people who had come from virus-hit countries, 284 were recommended home isolation. Of them, 179 have completed the mandated 28 days of observation. All samples from suspected cases have turned out negative.

