Stay alert about coronavirus but no need to panic: Experts
2020-01-29
Nagpur: There is lot of panic among people over coronavirus these days. WhatsApp forwards are adding to their confusion. Doctors, on the other hand, have told people not to panic at all as lots of screening, tranquillization, and treatment initiatives have been taken across the state.People affected by this virus are mainly those who have travelled to China recently. Most of such passengers are getting screened at major international airports in the country. So far, no person affected with new coronavirus has been found in India.As far as Nagpur is concerned, there is absolutely no need to panic as no flyer coming via China reaches Nagpur airport without screening at some or the other international airport. “Still, we have issued advisory to keep record of travellers coming via China. Even if they are non-infected, the government will keep track of their health record,” said Dr Sanjay Jaiswal, deputy director (health) for Nagpur division.Public health system in government as well as private set-ups have been asked to stay alert.Microbiologist Dr Ashwini Tayde said that following common respiratory antiquates and hand washing habits are points to remember for all of us. “Coronavirus is not new for microbiology. But, one new variant in this family has been found in China and it is creating panic. Coronavirus is responsible for common cold and flue-like illnesses. As a result, staying away from viral infections can be a good preventive measure,” she said.According to her, majority of victims of new coronavirus in China are elderly and ill people. So, keeping yourself fit and fine is the best way to stay safe.Another news creating panic among people is that doctors in China are using HIV drugs for treatment of illness caused by coronavirus. Dr Milind Bhrushundi, who is expert in HIV treatment, said the two viruses are different.“No vaccine has been developed to treat the new coronavirus yet. So, doctors are trying different combinationsfar. One of them is a combination of lopinavir and ritonavir — drugs used for treatment of HIV. But, both these viruses function differently,” he said.Even WHO advisory has stated that standard recommendations to reduce exposure to and transmission of a range of illnesses should be followed. This include maintaining basic hand and respiratory hygiene, safe food practices and avoiding close contact with anyone showing symptoms of respiratory illness such as coughing and sneezing.