Staying in quarantine in Karnataka a costly affair
2020-05-14
SALEM: Karnataka is apparently making a killing off people who are returning to resume their work by charging a hefty amount from them for the 14-day mandatory institutional quarantine. On offer are three categories of facilities that are priced at Rs 5,900, Rs 2,500 and Rs 1,400 per day for twin occupancy. Without knowing this, many people from neighbouring Tamil Nadu and Kerala are returning to the state to rejoin their firms.

Like many others, 27-year-old S Karthik didn’t know what was awaiting him when he headed to Bengaluru with his wife, two children and parents from Tiruchengode in Namakkal district on Tuesday. At the border, they were stopped by Karnataka police officials, who explained to them about the 14-day compulsory institutional quarantine and facilities available for the same.

Karthik said, “They said the facility with the best in class amenities will cost Rs 5,900 per couple a day, while the next category was priced at Rs 2,500 per couple. There are ordinary facilities as well for which one has to shell out Rs 1,400 a day for twin occupancy.”

Single occupancy is also available in all the three categories, with a marginal price difference. Karthik said he had to send back other members of the family as he couldn’t afford to spend lakhs of rupees for the 14-day quarantine. “I am put up in an ordinary facility near Attibele, the entry town of Karnataka. I have paid Rs 16,800 for my stay. Even if I test negative for Covid-19, I have to be in quarantine for 14 days.”

George Joseph, of Thrissur in Kerala, also faced a similar situation. He was asked to return to work by his Bengaluru-based firm. He too had to send his family back to Thrissur when he learned about the quarantine conditions. “When I informed my employers, they promised to reimburse the expenses. I have opted for the second category of facility.”

Dr Ravikumar Surpur, special commissioner for projects and health, Karnataka government, said they have fixed the rates for quarantine facilities for inter-state passengers in consultation with the deputy commissioner of Bengaluru urban. “We have been keeping international passengers under institutional quarantine for 14 days. Now, we have extended it to inter-state passengers, who will be provided rooms in hotels based on their choice.”

Pointing out that Tamil Nadu government had turned educational institutions into institutional quarantine facilities, a senior officer attached to Attibele police station said, “In Karnataka, we are providing star and non-star category hotels.”

N Ramachandran, president, Kannada-Tamil Harmony and Social Welfare Trust, said nearly 40% of IT workforce in Karnataka was from Tamil Nadu and Kerala. “They are not aware of the quarantine model in Karnataka. Hundreds of them are stranded on Karnataka-Tamil Nadu border in Jujuwadi near Hosur, despite having e-passes issued by both the states.”

Kavyasri Madhavan, 38, a beautician from Madurai, said she was stuck in Jujuwadi without knowing where to go. She is employed with a beauty parlour in Bengaluru. “I did not know about the compulsory institutional quarantine. And I don’t have enough money to either spend on it or for a taxi to go back home. I have asked my relative to deposit some amount to my bank account to pay for the taxi.”

Hariharasudan Anandaswaroop, a businessman from Salem city, said he was also forced to remain in 14-day quarantine while he was returning to his hometown from Bengaluru on Tuesday with necessary travel passes.

“Police officials stopped me at Attibele. I argued with them for nearly an hour following which they allowed me to cross the border after getting a written undertaking from me that I would remain in home quarantine for 14 days,” he said.


