Steel City hotel sealed for ‘violating’ lockdown norms
2020-04-27
Jamshedpur: Police on Sunday sealed The Alcor Hotel under Bistupur police station after it was found violating the lockdown norms and running its spa, bar and bakery. The matter came to light on Saturday when six businessmen were found partying inside the bar located on the second floor. While three of them managed to escape, three others were detained and later released.

Police said a woman from Kolkata, who works at the spa, was also found in the hotel during the raid on Saturday. She has allegedly being serving customers even after the lockdown. On Sunday, police detained the woman, who was living in the hotel since March 23. “We have shifted the lady to Mahila Thana for interrogation to ascertain in detail about her stay at the hotel and purpose of visiting the city. Health check-up of the lady will be done,” East Singhbhum SSP Anoop Birthare said.

A police team, headed by SP (city) Subhash Chandra Jat, has been constituted to search all the 69 rooms at the hotel and examine the CCTV footage to ascertain the activities of the hotel in the last 15 days. Birthare said, “The CCTV footage of all the cameras in the hotel have been collected and it will be scanned to see entry and exit of people in the hotel in the last 15 days.”

Sources also said the three businessmen, who were released after the brief detainment, were summoned once again for questioning. 

Birthare said, “The initial FIR has been on the basis of the lockdown violation, but it may be revised if the other serious allegations are substantiated.”

The hotel management said that salon was opened for the hotel staff and in the meantime, three guests arrived for shaving and soon after that police raided the hotel. “The guests had arrived for shaving, but I told them that it is open for the staff alone. We also served cold drink to the guests on their arrival but in the meantime police raided. On noticing the guests sipping cold drink police alleged that we are serving liquor to the guests,” claimed Alcor Hotel’s administrator Dhananjay Singh. 


