Steep cost of testing at private labs in Pune puts load on 3 government facilities
2020-04-25
PUNE: Very few sick people with the coronavirus symptoms are going to the four private labs in the city for testing. Instead, they are flocking to the three government labs for the checks, health officials said. 


Such a test costs Rs 4,500 in private labs while it is done for free in government facilities. 

Pune district health officer Bhagwan Pawar said the testing of samples has been scaled up in Pune and most of it goes to government laboratories. Over the last week, the number of tests in Pune has gone up to 500-600 samples a day. Of these, less than 50 tests are conducted in private laboratories, health officials added. 

This trend is in sharp contrast with Mumbai’s where more people are going to private laboratories even if it is costly.

State director of health services Satish Pawar said nearly 50% of testing is being done by the private facilities across the state, but it is not the case in Pune. “Those with the entire family to be tested may prefer a government facility where it is free. One has to pay Rs 4,500 at a private lab,” he told TOI. 

He said some private laboratories had sent their staff to collect samples at home but it was stopped after the curfew.

A health official said government facilities in Pune are closer and thus more reachable than in Mumbai. “In Mumbai, maximum tests are being done in private hospitals as they have better infrastructure, but families shell out a lot of money for such testing,” he added.

Laboratories conduct tests after getting referrals from the flu clinics or from health experts. A private laboratory in Pune said they get about 20-30 samples for testing a day when they can test 500. Another private laboratory that has full-fledged operations in Mumbai will start in Pune from Saturday and test 200 samples a day. 

Another private facility said some high-risk persons in contact with a patient come for testing without realising that it will take five to seven days for the viral load to increase enough to be detected, and the tests are almost wasted. 

A medical health expert said the Maharashtra government must increase free testing facilities. The Centre has fixed Rs 4,500 as the cost for a coronavirus test but states like Karnataka have capped the price at Rs 2,250. Diagnostic centres want simpler processes and prerequisites to make it more convenient for patients to get tested. An official from a laboratory chain said the volumes are largely being handled by government hospitals.

“The testing being done at quarantine centres is all by government laboratories which has kept our volumes low,” another private laboratory chain owner said.

Families will end up paying tens of thousands of rupees for tests in private labs, a Kondhwa resident said.

