‘Steps needed to counter economic fallout of virus’
2020-03-10
NEW DELHI: Policymakers will need to implement substantial targeted fiscal, monetary, and financial market measures to help affected households and businesses, considering that the economic fallout of the coronavirus outbreak reflects acute shocks in specific sectors, IMF chief economist Gita Gopinath said on Monday.


 Households and businesses hit by supply disruptions and a drop in demand could be targeted to receive cash transfers, wage subsidies, and tax relief, helping people to meet their needs and businesses to stay afloat, Gopinath wrote in a IMF blog.

 She said central banks should be ready to provide ample liquidity to banks and non-bank finance companies, particularly to those lending to small- and medium-sized enterprises, which may be less prepared to withstand a sharp disruption. Governments could offer temporary and targeted credit guarantees for the near-term liquidity needs of these firms. Financial market regulators and supervisors could also encourage, on a temporary and time-bound basis, extensions of loan maturities.

 
 

 Broader monetary stimulus such as policy rate cuts or asset purchases can lift confidence and support financial markets if there is a marked risk of a sizeable tightening in financial conditions (with actions by large central banks also generating favourable spillovers for vulnerable countries). Broad-based fiscal stimulus consistent with available fiscal space can help lift aggregate demand but would most likely be more effective when business operations be gin to nor malise.

 “Considering the epidemic’s broad reach across many countries, the extensive cross-border economic linkages, as well as the large confidence effects impacting economic activity and financial and commodity markets, the argument for a coordinated, international response is clear. The international community must help countries with limited health capacity to avert a humanitarian disaster,” Gopinath said in her blog.

 Gopinath said the coronavirus epidemic involves both supply and demand shocks. Business disruptions have lowered production, creating shocks to supply. And consumers’ and businesses’ reluctance to spend has lowered demand.

 “On the demand side, the loss of income, fear of contagion, and heightened uncertainty will make people spend less. Workers may be laid off, as firms are unable to pay their salaries. These effects can be particularly severe on some sectors such as tourism and hospitality —as seen for example in Italy.”

 “Since the start of the recent US equity market selloff on February 20, 2020, airline stock prices have been hit disproportionately, in line with the post-9/11 terrorist attacks but lower than after the global financial crisis. In addition to these sectoral effects, worsening consumer and business sentiment can lead firms to expect lower demand and reduce their spending and investment. In turn, this would exacerbate business closures and job losses.” 


