Step towards coronavirus hospital: Medical College Hospital Kolkata discharges patients
2020-03-25
KOLKATA: As a first step to convert the hospital into a Covid-19 facility, Medical College Hospital Kolkata (MCHK) started vacating the premises by discharging patients on Tuesday. The hospital is waiting for the green signal from Swasthya Bhawan to suspend OPD and emergency services for now.


“We started discharging patients who were waiting for planned surgery and those whose care can be taken at home with medication. We will shut down our emergency and OPD services once we get the written order from the health department,” said an official at MCHK.


 
On Monday, the health department officials had told the hospital authorities to start working to make it a dedicated Covid-19 centre for the state. The hospital currently has 2,200 beds and if the need arises, 800 more beds can be added.

“Nearly 60% of the hospital bed is now free after patients were discharged on Tuesday. Among the rest of the patients, there are some who are in critical condition. We are having talks with other hospitals on shifting these patients,” said an official.

The newly constructed superspecialty building that has 300 unutilized beds has been earmarked for treatment of confirmed patients. Sources said the building has patients of some departments like endocrinology, urology neurosurgery. They are making arrangements to make this building vacant before the rest of the buildings and other departments.

The other department heads have been asked to work on the second lists of patients who can be discharged and those who need to be shifted to another hospital. Talks are on with hospitals like NRS Medical College, SSKM, RG Kar and Calcutta National Medical College on how many patients each hospital can take in.

“On Monday, doctors told us that we have to take our patient back home or take him to another hospital because the hospital had to be vacated. Doctors checked on my brother today and said he can be kept on medicine at home for now,” said Poltu Das of Liluah, whose brother Tarak is suffering from cancer and was admitted 18 days ago. The doctors are yet to start chemotherapy as the patient is suffering from jaundice. Das was on treatment for jaundice.

“My daughter underwent surgery for deformity in her right hand few days ago. Doctors said we can take care of her with medication at home,” said Abhjit Chakraborty of Shyambazar. 

The hospital authority during the day had a meeting with director of medical education, Debasis Bhattachayya, and Rogi Kalyan Samity chairperson, Nirmal Maji, to expedite the preparations. Buildings that had major chunk of patients being discharged on Tuesday included the Green Building, Eden Building and MCH Building. 

