Stickers to mark homes of those in quarantine
2020-03-28
Thiruvananthapuram: The district administration, which is troubled by people skipping home or hospital quarantine, has started marking houses of people on quarantine. Though stamping on the hands of persons under home quarantine was adopted in other states, Kerala was taking a sensitive approach so far. With the spike in cases of people violating home quarantine instructions, the district administration began pasting stickers on houses from Friday. 

The sticker was released by tourism minister Kadakampally Surendran after a meeting at the collectorate. Minister said that the home marking would make quarantine effective. Around 11,024 persons are on home quarantine in the district. The surveillance team of district administration keep a track on them and their daily needs. 

The stickers will carry specific serial numbers, date of start and end of quarantine, number of persons on quarantine etc. This will help health workers to keep a watch and co-ordinate works to support such persons effectively.

Collector K Gopalakrishnan said that marking of houses is not to isolate such persons, but to provide them support. 

As many as 3,062 persons were brought under quarantine in the district on Friday, while three persons successfully completed their 28-day quarantine period.

A total of 101 persons are on hospital quarantine, of which 43 are at Medical College, 27 at General Hospital, three at District Model Hospital Peroorkada, nine at District Hospital Neyyatinkara, seven at District Hospital Nedumangadu, nine at SAT and three at KIMS. Some are staying at other centres. There are 31 persons at the university men’s hostel, 40 at women's hostel, 36 at IMG hostel, 19 at Veli Sameti hostel, 15 at co-operative institute Manvila and 12 at SUT Royal Hospital. Pullivila school has around 30 under quarantine and Poovar LP School has around 102 people under quarantine.

Meanwhile, the district crime branch on Friday launched a probe against Sreekaryam station house officer inspector Abhilash David for alleged atrocity towards motorists during the lockdown vigil. The probe was launched after the motorist, who faced the alleged atrocity filed a complaint before the state police chief. The state police chief directed crime branch Thiruvananthapuram unit SP A Shanavas to conduct the inquiry. 

The complainant is the husband of a doctor working at a private hospital in Venpalavattom. He alleged that the inspector stopped his vehicle and harassed him on Thursday while he was returning after dropping his wife at MCH.


