Stick to lockdown or face the ‘music’: Jaipur cops
2020-04-13
JAIPUR: Think twice before violating the coronavirus lockdown in Rajasthan’s capital — Jaipur Police will inflict ‘Masakali 2.0’ on you. 

Police here have warned on social media that they will confine violators to a room and then play the song, a recent remix of the original ‘Masakali’ from ‘Delhi-6’, over and over again for those found “roaming unnecessarily” during the lockdown to fight coronavirus.

The remake has not gone down well with many, including A R Rahman, the composer of the original for the Abhishek Bachchan-Sonam Kapoor-starrer, a decade back. It was sung then by Mohit Chauhan. 

Original lyricist Prasoon Joshi has also gone on social media, making clear that he is not happy with the Masakali 2.0 music video starring Sidharth Malhotra and Tara Sutaria. Jaipur Police are not necessarily taking sides in the row over the remake. It’s just that the lyrics are apt.

“Mat Udiyo, Tu Dariyo… Na Kar Manmani, Manmani… Ghar Par Hi Rahiyo, Na Kar Nadani,” the lyrics say. Don’t be stubborn, don’t be stupid, stay at home, the lines say. 

On Twitter, Jaipur Police warned, “If you are unnecessarily roaming outside, we will put you in a room and play Masakali 2.0 on loop.” The post also carried a cartoon making the same point.

“That’s a savage. Killing lot of birds with shot. Great sense of dark humour…. Can’t stop laughing,” Vivek Shah reacted on Twitter.

Shashi M Nair tweeted, “Awesome thinking. Masakali 2 music deadliest than coronavirus. It’s better to be at home rather than listening to the song.”

Deputy commissioner of police Kavendra Singh Sagar, who handles social media, said they decided to use humour to get the message across to people.

By Sunday afternoon, Jaipur alone had reported over 300 cases of coronavirus. Police have barricaded 262 locations in the city to prevent movement of unauthorized people. 

They have seized over 8,100 vehicles so far and arrested 131 people for flouting prohibitory orders. 

Drone cameras are in use and their live footage monitored to check if the lockdown is being followed, officials said. PTI


