Karnataka: Stigma attached to coronavirus now stoking protests, violence
2020-04-27
BENGALURU: As if ensuring lockdown norms are followed and migrant workers are fed has not been enough of a task, the government is now waging a war within its battle against Covid-19 battle on a new front – increasing stigmatisation around the disease resulting in politics, protests and violence. 


The government is not only worried over increasing incidents of violence against those who have been infected, but the stigma is also preventing people from reporting infections, resulting in a drop of almost 5% of suspected patients coming forward for tests.

“While initial estimations in reporting positive cases were barely 10% of those infected, there has been a further dip of another 5% due to stigmatisation of patients and resulting violent incidents. People with symptoms now think twice before opting for tests,” said Dr MK Sudarshan, chairman of the state government’s advisory committee on Covid-19 data analysis.

Although absolute numbers of samples collected and tests being done are increasing, it is not in proportion to the actual rate of the virus spread, which is much faster, Sudarshan said.

One big reason, officials say is misinformation on the virus and reporting of incidents by some news channels, which tend to target patients and their contacts. This has created confusion among people.

Following the incident in Sadiq Nagar, where a mob allegedly attacked an Asha worker on Covid-19 duty, incidents over the past two weeks have spiralled. The Padarayanapura violence and the subsequent political slugfest over shifting the accused to Ramanagara jail after five of them tested positive created a furore. 

This was followed by JD(S) MLC KT Srikante Gowda and his son vandalising a Covid-19 screening camp in Mandya just because it was set up close to his residence. 

On the weekend, BJP leaders including chief minister BS Yediyurappa’s political secretary and Yelahanka MLA SR Vishwanath and Kacharakanahalli BBMP corporators Padmanabha Reddy staged separate public protests against moving patients to their respective constituencies. 

“Covid-19 patients are not criminals and need to be treated with compassion,” said Dr CN Manjunath, member of the state’s Covid-19 taskforce. “Moreover, there is no reason to be scared about the virus. The only requirement is to be careful and follow social distancing norms in order to curb its spread.”

Sudarshan pointed at the high recovery rate – 96% – and insisted Covid-19 is not as fatal as being wrongly perceived by the general public. He went on to say that even the vulnerable group of aged patients with comorbidities can be saved with timely reporting.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has also time and again warned against stigmatisation, but those warnings appear to be falling on deaf ears as incidents of violence continue to rise. 

