‘Stigmatizing Covid will undermine efforts to check it’
2020-05-06
Social stigma associated with Covid-19 has been an issue as alarming and grave as the virus itself. A surge in incidents of violence against doctors, racial prejudices against north-eastern citizens, demonization of certain communities, and healthcare workers being falsely blamed as carriers of virus are some outcomes of this stigma. Dr Sonakshi Jyrwa, assistant professor at Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS, Nagpur, speaks about those: Why is so much stigma around Covid-19 in spite of so many information channels?As the virus is new; the course, treatment, and outcome are by and large unknown. Uncertainty and fear of the ‘unknown’ are perfect breeding grounds for assumptions and speculations. This behaviour is not new. Infectious diseases share a long history of stigmatization.  How serious is the issue in relation to Covid-19?Stigma hurts everyone by fostering fear and animosity towards fellow citizens. Recent reports of mental health issues and suicide among Covid-19 patients, healthcare workers and migrant populations are concerning. Such discriminatory behaviour is harmful to community. It prevents those with the disease from seeking care. People are fearful of disclosing symptoms for fear of being socially shunned. This will undermine efforts of our country to check the spread of Covid-19.  How to address this at individual and social level?Stigma can only be addressed if talked about openly. We are not granted immunity by virtue of our age, caste, sexual identity, religion, economic status or race. The virus can affect anyone. Precautionary measures minimize risk of acquiring infection, but in case one gets infected, it is not the fault or choice of the individual. We must stop thinking that people who have fallen ill are due to their own wrong and they deserve it. On social level, stringent measures to curb rumour-mongering and prompt action against hate crimes are necessary. Against this backdrop, what must people do?Communication is the key. We must choose our words wisely and carefully. As responsible citizens, we must avoid using racial or dehumanizing terminology like ‘Chinese virus’, ‘Infected cases’ or people ‘transmitting Covid-19’ or ‘spreading the virus’. Always seek information from reliable sources and verify facts before sharing. “Corona Warriors” such as healthcare professionals, sanitation workers, police, etc are working tirelessly and selflessly in the field. They and their families deserve our full support.