Stop-start Delhi Metro Phase-IV now skids on Covid-19
2020-06-08
NEW DELHI: After a delay of nearly four years, construction work of Delhi Metro’s Phase-IV had finally kicked off at the fag end of 2019. However, just when Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) was gearing up to work on a war footing to make up for the lost time, the spectre of Covid-19 put a spanner in the works. Acute shortage of construction workers and financial uncertainties have affected the pace of the project.


After a long delay, DMRC had started construction work of Phase-IV on December 30, 2019 through ‘piling work’ at Haiderpur Badli Mor, which is going to be an interchange point between the existing Yellow Line (Samaypur Badli-HUDA City Centre) and upcoming Janakpuri West-RK Ashram Marg corridor of Phase-IV. While six corridors have been proposed under Phase-IV, only three have got final approval from the Centre, with total length of 61.6 kilometres. While Janakpuri West-RK Ashram Marg is the first corridor where work started, tenders were floated for other sections of this corridor and two others.

Even as construction gathered pace, the national lockdown to curb the spread of Covid-19 was announced in March. In May, when construction was allowed with precautions, DMRC had only a third of workers available compared with the workforce before the lockdown as many had left for their native villages. According to DMRC, there were about 3,500 workers available before the lockdown, but at present, their number is between 1,000 and 1,500.

“Though we are continuing work with the remaining workforce, but the pace of work is suffering,” said Anuj Dayal, executive director (corporate communication), DMRC.

“The labour issue will impact the progress of work and the deadlines will have to be modified accordingly,” Dayal said, adding that Phase-IV work is still in preliminary stages and contracts are being gradually awarded.

Delhi Metro operations are completely closed since March 22, causing the corporation a loss of about Rs 600 crore in passenger and non-passenger revenue. Sources said ]with DMRC not in the pink of health financially, work on Phase- IV might also suffer as construction is highly capital intensive. Sources said that as work had just started, the process of applying for a soft loan from Japan International Cooperation Agency has not been completed.

The three approved corridors of Phase-IV, which would have total 45 metro stations, are Aerocity-Tughlaqabad (20.2 km), Maujpur-Majlis Park (12.5 km) and Janakpuri West-RK Ashram (28.9 km) corridors. The construction work was started first in December 2019.

Even when construction work was halted, DMRC’s engineers, architects, designers and contractors had continued to work in the background to ensure that DMRC was in complete preparedness when the lockdown ended and construction work resumed.

DMRC had devised an online mechanism — Building Information Modelling — through which designs, drawings and 3D models were being uploaded and then approved online. “Concerned directors held frequent meetings with the architects, engineers, contractors, etc, via video conferencing where crucial decisions were taken,” an official said.

