‘Stop chasing the virus, focus on those critically ill’
2020-05-28
AHMEDABAD: Stop chasing the Covid-19 virus, rather concentrate on treating those who need critical care. This was the advice from a team of disease experts, some of whom are also advisors to the state government on Covid-19. The experts wrote a letter addressed to the state principal secretary, health, Jayanti Ravi on Tuesday. They included Dr Pankaj Shah, infectious disease expert Dr Atul Patel and cardiac expert Dr Tejas Patel. The three doctors are also in the committee recently formed by the government to inspect issues at Civil Hospital in Asarwa. 


In the letter, the experts have suggested the authorities should stop testing asymptomatic individuals — patients who do not show symptoms but are carriers of the virus — including their contacts and their family members who may be in quarantine. In fact the experts have also stated that testing of individuals who had been diagnosed with Covid-19 earlier and would want to know their current Covid-19 infection status should also be avoided. “If these suggestions are accepted by the government, it will be a sea change in Covid-19 testing regime for the city,” said a senior official in the state government. TOI is in possession of a copy of the letter. 





Recently, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) guideline issued on May 18 has suggested testing of, “Asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case once between day 5 and day 10 of contact.” 

The state experts have suggested that Covid-19 testing should be done for patients with clinical suspicion of Covid-19 by a treating consultant and that only a symptomatic health worker should be tested on the advice of a consultant. The same condition, experts have suggested, should be applied for pre-operative testing for patients undergoing surgery or any other instrumentation on direction of a treating consultant. The only exception being patients receiving cancer chemotherapy, radiotherapy and planned haemo-dialysis and pregnant women.


