Store at Chennai mall in Covid eye
2020-04-01
CHENNAI: Employees of an apparel store in a Chennai mall were asked to quarantine themselves and report to health authorities if they faced any health problems after a second staffer tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday. Last week a woman employee from Ariyalur had tested positive.


The management has been told to contact all customers who visited the store between March 10 and 17 and ask them to remain in home quarantine and approach health officials if they need assistance, said Greater Chennai Corporation deputy commissioner (health) Madhusudhan Reddy. “We have collected the list of customers and staff. Our teams will be visiting them,” Reddy said.

 The shop has the list of customers who made purchases, but not details of people who merely visited the mall. Corporation officials were debating whether they should release an advertisement to warn people who visited the mall and the store.

On Tuesday, the civic body also put out a notice that a man who visited the visa application centre in Good Shepherd Building on Kodambakkam High Road on March 15 afternoon turned out to be Covid-19 positive. In a red corner notice, the Greater Chennai Corporation said people who visited the centre on the same day should remain in home quarantine and isolate themselves. It also asked them to report to the civic agency immediately or call control room at 044 2538 4520.

On Tuesday, officials from the civic agency visited homes of people with travel history to urge them to isolate themselves from the rest of the family within their homes. “We are seeing many families of Covid-19 cases also testing positive,” said a senior city health official. For instance on Tuesday, the 43-year son of a 73-year-old woman also tested positive for the virus. He works for in a pharma company and has a travel history to Thiruvananthapuram, officials said. He has been admitted to Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital.

In the Covid-19 control room, officials said the list of people in Chennai testing positive for the disease without contact or travel history was getting bigger. Four patients from Chennai admitted to government and private hospitals did not have contact or travel history. “This is more because younger people in the house with domestic travel history remain asymptomatic. They infect the elderly first. When we later test them they turn out to be positive,” he said. The state health department has advised the elderly to wear masks inside houses if people is they are living with people who have a travel history."

Health minister C Vijayabaskar said while the state has initiated containment plans, it has not dropped it guard. “We are preparing ourselves for any surge in infections,” he said. From human resources to infrastructure and medicines, we are stocking up supplies, he told reporters after WHO members visited the 500-bed dedicated Covid-19 ward at the Omandurar Multispeciality Hospital.


