Stranded Nepalese workers’ wait to return home prolongs as Nepal extends lockdown
2020-04-28
Pithoragarh: In a major disappointment for Nepalese workers stranded in Uttarakhand, Nepal’s government extended the lockdown for 10 more days on Monday (April 27) and prevented their return to homes. These workers have been waiting to return to their homes for over a month now. 

Earlier, the officials of Nepal had decided to allow these workers to enter its territory on Sunday but the decision was retracted after lockdown extension. “We had planned to take the stranded Nepalese workers to Indo-Nepal border at Banbasa but on Sunday morning, the officials of Nepal didn’t allow their entry. Most probably, higher officials of the neighbouring country retracted on their decision to allow entry of its citizens after lockdown extension,” SN Pandey, district magistrate of Champawat, told TOI.

Pithoragarh’s district magistrate Vijay Kumar Jogdende told TOI, “Nepalese officials had written to Pithoragarh district administration about the return of these workers. Subsequently, the district administration had written to Union ministry of home affairs regarding the guidelines for the procedure. However, the return of these workers was cancelled.” The official added that more than 1,400 Nepalese citizens have been lodged in six camps of Pithoragarh.

Sources from Nepal told TOI that officials of the country had even arranged quarantine facilities where these workers would have been kept after their return.

Meanwhile, VC Pant, circle officer of Tanakpur, said, “Around 204 Nepalese workers are staying at Banbasa camp in Champawat district. Earlier on April 23, the district magistrate and superintendent of police of Nepal’s Kanchanpur district had come to the Banbasa camp to check facilities being given to these stranded workers. The officials expressed satisfaction over the facilities that are being provided at the camp.” Pant added that the workers had then requested the two Nepalese officials to ensure their return to home.


