Stranded Kashmiri students feel jittery amid lockdown
2020-04-29
BHOPAL: With state government managing to bring MP students back home from Kota in Rajasthan, Kashmiri students who are stuck-up in Bhopal due to lockdown, have now urged the administration to send them to their home. 

Around 200 such students pursuing different courses in the city are stuck up here . 

Students said they are desperate to go back to their home. “This is a very cumbersome situation; temperature here is rising daily, which has made situation even worse as we are not used to hot climate,” said Zakir Ali, who is pursuing post graduation in Mathematics from Barkatullah University. He claimed that many Kashmiri students have gone into depression, staying locked inside their rooms, far from their families during these trying times. “There are many Kashmiri girls too, who are stuck up in Bhopal without proper rations. Whatever is available is extremely costly for a student to buy,” said Ali. 

Another student, Irfan Wazir, also said that situation has become unbearable. 

“We have gone from pillar to post but nothing has been done to send us home. Our hostel friends from Punjab, Rajasthan and other states have gone home, after their respective governments took pro-active steps to bring them back. Most of us are living on the money borrowed from local students; this is really frustrating,” said Irfan who is pursuing M.Phil from a private university in Bhopal. Problems began for these students when they were asked to vacate their university and college hostels. A student said, requesting anonymity, “We were suddenly asked to vacate the hostels; in fact, we were not even given time to manage the basic affairs. Now, I am staying with one of my local friends. I can’t continue like this anymore; we want the government to help us urgently.”

Worried over the spread of Covid-19 on the campus, BU had issued an order to vacate the hostels soon after the lockdown was imposed. There were about 700 youngsters, including Kashmiri students, in six BU hostels. 

Students had objected to the decision to evacuate them from the hostels, stating that university authorities did not want to take the responsibility that’s why they had asked them to move out. “When everyone was saying ‘stay away from people,’ the university officials asked us to travel in trains and buses. Instead of throwing us out of the hostel, they should have made arrangements to keep us safe like others did,” said another Kashmiri student, who didn’t want to be named.


