Coronavirus outbreak: Stranded Indians in Kuala Lumpur grow more desperate
2020-03-20
MANGALURU: With a week-long ban on the arrival of international flights into India set to kick in from Sunday, desperation among 250-odd Indians stranded in Malaysia is on the rise. Their sense of angst is stemming from the fact that while Indians stranded in Rome, Tehran and other Covid-19 hotspots are being brought back, the government is not considering a similar course of action for those in Kuala Lumpur, which has put them in a desperate situation.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Mahima Gupta, one of those stranded in Kuala Lumpur, in a tweet to minister for external affairs, S Jaishkar, stated, “India please don’t abandon us here. We want to go back home. We are doctors and hence understand the gravity of the situation and agree to cooperate with all the screening and quarantine procedures.” Mahima and Navin Mallya are students from Kasturba Medical College, Mangaluru, who went to Malaysia for their medical internship.

Luckily for Mahima, she has stocked up essentials that can last for a week. Moreover, KMC has ensured that she and Navin are looked after well by their local guardians in Kuala Lumpur. Rajeev Kumar Gupta, Mahima’s father, said that with Malaysia in total lockdown and stores empty, the situation of those stranded will worsen. There are the old and infirm keen to return to India. They must wait for the government to intervene on their behalf, he said.

Noting that the situation was not this alarming when Navin and Mahima went to Malaysia on March 12, and the authorities there were positive about their invitation, Gupta said interns were told to return to India on Tuesday, following a directive from the government there. The Air Asia flight that came to Vishakhapatnam and Delhi on Wednesday brought stranded transit passengers from the Philippines, while leaving behind those stranded in Kuala Lumpur.

Observing that there have been no reports of any of the passengers stranded in Malaysia reporting positive for Coronavirus, Gupta said on the other hand the government is bringing back Covid-19 positive people from the hotspot regions of the world, and sending them to quarantine facilities. “It is our request that those stranded in Malaysia too are brought back home at the earliest, before they contract the disease and the situation worsens for them,” he added.

