Stranded Indians rush to return amid ad hoc coronavirus cancellations
2020-03-14
KOLKATA: Ad hoc cancellation of international flights by airlines struggling with India’s lockdown order has left Indians desperate to return and foreigners keen on exiting, bewildered and in extreme panic. Various airlines have already cancelled 22 flights over the next seven days. This is in addition to the 16 daily flights already suspended by a dozen carriers. The only international airlines that insisted they were still operating on schedule are Gulf carriers Emirates, Qatar and Etihad. But sources said the situation was fluid and could change dramatically within a couple of days when passenger load could experience a precipitous drop across sectors. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

On Friday, Bangladeshi passengers made a scramble to board flights out of Kolkata with fares for the hour-long journey touching Rs 15,000. With four Bangladeshi carriers suspending operations, only Indian carriers IndiGo, SpiceJet and Air India are operating flights on the sector. Fares on the return sector that has hardly any takers is selling at a third the price. 

Ahsan Rabi Mortaza, a Bangladeshi citizen who is in Kolkata for his son’s treatment, is among several thousand Bangladeshis who are uncertain about their status after India’s decision to cancel all visas issued earlier. “The doctor is supposed to see my son on Monday. I am unsure what to do and will drop in at the Bangladesh deputy high commission for advice on Saturday,” he said. 

In Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 40 people from Kolkata are stranded in a hotel for three days after the flight they were supposed to board on March 9 was cancelled. “On reaching the airport, we were told the flight had been cancelled. We were taken to a hotel, where we spent three days without any news of the flight,” wrote Ziaur Rehaman, one of those stranded. 

Two Kolkatans — Sanyam Surana and Shivangi Banthia — are holed up in Stockholm. On a Scandinavia trip, the tour was originally scheduled to conclude in Amsterdam on March 22 and they were to board a flight back home via Frankfurt and Delhi. Following the lockdown order, they wanted to cancel the tickets and book fresh ones that would avoid Germany. But the airline they are booked on has refused to waive cancellation charges. “We want to avoid Germany because it is one of the Covid-19-affected countries and if we fly through it, we could be quarantined for a fortnight. Since we had booked Air India tickets (the Amsterdam-Frankfurt leg was on a partner airline), we wanted to cancel them. But the call centre insisted the cancellation charges had to be paid and that it could only waive rescheduling fees. At an emergency as this, all other airlines are waiving cancellation charges,” said travel agent Payal Khandelwal. AI said it permitted one free change and would postpone any international or domestic bookings on the airline network but there was no case of waiving cancellation charges. 

The situation has been compounded by unannounced cancellation of flights by airlines. Aviation industry sources said both Singapore Airlines and Thai Airways had decided to rationalize their daily flight to four-a-week. In addition, SpiceJet and AirAsia had decided to cancel at least four flights to Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur in next 12 days. IndiGo has also suspended flights to nearly all international sectors till the end of next week. 


