‘Strays and pets do not spread Covid-19, treat them well’
2020-04-30
Nagpur: Abandoning your pets out of fear of coronavirus might land you behind the bars, as per the latest advisory issued by the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI).

AWBI, which is a statutory advisory body on animal welfare laws in the country, has been receiving numerous complaints regarding cruelty cases against pet animals during the lockdown period. “The board has also noticed that animals are brutally beaten with rods or hard objects. Such kind of inhuman behaviour of the people or animal owner is punishable offence and the police department is requested to immediately act on the matter when reported by any person, feeder and animal welfare activists,” the board stated in its advisory.

According to local animal activists who are running shelters, many citizens are abandoning their pet dogs and cats fearing spread of Covid-19. However, the board has clarified that animals pose no threat to humans.

“It may be noted that pets or stray animals do no spread Covid-19. Anyone abandoning or harassing animals out of fear of spreading of Covid-19 will be liable to be prosecuted under Section 11(1) of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, where police is fully entitled to take cognizance under this section as deem fit,” the advisory stated.

Citing a petition that was filed in the apex court regarding feeding of animals and birds during lockdown, the board further added that the feeder should identify a specific place and time. “The pets and strays should be fed at the said restricted area only on the specified time. The area for feeding the animals should be away from the public movement,” it added.

The board has asked the animal feeders to co-operate with local authorities which are implementing government’s guidelines for lockdown and maintaining law and order. Following this directive, local animal activists have formed a group to feed the strays in the night.

“We have taken permission from the authorities and are volunteers feeding hundreds of stray dogs every night. We are grateful that the police are cooperating with us. We can’t let the animals die during lockdown,” said animal welfare activist Karishma Galani.

The feeders have also been asked to follow the norms of waste management after feeding the animals. They have to maintain personal hygiene and mandatorily wear masks and gloves. “The residents should also be made aware not to litter leftover food and distribute it in one corner where animals can eat with respect and keeping waste management in place,” the advisory added.


