Street vendors turn virus busters: Sanitise Kota city for 7 hours daily
2020-04-14
KOTA: As many as 60 volunteers of Rojgar Utthaan Thela Futkar Seva Samiti (RUTFSS) of Kota are sanitising the city by spraying disinfectants with knapsacks weighing nearly 20kg which they carry on their backs. There are 10 volunteers who monitor their work. In the last 21 days, they have sanitised 23 out of around 150 wards of Kota Municipal Corporation.

“After enforcement of the lockdown in the state, over 125 members of RUTFSS offered voluntary service for spraying sodium hypochlorite solution for sanitisation of the city. After getting permission from Kota Municipal Corporation (KMC), they formed three spray teams with 20 volunteers each. They are on the job since March 23 and have sanitised 23 wards so far,” Nitin Saini, president of RUFTSS, told TOI on Monday. “The three teams are regularly spraying sodium hypochlorite solution in the allotted wards from 11am to 6pm while 10 other volunteers are monitoring the work,” he added.

“Since the members of the RUTFSS, who earn their livelihood by selling various items on the pushcarts, were left without work due to the lockdown, they expressed a desire to do ‘dharma’ (service for humanity) by offering to sanitise the city,” Saini said.

Initially, RUTFSS had only six hand spray machines, which were used for sanitisation for controlling the spread of dengue. Sixteen new machines, each costing Rs 1,200, were recently purchased for the purpose.

The machine weighs around 4kg and when filled with sodium hypochlorite solution, it weighs around 16kg. A volunteer carries the machine for nearly seven hours a day.

“Several volunteers have sustained injuries on their backs and shoulders but they refuse to stop the work,” Dayal Das Chawla, secretary, RUTFSS, said.

He added that most members of the organization are in the 20-40 age group.

“The district administration and other organizations provide ration packets for the families of volunteers,” said Haider Ali.


