Strictly enforce lockdown along West Bengal border: Mamata Banerjee
2020-03-31
KOLKATA: Chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Monday called for the strictest enforcement of the lockdown along Bengal’s borders to keep migrant workers out of the state. She even directed the administration not to entertain requests from MLAs and MPs on this issue.


At the same time, she also took a number of steps to restore the supply of commodities: sweet shops will stay open four hours each day and kirana stores and home deliveries will be allowed to function as normal. And, to cope with hospital bed shortage, each district has been asked to identify and requisition private hospitals, university campuses, forest tourism centres, youth hostels and other centres for use as isolation wards for fever patients.

Around two lakh migrant workers from Bengal are held up in other states. “We are getting in touch with them so that they can survive during this two-week lockdown,” Banerjee said. “These two weeks are very crucial. We will sit again on April 13 and may give some relaxation on April 14.” April 14 is Poila Baisakh, the Bengali New Year. 

The chief minister also pointed out that 40,000 migrant workers from other states are caught up in Bengal. “We are arranging basic amenities for them, like food and shelter,” she said in a video-conference from Nabanna with medicine experts, health officials, district magistrates and superintendents of police. She directed district magistrates to provide food to even those who don’t have the ration cards to collect the earlier-announced relief of five kilos of foodgrain from ration shops. 

The chief minister said she feared that a fresh influx of migrant workers — such as the one at the Delhi-NCR region a few days ago — would make the rural population of Bengal extremely vulnerable.

“As many as 200 migrant workers have entered Islampur in Uttar Dinajpur; how could they enter?” she asked. The North Dinajpur SP replied that the group took a different route and entered through Gajole in Malda. “I don’t want to hear whether they entered through Gajole or Chanchol. This should stop,” she replied.

The CM’s other steps — to restore the supply chain — were to ensure the lockdown didn’t descend into chaos. She lifted the lockdown on sweet shops, allowing them to remain open from noon to 4pm, in a bid to help milkmen cater to the demand for milk. Milk traders are among the worst hit because of the lockdown. A lot of milk has remained unsold because milkmen couldn’t market it to households, dairies and sweet shops. “Babies should get milk; milkmen shouldn’t waste their produce,” Banerjee said. She also announced a bonus on the commodity front saying that commodity shops (kirana shops) should be allowed to function normally, along with home deliveries. 

She also reassured traders, particularly those dealing in food and medicine, after they said police excesses were preventing proper goods delivery. She said that the government was trying for the last three days to remove bottlenecks. The chief minister named a policeman on duty at Alipurduar during her interaction with the Alipurduar SP. “Find out what he is doing. Eta korakori noi, barabari (This is not strict law enforcement, this is excess),” she commented.

To citizens, she appealed against panic-buying. “There is no need to stock food and medicine,” the CM said.

The chief minister directed the district administrations to identify and requisition each district’s private hospitals, university campuses, forest tourism centres, youth hostels, hospitals run by Bharat Sevashram Sangha away from towns, and set up isolation wards for fever patients. The chief secretary has issued a circular stating that the government will requisition not only the infrastructure, but also the services of doctors and nurses working there. The government plans to bring all of them under novel coronavirus insurance: the chief minister increased the insurance cover from Rs 5 lakh to Rs 10 lakh till May 15.

Banerjee also fixed responsibility on individual officers to coordinate with Swasthya Bhavan on an emergency basis and assigned a senior officer for the five districts of north Bengal. She appeared unhappy with the arrangements so far. The relatives of the Covid-19 victim from Kalimpong have gone public with their experience in such quarantine centres. She talked in great detail about the health infrastructure in each district.

Aware of the deficit in the pool of doctors in a state where the patient-doctor ratio is below the national average, the chief minister granted a proposal from North Bengal Medical College authorities to absorb 30 MBBS pass-outs as house staff on stipend. Mamata extended this principle to all medical colleges in the state. 

The chief minister appealed to citizens to bear with the lockdown for another two weeks to break the virus chain. Chief secretary Rajiva Sinha seized the opportunity to mention that the administration was getting written requests from MLAs and MPs, urging the administration to let the migrant workers to return. “Do not entertain letters from MLAs and MPs,” the CM said, asking the district administration to beef up border surveillance. She assigned senior IPS officer Ajay Kumar to oversee Siliguri, which shares borders with multiple countries.

