Stricter lockdown imposed during evening hours: Police
2020-04-12
Aurangabad: The city police have started imposing stricter lockdown orders during evening hours from 7 pm to 11 pm. Saturday turned out to be the fourth consecutive day when curfew remained imposed in the entire city.

Sources said that as the state government has extended the lockdown till April 30, the city police have decided to walk an extra mile for ensuring effective lockdown. Already the surge in the number of Covid-19 positive patients in the city has kept the administration, health as well as the police department on their toes. 

The decision to impose stricter lockdown during the evening hours has been taken after it came to fore that several people, who are not stepping out of their homes during the day, are going out in the evening with or without valid reason.

“Moreover, the casual approach by a handful people who step out for no reason poses a grave threat for not only contracting the disease, but also becoming a possible carrier. Our ultimate aim is keep such people indoors,” said police.

Orders in this regard have been issued to public while exemptions granted to other services, except for pharmacy stores and hospitals, were being withdrawn except in emergency situations.

On Saturday, fresh orders for imposing similar restrictions were issued by commissioner of police Chiranjeev Prasad. While appealing to the commoners to remain indoors, the officer warned of stringent legal action against those violating the orders.

For the effective implementation of these orders, police bandobast along with the additional forces comprising state reserve police force (SRPF) companies as well as riot control police teams are being deployed on the city streets.

Sources said that the city police have decided to straightway register offences against anyone found violating the restrictions.

Already, the city police have registered dozens of offences against those violating the lockdown orders, apart from seizing vehicles used by them.

Police have seized a number of two-wheelers at Nanded, Parbhani, Hingoli, Beed, Osmanabad, Latur, Jalna and Aurangabad rural.


