Strict vigil to enforce lockdown in districts
2020-03-28
CHHAPRA/ BHAGALPUR/ NAWADA: Authorities and officials across the state are taking a slew of measures for preventing the spread of Covid-19 as well as enhancing medical facilities to tackle the pandemic. 

At Chhapra, the Saran district administration has started a disaster relief center on the premises of Jai Prakash Institute of Technology for people facing difficulties in reaching their destination due to the lockdown.

Senior officials in Saran district administration said that altogether 36 persons have been provided food and accommodation at the relief center since Thursday. “People from different districts have come here and many of them are dailywage earners,” an official said.

Saran district administration has also taken several steps to ensure that people stay in their houses and those found loitering on different streets have been either asked to return to their house or have been taken to task. Altogether 2,158 persons have been quarantined in 33 different schools, home and isolation centers in Saran district.

DM Subrat Kumar Sen has directed the foodgrains and grocery shop owners to open their establishments between 6am to 6pm only and to procure necessary permits for movement of vehicles carrying food grains. FIRs have been lodged against 15 shopowners involved in hoarding and black marketing of food grains.

Steps for strict implementation of lockdown are being taken by the Bhagalpur district administration also. Bhagalpur SSP Ashish Bharti is personally supervising the lockdown in the district and has also ordered the SHOs of police stations to enforce social distancing among the people, who come out on streets to buy essential day-to-day commodities.

Altogether 30 magistrates have been deployed in Bhagalpur town to enforce the lockdown and announcements are being made on public address systems urging the residents to remain indoors and not to take advantage in the name of buying groceries and other exemptions.

DM Pranav Kumar said that a ‘special control room-cum-Covid-19 cell’ has been formed to monitor the situation and complaints related to Covid-19 spread and lockdown. Bhagalpur SSP Ashish Bharti said police are working round-the-clock for manning the streets and commercial establishments selling essential commodity for maintaining social distancing. 

At Nawada, identification and surveillance of around 4000 persons from outside the district, state and country is posing a tough task for the officials. Over 69 persons arrived from different countries, of which 39 are senior citizens. In a respite, 40 persons who returned from abroad have tested negative for Covid19-free and have been reunited with their family. So far, nine suspected cases have been referred to nearby Pawapuri Medical College and Hospital in adjoining Nalanda district, who later tested negative for the virus.

Considering a large number of arrivals, Nawada DM has deputed district education officer (DEO) to get such persons screened by doctors and if necessary, quarantine them at numerous isolation centers and hotels. “Around 125 doctors have been roped in for this gargantuan exercise. Efforts to rope in private doctors are on the anvil,” DM Yashpal Meena said.


