Covid-19 in Gujarat: Stringent action on anvil for spitting in public
2020-03-15
AHMEDABAD: The state government is mulling to make spitting in public places a punishable offence, said Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary, health and family welfare, in an interaction on Saturday. The decision is taken in the light of the fact that COVID-19 is found to be spreading through droplets, said the IAS officer.


“We are discussing ways to ban spitting at public places with the district collectors, municipal commissioners and municipality chief officers through video link. We are also discussing how to penalize spitting, which can be a cause of coronavirus spread,” said Ravi.


 
 

Ravi said that the state has introduced Gujarat Epidemic Diseases (COVID-19) Regulations, 2020 based on Indian Epidemic Act, 1897. Through the notification, authorised officials from the state health department, district collectors and municipal commissioners, will be empowered to take necessary action to prevent spread of COVID-19.

“There is no epidemic currently in Gujarat and fortunately we have not reported any positive case. However, during our drive to ensure quarantine of the suspected cases, a few of the instances were reported where the persons had resisted the action necessary for ensuring public safety. The regulation will prevent leave or discharge against medical advice,” said Ravi.



Coronavirus outbreak live coverage


Health department officials said that initiatives such as keeping a close contact with the passengers coming back from the affected countries and regions are taken. The teams of health department are taking physical and telephonic follow-up of all the cases, said officials.

Answering a question on whether schools will be closed down in the wake of alert like a few neighbouring states, Ravi said that the WHO experts have said that move such as closing the schools won’t help in preventing transmission. “Even in countries like the US and the UK, such steps are not taken. Wherever such steps are taken, they are taken in context of a case. We will also review the situation from time to time,” she said.

She added that there are no directives so far to close down tourist attractions in the state. “We are in close contact with the central authorities and are monitoring the developments. We don’t want to create any panic,” said Ravi, adding that they are mulling to get temperature guns for screening at major government offices.


Screening centres

Time taken to process samples for identification of COVID-19 infection has got reduced after establishment of a lab at BJ Medical College in Ahmedabad. Earlier, the samples were sent to Pune-based National Institute of Virology. A centre at MP Shah Medical College, Jamnagar, has also been made functional. “We have sent proposal to the central health ministry for establishment of more screening centres but it’s yet to get nod,” said a senior health department official. 


Pattern change

As on Saturday evening, the lab at BJ Medical College processed 77 samples and all the samples are negative, said officials. “Earlier, it were mostly persons with history of travel to southeast Asian countries including Thailand, Singapore, China, Malaysia and Indonesia. But in past one week, the persons who were termed potential cases include those who have travelled to Italy, France, Germany, Spain, UK, USA, Dubai and Saudi Arabia, said an official.


