West Bengal lockdown: Stricter action ordered against rule-breakers
2020-04-03
KOLKATA: The state has ordered a renewed crackdown on those who are taking the lockdown lightly. Chief secretary Rajiva Sinha, in a video conference with superintendents and commissioners of police on Thursday evening, directed them to take stringent action against offenders after Union home secretary Ajay Bhalla directed chief secretaries to book the accused under The Disaster Management Act, 2005. Under the act, those flouting lockdown rules may be imprisoned for up to one year or have to pay a hefty fine.


Chief minister Mamata Banerjee sent out a stern warning against violations of lockdown on Wednesday. A section of people who were complaining against “police excess” during the first two days of the lockdown were found flocking to rations shops and markets, as well as to religious places, despite the lockdown. 

 


In a four-hour drive on Thursday, Kolkata Police seized 77 vehicles and arrested 980 people under IPC 188 for violating orders. The arrest count since the lockdown began has now reached 3,936. 

Taking a leaf out of the Railways book, cops devised a unique punishment for the offenders. Vehicles seized in one part of the city are being taken to the extreme opposite end to make matters tough for the violators. For instance, a car seized at Thakurpukur on Thursday was handed over to the owner at Vidyasagar Setu, after he walked the entire 12km stretch.

The Union home secretary has asked states to take action under sections 50 to 60 of The Disaster Management Act and under Section 188 of IPC. Bhalla, in his letter, mentioned that offenders may face imprisonment if they refuse to abide by the lockdown rules. He also directed states to take legal action against those raising false alarms about the virus. Two persons were arrested from Bidhannagar on Thursday for making false claims about the disease.

Under The Disaster Management Act, the administration can also take legal action against a person or a firm refusing the requisition made by the district administration.

