Coronavirus in Kerala: Strict vigil at sealed resort
2020-03-12
KOLLAM: Chirakkara grama panchayath authorities, revenue and police have made efforts to keep watch on the 42 foreign tourists who have been quarantined over Covid-19 fears at an Ayurvedic resort and homestay here.


Following reports that some foreign tourists who had travelled along with the Pathanamthitta natives from Italy on the same flight were staying at the Mythri Ayurvedic resort and homestay at Chirakkara, revenue authorities sealed the homestay on Tuesday night and ordered to quarantine 42 tourists and 30 employees working there for 28 days.

Deputy collector Sumeethan Pillai had inspected the homestay and sealed it. Further, police personnel have also been posted at the homestay to prevent any of the tourists or employees going out breaching the orders.

Health standing committee chairman of Chirakkara grama panchayath Ullas Krishnan said there were 39 people from France and three from Belgium staying there. He said only three French men had travelled with the Pathanamthitta natives on the same flight.

“The foreign tourists usually stay from January to June here at the homestay. All the 42 people staying here have come at different times. They are not part of a single group. They came separately,” he said.

According to reports, the resort had more bookings from foreigners and many of them were on their way to here. “However, we have given strict orders not to accommodate or let anyone go out till the situation is brought to normal and the threat of pandemic is over,” he said.

However, asked whether the resort was unauthorised as stated by the deputy collector who sealed it on Tuesday, Kirshnan admitted that panchayath had issued only a building licence to operate the business.

“What the panchayath issued was an initial licence to start business. The rest of the licences had to be obtained from the District tourism promotion council and other government authorities as relevant for running a resort,” he said.

Asked whether there was any other resorts functioning legally or illegally in the panchayath accommodating foreign tourists, he said they had conducted a thorough checking and no other foreign tourists could be found anywhere else in the panchayath.

Ullas Krishnan said they had ensured that all the natives coming from foreign countries including gulf countries were sent to the Public Health centre for the initial screening to ensure that they don’t have any symptoms of covid -19.

In view of the presence of foreign tourists who had travelled along with the Pathanamthitta natives staying in the nearby Chirakkara , an awarness campaign was held at Kottiaym and neighbouring places under the aegis of the SFI, Kottiyam area committee. SFI Kottiyam area secretary Sachindas told TOI that they had distributed pamphlets at major junctions besides launching a house to house campaign to sensitize people that instead of getting panic, people should take extra vigil against the virus spread. He said the campaign would be continued in the coming days.

