Stuck at home since lockdown, men take over iftaar duty in city
2020-05-19
Prayagraj: For as long as she can remember, iftaar had largely been Nasreen’s responsibility given her husband’s busy schedule as a businessman. The Mundera resident has fond memories of rustling wholesome meals for her family, when they used to sit down together to break their rozas during the month of Ramzan every year.

This year, however, there has been a change of roles in who’s heading the kitchen. Stuck at home because of the lockdown, Nasreen’s husband has been showing off his culinary skills in the kitchen while preparing iftaar.

“Till last year, it was primarily the women in the family who used to prepare the iftari, as our husbands were busy managing shops and attending offices. Now, with my brother-in-law working from home and my husband’s shop being closed because of the lockdown, they too pitch in with the cooking. Even if they are busy with something, they at least help us in the preparation,” said Nasreen, who is a housewife. 

There are many Muslim women like Nasreen who are overjoyed at having their husbands and sons help them out in preparing meals while fasting for Ramzan. Many credit the change in tradition to the lockdown enforced due to the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak.

Tabrez Ali, Shahganj-based contractor who used to travel frequently for work, is happy to be at home for once. “There were many times when I had to travel for work even during Ramzan. However, I have no option but to stay home because of the lockdown. My work has stopped, but I am happy to get some time with my family. I am using this opportunity to polish my cooking skills and making meals for my family.”

Shahabuddin, who lives in Harwara, said he surprised his wife by making biryani for iftaar, after searching for the recipe online. “I have made it five times since and everyone loves it, except my son,” he added.

For Shadab, until last year work never stopped even during Ramzan. “I was always busy either with meeting clients or with something else at office. I could only be home for a few iftaars. However, this year as I am working from home, I am not only getting time to help my wife Famina in kitchen, but also experimenting with dishes,” said the Leader Road resident.


