Covid-19 outbreak: Stuck in foreign lands, Kolkatans race against time to return home
2020-03-19
KOLKATA: Scenes from Steven Spielberg’s 2004 movie ‘The Terminal’ that captured the days of an Eastern European man who got stuck in New York’s John F Kennedy Airport is being played out in real life with Indians from various walks of life in the role that was essayed by Tom Hanks in the Hollywood film. Ironically, Hanks, who played the lead in the movie, is down with Covid-19 at present.


Cornavirus outbreak live updates

Rosary Manna, daughter of an advocate from Kolkata, was stuck at Kuala Lumpur airport after India suddenly decided to snap all travel links with Malaysia, Philippines and Afghanistan on Tuesday. Two Indian engineers who were stuck in Dusseldorf, Germany, have somehow managed to board an Emirates flight but remain uncertain of the future. A Swiss national, who has been stuck in Kolkata for a week, finally managed to get a ticket to Zurich. But he isn’t sure when he will reach there.

 
 
Rosary is among the more than 100 students in Philippines who were returning home when they were caught unawares by the directive to ban all travels from the country as well as Malaysia, the country through which they were transiting. “The schools in Manila and rest of Philippines announced a closure on Monday. We immediately booked tickets to Kolkata and reached Kuala Lumpur around 5am on Tuesday. On landing, we were told that there were no flights operating to India,” said Rosary, who has appealed to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and chief minister Mamata Banerjee to help those stranded return to the country.

“Philippines also put in place travel embargo and we can’t return there. Malaysia won’t allow us to enter as we don’t have any visa. So we are now stranded at the airport,” she added.

Thousands faced uncertainties in foreign lands as they attempted to beat Wednesday’s deadline before India temporarily shuts its doors to even Indians returning from Covid-19-affected countries. The director general of civil aviation in a circular told airlines not to allow India-bound passengers board flights from Europe after 12 GMT on Wednesday or 5.30pm IST. 

Engineers Tuhin Subhra Maiti and Aru Bikash Samanta, who were in Dusseldorf, somehow managed to board an Emirates flight. But they weren’t sure of what lay in store once they landed in Dubai to take the connecting flight to Kolkata. “If they manage to reach on time, they will be quarantined at a facility in New Town,” an airport official said. 

Another travel agent was trying to make arrangements for a student stuck in Toronto. “I have been trying for hours but with so many flights being cancelled ad hoc due to travel disruptions worldwide, I have been unable to do so,” he said. 

With global ticketing systems like Galileo, Amadeus and Sabre shut down due to ad hoc cancellations, travel agents are unable to view which flights are operating and which aren’t. For travel agents, it is back to basics: calling up airline representatives over phone to inquire about a flight. A ticket is being issued only after there is a confirmation from the airline headquarters.

While several airlines have suspended operations to Kolkata, Thai Airways and AirAsia are all set to pull out in the next few days. According to industry trackers, Thai Airways will suspend operations after the flight from Kolkata to Bangkok on Wednesday. 

AirAsia that flies to Kuala Lumpur and Bangkok will suspend operations after March 21. 

