Students may opt for pvt schooling to weather the Coronavirus storm
2020-05-31
Indore: Corona is changing the dynamics of the education system. More students opting for private mode for undergraduate courses may become the new normal. 

Home schooling may soon trend in this part of the world too as parents are apprehensive of sending their children to educational institutions for which government college authorities expect increase in number of students opting for non-collegiate (private) mode.

Financial constraints and need of social distancing are the two main factors that have majorly fostered the idea among students and even parents to go for non-collegiate mode.

Most government college principals have agreed that it is only the mindset towards private mode that makes students opt for regular mode. Otherwise the curriculum and course for private and regular students remains the same. The only difference in the examination comes in the marking scheme of the students. Students of non-collegiate mode give two examinations of 50 marks each. The regular mode students have the marking scheme divided into 40, 40 and 20 marks of internal assessment.

“There is no seat limit for private mode. The benefit of non-collegiate mode at the moment is the fact that it can be changed to regular mode,” exam controller of Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya Dr Ashesh Tiwari told TOI.

Students opting for any non-collegiate option will not be allowed to opt for a regular course, he added.

Conventional undergraduate courses such as BA, BCom and even BSc can only be opted in non-collegiate mode. Professional courses can be done only through distance mode and regular mode. There might be rise in number of students for private mode this year, principal of Old GDC Dr Sumitra Waskel told TOI.

“The situation is such that parents also would not want to send their kids to colleges. However, it would be after admission process that we will get to know the final output of students opting for private mode,” she added.


