Student with quarantine mark offloaded from Rajdhani at Nagpur
2020-03-23
NAGPUR: A student with quarantine stamp on his hand was stopped from travelling further, and offloaded at Nagpur station, on Sunday. He was taken to MLA Hostel quarantine facility as a precaution in an ambulance of Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC).


On Saturday, a New Delhi-based couple was detrained at Kazipeth from Bengaluru-New Delhi Rajdhani Express, 

The 21-year-old student, travelling in New Delhi-Chennai Express, had returned from Russia to Delhi. He had a ticket to Chennai and was in AC-3 tier B2 coach. He is a resident of Vijayawada.

The student, travelling alone, was screened at the Covid-19 test booth set up by Central Railways near Platform 1, which is manned by Railway Protection Force (RPF) and medical team of the railway hospital. His temperature recording was ‘normal’, said a railway source.

Though the railway personnel tried their best to convince the student, tension and disappointment were writ large on his face as he pulled his luggage into the ambulance before it sped away.

Some co-passengers spotted the home quarantine stamp on his hand at Itarsi when the train reached there around 10.30am. Panicked, they immediately informed TTE Sunil Kumar Singh, who alerted commercial control room and Nagpur railway station. 

At Nagpur, assistant commercial manager (goods) SG Rao and a nursing team led by Central Railway hospital’s divisional medical officer Dr Chandrashekhar were ready for assistance along with deputy station superintendents Manish Gaur and Atul Shrivastav. The commercial department personnel had alerted the state government control room, seeking assistance to shift the passenger to the quarantine facility at MLA Hostel. 

“When the train reached Platform 2 at Nagpur railway station at 2.30pm, we de-trained the passenger. There was no panic as the passenger has not yet tested positive for coronavirus,” said Rao. “We sanitized the entire coach at Nagpur before the train left for further journey,” Rao added. “Every part of the coach passengers may use was sanitized thoroughly,” he said. 

Sources from MLA Hostel said the student would not be tested as he was not a ‘patient’ but only identified as ‘home quarantine’. He would be released after at least 48 hours as per the latest government guidelines, if no symptoms surface. “He (the student) would be tested if he develops symptoms. Under no circumstances would he be allowed to use public transport before 14 days, and will have to stay back at the quarantine facility at MLA Hostel,” said a health official.

As thousands of people use railway network, passenger trains are seen as the biggest means of spreading coronavirus. It is becoming very difficult for even officials and front-line staff to detect suspect cases.

On Saturday, after co-passengers observed a home quarantine seal on a man’s hand, a Delhi-based couple was offloaded at Kazipeth in Telangana on Saturday. The AC compartment in which they were travelling was sealed after sanitization and passengers adjusted in other compartments.


