Student back from US gets infection; 10 coronavirus cases in Pune district
2020-03-14
PUNE: A 21-year-old student, a resident of Mangaldas Road in Pune, has tested positive for the novel coronavirus infection (Covid-19) on March 13. His close contacts are now being traced.


The case tally of Covid-19 cases has gone up to 10 in Pune district. Of these, seven are in isolation care at Naidu Hospital and three positive patients have been quarantined at YCM Hospital in Pimpri-Chinchwad.

"The new patient returned to Mumbai from Seattle in the US via Frankfurt in Germany on a Lufthansa flight on March 10. He was at the airport for about 40 minutes,” a civic health official said. Seattle is being considered as the epicentre of the outbreak in the US . 

The man dined with two friends at a restaurant just opposite the airport and took a cab to Pune arranged for by his father. 

“On arrival, he was with his parents for two hours before he self-reported to Naidu Hospital when he had throat irritation. He was quarantined the same day and his throat swab sent to National Institute of Virology tested positive for the contagion on Friday afternoon,” official said. 

Health officials have begun tracking the man's two friends with whom he dined in Mumbai. “We will isolate and test the cabby and his parents to rule out Covid-19 infection," they added.

Earlier, four members of a group that had visited Dubai tested positive for the contagion on March 9 and 10. A couple, their 23-year-old daughter and another man are residents of Sinhagad Road. 

A private cab driver, who had ferried the couple and their daughter from Mumbai to Pune on their return on March 1, also tested positive for the contagion on Tuesday. Thereafter, another 27 year old co-traveller who was also part of the group tested positive for the contagion. 

Three residents of the Pimpri Chinchwad who were part of the same group were also found infected with the contagion on Wednesday. They are stable and will remain at the YCM Hospital.

On Thursday, another resident of a housing society on Sinhagad Road, who had returned from the US, tested positive for the infection.

In Nagpur, two persons who were in close contact of the man who tested positive soon after returning from US also tested positive for the contagion on Friday. The total tally of the Covid-19 infected persons has gone up to 19 in Maharashtra between March 9 and March 13. A person in Mumbai and another in Ahmednagar tested positive on Friday. 

“Except the cab driver in Pune and two close contacts in Nagpur, the remaining 14 people who tested positive for the contagion in Maharashtra had a history of international travel. This shows that there is no community spread so far in the state. Every effort is being made to trace, isolate and test those who have come in close contact with the travellers to contain the virus from spreading,” state surveillance officer Pradip Awate said. 

41 swab samples from 

PCMC areas with NIV 

Two citizens from Pimpri Chinchwad, with a recent history of travel abroad , were admitted to YCM Hospital on Thursday. They were allowed to go home on Saturday after their swab samples tested negative on Friday.

The PCMC said swabs of 41 citizens have been sent to NIV and the results are awaited. Also, the test results of 34 people, who interacted with the three positive patients from Pimpri Chinchwad, are awaited. They are home quarantined.


