Coronavirus outbreak: Students left in the lurch after JNU, DU, Jamia Millia Islamia close hostels
2020-03-21
NEW DELHI: With different varsities shutting down their hostels in the wake of the novel coronavirus outbreak, several students are left in the lurch. Many of them can neither afford to stay outside the campus in Delhi for long, nor can they go to their respective hometowns due to the trains getting cancelled.


Delhi University expects its students to vacate the hostels by Saturday. On Friday itself, many were seen leaving the premises. On Sunday, they fear of not getting the transportation facilities.

“Most of the students have left for their hometowns. A few others have shifted to their friends’ places. As per the university’s new orders, even non-teaching staff, including mess workers, have been asked not to come to the campus. So, students have to leave,” said Prabhanshu Ahuja, a resident of Gwyer Hall.

The residents of North-East Student House for Women complained that it would be tough for them to travel in such a short notice. In their letter to the vice-chancellor, Yogesh Tyagi, about 40 students said: “Majority of the students residing here are from the northeast, and travelling to our hometown requires us to avail public transport of more than one kind. The travelling will expose us to more dangers of the virus.”

The students urged the VC to allow them to stay back in the hostels. At JNU too, the student union gave similar suggestions.

Mohammad Mustafa, a student of MA at Jamia Millia Islamia, rued that the administration did not inform them in advance. “With many trains getting cancelled, we may have to look for temporary accommodations,” said the resident of Allama Iqbal hostel.

However, for international students at DU, the administration notice said that “they take decision in their best interest.” 

“This is vague. Many of us are thinking of going to our friends’ place,” said a student residing in the International Students’ house.

Rajeev Gupta, the provost of the hostel, however, said that “special provisions have been made for them and they can stay back in the hostel if they want. We will make sure they have all the facilities.” Jamia also said that it would take care of its international students.


