Coronavirus scare in Maharashtra: Students, parents breathe easy as schools, colleges shut till March 31
2020-03-15
MUMBAI: Much to the relief of parents and students, the state government on Saturday announced all schools, colleges, technical institutions, anganwadis in urban areas and coaching classes in the state would remain shut till March 31. SSC, HSC and all university exams, though, will continue according to schedule. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Parents and institutions have been asked to ensure students who are unwell are not allowed during exams. The government also gave powers to local district collectors to shut schools and colleges in rural areas depending on the situation there.

State health minister Rajesh Tope said all Class X and XII and university exams will go on as per schedule. He added schools can decide to reschedule their school exams. “Also, coaching classes where there are huge crowds should remain shut. But places that have smaller batches like home tuitions and personal coaching can continue,” said Tope. 

The directive to continue with university exams garnered mixed reactions from parents, students and principals. Mumbai University exams are to start on March 23. An official said there will not be any change in the schedule as of now. Most autonomous colleges, including Mithibai, St Xavier’s, Jai Hind and Ruia, though, have their exams scheduled in the coming week. A principal said, “Only our exams were pending, which are to commence on Monday. There have been requests from parents and students seeking postponement of exams. But we must follow government directives.”

Parag Thakker, principal of H R College, though, said it is a tricky situation for colleges. “If it was a matter of a few days, it would have been easier to postpone exams. But there is no clarity on how long this will last,” he said. Ashok Wadia, principal of Jai Hind College, said they have been taking precautionary measures. “We are trying to procure sanitizers directly from companies. Students will be given masks, if they require,” said Wadia.

Meanwhile, an online petition started by St Xavier’s College students appealed to authorities to suspend all activities on campus and reschedule exams. The petition, which started on Saturday afternoon, saw around 850 signatures by 10pm. Students said it would be risky to travel by public transport during peak hours with fear lingering on their minds. Principal Rajendra Shinde said the college will have to follow directives issued by the university and the state government. He added the college is prepared to conduct the exams.

Francis Swamy, principal of St Mary’s School and joint secretary of Archdiocesan Board of Education, said most ICSE schools have anyway shut. “We have already created awareness about the disease’s spread.” SSC and HSC exams will end on March 23 and March 18, respectively. 


