Students in Wuhan seek Centre’s help to return home
2020-01-26
KOCHI: Following reports about the US and French governments planning to evacuate their diplomats, employees and citizens from novel Coronavirus-affected Wuhan, Indian students trapped at College of Medicine, Wuhan University, China demand that the Union government make similar moves to help them return to home at the earliest.


The students said that French consulate has started arranging bus rides for its citizens to leave the locked-down city, and the US is arranging flights to carry its citizens to their homeland. Many students at Wuhan University have left the city using these facilities and Indian students have sought authorities help to arrange private vehicles to help them reach nearest airports.

“The Government of India can negotiate with the Chinese authorities to arrange flights to take us back home. If countries like the US and France have ordered evacuation, it shows the bleak picture. We are facing food shortage too as most shops are shut and our food provisions are running low,” said Faizal Naser, a final year medical student. He said that he speaks on behalf of fellow Indian students who are desperate to leave Wuhan.

The students also expressed concern about misleading reports coming from Kerala that authorities were not keen about bring them home as it could lead to the spreading of virus. However, on cross verification, it was found that such reports were false.

Meanwhile, it is learnt that around more than 25 Keralite students from Wuhan University have managed to leave the city and are expected to reach Kerala over the next days. 

Manasa Manoj and Athul Raj, both final year medical students at China Three Gorges University in Yichang, near Wuhan, landed in Kochi airport on Saturday night. They had undergone health screening at Kunming airport and Kolkata airport. “We were a group of 17 students who took a flight to Kolkata from Kunming airport, which is more than 1,300km from our university located in the landlocked Hubei province. At the airport, they checked our body temperature, and only those who indicated temperature variations were detained. We were screened at Kolkata too. There were students from various parts of Kerala and they had taken different connection-flights available,” Manasa said. 


