Students back from Wuhan recall panic, thrill, and pride
2020-02-20
Nagpur: After more than three weeks of isolation in their hostel rooms and 17 days quarantine in India, medical students from Hubei university of science and technology in Wuhan, China, finally reached their home on Wednesday. For families of four girl students of Vidarbha, it was a grand homecoming.

“We were asked to stay back in our hostel rooms since mid-January. Chinese staff and teachers used to provide us all necessary goods. By January 23, when their New Year began, everything was shut. Metro, airport all came to a standstill,” recalled Prachi Bhalerao, a second year medical student. Prachi’s parents stay in Akola.

First batch of evacuated Indians that was allowed to go home on February 17 included four girl students from Vidarbha.

Sonali Bhoyar, who is from Gadchiroli, said people were dying daily in Wuhan. “It was a real panic to see so many deaths every day. Even if our university was taking care of us, we finally approached the Indian embassy. They were quick to act. We were evacuated in first flight that landed in Wuhan on February 1,” said Sonali.

After landing in India, these students were kept in isolation at a medical facility of Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) near New Delhi. Here, Government and armed forces made all arrangements for them. 

“Under isolation, facilities like indoor gym, carom, chess, table-tennis were available for us. We had a lot of time to spend together. Many of us got new friends. ITBP doctors also became our friends for lifetime,” said Komal Jaddewar from Nanded. She reached here by Dakshin Express on Wednesday evening.

Government made post-quarantine travel arrangement also for most of these students. Those who were from New Delhi were dropped at home. Train tickets, hospital to airport drop facility were provided to others. Students said they were proud of Indian armed forces for timely evacuation and for taking very good care during the quarantine facility.

Education continues online

Even when universities are closed, these students are attending online tutorials and digital classes.

“We have already started attending digital classes. We get online video of our lectures and PPT presentations. By scanning a QR Code, we can register our attendance. So, our session will continue virtually for now,” said student Bhagyashree Uke. The facility of online examination is also available in this university in case of emergency. So there is no hurry for them to return to Wuhan.

“I am not planning to go back unless WHO declares Wuhan free from coronavirus threat and the university invites me back,” said Sonali Bhoyar.


