Covid-19 scare in Patna: Substantial fall in petrol, diesel sales
2020-03-17
PATNA: Petrol pump owners are a worried lot as sales of petrol and diesel have come down by 20-40% in the past fortnight amid fears of Covid-19 outbreak in the city. Petrol and diesel prices have been cut by Rs 1.34 and by Rs 1.28 respectively in the past one week due to fall in crude prices in the international market.


According to the latest figures, the sale of diesel in Bihar plunged from 43,191 kilo litres in the first week of March (1 to 7) to 34,314 kilo litres in the second week. “Similarly, the sale of petrol fell from 22,337 kilo litres in the first week of March to 21,860 kilo litres in the second week,” an Indian Oil Corporation official said.

Vijay Kumar, a sales executive at a Bharat Petroleum outlet near Gandhi Maidan, said, “Sales have dropped to almost 40% at our outlet in the past three days. Even the flow of public transport especially auto-rickshaws has declined,” Kumar said.

“Petrol price has reduced to Rs 74.31 per litre on Monday from Rs 75.65 per litre on March 7 while the price of diesel has come down to Rs 66.8 per litre from Rs 68.23 per litre. The prices are continuously dropping,” he added.

Proprietor of a petrol pump at Bahadurpur, Anuj Raj, said more than 1,600 vehicles come for refilling per day. “But now it has been reduced to 950 per day. The market is slow,” he added. 

Ashok Kumar, owner of a petrol pump at Dak Bunglow roundabout, told this newspaper on Monday that sale of petrol has dropped by almost 40%. “We have not seen demand destruction at this level throughout the year,” he said. He added: “The only time the sale of oil went down was in September when the state government imposed the Motor Vehicles Act, 2020. The crowd on road has also thinned.”

KB Gandhi, manager of a petrol pump at Buddh Marg, claimed that the sale of petrol has gone down by 38%. “Over the past three days, we have been witnessing low footfall,” he said.

Analysing the reason behind the fall in oil consumption and rate reduction, economist DM Diwakar told this newspaper that the world market price of crude oil has declined to $37 per barrel from $51 per barrel. “The price of oil should be reduced further, so that the sale of petrol and diesel can increase. But due to poor economic condition of the country, the Centre did not reduce the market price,” he said.

Diwakar, professor at AN Sinha Institute of Social Studies, said, “The outbreak of Covid-19 has further aggravated the economic condition of most countries. Automobile companies are facing loss and thus the sale of crude oil has declined. The other reason for reduction of sale of petro products is because slowdown of market as industries, educational institutes and other gathering places are shut owing to Covid-19.”


