Coronavirus scare in Pune: Sudden ban on vehicles shocks commuters
2020-03-24
PUNE: The city police’s sudden decision to ban movement of private and non-essential vehicles on roads till the midnight of March 31 caught several people unaware, triggering undue concern about their travel back home.

The ban covering all autorickshaws, app-based cab services like Ola and Uber, and private taxi services left many people worried about their commute to destinations such as the city airport or travel back home. There were reports and videos on social media sites about high-handed behaviour of the police in dissuading vehicle users from proceeding further and asking them to return.

 
 
Pune police commissioner K Venkatesham, however, told TOI, “Strict instructions have been given to all policemen to be polite and firm while implementing the vehicular movement restrictions. Barricades have been put up on roads to restrict needless movement.”

Joint police commissioner Ravindra Shisve said, “We have specifically asked all our personnel not to beat anyone and, instead, counsel them against venturing out on the city roads before letting them go.”

Venkatesham had tweeted on Monday morning stating that vehicle movement would be stopped completely by the evening. Soon, Puneites took to Twitter to seek clarifications and answers about the ban.

 
@CPPuneCity @K_Vyankatesh @puneruralpolice What about grocery delivery services like Grofers, BigBasket, Amazon and… https://t.co/7jR3H5qXmA— Rasik Mhatre (@rasikdon) 1584960393000 
A Twitter user Rasik Mhatre (@rasikdon) wrote, “What about grocery delivery services like Grofers, BigBasket, Amazon and medicine delivery like 1MG, PharmEasy, etc. We are senior citizens and highly dependent on these services.”

Another twitter user Ashish Bohra (@ca_wala_chokra) said, “But sir, my father works in a medical store, which is open as essential need. How will he travel back home then?”

Several people were stuck because of the barricades installed at major junctions. A city resident stuck at the Pune University junction said, “We had to spend a while as the barricading led to congestion. People were extremely confused with the sudden decision.”

Venkatesham said, “Staying home is good for everyone. We are constantly learning as we go further with our decisions to deal with the given situation. We want to help people.”

He said, “There is no restriction on people walking down to neighbourhood shops for buying essentials, but they need not travel distances.”

Earlier, joint commissioner of Pune police Ravindra Shisve issued a fresh order under Section 144 (1) (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, banning movement of all types of vehicles, barring those engaged in transport of essential goods and services, on the city roads from 6pm on Monday till midnight of March 31.

Venkatesham said, “The latest order is in continuation of the Section 144 CrPC order we had released on Sunday night after we assessed the overall situation post-Janata Curfew. People seem to have not understood the purpose behind these orders and started venturing out of their homes. Hence, we had to take this decision.”

The latest order covers bicycles as well as all conventional and non-conventional fuel, geared and non-geared two-, three- and four-wheelers, light and light commercial vehicles, passenger buses and trucks. “No private vehicles, autorickshaws and app-based cab services like Ola and Uber, would be allowed to run on the city roads,” Venkatesham said.

Superintendent of Highway Safety Patrol Milind Mohite said, “Barring essential goods transport, very few private vehicles were seen commuting on the highways. Vehicles entering Pune city from outstation destinations will be allowed to go home but they won’t be allowed to move out for non-essential purposes.”

Additional commissioner of police (Pimpri Chinchwad) Ramnath Pokale said, “We shall go by the state government’s order. Taxis with two passengers and a driver, and autorickshaws with one passenger and a driver will be allowed only for the purpose specified in the order.” 

