Suicide abetment accused tests positive, five cops quarantined
2020-05-05
LUDHIANA: Three days after an 18-year-old man was arrested on the charge of suicide abetment, he tested positive for novel coronavirus on Monday. After receiving his report, the administration quarantined his 13 contacts, including five cops and four family members.


It is the third such incident in the district wherein an accused tested positive a few days after arrest. The man, a student of Class XII, was arrested on April 30, 21 days after his classmate, also 18, committed suicide at her house.

The woman’s mother had told the police, “My daughter had hanged herself from a ceiling fan on the night of April 9. Days later, we learned that her classmate had raped her after befriending her. He had her objectionable pictures and videos and was blackmailing her. After he blocked her cellphone number, she took her life.”

After a medical examination on May 1, the man was sent to Ludhiana Central Jail. There, he was kept in an isolation centre for new inmates.

Ludhiana chief medical officer Rajesh Bagga said, “After the accused tested positive, his direct contacts, including police personnel and family members, have been home quarantined. His other contacts are being traced.” 

Assistant commissioner of police (Industrial Area-A) Vaibhav Sehgal said, “Five cops, included two ASIs and three constables, of Mundiya police post and Jamalpur police station, four of his family members and four members of the deceased woman’s family came in his contact.”

His family and cops are wondering how he got infected.

The accused’s father said, “My son was depressed after the death of his classmate and so, he did not go anywhere. Besides, we did not allow him to go out due to the pandemic. On April 10, he had gone to his classmate’s house to meet her family. After that twice he had gone to Mundiya police post and Jamalpur police station to join investigation and every time I accompanied him.”

 “Even before his classmate’s death, my son hardly went out. None at our house, including him, has any Covid-19 symptoms. We are clueless how he contracted the disease,”

The accused has now been shifted to Ludhiana civil hospital. 

