SUK hostel buildings to be converted into Covid-19 hospital
2020-04-02
KOLHAPUR: The district administration is planning to convert the Shivaji University, Kolhapur (SUK) hostels into Covid-19 hospital.

There are over 3,000 rooms in various hostels of the university. Currently, owing to the virus outbreak, no academic session is going on and the exams have been postponed. Students living in these hostels had left for their respective homes just before the announcement of the 21-day lockdown.

The officials of the district administration have prepared a report stating that a 1,000-bed hospital can be developed in various hostels of the university. 

District collector Daulat Desai visited the university on Wednesday and had discussion with the university officials. According to the district administration officials, who were involved in the discussion, the university has agreed to the plan, but has raised some concerns. 

One of the concerns was that after lockdown the university is planning to conduct the exams and providing accommodation to the students will be a major challenge.

A senior district administration official said, "The university officials have suggested us to use the hostels belonging to the department of technology. The hostels have a capacity to accommodate 500 people. They also need time to shift the belongings of the students and put them in a safe place. We will take the call on the suggestion by Thursday."

Currently, the rooms are locked up, the keys are with the students. The report of the district administration states that both ICU and isolation wards with a total strength of 1.476 beds can be set up in various buildings on the university campus. The arrangement will be made in such a way that one room will have only one bed. 

Also, there is a need to repair the toilets, doors, windows of the buildings and set up the facilities like clean drinking water and communication systems. The officials claim they are working at war footing to set up the hospital since the number of Covid-19 cases are likely to increase.

Meanwhile, Chhatrapati Pramila Raje (CPR) civil hospital has been converted into Covid-19 hospital. All the in-house patients have been moved to private hospitals and the OPD has been shifted to Seva hospital in Line Bazaar area.


