30 NRS staffers test negative for Covid-19
2020-04-08
KOLKATA: Swab samples of 30 healthcare providers attached with NRS Medical College and Hospital have tested negative to Covid-19, much to the relief of the hospital authority and the state health department. Currently, 79 healthcare workers are under isolation at the government’s quarantine centre at New Town. More samples are being sent for confirmatory tests.

“The first lot of samples were collected from those who came in close contact with the Covid-19 positive patient. Thirty four more samples were collected on Tuesday and sent for testing. Samples of all those who are quarantined will be tested to rule out the remotest chance of infection,” said a hospital source.

 


The death of a 35-year-old in the hospital on Saturday sent a shock wave in the hospital when the patient’s test reports came positive. The patient, who was suffering from haemophilia, had come to the hospital’s emergency wing on March 30. Since he had no corona symptoms, he was admitted at the male medicine ward and later shifted to the critical care unit and was put on ventilation. His swab samples were sent when he was on ventilation. 

“Had the patient come with any kind of symptoms, he would be have been treated at the hospital’s isolation facility created for Covid-19 or suspected cases where the healthcare providers are equipped with protective gear. This could have saved us from a lot of trouble,” said a doctor. 

Even as the first lot of 30 have tested negative, the health department is likely to keep them in isolation for 14 days. According to sources, none of the 79 has developed any noticeable symptoms. But they are on hydroxychloroquine regime. “It is a huge relief that 30 have tested negative. But given this kind of situation, where a patient turns up with no symptoms and then tests positive, has made us little shaky,” said a junior doctor in the hospital.

The male general medicine ward and the CCU unit remained sealed on Tuesday as well. Officials said these two units will continue to be to shut till complete disinfection. Though a few patients turned up the general medicine OPD on Tuesday, no patients were admitted. 


