Coronavirus in Bengaluru: Summer camp organisers wait & watch; parents wonder how to keep kids busy
2020-03-11
BENGALURU: This summer vacation may not be like every other year, after all. Several organisers of these camps are either holding back registrations or cancelling their programmes altogether, thanks to Covid-19’s cascading effect. 

This has put parents in a fix. They don’t know how to keep their kids busy during the long summer break.

In the normal course, with the academic year winding down, parents would have been making a beeline for summer camps by now. “The registration enquires till now are far from encouraging. We haven’t had too many people opting for the summer camps either. We are hoping the trend will change in the coming days as the virus threat passes. If not, we will be hit hard because these camps are our biggest revenue generators,” said a representative at a multi-discipline sports camp centre, who didn’t want to be named. 

In swimming, according to Olympian Nisha Millet, who runs the Nisha Millets Swimming Academy, there is a greater demand for personalised coaching. “We haven’t seen a dip in attendance at the pools. If the water is adequately chlorinated, it’s safe to swim. The key is to ensure the surroundings are clean and hygienic, the changing rooms in particular. Also, we have seen an increase in the number of people opting for personal classes at private/apartment pools.”

Sandhya Reddy, who conducts classical dance and music camps every summer in Whitefield told TOI she has decided to cancel the session this year owing to the virus. “This has become a matter of international concern and we are no exception. We cannot risk children’s health for anything. In fact, they are the most vulnerable to cold, cough and fever,” Reddy said, adding that she is worried not only about their health during the camp but also their commute. 

Another organiser said they have decided to put summer camp registrations on hold and are waiting for directives from the government. “For the safety of the children and our staff, we won’t be going ahead for now. We will have to wait and watch,” she said. 

Sangita, community manager at Lahe Lahe, a non-profit, performing arts theatre located in Indiranagar said they have to see how things pan out. Meanwhile, they are taking all the required precautions. Lahe Lahe has organised a four-day creative summer camp on poetry, theatre, cooking and craft starting April 21. “We will start getting enquiries only after March. So we are not sure how it will be. For now, we are keeping the space sanitised,” she added. 

Working parents, meanwhile, are wondering how to keep their kids safe during the break season. Amit Das, a techie and his wife, Shama, a researcher, said they used to leave their six-year-old son at a daycare and had planned to send him for a summer camp. “We don’t know what to do now. It’s unsafe for him and impossible for us to take a long break,” said Das. 

Das isn’t alone. With the virus scare growing, many like him are at their wits’ end, trying to figure out how to balance work and childcare. 


