Sunday rush at fish, meat stalls throws lockdown out of gear
2020-03-30
Madurai: Fish and meat markets in the city witnessed good crowd on Sunday flouting social distance norms even as the scare of Covid-19 is looming large every day. Police and local body authorities were caught off guard at the overwhelming crowd at the fish markets and meat stalls.

What police could do was to make announcement using a public-address system asking people not get into crowded markets further in vain. Hundreds of people kept crowding the Nelpettai market since early morning. It left the narrow street more crowded than a normal Sunday. People have forgotten everything and focused only on purchasing their favorite non-veg items. Traffic police in East Veli Street had a tough time handling vehicle movement and restricting parking.

A police office said, “People developed the habit of enjoying Sundays with family at home by cooking sumptuous food, but these days people are confined to home through the week. One can purchase non-veg items on any week day, but people are flocking to markets as it is the last day of non-veg sales.”

P Pachaiappan, a resident of Tallakulam, said that fresh non-veg items such as fish are available only on Sundays. He came to the market thinking that there would be few people due to the restrictions.

All fish stalls, meat stalls and markets were overcrowded on Sunday. A large number of people gathered at Southgate Fish market and vegetable market in South Marret Street, forcing the police to close the road for traffic movement. Commuters had to use alternative roads. Similarly, Thayir Market and Simmakkal were also crowded as people gathered in large number to purchase vegetables and fruits.

Sources at Madurai Corporation said that they are planning to close down vegetable markets at South Marret Street and Thayir Market, while retail sales at the Central vegetable market at Mattuthavani has already been closed.

Madurai collector T G Vinay and corporation commissioner S Visakan inspected the market later in the evening. Corporation commissioner said that efforts are under way to decongest the market by spreading out shops to various areas. Madurai district police have registered 384 cases for violating curfew restrictions and arrested 450 people. As many as 284 vehicles were impounded by them. On Saturday, around 180 cases were registered and 227 people were arrested. As many as 113 vehicles were impounded.


