‘Superman’ Sonu Sood does a cameo in Jhansi police’s Covid drive
2020-06-06
JHANSI: Actor Sonu Sood, who has earned all-round accolades for arranging return of thousands of migrants stranded in Maharashtra to their homes in states like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, has now some glowin words to say about corona warriors while endorsing an online video awareness campaign of Jhansi Police on Covid-19. 

The video, which is expected to hit the social media soon, begins with Sood asking people to define a corona warrior, telling that every Indian is a corona warrior in his/her own way. The actor goes on to introduce the video campaign of Jhansi Police as an important tool in spreading awareness for Covid-19.

The 2.20 minute video, which has been produced here with the help of a local production company, shows Sood saying, “All Indians are Corona warriors as they are taking care of themselves and their family members. Some are fighting outside while some by staying at home. I appeal to all of you to listen to this message by Jhansi Police. By following this message, you can keep yourself and your family members safe and help in fighting Corona.”

SP City Rahul Srivastava, who has been instrumental in creating the video, said: ‘Our main purpose to make the video was to create awareness among the masses towards the pandemic. The entire video has been shot and produced in Jhansi itself with the help of police personnel, NCC cadets and university students.”

The video depicts the dos and dont’s that need to be practised while being in the market, using a lift, riding a bus, using staircases, entering home, disposing of used masks and so on. It shows both the right way as well as the wrong way to execute such tasks along with graphical right and wrong signs with cops and NCC cadets doubling up as actors.

The vidoe up with the message, “Do gaz ki doori, mask hai majboori, haat dhona hai zaroori’ (maintain two yards distance, mask is a must and washing hands is essential).” The campaign will be launched on the official twitter handle of Jhansi police (Jhansi Police @jhansipolice) in English while the Hindi version of the campaign will be uploaded on twitter handle of SP Jhansi Rahul Srivastava (@upcoprahul)

Senior under officer NCC, Hitika Yadav, who has been featured in the video, said: “It is very exciting to be a part of this video and feel honoured that it has been introduced by Sonu Sood. I am thankful to the SP Sir because of whom it was possible.”

Similarly, Shaswat Singh, a post-graduate student of mass communication at Bundelkhand University, who along with three of his friends shot and edited the entire video, said: “It was a wonderful and challenging experience for us and we feel proud that we have got a chance for doing our bit in creating awareness against this global pandemic.”

