Covid-19: Experts say supervision will be key to effective self-isolation
2020-05-01
PUNE: Home isolation of "mildly symptomatic" persons will be effective only if there is a plan in place to ensure their constant monitoring, medical specialists have said.


Some of them suggested the individuals be linked with doctors via a telemedicine platform. 

The observations come a day after the Union health ministry said people with very mild Covid-19 symptoms can self-isolate at home provided they have space and the means - including 24x4 caregivers and access to separate toilets - to do so.

Health experts said on Wednesday the move will reduce the burden on local administrations that have been struggling to set up more quarantine centres. But they said administrations should ensure the people at home are being monitored in accordance with clearly laid out rules and regulations. 

The state president of the Indian Medical Association, Avinash Bhondwe, said the Centre's guidelines on home isolation will definitely reduce patient burden for hospitals and quarantine centres. 

“But these individuals should be properly counselled on the dos and dont's of home isolation. The guidelines to test these individuals (regularly) should be scientific, everyone should know the minimum duration of isolation and once a person is cured, he or she should be provided with a certificate to avoid social discrimination. Importantly, we have to have doctors monitoring these individuals via a telemedicine platform," Bhondwe said. 

Public health expert R Jotkar said quarantine centres could be overwhelmed if there's a spike in cases after lockdowns ease. "What will happen if there is an increase in the number of suspects or actual cases? These centres will not be enough to handle the load," Jotkar said. He said self-isolation was the only to ensure community participation in the fight against - and containment of - Covid-19. 

Rajesh Swarnakar, the Nagpur-based pulmonologist whose PIL had prompted the Supreme Court to direct the Union government to take a decision on matter, said quarantine centres were hurting the state exchequer. He added that having these centres in hospitals was putting lives of healthcare workers at risk.

“It is a fact that 85% of Covid-19 cases recover on their own. Only 15% require hospital admission, 5% require ICU care and only 3% - the elderly and those with comorbidities - face the highest risk. Patients who show mild symptoms are being admitted to hospitals. We have spent so much exchequer money by unnecessarily admitting and treating the mildly symptomatic in hospitals when they could've recovered at home, under supervision," Swarnakar said. 

Pune district collector Naval Kishore Ram, who is awaiting state orders, said a uniform approach cannot be adopted in these cases. Ram highlighted the problems in slums while adding that adequate information needs to be collected to determine if there are individuals willing to help those isolating at home.

There are currently over 100 quarantine centres in the region. Collectors have been given powers to requisition hotels, educational institutions and sports arenas if need for more space arises.

