Supermoms who fight on the Covid frontline
2020-05-10
For the nation, they are frontline workers risking their lives for the call of duty, but for their children, they are supermoms who don’t have the luxury of working from home even during a pandemic. On Mother’s Day, we bring you three Covid warriors, whose children are excitedly prepping up to surprise their mums on the occasion even when they are unsure if they will get to have them by their side. 


Dr Mahuya Mukherjee, deputy super of a hospital

My only solace is that my workplace is near my house. Besides patients, the volume of administrative work has also gone up. Post duty, the cleaning and sanitising process takes hours. Additional household chores have added to the overall pressure. My husband is also a doctor and both of us are keeping very busy. We are struggling to take time out for our daughter.


While it is true that I am anxious about my parents, I am also super proud of them. In this hour of crisis, like other doctors, my parents are putting up a brave fight. I know my mother is busy, but I hope she gets her day off today. I have a Mother’s Day surprise planned for her. She loves chocolate cake and I am baking one for her! 
— Pubali Paul, daughter and a third-year student of biotechnology





Christina Mary, sub-inspector


Taking off from work is not an option for us in a situation like this. If we are off, who will ensure safety of others? My husband is also in the same profession. We are on duty 24x7. We save our off days for emergencies. My children are extremely supportive. These days, I leave home early in the morning and come back late in the evening. This schedule will go on indefinitely. 


Long hours of duty can get frustrating for cops. Nowadays, I see Ma getting irritable every now and then. Today, my brother and I wish to be by her side and listen to her inspiring stories. We want to comfort and calm her. We also plan to whip up some nice breakfast for her and spend quality time together.
— Sofia, daughter and student





 
Papiya Nag, nurse


In my 28 years of service, I’ve never faced a situation like this. We get a variety of patients, including Covid-19 positive cases. In fact, we send swabs for testing every day. We wear PPE throughout duty hours. After getting back home, it takes me more than two hours to sanitise myself before I can go near my son. My family has been my biggest support system.


My mother loves fried rice and chilli chicken. I want to cook for her. I’ve also planned to gift her a collage of our photos. I’m very proud of what she’s doing. She leaves at 7.30 am and comes back late evening. She is really putting up a great fight in this moment of crisis. I simply salute her courage.
— Srijan Nag, son and a BTech student



